New federal overtime rules will pump $20 million into the pockets of 67,000 New Yorkers, an analysis by City Controller Scott Stringer found.
The Obama administration finalized new rules Wednesday hiking the threshold below which employees must get overtime pay to $47,476 — up from $23,660 under current rules.
“New York is the hardest working city in the country, but overtime protection hasn’t kept up with the times, even as productivity has skyrocketed,” Stringer said. “The new rules announced today by the Department of Labor will strengthen those protections, and make sure that an honest day’s work is rewarded with an honest day’s pay.”
Hourly workers are required to get time and a half pay when they put in more than 40 hours a week. But salaried employees who make more than the threshold and have jobs classified as executive, administrative and professional can be required to work extra time with no extra pay.
New York state has a higher threshold, $35,100 a year. But state rules dictate that people who make less than that, but more than the federal mark, get 1.5 times the state minimum wage instead of time and a half based on their regular pay.
Stringer’s report found that 67,000 workers in the city who currently get neither type of overtime pay will now be eligible. They’ll earn an average of about $300 more per year, boosting total take home pay in the city by $20 million.
Some 110,000 salaried workers will get federal overtime eligibility for the first time.
The current overtime threshold is below the poverty line for a family of four, and hasn’t been updated since 2004. As a result, only 7% of the salaried workforce now qualifies for overtime — down from 62% in 1975.

Nearly 5 million more U.S. workers will soon become eligible for overtime pay under new rules issued by the Obama administration. (CAROLYN KASTER/AP)

Under the old rules, businesses could classify low-paid managers and assistant managers in retail stores and fast food restaurants as executives and avoid paying them overtime.
Mayor de Blasio also welcomed the new rules. “President Obama and (Labor Secretary Thomas) Perez are taking an important step forward in addressing inequality, rectifying decades of decline in overtime eligibility in the American workforce,” he said.
Nationally, the new rules are expected to make 4.2 million more salaried workers eligible for overtime pay. Obama had initially proposed $50,440 as the threshold, but cut it back slightly in the final rules to address business concerns.
While proponents say most employers will either pay the required overtime or have employees stick to a 40 hour week, critics say many will slash base pay so that total hours and pay remain the same.
“These rules are a career killer. With the stroke of a pen, the Labor Department is demoting millions of workers. In the retail sector alone, hundreds of thousands of career professionals will lose their status as salaried employees and find themselves reclassified as hourly workers, depriving them of the workplace flexibility and other benefits they so highly-value,” said National Retail Foundation senior vice president David French.
“Most of the people impacted by this change will not see any additional pay.” 
