“You will be paid, just not on time,” said John Cooney, a former Reagan adviser. Shutdown would delay military pay

The armed forces and their families are once again facing the possibility of delayed paychecks.

If Congress and the White House can’t reach a spending deal by the end of the fiscal year on Sept. 30, members of the military would be expected to work during the shutdown, but would not get paid until the issues are resolved.

Story Continued Below

“You will be paid, just not on time,” said John Cooney, who served as deputy general counsel in the Reagan White House Office of Management and Budget.

Military pay often becomes a political football as budget negotiations go down to the wire because it provides each side with accusations they can use against each other, Cooney said. “It’s part of the rhetoric to influence the public. Each side accuses the other of harming the military and national security.”

( Also on POLITICO: Senate turns to CR that defunds Obamacare)

There have been some legislation efforts to take the troops out of the equation, but none has gotten off the ground.

In January, Sens. Mark Udall (D-Colo.) and Jerry Moran (R-Kan.) introduced legislation that would protect pay for the troops during a shutdown, but it didn’t get beyond the committee.

Politically, there’s little incentive for Congress to take the issue off the table because it’s a key part of the blame game. In reality, though, the uniformed military would fare relatively well during a shutdown because they’re guaranteed by law to be paid, whereas hundreds of thousands of Defense Department civilians risk more unpaid furloughs, Cooney said.

( Also on POLITICO: House Democrats wrestle with shutdown options)

With government-shutdown scares becoming an almost annual ritual, the Pentagon has little new planning to do to prepare for life without any continuing spending resolution beyond Sept. 30.

“Unfortunately, we’ve seen this movie before,” George Little, assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, told reporters at the Pentagon. “We have plans on the shelf if required to execute a government shutdown.”

Earlier this week, OMB asked all federal agencies to prepare for the possibility of a government shutdown. And at the Pentagon, spokesman Cmdr. Bill Urban said, “The planning is consistent with what has been done in previous instances where a potential lapse in appropriations was approaching.”

( WATCH: Obama: GOP 'holding the whole country hostage')

For now, he said he could not provide any more specific details. But if the guidance provided in recent shutdown drills is any indication, the Pentagon will not have the funds during the days the government is shut down to pay the military and civilian employees who are required to work.

During the shutdown scare in the spring of 2011, service members and essential Defense Department civilians were expected to work without receiving immediate pay. Instead, they would have to be paid retroactively, the Pentagon said at the time.

All personnel whose jobs are associated with protecting life and property are required to work. And in 2011, in addition to military operations overseas in Afghanistan, Iraq, Japan and Libya, the Pentagon also exempted:

— Inpatient and emergency outpatient care in defense medical treatment facilities and emergency dental care.

— Dining facilities and child-care activities.

— Some legal activities and contracting and logistics operations supporting exempted activities.

— Some education and training activities, including Defense Department Education Activity schools, and some financial management activities.

For those DoD civilian employees who were furloughed during a shutdown it would be up to Congress to provide Defense Department the authority to pay them retroactively.

( PODCAST: The Scrum: Government Shutdown vs. Obamacare Funding)

In every earlier shutdown, Cooney said, Congress has gone back and paid those furloughed.

Retired members of the military have a lot less to worry about as their benefits are not funded through the annual appropriations process, but instead paid for by multi-year bills. And those checks will keep coming because Congress has already committed the money, Cooney said.

While the Pentagon has gotten used to the shutdown threats, it has also become accustomed to Congress averting the crisis at the last minute.

For now, the Pentagon is hoping the same thing happens this time around.

“There is enough time for Congress to prevent a government shutdown,” Urban said, “and we hope that Congress will work with the administration to pass a full fiscal year 2014 appropriations prior to Oct. 1.”

Authors: