House Speaker Paul Ryan of Wisconsin calls for a conservative agenda last week as he delivers his first major policy speech since talking over the gavel just over a month ago. Credit: Associated Press

Paul Ryan wants a clear agenda for the Republican Party — a clear alternative to President Barack Obama and the Democrats.

We want the same things. Citizens deserve a clear choice and a robust, thoughtful debate over those choices over the next year. Ryan, the new Speaker of the House, has an opportunity to reset that debate.

He took a step in that direction in his first major political address since becoming speaker. His speech laid the groundwork for a discussion on a range of issues from Obamacare to tax reform. We think the speaker is wrong on some of these issues. But his speech was not, as a spokesman for former House Speaker Nancy Pelosi put it, "fixated on a toxic special interest agenda that threatens the economic security of millions of seniors and hard-working families."

Instead, it was Ryan the Wonk, pushing for conservative ideas within a conservative framework. Nothing wrong with that. The Democrats need to counter his ideas with better ideas of their own.

Also promising: Ryan promised not to "demonize, polarize, turn out your voters (and) hope the rest stay home." As he said, "Yes, it's possible we could win that way — but to what end?"

In a general way, Ryan outlined a conservative agenda — repealing Obamacare, flattening the tax code, cutting taxes, spending and national debt, promoting trade, revamping the military and offering conservative solutions to poverty and stagnant wages.

Ryan suggested combining poverty programs, expanded work requirements and letting states experiment. He was tough on the Obama administration's approach to foreign policy.

The main goal of House Republicans should be passing bills that "offer positive conservative alternatives" to those of Obama and the Democrats, he said.

We think Ryan is wrong on Obamacare — it's hardly a disaster when 17 million people who were previously uninsured now have coverage under the Affordable Care Act. And we'd have concerns about too much tinkering with federal poverty programs. By giving them over to the states, there is a real risk of a race to the bottom in which the poor get shoved aside.

But there is plenty of room for discussion about the Byzantine American tax code, military reform and new approaches to helping the poor. He's right about the need to expand trade agreements. And he has a point about Obama's handling of, in particular, Middle East policy. Yes, the president was handed a mess but Obama could have taken stronger action to prevent the humanitarian disaster in Syria.

In all, Ryan's vision is worth a hearty debate. Let's hope that happens.

Journal Sentinel editorials are the product of discussions among members of the Editorial Board. Contact: jsedit@jrn.com.