NFP Hospitals Bolster Financials, For-profits Confront Debt Issues

The improving economy and the PPACA are not the only reasons why not-for-profit hospitals are doing better than three years ago, says a senior analyst at Moody's Investors Service.

Financial profiles at not-for-profit hospitals have strengthened over the past three years, thanks in large part to the recovering economy and the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, Moody's Investors Service says.

"Stronger operating performance is the result of significant gains in the number of people with insurance, growing patient volumes, and sizeable reductions in bad debt expense. The Affordable Care Act increased insurance coverage in states that expanded Medicaid coverage, contributing to lower bad debt expense," Moody's says in its April Healthcare Quarterly newsletter. "The improving economy, related job gains, and stronger patient volumes also contributed to the sector's stronger performance."

Dan Steingart, a senior analyst Moody's, says the improving economy and the ACA are not the only reasons why not-for-profit hospitals are doing better than three years ago.

"I don't want to give the wrong impression that they haven't been working on their own, because they have," he says. "On the expense side hospitals have been working for several years to take a lot of costs out of the system, but there is a lot more work that can and will be done."

"Those hospitals that have installed electronic medical records systems and have them up and running do realize some incremental savings, but that's sort of a small, sexy area," he says. "There are a lot of nuts-and-bolts, blocking-and-tackling around supply costs, along with productivity. Reducing excess layers of middle management has been a popular area."

The productivity improvements include ensuring that providers work at the top of their licenses, and that the administrative bloating that often comes with mergers and acquisitions is addressed.

"Over the past few years there was slower wage growth, and salaries and benefits are the number one line-item for hospitals," Steingart says.

The improved finances come as hospitals contend with medical inflation, especially around pharmaceuticals. "It's been growing rapidly," Steingart says. "That's a big challenge because after labor, supplies, and drug expenses are a big portion of supplies. [Drugs are] the number two expense for hospitals."

The Effects of M&A

Although mergers and acquisitions in the not-for-profit hospital sector have increased over the past few years, Steingart says it's "a notoriously hard thing to measure" how these consolidations have affected hospitals' financial profiles.

"M&A in the not-for-profit sector ranges from large systems acquiring a much smaller community hospital to two larger hospital systems coming together," he says. "I wouldn't say you're seeing savings from M&A, but that is not because it's not necessarily there. It's just much harder to measure because you don't have these big deals that you can point to. You have a lot of drips and drabs in M&A."

"The other side of it, there was a big run up in financial performance in the past two years and that is due to a lot of other factors, the economy, the ACA and the hospitals' own cost-saving initiatives. To attribute that to M&A wouldn't be fair," he says.

The bottom line, Steingart says, is that the improved financial profiles for not-for-profit hospitals means they'll be better positioned to adjust to looming value-based and population health payment models.