People across the world have been paying tribute to Erno Rubik on his 70th birthday by baking Rubik's Cube-inspired cakes and sending him pictures.

Yesterday the Liberty Science Center got a slice of the action.

The "Great Beyond Rubik's Cube Cake-Off" was held to salute Rubik and the fact that the creator of the gizmo was not on hand did little to dampen the festivities.

"The thing about Rubik's Cube is that it inspired people in all sorts of unexpected ways in the 40 years it has existed," Liberty Science Center Paul Hoffman said.

Contestants and attendees sang "Happy Birthday" to Rubik and had a slice of birthday cake donated by Carlo's City Hall Bake Shop of "Cake Boss" fame. A video of the birthday salute will be sent to Rubik.

In all, 10 contestants baked and crafted Rubik's Cube-inspired creations of various shapes and sizes. But they all had one thing in common — the iconic cube.

The centerpiece was the Carlo's cake, a three-layer Rubik's Cube with a revolving top layer.

A panel of judges — Castano, Hoffman and speed cubing champion Anthony Brooks — chose the winning entries in the business and individual categories and a vote of visitors at the LSC today decided the "people's choice" award.

Carmen Rosa's Bakery, 37 Coles St. in Jersey City, earned the business category trophy for its four-layer cake that included two Rubik's Cubes and the number 70, for Rubik's age.

The winner for individual design was Dawn Feminello of Jersey City, who baked a cake consisting of four Rubik's cubes. The cake read "Rubik's Cube" and had a "70" on the top cube.

Feminello said she was shocked that she won because she entered the contest for fun.

"I just did it for the fun of it, but it's a cool idea, cool concept, so I'm very happy that I was chosen," Feminello said.

The people's choice winner was Gluten Free Gloriously, a gluten-free bakery in Stirling that made a cake called "Rubik's Touches the World" — the base was a map of the world, while the rest of the cake was made of Rubik's Cubes.