Why Choosing the Right Plan Makes Sense

Millennials and Gen X-ers who are healthy and think that a barebones health insurance plan will suffice may find themselves in for a surprise if an accident or injury occurs. A plan with a lower premium might suit many people who are in decent health and rarely go to the doctor, said Joe Ellis, a senior vice president at CBIZ Benefits and Insurance Services, a Cleveland, Ohio-based professional services company. Some individuals are “pretty sure” they will not “voluntarily” use medical services and are attempting to “mitigate the risk from an unexpected need for services,” he said.

Balancing the total cost of the plan compared to the deductible and coinsurance along with prescription drugs helps consumers estimate the approximate costs and decide on the right plan.

“I am not one to immediately opt for the best plan if it is reasonable to expect no need for it,” Ellis said. “For example, if I am in pretty good health, have no terribly harmful habits and haven’t used my health plan for a few years, I would choose the low premium cost plan, even if it had high deductibles.”

Just choosing the same plan you had previously can backfire especially if you only went to the doctor once or twice last year.

“Maybe it worked O.K., maybe it didn’t, but it’s not like you really dug in to your other options to know anyway,” said Amanda Lannert, CEO at Jellyvision, a Chicago-based employee benefits software company. “The truth is, unless there’s a palpable sense that you were getting screwed, it feels fine to leave things are as are.”

Factors To Consider

Many preventive services like an annual physical are now free, while other procedures such as a MRI could be subject to cost sharing in the form of deductibles or coinsurance. If you are unsure of the costs, call a health provider to determine the cost.

Start by figuring out how much money your budget allows you to spend on a plan, Ellis said.

“You want to be prepared before you go anywhere near your choices,” he said. “Taking the time to understand your financial picture makes it immensely easier shop for a health plan.”

Seeking advice from someone in human resources or an insurance agent is helpful, because such people are skilled at “focusing in on the things that matter the most,” he said. These factors could include the premium, the amount of money you have to spend on top of the premium and the breadth of providers near you.

“There is nothing more frustrating than choosing a plan only to find out that the network of providers is limited,” Ellis said. “Just because your primary care doc is in the network does not mean that the best specialists will be in network. The days of ‘everybody is in network’ are gone.”

When consumers wait until the last minute to choose a plan, they tend to just examine the monthly premiums and overlook the co-pay and deductibles, two of the largest financial factors to consider when they have a doctor’s or hospital visit, said Nate Purpura, vice president of consumer affairs at eHealth.com, an online health insurance exchange based in Mountain View, Calif. A recent survey from eHealth found that 37% said they spend more time thinking about their cable package than their health insurance plan.