Mark Alexander

The medical office building (MOB) market is quietly being driven to new heights.

According to latest data from Revista, a company that tracks the national medical office market: Florida is ranked #4 in the USA for MOB new construction with $5.5 billion in projects underway and the U.S. has 84.4 million square feet of MOB new construction underway covering 647 properties that total $68.3 billion worth of new MOB development

The rising demand for health care services is driving the need for more MOB space to be built to accommodate growth.

The drivers pushing growth in the medical office building sector are a combination of three factors that have created a perfect storm of strong underlying business fundamentals that are set to propel the MOB market over the next 10 to 15 years.

Demand Driver 1: Effects of Affordable Care Act and aging demographics

ACA has allowed 15.3 million people to obtain medical insurance between January 2013 and September 2015 that otherwise would not have been available to them. In January 2013 the US had 4.8 square feet of medical office space for each medically insured patient, but in September 2015, the U.S. had just 4.58 square feet of MOB space for each medically insured patient. The increased demand for medical care caused by the Affordable Care Act has created a gap or need for 62 million more square feet of MOB space to simply return to where we were in January 2013.

This ACA-fueled permanent uptick in demand for health care services and corresponding need for more MOB space to treat these new patients combines with aging baby boomer population (i.e. those born between 1946 and 1964). This combination of factors creates a steady increase in demand for HC services that will be sustained over the next ten to fifteen years.

The older we get, the more health care we need. According to the US CDC (Center for Disease Control), the growth in the number and proportion of older adults is unprecedented in the history of the United States. Longer lifespans and aging baby boomers have brought the US to its current status where 66% of all US health care expenditures are made by or on behalf of those aged 65 or older. According to the US Census Bureau, the total number of US baby boomers (BBs) that have reached the age 65 over the last two years has increased by 2 million. That increase of 1 million BBs each year is expected to increase to 2 million new BBs per year for each of the next ten years, from 45 million in 2015 to 65 million BBs in 2025. Then the BB growth rate is expected to slow a tad to 1.4 million BBs per year from 2025 thru 2030 when the US Census Bureau expects the baby boomer population over 65 years of age to reach approximately 72 million.

Given these factors, demand for health care services over the next 10 to 15 years will be quite remarkable. We need many more doctors and medical office buildings to service this rising demand for health care services. Health care delivery must and will change to support this escalating demand so the emergence of tele-medicine will play an ever increasing role in health care delivery going forward.

Demand Driver 2: Hospital systems and doctors move into communities

This trend is called the “Retail-ization” of Health Care. Hospitals and doctors are following the retail model of business by seeking shopping center type clinic locations closer to where people live to be more convenient to patients. In the past, hospitals were located in the older part of town and your main choice when you became ill was to travel to the hospital. This aging model is also the most expensive form of HC service delivery.

Today, there are many more choices to get health care closer to where you live at more affordable prices than a hospital and this trend will continue. These new retail oriented MOBs include urgent care centers, wellness centers, ambulatory surgical centers and mini-hospitals with bigger footprints of 20,000 to 40,000 square feet. These facilities house multiple medical specialties with some even including a surgery center for one-stop type medical shopping.

Today in the U.S., hospitals have approximately 5,400 properties totaling 1.5 billion square feet with a current estimated value of $581 billion according to Revista. The total number of medical office buildings is around 32,200 properties with 1.3 billion square feet for an estimated value of $344 Billion. But 63 percent of all MOBs today are aging structures that were built prior to 2000.

Since tele-medicine is expected to play a major role in the future of HC delivery, and hospitals and doctors prefer to serve patients in newer buildings, these older MOBs will need major retrofitting for technology and office lay-out up-grades. For these reasons, MOB construction activity is expected to remain brisk over the next decade, helping the local economies.

Demand Driver 3: Favorable capital environment

Investors and capital markets have flocked to this MOB sector because of the strong underlying business fundamentals noted above. According to Revista, over the past seven quarters (from January 2014 through September 2015), investors have purchased $18.7 billion worth of hospital and medical office properties. Over that same time frame, average hospital property values have increased from $262 to $361 per square foot and MOB average property values have increased from $245 to $317 per square foot.

These escalating sale prices or “cap rate compression”, as it is known in commercial real estate circles has occurred because there is more demand than supply of hospital and medical office properties. 85 percent of all MOBs (including hospital properties) are still owned by health care providers today. So, opportunities for investors cannot occur until these owner/occupants are convinced to monetize their facilities.

This constraint on MOB supply has helped escalate their prices over the past two years. Real Estate Investment Trusts, or REITS, today own only a small percentage of the MOB market. This is the case because they tend to strictly buy properties that have credit tenants with health care systems. The vast majority of the market is made up of non-credit tenants (i.e. groups of doctors).

The stability of the MOB market has been one of the main reasons why capital markets have embraced that sector. For example, according to Revista, tracking occupancy rates through the recession for high quality MOBs compared to high quality general office buildings in central business districts across the US, MOBs averaged a nine percent vacancy rate in 2007 and rose to 10.5 percent at the peak of the recession in 2009 before leveling off to a vacancy below 10 percent in 2014. Conversely, high quality general office buildings started with a 12.5 vacancy average in 2007 and peaked at 17.5 percent in 2009 before inching down to 1percent vacancy by 2014.

These metrics proved that the MOB sector is much more recession resistant than the general office market. This sector stability has attracted capital looking for security. MOB REITS are raising more money for MOB purchases and now equity and pension funds are have jumped into the MOB acquisition pool as well. Cross-over buyers to the market from other commercial real estate sectors have been noted.

Additionally, shifting exchange rates relative to the U.S. dollar and political instability around the world have combined to increase the attractiveness of the U.S. commercial real estate market, with the U.S. MOB sector appearing to be among the safest havens.

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1HEzANA