On Nov. 13 Cornell University’s School of Industrial and Labor Relations (ILR) held their social justice roundtable to showcase labor, diversity, and inclusion. The annual event featured some rather unsettling artwork.

Hypeline reported that some of the artwork done by Huck/Konopacki included an elephant appearing as a terrorist with a knife. He looks to be about to behead a man in an orange jumpsuit who represents “the middle class.”

Other pieces of artwork are equally as disturbing, but have even less to do with the theme of labor, and certainly not of diversity and inclusion. One shows the Republican elephant symbol sticking its trunk up a female’s dress. Another represents the Confederate flag as a swastika.

Cornell’s website lauds the event as one to do with “social justice.” As is mentioned:

“This event provides our undergraduate and graduate students with an opportunity to gain exposure to the labor movement and understand the crucial role it plays in bringing about change,” said Rachel Aleks, assistant professor in the Department of Labor Relations, Law, and History. “The roundtable is a unique event that educates students, through small group discussions with labor leaders, on current issues in the labor movement and allows them to learn about a variety of unions and non-governmental organizations working toward advancing worker rights,” she continued.

Hypeline included an e-mail statement from the dean of ILR, Kevin F. Hallock, which addressed the artwork:

“As part of the ILR School’s annual Labor Roundtable on Nov. 13, students and faculty invited labor and political cartoonists to display some of their work during a two-week period around the Roundtable,” Hallock wrote. “This year’s display again includes strong images, a few of which have provoked complaints by viewers as being inappropriate or offensive. Art can sometimes shock and be controversial, and the dialogue created can be important,: Hallock continued, citing academic freedom as a reason for their display. I hope the ILR school can flourish as a place where we discuss difficult issues and one where the members of our community feel safe and supported. I also hope that we can continue to prepare leaders who will help others increase inclusion, sensitivity and tolerance far beyond our school.”

Be that as it may, it still doesn’t explain how such imagery speaks to the theme or goes beyond denouncing an entire political party through juvenile manipulating of some stock images.

The list of representatives included: