For the sixth consecutive year, The Chronicle of Higher Education has recognized Delaware County Community College as a Great College to Work For.

The results were released as part of The Chronicle of Higher Education’s eighth annual report on the Academic Workplace in which 44,000 employees from 281 institutions around the country were surveyed. Delaware County Community College was one of 86 colleges, and one of only 24 two-year institutions, named as a Great College to Work For.

“It is a great honor that Delaware County Community College has been recognized for the sixth consecutive year as a Great College to Work For. This distinction is a testament to our commitment to creating a community that values the needs and contributions of every individual and fosters a collaborative, supportive environment in which faculty, staff and students can succeed,” said college President Dr. Jerry Parker.

This year, the college was named to the honor roll and recognized in the following categories:

Advertisement

 Compensation & Benefits

 Facilities, Workspace & Security

 Teaching Environment

 Work/Life Balance

Great Colleges to Work For is one of the largest and most-respected higher education workplace-recognition programs in the country. Administered by ModernThink LLC, the survey included a two-part assessment process: A survey administered to faculty, administrators, and professional support staff and an institutional audit that captured demographics and workplace policies and practices from each institution. Employee feedback was the primary factor in deciding whether an institution received Great College to Work For recognition.

Visit http://chronicle.com/section/Academic-Workplace-2015/879 to view the survey results.

For more information, visit www.dccc.edu

Cabrini College

RADNOR >> Erica Abbott and Nicole Mullen, both of Clifton Heights, earned president’s list honors from Cabrini College for the spring academic year.

Dean’s List students have achieved a GPA of 3.5-3.89 for coursework completed at Cabrini with a minimum of 15 credits. President’s list students have achieved a GPA of 3.9 or higher for coursework completed at Cabrini with a minimum of 15 credits.

University of Richmond

RICHMOND, Va. >> Brandon Waller, ’17, of Ardmore, the son of Scott and Karin Waller, is conducting ethics research in Richmond through the University of Richmond’s Summer Fellowship (URSF) program.

This summer, hundreds of U.R. students completed summer fellowships through The Richmond Guarantee, a university promise to provide a fellowship for at least one summer research or internship experience for all traditional undergraduate students.

Waller, a Haverford High School graduate and a leadership studies major and member of Richmond’s football team, has always been fascinated with health care and hopes to pursue a career in hospital administration.

Under the guidance of Jessica Flanigan, assistant professor of leadership studies and philosophy, politics, economics and law at U.R., Waller’s research focuses on the Affordable Care Act. Specifically he is closely examining the component of the law that requires people to either buy health insurance or pay a fine. Waller is comparing his own conclusions on the ethical implications of this mandate to his research on other people’s reactions.

“Learning ethics has been some of the most difficult thinking I’ve done, but it has been very rewarding as well,” said Waller. “Now I view situations more clearly and have discovered some of my own definitions of right and wrong.

“Not only does this research directly impact my understanding of how health systems work, I am learning how complex some of the issues facing Americans today really are while reducing my own ignorance to a sector that will always affect my life,” he added.

Regarding the URSF program, Waller said it allows him to further pursue his academic interests while not interfering with his athletic commitment.

“I’m grateful that I’ve gotten this summer fellowship because I’m able to both do the research I enjoy and stay in Richmond to meet my football needs,” Waller said.

To learn more about The Richmond Guarantee and other U.R. students benefitting from this program, visit www.richmond.edu/guarantee.

Robert Morris University

MOON TOWNSHIP >> Dana Davis of Garnet Valley and Jonnai Jones of Sharon Hill were named to the dean’s list for the spring 2015 term at Robert Morris University.

Wheaton College

WHEATON, Ill. >> Rachel Anstatt of Media and Sydney Gougeon of Glen Mills were named to the dean’s list for the spring 2015 semester at Wheaton College.

To earn dean’s list honors at Wheaton, an undergraduate student must carry 12 or more credit hours and achieve a 3.5 grade point average or higher on the 4.0 scale.

Stevenson University

OWINGS MILLS, Md. >> Philip Iacona and Jacqueline Kelly, both of Aston, earned dean’s list honors from Stevenson University.

The dean’s list recognizes full-time undergraduate students whose academic achievement is outstanding in each semester. To qualify, a student must earn a grade point average of 3.50 or better and must have completed 12 credits or more during that semester.

Keystone College

LA PLUME, Pa. >> Richard Hardy of Boothwyn was named to the dean’s list for the spring 2015 semester at Keystone College.

Dean’s list status goes to full-time students who complete 12 credits and achieve a grade point average of 3.70-3.99.

University of Rochester

ROCHESTER, N.Y. >> Giuliana Catherine Brawley of Glen Mills, a freshman majoring in linguistics and applied music (voice) at the University of Rochester, has been named to the dean’s list for academic achievement for the spring 2015 semester.

Brawley is studying in the university’s College of Arts, Sciences and Engineering as well as in the Eastman School of Music.

Brawley is the daughter of Charlie Brawley and Maria Brawley, and a graduate of Archmere Academy in Claymont, Del.

Lebanon Valley College

ANNVILLE, Pa. >> Nearly 150 Lebanon Valley College students will march with The Pride of the Valley Marching Band this year.

The marching band performs at all home football games as well as appearances at various exhibitions throughout the fall semester.

Local students who are members of The Pride of the Valley include:

Ryan Holland of Landsdowne, a graduate of Upper Darby High School who is pursuing a bachelor of arts in sociology, Gianna Rossillo of Glenolden, a graduate of Interboro High School who is pursuing a bachelor of science in physics, and Asia Burnett of Upper Darby, a graduate of Mastery Charter High School who is pursuing a bachelor of arts in undeclared/open major.

The band is under the direction of Dr. Christopher J. Heffner, director of bands and associate professor of music, and drum majors Sam Porter, Meghan Owens, and Michael Halcovage.