The European Central Bank‘s now-defunct bond plan, the Securities Market Program, has been widely dismissed by euro crisis observers as an unsuccessful effort to get a handle on the euro zone’s debt crisis: its “limited” and “temporary” nature meant it wasn’t an effective firewall, while German opposition doomed it from the start.

AFP/Getty Images

The ECB ultimately bought around 220 billion euros of government bonds under SMP in 2010 and 2011, yet it wasn’t enough to dispel fears of a euro breakup. A new bond program, OMT, was announced one year ago and has no pre-set limits. Unlike SMP, the new plan is widely seen as a roaring success, sharply reducing bond yields without having to be used.

But the findings of a new ECB paper suggest the old SMP program wasn’t so bad after all, and delivered more bang for the buck in terms of bond yields than asset purchase programs created by the Federal Reserve.

A pair of ECB economists estimate for every 1 billion euros of “repeated interventions” in bond markets, the five-year government bond yield fell from a low of 0.01-0.02 percentage point (for Italy) to as much as 0.21 percentage point for Greece. Ireland, Spain and Portugal were somewhere in the middle.

“These estimates…are considerably larger than what is found in the literature for purchases of U.S. Treasuries during 2008-09 within the Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchase (LSAP) program,” authors Fabian Eser and Bernd Schwaab wrote. “This is intuitive given the differences in market sizes, liquidity, and default risk premia.”

On top of that, there were “large and economically significant announcement effects,” in May 2010 (when the ECB unveiled SMP) and August 2011 (when it was reactivated and expanded to include Italian and Spanish bonds), according to the paper.

The authors estimate that about three-quarters of the initial effect on bond yields lasted into the longer term.

The paper notes some caveats, especially when comparing ECB bond buying with asset purchases of the Fed and other central banks.

The ECB bought debt of stressed countries whose bond markets had grown illiquid, a contrast to the U.S. and U.K. bond markets. And bond markets in southern Europe and Ireland are by and large much smaller than in the U.S.

In the case of large asset purchases and quantitative easing by other central banks, the signaling effects of bond purchases are largely related to monetary policy.

“Bond purchases under the SMP also send a signal,” the authors wrote.

“First, purchases may be interpreted to mean that the Eurosystem regards country yields as higher than justified based on country fundamentals,” they wrote.

Another implication: “Purchases may also be understood as a signal that the Eurosystem is willing to consider and implement non-conventional approaches to combat the crisis,” they wrote.

All in all, a pretty favorable look-back at the SMP.