The single biggest mismatch doesn’t involve Ross and Rachel, Lyle and Julia or even Stallone vs. Dennehy in “First Blood.” It exists along the NFL line of scrimmage. The hulking offensive tackles possess incredible muscle and strength, but they might as well be oak trees sticking out their limbs in an attempt to stop speed-rushing defensive ends.

On a weekly basis, defensive end DeMarcus Ware reveals the growing gulf between the skill sets of the two groups. He has 10 sacks, more than rewarding the Broncos’ faith in him. They took a calculated risk that the 32-year-old Ware would be revitalized after last year’s injury-riddled season with Dallas. The Broncos guaranteed him $20 million over the first two seasons of a three-year contract. Ware is now back among the elite rush ends.

“Last year, I was playing a different technique, getting double-teamed more inside. It was hard on my body,” said Ware, who suffered injuries to his quadriceps and elbow, which held him to six sacks in 11 starts. “I played with like 20 different tackles. We were constantly bringing guys in on a bus and working them out every week. Here, I have a new role. I feel much better physically.”

The Broncos brought in Ware to make the lives of quarterbacks miserable. Welcome back to Denver, Kyle Orton, now running the show for Buffalo, which is Denver’s opponent Sunday.

“Having coached against DeMarcus Ware before when I was in this league, he’s an outstanding player,” Buffalo coach Doug Marrone said.

The Broncos wanted a pairing similar to what they had with linebacker Von Miller and end Elvis Dumervil in 2012. Through 12 games, Ware and Miller, who has 12 sacks, project to finish with 29 sacks, which would be half a sack less than the Miller-Dumervil franchise record for a duo. Ware doesn’t hide his desire to break that record. No one doubts him.

“All he needed to do is get healthy,” running back C.J. Anderson said. “You are talking about a Hall of Famer, one of the best of all time.”

As is his custom, Ware began peeking at his statistics after 10 games. He likes to know where he stands. This season, the sack title remains within reach of his 34-inch arms. He sits four behind Kansas City’s Justin Houston.

“It’s how you start and finish,” Ware said. “And I am trying to finish off the right way.”

To understand how Ware’s journey might end, it helps to go back to the beginning of his NFL career. He arrived at Dallas as a first-round pick from Troy (Ala.). He learned his Hulk Smash dance as a rookie from a special-teamer but, more important, began mixed martial arts training at the suggestion of defensive end Greg Ellis.

It launched a career of learning, of constantly adding to his repertoire. Ellis taught Ware how to use his hands to shed blockers. From former Miami Dolphins star Jason Taylor, Ware incorporated the hand stab into a defender’s chest. The chop of a quarterback’s arm? Ware is paying homage to Hall of Famer Bruce Smith. In an interview Thursday, Ware jumped from a couch to show how Houston’s J.J. Watt executes the rip-and-curl move, lowering his body to avoid the defender’s arm.

“You constantly look for ways to improve,” Ware said. “You have to in this game. When you might not be as fast, you have to use your head.”

Ware has talked pass rushing with one of the all-time greats, Deacon Jones — “His intensity is amazing,” Ware said — and body shaping with Hall of Famer Michael Strahan, who stressed the importance of getting leaner and lighter later in your career.

The education and the physical transformation paid off in a single play this season against San Francisco standout tackle Joe Staley. Ware attempted spin moves against Staley earlier in the game that weren’t effective. He filed away how Staley reacted. Later in the game, at a key moment, Ware feigned the spin and stopped halfway as Staley blocked air waiting for Ware to finish his rotation. Ware then got around him for a sack.

It was akin to Greg Maddux introducing a third pitch the second time through the lineup to puzzle an opponent.

“Nothing about him surprises me,” Denver coach John Fox said of Ware. “He’s had an incredible career.”

His teammates notice. It’s no wonder he carries an E.F. Hutton presence during games.

“DeMarcus, man, it’s fun to work with him. He understands all the different protections,” defensive lineman Derek Wolfe said. “He will just tell you what to do during the game. He will say something, have a code, and I will know what it means. I will do whatever he wants. When a Hall of Famer tells you to do something, you listen and just do it.”

Ware is built like a basketball player, standing 6-foot-4 and weighing 258 pounds. He brings power, rangy limbs and a healthy “tenaciousness,” defensive coordinator Jack Del Rio said. Broncos offensive tackle Ryan Clady wasn’t sure he was going to make it in the NFL after he faced Ware as a rookie. Ware’s moves and leverage dazzled him.

While Ware appears at first glance like a clone of Miller, they could not be more dissimilar. Miller, a fourth-year pro, may have even more natural athletic ability but is still learning the fine points of his craft.

“He is just faster and stronger than other guys,” Ware said. “I have never played with anyone like Von. In many ways, I still think he’s raw. His ability is so special.”

To help Miller realize his potential, if not regain traction on his career, the Broncos turned to Ware. They had a spot open. And Ware recognized the fit. He had grown tired of the Cowboys’ mediocrity. He begins his first December in Denver with the end of his career nowhere in sight.

“I’ve been in December seasons where you are 8-8, but now being 9-3 and looking for some type of playoff berth and making it to the Super Bowl, everybody wants that,” Ware said. “But we have to focus on each week. We have to continue to attack.”

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck