An analyst upgraded the stock of Tenet Healthcare Corp. last week, and the price rose over 9 percent, its biggest daily gain of the year. But two days later, Tenet was dropped from the Standard & Poor’s 500 index because its market value had fallen so sharply.

It’s been a tough stretch for the Dallas company, which became a health care giant after a string of mergers and acquisitions. Tenet has roughly doubled its revenue and workforce in the last three years and is now the No. 3 hospital operator in the country.

Tenet, whose headquarters is in downtown Dallas, has 130,000 employees — on par with American Airlines.

Earlier this month, when the S&P said Tenet no longer ranked among the top 500, its market cap had dropped by $3 billion since July. In general, investors have been souring on hospitals because they’re no longer getting much lift from the Affordable Care Act. The law is also pushing to reduce expensive inpatient treatment.

But Tenet has its own issues, too, starting with the highest debt burden in the business. In the last three years, Tenet’s long-term debt has almost tripled, to $14.4 billion.

There’s also the overhang of a kickback scandal and whistleblower lawsuit. Tenet disclosed the case several years ago and reserved $20 million to cover it. In February, Tenet provided an update: It has offered $238 million to settle with the government — and that may not be enough, it said in its annual regulatory filing. Tenet had to increase its litigation reserves for the case, and that led to a net loss of $140 million last year.

Tenet had another piece of unusual news. In January, the board was expanded by two seats so it could add directors from a New York hedge fund. Glenview Capital Management, Tenet’s largest investor, with 18 percent of outstanding shares, also has the option of appointing two independent directors next year.

The refreshed board isn’t waiting to act. “In light of the decline in the stock price,” long-term stock awards to CEO Trevor Fetter have been cut by 19 percent, the board wrote in its proxy last month.

That’s a notable hit, even for an executive whose pay package was valued at $15 million last year. It’s also a public message that the pressure is on.

“The market views our company very differently than it did just seven months ago,” Fetter told analysts in a conference call in February.

Growth in hospital revenue has slowed for Tenet. And in the fourth quarter, same-hospital admissions and patient days declined from a year earlier.

The upside from the health law has also been dampened because Texas and Florida, Tenet’s two largest markets, haven’t expanded Medicaid. That would reduce the number of uninsured and reduce uncompensated care in the two states. Tenet doesn’t expect the states to change this year.

Tenet’s trials are another example of how the health care industry is adjusting to Obamacare, sometimes painfully. The state’s largest insurer, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas, has lost about $720 million on exchange customers in the past two years and has been trying to right the business.

This week, United Health said it would exit the exchanges in most states where it now offers that insurance. Many consumers are also unhappy that narrow provider networks and higher out-of-pocket costs are becoming common.

Tenet beefed up in preparation for the post-Obamacare world and was generally cheered on by investors. In addition to buying hospitals, it expanded aggressively into outpatient treatment and management services.

Tenet has a relatively small footprint in hospitals in Dallas. With Baylor Scott & White Health, it’s a partner in five hospitals in the area. But it’s a major player in San Antonio, El Paso and Houston, and Texas accounts for a quarter of Tenet’s hospital beds nationwide.

Tenet has adopted a new strategy. It no longer plans to grow rapidly through large mergers and acquisitions, Fetter said. And after it finishes four hospital projects early next year, it plans to tap the brakes. Cuts in capital spending are coming soon.

The new focus has turned to improving operations, expanding margins and increasing cash flow. Tenet recently sold five hospitals in the Atlanta area for $575 million, part of its push to concentrate in locations where it’s one of the top players.

The new efforts should enable Tenet to pay down debt and buy back stock. Fetter called it “a natural evolution in our strategy.”

Last year, Tenet merged with United Surgical Partners, giving it a major outpatient surgery network. That segment is fast-growing, with higher profit margins.

Tenet also operates Conifer, a health business services unit in Frisco. It has over 800 clients, including many in the not-for-profit sector, and 14,500 employees nationwide. That’s another way to diversify and inject a growth element.

“They’re going in the right direction,” said Jason McGorman, a senior industry analyst at Bloomberg Intelligence. “Outpatient service generates more cash flow. And if they’re not growing admissions, it’s prudent to pay off debt and maybe buy back stock.”

If that doesn’t lift Tenet shares, more moves will follow. Hedge funds can get restless fast, especially when they’re on the board.

Twitter: @mitchschnurman