The few words that Mary Louise Lee spared at 10:30 a.m. Saturday were nearly inaudible.

Having warmed up nearly three hours earlier singing to her husband, Denver Mayor Michael Hancock, the accomplished vocalist was saving her voice for producers of “America’s Got Talent.”

“I really wake up every morning singing,” Lee said. Her face contorted into a playful grimace when she talked about occasionally waking up to Hancock’s singing.

She was one of about 1,200 people who tried out for the television series that held one day of auditions in the belly of the Denver Convention Center.

After the show’s producers visit 11 cities nationwide, they will invite 4,000 to 5,000 people in late February or early March to the next wave of auditions — videotaped performances in front of judges Howard Stern, Heidi Klum, Mel B and Howie Mandel.

Lee said that that, if invited back for a potentially life-changing second audition in spring, “I would be OK with that.” The company she was working with in 2011 and 2012, Afterthought Theatre Company, closed shortly after she performed in its 2012 production of “Annie.”

For her audition Saturday, Lee chose a song from “The Wiz,” her first musical with the theater. The song ” Believe in Yourself” became her personal and professional motto after she sang it at Hancock’s mayoral victory party in 2011.

In their 20 years of marriage, Lee said she and Hancock have made a conscious effort to build their careers separately. She has identified with singing since she belted her first notes at the age of 3 and struggled to retain that independence throughout her husband’s political career.

“He’s very supportive of me keeping myself,” Lee said.

Lee said Hancock has made it to each of her musical theater shows and as many of her band’s performances as he could. He was not at her audition Saturday.

Waiting in the basement of the convention center with a bodyguard from his detail, Lee said she was hardly nervous.

She has performed in front of tens of thousands of people at Broncos and Nuggets games and international military events. In 1992 and 1994, she said the Department of Defense flew her around the globe to sing for American troops stationed in Korea, Japan, Panama and Honduras.

“As soon as I get into the song, any nervousness I have goes away,” she said.

She and the thousands of other acts who try out for America’s Got Talent will be notified of their fate on the show in early 2014.

Alison Noon: 303-954-1223, anoon@denverpost.com or twitter.com/alisonnoon