Community center could add quarter million to Wilmington’s annual costs

WILMINGTON- The prospects of a town-owned community center at the former high school building appeared a bit more bleak after Wednesday evening’s selectboard meeting.The bottom line, according to figures supplied by Stevens and Associates, is that the two most viable options would add as much as $250,000 to $300,000 net increase in annual operating costs to the town budget.Bob Stevens and Jeffrey Glassberg, a real estate development consultant, guided board members, and about 17 members of the public attending the meeting, through their budget and long-term cost estimates for two of the five (including a “no build” option) alternative plans for redeveloping the former school building. Both of the plans came with similar price tags, about $5.4 million in development costs. One of the plans, “Option B,” would include redevelopment of the entire existing building, to include space for municipal services, areas to be rented by other agencies, and apartment space. But even accounting for the sale of the current town hall building and the town’s current town office expenses, Stevens said the option would still add about $247,000 to the town’s annual budget. “It’s a fundamental issue,” Stevens said.Under the second plan, Option D, the old section of the building would be demolished, and the 1955 building would be redeveloped for town offices, public space, and a smaller amount of rental space for agencies. But Stevens said that option would cost even more than Option B, at about $292,000 per year. “It’s because there isn’t as much rental space,” he said. “I wish I could say I have a silver bullet here, but this is the information you wanted.”Stevens said the numbers weren’t exact, but gave an idea of “order of magnitude.” But the bottom line, he said, is that “if this were to happen, if the town were to take this over, we’re looking at a quarter million for the town to carry the cost and debt.”Stevens’ and Glassberg’s presentation was met with silence from board members, which selectboard chair Tom Fitzgerald attributed to “sticker shock.” Responding to a question from the public, Fitzgerald noted that a penny on the tax rate raises about $69,000 in Wilmington. “So this would add 3 to 4 cents,” he said.Stevens told board members his firm was ready to work on more precise plans and costs, once the board chooses an option they want to pursue.In other matters, representatives from Deerfield Valley Rescue met with the board to discuss several issues ranging from funding to Act 250. Deerfield Valley Rescue administrator Heidi Taylor said the ambulance service is struggling with an increase in Medicaid patients. The problem, she said, is that Medicaid only pays 43% of the cost of a transport. The number of Medicaid patients in DVR’s coverage area has doubled under the Medicaid expansion that was part of the Affordable Care Act, Taylor said. Although legislation has been proposed to increase the Medicaid reimbursement, Taylor said legislators have proposed a tax on rescue services. “The legislation would bring our reimbursement up to the 80% reimbursement physicians get, but they’ve said ‘If we do that, we’re going to charge you a provider tax of 3.5% of everything you bring in.’ That’s going to cost us even more money, so we’re trying to fight that.”Deerfield Valley Rescue founding member Merrill Mundell asked board members to include the rescue service in Act 250 municipal impact discussions. “We feel we should be included in your discussions, and we should sign off on it. If you won’t represent Deerfield Valley Rescue, we can get party status. But that shouldn’t be necessary and we should be working together.”Board member John Gannon said the board was in the process of improving their Act 250 response to municipal impact questions, and asked if Deerfield Valley Rescue would like to be included in the same manner as the Wilmington fire and police departments. “We’re planning to plagiarize from Dover’s process,” Gannon said. “If you’re invited to that table for discussion, and we work with you to make sure your needs are met, would that make you comfortable?”Mundell and other rescue members appeared to agree that the plan would satisfy their concerns.