We must build a wall to protect our border! It is becoming clearly evident that a wave of illegal immigrants is potentially headed our way.



These people will become a burden on our society. They will eat up our health care system. They will make our schools overcrowded. They will overtax our transportation infrastructure.



Our housing prices will rise. They’ll bring their guns. They will take away our jobs. We must keep them out. These people are no good.



Their ideas are out of the mainstream. They do not have the same beliefs as we do. Think about it: This impending wave would rather watch baseball than hockey. They would rather drink Bud Lite than Molson.



They can’t speak French. They don’t know what a Loony is. They are untidy, unscrupulous and quarrelsome. They sing the wrong national anthem, and they don’t believe in the Queen.



Fellow citizens, if the foolishness gripping those below our southern border does not abate soon, we are facing a potentially catastrophic influx. If so many Americans try to head north to flee Donald Trump’s regime, we will no longer be the Canada we have become.



Do we really want to eat burgers instead of smoked meat? Play four downs instead of three? Say “what?” instead of “eh?” Do we want to give them free health care and affordable drugs?



It is high time we start the emergency plans for a wall to extend straight across the continent, all 6,416.455 kilometers (3,987 miles) of it. We should also ready the analysis of what it will cost so we can send Trump the bill. Really, should we have to pay to build a wall to keep our precious Canadian national identity intact? I do not think so.



If American citizens decide to flee the fascism they vote in, Canada should not have to absorb the political refugee population it creates. Canada is for Canadians, not those people from the south. I will ask Parliament to act swiftly in this matter.



A theoretical speech by Justin Trudeau, prime minister, Canada



Art Edelstein lives in East Calais — not too, too far from the Canadian border.