ObamaCare Compliance Rules Paying Off For Paycom ObamaCare Compliance Rules Paying Off For Paycom Already a leader in cloud-based human capital management software, Paycom is seeing new opportunities as companies struggle to comply with Affordable Care Act regulations. As the stock nears a new buy point, Paycom hopes its Enhanced ACA product will help keep its trend of triple-digit earnings growth going. 600x450 640 x 480 ISA 444 kb/s T3M20S mp4 Flash 2015-06-19T10:30:00 Paycom Software, cloud-based human capital management sofware, ObamaCare stocks to buy, Affordable Care Act regulations, complying with ACA, base-on-base, how to read stock charts, IBD Stock Analysis MATTHEW GALGANI

Every company needs to manage its payroll and human resources. And the Affordable Care Act (ACA) has added new complexities to health care benefits. That means more business for 2014 IPO stock Paycom Software (NYSE:PAYC), which provides cloud-based human capital management software covering everything from recruiting to retirement.

The Oklahoma City-based firm now also offers Enhanced ACA, a product to help companies comply with ObamaCare regulations.

Key Fundamentals

Revenue growth has moved higher in each of the last four reports. Paycom has delivered a few quarters of triple-digit earnings gains.

For the full year, analysts expect earnings to rise 61%, followed by a 38% gain in 2016.

A 24% return on equity and a 73% five-year average EPS growth rate help Paycom earn IBD's highest possible Composite Rating, 99.

Institutional interest in the stock is reflected in its A- Accumulation/Distribution Rating and 1.5 up/down volume ratio, plus a steady rise in fund ownership in recent quarters.

Chart Analysis

After going public in April 2014, Paycom formed two bases before shooting higher in November. It then formed a double bottom and is now working on a later-stage base-on-base pattern.

Paycom has a history of stumbling after a breakout before eventually climbing higher. It happened in September, January and again in May.

But the stock has generally found support around its 10-week line.

Trading within its latest base has tightened up, and its relative strength line has been trending higher into new high ground.

The buy point is 39.85, 10 cents above the peak on the left.

See related video at Investors.com/ibdtv.