I bet that President Obama and Valerie Jarrett think they’re really clever and boxing in Senate Republicans by floating the story in the Washington Post that they are considering appointing Nevada’s Republican Governor Brian Sandoval to the Supreme Court.

Update: that didn't last long. Via CNN:

Nevada Gov. Brian Sandoval on Thursday ruled himself out for a nomination to the Supreme Court, one day after news broke that President Barack Obama was considering the Republican to replace late Justice Antonin Scalia.



"Earlier today, I notified the White House that I do not wish to be considered at this time for possible nomination to the Supreme Court of the United States," Sandoval said in a statement. "I have also spoken to Senators (Harry) Reid, (Dean) Heller and (Mitch) McConnell and expressed the same desire to them. The notion of being considered for a seat on the highest court in the land is beyond humbling and I am incredibly grateful to have been mentioned."

Yes, Sandoval is a Hispanic, so the intent here is to alienate Hispanics from the Republican Party – though Democrats killed the foreseeable appointment of the first Hispanic to the Supreme Court when they filibustered Miguel Estrada’s nomination to the DC Court of Appeals, widely seen as a step toward an eventual SCOTUS nomination. But that was then, this is now, and besides Republicans can be criticized for doing things Dems get away with (for instance, declaring that no presidential election year nominations to SCOTUS should be taken up by the Senate).

But in order to spring this trap, Obama would have to actually nominate Sandoval, and the GOP would have to yield to media pressure and schedule Judiciary Committee hearings. Both are very unlikely.

If Obama actually nominated Sandoval, there would be screams of protest from the left. See, for example, Think Progress:

Democrats think that with Trump looking increasingly like the GOP nominee, they have a good chance of winning the White House and possibly the Senate majority, so an actual nomination of Sandoval would waste an opportunity to switch the Supreme Court to a hard left majority.

But suppose Obama does nominate Sandoval, why would the GOP reverse their reliance on the Biden Rule? There would be no benefit whatsoever to giving Sandoval hearings. That would only benefit the Democrats’ argument about insulting Hispanic voters with a rejection. By sticking to Biden’s position, they have less liability, arguing from principle, not the specifics of Sandoval himself.