President Barack Obama, left, arrives for a CNN televised town hall meeting hosted by Anderson Cooper, right, at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va., Thursday, Jan. 7, 2016. Obama's proposals to tighten gun controls rules may not accomplish his goal of keeping guns out of the hands of would-be criminals and those who aren't legally allowed to buy a weapon. In short, that's because the conditions he is changing by executive action are murkier than he made them out to be. (AP Photo/Pablo Martinez Monsivais)

WASHINGTON (MEDIA GENERAL) – Lawmakers had a busy first week of 2016. Congress sent a bill repealing Obamacare and defunding Planned Parenthood, prepared for the president’s last State of the Union, and debated gun regulation. Here is your Capitol Edge.

“This is the closest that we have come to repealing Obamacare,” Speaker of the House Paul Ryan (R-WI) said at a signing ceremony Thursday.

Republicans have tried more than 50 times to get a bill both the House and Senate can agree on to send to President Obama. They finally passed a bill on Wednesday. President Obama, as expected, vetoed the bill Friday.

“That is what we promised to do – we are making good on that promise,” Rep. Marsha Blackburn (R-TN) said about passing the bill.

Republicans, for now, do not appear to have the support to overpower the President.

“You know, we have passed some things out of the House that people didn’t think we would ever get passed, so we’ll see,” Blackburn said in an interview Wednesday.

President Obama announced several executive orders this week he believes will curb gun violence. Some Republicans said they plan to challenge his executive orders by doing whatever they can to cut off funding for his plans.

Next week, the House is expected to vote on whether or not to punish North Korea after they claim to have tested a hydrogen bomb.

The biggest story on Capitol Hill next week though will be the State of the Union. You can expect President Obama to talk about ISIS, guns and the economy. He said this speech will be unorthodox compared to his past speeches, but didn’t offer any other details.