Photos and more below.

One of the most vigorous legal challenges to the Affordable Care Act, popularly known as Obamacare, is taking place right here. Little Sisters of the Poor, an organization based in Denver and Baltimore, is challenging an Obamacare mandate concerning contraception, and a not-so-brief brief filed yesterday in the United States District Court for Colorado outlines how they feel rules put in place to distance religious organizations from such matters still connect them to acts they regard as sins. The argument, documents, a video and more below.

Representing the Little Sisters is The Becket Fund for Religious Liberty, which describes itself as "a non-profit, public-interest legal and educational institute with a mission to protect the free expression of all faiths." While the organization has defended religious institutions "from A to Z...Anglicans to Zoroastrians," it is best known for defending Christian groups.

Little Sisters of the Poor photos courtesy of The Becket Fund

A page devoted to the Little Sisters suit notes that it is the 72nd the fund has filed against the Obamacare mandate, with other plaintiffs including "Belmont Abbey College, Colorado Christian University, East Texas Baptist University, Houston Baptist University, Ave Maria University, Wheaton College and Hobby Lobby."

Still, the Little Sisters' offering appears to be among those getting the most traction. On December 31, a few months after the original complaint was filed (we've also shared it here), Supreme Court Justice Sonia Sotomayor issued a temporary restraining order exempting the organization from following the mandate until the legal challenge runs its course. If Sotomayor hadn't acted, the mandate would have kicked in the next day.

The aforementioned brief, which runs 63 pages, describes the Little Sisters as "Catholic nuns who devote their lives to caring for the elderly poor. They provide care for the elderly of every race and religion, love and respect them as if each elderly person were Jesus Christ himself, and treat them with dignity and compassion until they die. The Little Sisters perform this ministry in homes throughout the world, including almost thirty in the United States. Although they have operated their homes in this country for over a century in the highly regulated sector of elder care, federal law has never before put them to the impossible choice of either violating their faith or violating the law."

Related Stories Contraception Mandate v. Denver's Little Sisters of the Poor in U.S. Supreme Court

The issue, according to the document, is EBSA Form 700, which the federal government requires religious institutions to fill out in order for other organizations to handle contraceptive coverage to which they might object. "The government's argument for requiring this specific act hinges on the fact that the Little Sisters have associated with religious benefits providers to provide employee benefits consistent with their shared Catholic faith," the suit maintains, adding, "The government argues that...filling out EBSA Form 700 is a meaningless exercise, to which the Little Sisters should have no objection."

Wrong.

Continue for more about the latest filing in the Little Sisters of the Poor's Obamacare challenge, including documents and a video.

The brief lays out three main complaints about the procedure. The first? Since the form "designates, authorizes, incentivizes, and obligates third parties to provide or arrange contraceptive coverage in connection with the plan," the brief contends that "once the Little Sisters execute and deliver the Form, the Mandate purports to make it irrevocably part of the plan by forbidding the Little Sisters to even talk to the outside companies that administer their health plan, 'directly or indirectly,' to ask them not to provide the coverage."

In addition, the brief allows that "regardless of whether the government sincerely believes EBSA Form 700 is morally meaningful, the relevant legal question is whether the Little Sisters do. And on that point, there is no dispute: the Little Sisters cannot execute and deliver the contraceptive coverage form without violating their religious conscience. The government may think the Little Sisters should reason differently about law and morality, but their actual religious beliefs -- the beliefs that matter in this case -- have led them to conclude that they cannot sign or send the government's Form."

Finally, the government's so-called "scheme" is said to violate the First Amendment, because it has "exempted a large class of religious organizations based on unfounded guesswork about the likely religious characteristics of different religious organizations. The government has no power to discriminate in this fashion, allowing some religious organizations to survive while crushing others with fines for the identical religious exercise. This violation of the Free Exercise and Establishment Clauses is compounded by a clear violation of the Free Speech Clause: the Mandate both compels the Little Sisters to engage in government-required speech against their will, and prohibits them from engaging in speech they wish to make."

Look below to see a video introduction to the Little Sisters of the Poor, followed by the new brief and the original complaint.

Send your story tips to the author, Michael Roberts.

More from our Politics archive circa September 2013: "Marijuana: Does Amendment 64 decision mean states can defy feds on Obamacare?"