Meet Sarah Johnson, fitness DVD addict. The 32-year-old considers her handpicked collection of workouts her “prized possessions,” particularly the titles featuring instructor Shaun T.

“He helped me lose 30 pounds and so many inches,” she says.

Johnson loves progressing through a familiar routine. She feels like she’s become buddies with the folks on screen.

So why doesn’t Johnson have plans to buy any more DVDs — not even this month, the biggest time of year for the fitness industry? There’s simply too much competition for her muscles.

Her marketing job keeps her on the road a week each month, and her phone travels with her everywhere. Google’s fastest-growing app category in 2014 was health and fitness. So for those hotel-room workouts, Johnson now uses Sworkit (free, or $1.99 for the premium version, iOS and Android), which spits out customizable circuit-training routines.

On the side, she’s experimenting with streaming workouts, which have transformed the Internet into an all-you-can-sweat buffet. For now, Johnson has just sampled free options, including the BeFit YouTube channel and Popsugar (available on YouTube and Hulu), and she’s been consistently pleased with the content, if not always her WiFi connection.

With so many new alternatives available — most of them considerably cheaper than investing in another disc — of course Johnson and her fellow DVD devotees are straying. The only question is how much longer the market has before its final cooldown.

When historians study the fitness DVD era, they may be able to pinpoint its demise to March 11, 2014. That’s when Collage Video, which started hawking workout programs in 1987, shocked its die-hard fans with the news it was closing.

The site’s thorough reviews and preview snippets had made Collage the Web’s most trusted DVD source. But shoppers had been increasingly reading up on possible purchases, and then clicking over to Amazon or eBay to save money.

“The outlook was bleak,” admits Peter Castro, vice president of BayView Entertainment, a New Jersey studio that produces and distributes exercise videos. Rather than see one of its best customers go under, BayView purchased Collage and relaunched the site in June with a revamped look and lower prices.

Castro is convinced that if any segment of the DVD market has the stamina to survive, it’s fitness. Unlike movies or shows most people watch only a handful of times, workouts are often replayed daily. Fans generally want to experience them in a single location — often a living room or basement. Plus, the core customers aren’t especially tech-savvy, says Castro, who’s amazed how much business is still conducted through catalogs and by check. Until four years ago, he notes, Collage was selling VHS.

But even Collage will likely migrate — at least partially — to a streaming, subscription-based model, Castro says. He’s just not sure when, or how different it will look from the other Web sites jostling for the title of the “Netflix of fitness.” The list of competitors keeps growing. Some are focused on one studio or instructor, such as Cathe Live, Suzanne Bowen Fitness and Barre3.

Although the workouts these outlets offer might not seem so drastically different from what’s on DVD, the online format is reshaping the industry.