Millions of people signed up for Obamacare health plans in 2014. But states and the federal government faced a quandary when it came to keeping them enrolled for 2015.

They could set up an automatic renewal process, so that customers who took no action would just stay in their existing plans. Or they could require every customer who wanted to stay insured to go back online and shop for a new 2015 plan.

There were trade-offs to each approach. Allowing people to default into existing plans meant they might not shop around — and many might get stuck with big premium increases when cheaper plans were available. But forcing people to shop again meant that distracted or unmindful customers might end up losing health coverage.

The federal government opted for the automatic process, determining that keeping people insured should be the paramount goal. But Rhode Island, which is running its own insurance marketplace, decided that every customer would need to shop for health insurance again.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The divergence has led to an interesting experiment in consumer behavior. In the federal marketplace, so far, 35 to 40 percent of 2014 customers came back to HealthCare.gov and picked a plan for this year, according to the Department of Health and Human Services, while the remainder were automatically renewed. In Rhode Island, 78 percent of people have gone back to the marketplace to shop, according to state officials.

“I am exuberant,” said Christine Ferguson, the former director of HealthSource RI, which decided to require everyone to renew. Ms. Ferguson was just replaced in her job by the state’s new governor. “The original decision, which I made back in the summer, was pretty scary because no one else did it.”

Photo

Of those customers who came back to the state’s market to shop, 60 percent selected a health plan different from the one they bought in 2014, an unusually high number for a health insurance market. Only about 13 percent of seniors enrolled in Medicare prescription drug plans, for example, switch plans in a given year. In the Massachusetts health insurance market before the Affordable Care Act, only 7 percent of customers changed plans. The Department of Health and Human Services hasn’t yet published any numbers on the rate of plan-switchers in the HealthCare.gov states.

Ms. Ferguson said her state’s decision was driven by a desire to ensure that consumer choices were shaping the state’s health insurance market. The idea behind the Obamacare insurance marketplaces is that, by allowing consumers to shop for the best health plans each year, insurance companies will have incentives to keep their products attractive and their prices competitive. Ms. Ferguson said that she felt that only real consumer engagement would push the insurance industry to offer the products people most wanted at competitive prices.

“Consumers can put pressure on carriers and providers to do a better job of providing what they as consumers want,” she said.

In most markets in the country, consumers can get a much better deal by switching from the most popular 2014 plan to a new one in the same category. (A map made by my colleague Amanda Cox shows you the spread in every market in the country.)

A federal study found that 70 percent of consumers would save money if they switched plans. That divergence was particularly pronounced in Rhode Island, where the cost of the least expensive plan in the “silver” category actually went down by more than 10 percent, while the price of the most popular 2014 silver plan increased.

Many of the Rhode Island customers who switched were able to capture big savings. (Of course, price may not be the only reason one plan is better than another for a given customer. Others may have changed plans to have access to different benefits or networks of doctors and hospitals.)

Health Insurance Customers in Rhode Island Shopped, and Switched Health Plans Unlike most states, Rhode Island required all customers to shop for a plan if they wanted to stay insured in 2015. The result: 78 percent of returning Rhode Island customers shopped around, and 60 percent switched plans. Share of returning customers who selected a 2015 health plan Rhode Island HealthCare.gov +78% +40% Share of returning customers who selected a 2015 health plan Rhode Island HealthCare.gov +78% +40%

Aggressive shopping by consumers may change future insurance carrier behavior. At least one academic study has argued that, in the Medicare market, the low switching rate has led to sharp increases in the prices of existing, popular plans. A high shopping and switching rate has the potential to shape the future of health insurance markets.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But there is also a downside to the Rhode Island approach: Some 22 percent of the state’s customers from December no longer have health insurance.

That number may not turn out to be as substantial as it looks. The enrollment period this year runs through Feb. 15, so some shoppers may enter the market late, missing only a month or two of coverage. There is also some natural attrition in the individual insurance market: People may have left the market because they found a job with insurance coverage, married or had some other life change that helped them find insurance elsewhere. But the number of Rhode Island insurance customers who lost coverage will almost certainly be higher than in the states with automatic renewal.

Rhode Island officials, knowing that people who missed the deadline would lose coverage, mounted a substantial outreach effort to get people back online. Ms. Ferguson described letters, emails, robocalls, advertising, social media and news interviews to alert customers to the looming deadline. The state set up a jokey “nag tool-kit” website, devised to instruct parents in how to nudge their children to go to the exchange.

The federal government also invested heavily in advertising. Returning customers received between three and 10 “touches” from the federal government, according to Health and Human Services. But it was not able to achieve the high shopping rate seen in Rhode Island.

Heather Howard, the director of the State Health Reform Assistance Network at Princeton University, which is helping some states with their exchanges, said Rhode Island’s policy choice may have been as important as its outreach effort.

“All the message testing seems to show that mandates and threats do work,” she said. Still, she argued, an ideal policy would include both lots of shopping and the highest possible retention rate. If she were running a marketplace, she’d probably err on the side of auto-renewal.