WASHINGTON – Rep. Steve Scalise's effort to move up the ranks of House leadership won't happen without a fight.

House Speaker John Boehner's surprise announcement Friday that he's stepping down as speaker and giving up his Ohio House seat on Oct. 30 has touched off a leadership fight. Scalise, a Jefferson Republican, is running for House Majority Leader, the No. 2 House leadership post. Scalise is currently House Majority Whip., the No. 3 leadership post.

Scalise suffered a setback Monday when one of his competitors, conservative Rep. Tom Price, R-Ga., won the endorsement of House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Paul Ryan, R-Wisc., and Rep. Jeb Hensarling, R-Texas., a favorite of conservative House members.

"Tom Price is a committed conservative and a good friend," said Ryan in a statement. "He and I have served for years together on the Budget and Ways and Means committees, working to pay down our debt, fix our tax code, and grow our economy. Tom has a proven record of advancing conservative solutions and principles. He has the knowledge and skills needed to be an effective Majority Leader, and I'm proud to support him."

Ryan's name is familiar to many because he was Mitt Romney's vice presidential running mate in 2012, when Democrat Barack Obama won re-election as president.

Hensarling's name is also familiar to some in Louisiana after he temporarily blocked legislation last year to prevent sudden, large increases in flood insurance premiums, before the bill was taken away from control by Hensarling's committee, allowing the measure to move through the House and Senate.

Scalise's chances were given a boost when another member of the current GOP leadership team, Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, R-Wash., the Republican Conference chairwoman, announced Monday night that she would not run for majority leader.

"The best way right now for me to empower my colleagues through positive change is to remain Conference Chair," said McMorris Rodgers in a statement.

A source close to Scalise said the congressman worked the phones over the weekend, successfully building support for his candidacy. And the source said Scalise has assembled a strong team of fellow House Republicans to work for his candidacy. There was a meeting of lobbyist supporters of Scalise Monday to discuss strategy to help advance Scalise's campaign for majority leader.

The last Louisiana member of Congress to serve as House majority leader was the late Hale Boggs, D-New Orleans, who died in a plane crash while campaigning in 1972 for a House colleague in Alaska

House Republicans are meeting Tuesday afternoon to discuss the process and timing for the new leadership elections. It comes as the GOP caucus is divided between conservatives who want to mount a strong effort to repeal the Affordable Care Act and defund Planned Parenthood, even though there's little likelihood they have the two-thirds votes in the House and Senate to override a certain veto by President Barack Obama.

On Monday, current House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., confirmed that's he's seeking the speaker's job – a post that ranks only behind the vice president as successor to the president of the United States.