<p>Greg Johnson</p>

One week after Knoxville-based Community Health Alliance entered into a “voluntary runoff” — aka “went broke” — Consumers’ Choice Health Insurance Company in South Carolina effectively shut down as well. Totally unsurprising.

The two Consumer Oriented and Operated Plans created by the Affordable Care Act, as noted here before, were run by a management team headed by Jerry W. Burgess and left 27,000 insured in Tennessee and 67,000 insured in South Carolina in the lurch, now seeking insurance elsewhere for 2016.

So far, 11 of 23 CO-OPs have failed, meaning more than $1 billion in taxpayer-backed loans to fund the CO-OPs are likely gone for good. What does the White House have to say about the serial failures?

“What we have seen is that people who are shopping on these marketplaces in general are finding a good product at an affordable cost,” said Obama spokesman Josh Earnest. When asked about Congressional Budget Office projections that overall enrollment will be about half earlier forecasts, Earnest said, “The Affordable Care Act I think is working better thus far than anybody predicted.”

Tennessee Republican Sen. Lamar Alexander, chairman of the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee, wrote to acting head of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services Andrew M. Slavitt asking for a non-ridiculous explanation. Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, co-authored the letter.

“The CO-OPs are not living up to these expectations. To date, eleven ACA CO-OPs … have collapsed,” Alexander wrote. “As a result, hundreds of thousands of Americans will lose their health insurance plans and will have to scramble to find new plans, most likely with higher premiums and deductibles. There are indications that additional CO-OPs will close before the end of the year bringing even greater uncertainty to the nearly 870,000 individuals enrolled in CO-OPs nationwide.”

Alexander and Hatch cited the $2.4 billion the Obama administration pumped into the CO-OPs and questioned what could be seen as accounting shenanigans endorsed by CMS. “Our concern deepened when we became aware … (CMS) will allow CO-OPs to request that surplus notes be applied to CO-OP program start-up loans,” Alexander wrote. CMS told CO-OPs “applying surplus notes to the startup loans will enable CO-OP borrowers to record those loans as assets in financial filings with regulators.”

Abracadabra. Like that, liabilities become assets. “This raises a number of questions about whether CMS is allowing creative accounting to occur to enable the CO-OPs to appear more profitable than they actually are and if that false positive will then result in even more failures,” Alexander and Hatch wrote. Of course it is and of course it will.

ACA CO-OPs have come and they will go. Obamacare apologists like Earnest are still in delusional denial. The whole plan, but particularly the CO-OP piece, was flawed from the get-go. Alexander will likely never get straight answers from the gang that can’t shoot straight in the White House.

Greg Johnson’s columns appear on Wednesdays, Fridays and the second Sunday of each month. Follow him on Twitter @jgregjohnson. Email him at jgregjohnson@hotmail.com.