New Jersey residents shopping for individual health insurance on the federal website will have more options this year, as the marketplace has attracted both new carriers and new plans.

Rates are up for many of the standard offerings, according to one broker. However, at least one company - the non-profit co-op Health Republic of New Jersey - has been able to shave its rates anywhere from 10 to 20 percent, according to a spokeswoman.

Healthcare.gov, the website through which people can buy policies and obtain a federal subsidy to defray the cost, opened for "window shopping" yesterday. The three-month open enrollment begins this Saturday.

"Knock wood, it seems to be okay," said insurance broker David Oscar of the website, which buckled under the strain of handling applicants a year ago.

He noticed rate increases that were about 9 or 10 percent over last year - a large jump, but one that mirrors the trends of previous years. "It seems like it's awful, but depending on where you fit in the spectrum and what kind of subsidy you might qualify for, it may not be so bad," said Oscar, of the Fairfield-based firm Altigro.

The choice of policies offered is based in part on location, so residents living in different regions of the state will have a slightly different selection of plans available to them.

A resident of High Point would see 43 plans pop up on the website search, while someone in Cape May would see 47. Residents of Jersey City can choose from among 47 policies, while residents of Phillipsburg would see just 43. People who live in Monmouth County appear to have the most choices, at 51 plans.

All told, five companies in New Jersey now sell policies on the government marketplace:

• Horizon Blue Cross & Blue Shield of New Jersey is adding four new plans to the five it sold through the website last year, according to a spokesman.

Horizon will offer two plans in the Gold category, four in the Silver and two in the Bronze category of policies, along with a low-cost "catastrophic" plan that kicks in only when medical bills are become very high.

Of those Horizon policies that were offered both last year and this year, price changes ranged from a drop of four percent to an increase of three percent, said Thomas Vincz, spokesman for the carrier.

• Oscar, the startup firm moving into the Jersey market for the first time, debut on the site - but only in selected regions of the state.

• Health Republic of New Jersey, a non-profit co-op, drastically expanded its offerings to 21 plans, up from nine last year. Rates have dropped on most plans 10-20 percent, according to Cynthia Jay, spokeswoman. The company in particular tried to make its Silver plans - the level of coverage that proved to be the most popular last year - more competitively priced.

The company is also offering a community-based network for Monmouth County - a low-priced option for people who would rather have a deep, local network of participating providers than a wider, but less comprehensive network. The company also eliminated the requirement that patients get a referral to a specialist from its plans, Jay said.

• AmeriHealth offers at least 13 different choices. It is also one of the companies that has pruned its list of offerings, eliminating at least one plan that was offered last year, according to Oscar.

• UnitedHealthcare is the second carrier that jumped into the New Jersey federal marketplace after remaining on the sideline.

The early debut of the federal website Sunday night took some carriers by surprise. That means some of the "click through" pages that show shoppers a list of participating doctors may not fully load yet, for example.

Nationwide, 112,000 people lost coverage over citizenship or immigration problems, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services announced Monday. That means they couldn't prove they were entitled to purchase policies through the Affordable Care Act, which is meant to cover only people residing here legally.

People who bought policies through the federal marketplace can switch plans during the open enrollment period, but Oscar said he thought that while half of them may consider switching, most of them won't.

The only people switching would be those who bought too little insurance, not too much, he predicted. They made the mistake of shopping based on the monthly premium, not on the depth of coverage or breadth of provider network.

"I'm telling people to shop a little bit better," he said. "You've got to shop smarter."

Kathleen O'Brien may be reached at kobrien@njadvancemedia.com, or at (732) 902-4557. Follow her on Twitter @OBrienLedger. Find NJ.com on Facebook.