Louisiana's new Democratic governor promised to expand Medicaid in his state.

Remember Addyi (flibanserin), the "female Viagra" approved last year? In its first 2 months on a market, only about 1,000 prescriptions have been filled. (Pittsburgh Post-Gazette)

Should physicians speak up if they have depressive symptoms? (The New York Times)

Britain's strike by junior doctors is underway.

Will President Obama extend an olive branch to Republicans on the Affordable Care Act in tonight's State of the Union address, or perhaps jab them with more executive orders? Stay tuned.

A lung transplant for a patient with black lung disease was broadcast live in China. (Global Voices)

Johnson & Johnson will have to pay $124 million for improperly marketing risperidone (Risperdal), after the U.S. Supreme Court declined to hear the company's appeal in a South Carolina case.

The Perceval sutureless heart valve won FDA approval, said its British manufacturer.

An FDA advisory committee takes another look today at a depot formulation of buprenorphine for treating opioid addiction.

Questions are being raised about that "study" of chocolate milk and high school athletes' cognitive function.

Ezekiel "Zeke" Emanuel -- of "die at 75" fame -- can add venture capitalist to his CV.

This social worker was told he had a split personality -- by a client with schizophrenia. (Washington Post)

A PLOS blogger looks at the research on red wine and cognitive performance.

Top-selling asthma controller medication Advair (fluticasone/salmeterol) could have a generic alternative soon, Reuters reports.

Here's another take on the new U.S. dietary guidelines. (BMJ blogs)

The first round of pro football playoffs left several key players on the winning teams with injuries. Former NFL team physician David Chao, MD, reviews their chances of playing this coming weekend.

And speaking of the NFL, is Tom Brady really getting anything special from his "anti-inflammation" diet? Vox is skeptical.

Ambulance services are getting into the Medicare fraud act, according to The Doctor Weighs In.

Morning Break is a daily guide to what's new and interesting on the Web for healthcare professionals, powered by the MedPage Today community. Got a tip? Send it to us: MPT_editorial@everydayhealthinc.com.