Police are now looking for 37-year-old Teresa Vandiver.

An Oklahoma City mother is facing felony child neglect charges, after prosecutors determined she took methamphetamine while pregnant.

She went into labor early, and her baby boy died. It turns out it's not the first time it has happened.

Police are now looking for 37-year-old Teresa Vandiver. Court papers state she had one other child, a baby girl, that was stillborn. Autopsies at the medical examiners showed both babies had meth in their system.

Vandiver has been arrested before accused of trespassing and stealing a car but has never faced any drug charges in Oklahoma County.

Court papers state in August of 2012, Vandiver gave birth to a son inside a home in southeast Oklahoma City after going into labor early. She and her husband then called 911, and the baby was rushed to Southwest Medical Center by ambulance where he later died.

Court papers state Vandiver said she had not received any prenatal care and could not remember all the pregnancies she has had, but said this was not the first infant death she has had due to preterm birth.

Initially, Vandiver denied drug use, but said she had used methamphetamine in the past.

Hospital records at Southwest Medical Center show she tested positive for meth when she brought in her son.

She told investigators one of her children was taken away at birth due to meth being found in her system.

Court papers state DHS records show Vandiver gave birth to a stillborn child in September of 2011, and that the reporting party stated the baby girl died due to the mothers meth usage.

The medical examiner's report listed the probable cause of death as stillbirth due to unknown etiology with possible methamphetamine toxicity. The medical examiner listed the manner of death as unknown, but listed maternal drug abuse as a possible factor.

We went to Vandiver's last known address but no one was home.

Neighbors said they have seen a lot of drug activity going on here in the past but claimed the family that used to live here had moved a while back.

Now police are left looking for this mother, who desperately needs help kicking the habit, and who now faces a criminal felony charge as a result.

Court papers also state this mother had other children that tested positive for meth at birth and lived. All of them have been placed in protective custody.