8/13/2014: Chicago teen, boyfriend accused of killing her mother in Indonesia. NBC 5's Natalie Martinez speaks with a friend of one of the suspects who went to school with him at NIU. (Published Wednesday, Aug. 13, 2014)

A Chicago teen and her 21-year-old boyfriend, in custody in connection with the death of the teen's mother, have taken psychiatric examinations, Indonesian authorities said Thursday.

The half-naked body of 62-year-old Sheila von Wiese-Mack was found stuffed in a suitcase after being left outside the five-star St. Regis hotel in Denpasar, on the island of Bali, earlier this week.

Von Wiese-Mack's daughter, 19-year-old Heather Lois Mack, and Tommy Schaefer were arrested at another resort after leaving the suitcase with a taxi driver and sneaking off, authorities said.

Authorities said Wednesday the pair were being uncooperative while behind held at South Kuta police station at Nusa Dua.

"We have done a blood test and psychiatric test to try to relate their motive to the case. Maybe they are mentally unstable," Police Chief Djoko Hari Utomo told reporters. "So far we haven't got any information on what problems lie behind the murder, if it's financial or something else. We still do not know."

Chicago Woman's Neighbors, Friends React to Bali Murder 8/13/2014: Daughter, boyfriend implicated in woman's murder. NBC 5's Susan Carlson reports. (Published Wednesday, Aug. 13, 2014)

At the same time, NBC Chicago learned that police in Oak Park, where von Wiese-Mack lived with her daughter before moving to a condo in downtown Chicago, made 86 calls to the family's former home between January 2004 and June 2013 for a combination of domestic violence, theft and a missing person.

The domestic incidents involved the daughter and mother, according to authorities.

Neighbors said the Oak Park home masked a volatile relationship between the mother and daughter, but none expected it would end in such tragedy.

"I heard they had some domestic issues especially after Heather's dad died but I didn't know it was this bad," said Lois Mack's former classmate, Alex Bailey.

Von Wiese-Mack's husband, composer/producer James Mack, died in August 2006.