To the Editor:

Re “Hi, It’s Your Doctor,” by Ezekiel J. Emanuel (Op-Ed, Sept. 6):

I am all in favor of moving care, as much as possible, from the acute-care setting to the home. But I doubt that there are cost savings to be gained in treating the very elderly, no matter how we try.

As a cardiologist for 25 years, I have seen a dramatic change in the acuity and complexities of the patients we treat. Because of stents and defibrillators, as well as much more effective pharmacotherapy, patients are living much longer, with multiple illnesses, with resulting readmissions.

“Frailty” is a new diagnosis, seen more and more as patients live with conditions that were once fatal and are now chronic. This is a consequence of our great success in treating heart disease.

More home care, as Dr. Emanuel advises, is a compassionate alternative to hospitalizations and should be advanced. But as these patients continue to live with their severe multiple chronic illnesses, they will continue to be very costly to treat. We need to accept that fact.

PETER G. MANDELSON

Barrington, R.I., Sept. 7, 2013

To the Editor:

If a doctor can make house calls and deliver good patient care, we are all for it. We are not in favor of allowing “computer software” and “algorithms” to determine who needs to go to the emergency room. Triage must be done by an experienced medical professional, or patients risk dangerous delays in treatment. Time lost at the computer cannot be regained.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Emergency physicians are also all for saving money in the health care system and have substantial control over hospital admissions, which contribute to the high cost of health care in this country.

But deterring or diverting patients from the E.R. will do little to reduce overall costs, since the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports that all 130 million E.R. visits in 2010 accounted for only 4 percent of our country’s health care dollar. Of those, only 8 percent were for non-urgent medical conditions.

House calls cannot replace the emergency department.

ALEX ROSENAU

Allentown, Pa., Sept. 9, 2013

The writer is president-elect of the American College of Emergency Physicians.

To the Editor:

We in the Mid-Atlantic Consortium (Washington Hospital Center, Virginia Commonwealth University and the University of Pennsylvania) are a site in the Independence at Home Demonstration, a part of the Affordable Care Act intended to show the care and cost-effectiveness of home-centered primary care.

Part of the design of the demonstration is aligning the financial incentives within traditional fee-for-service Medicare to support some of the frailest patients and their providers in managing their own care.

When the 1.5 million eligible beneficiaries have access to effective Independence at Home programs, Medicare may realize savings of $6 billion a year.

Photo

For more than 20 years, we have directed longitudinal, complex chronic-care, house-call programs providing the primary care that the elderly limited to their homes need, typically for the last two to four years of life.

We, and hundreds of similar programs around the country, have made it possible for them to avoid unnecessary emergency room visits, hospitalizations and nursing home placements.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

BRUCE KINOSIAN

GEORGE TALER

PETER BOLING

Philadelphia, Sept. 6, 2013

The writers are geriatricians at the University of Pennsylvania, Washington Hospital Center and Virginia Commonwealth University, respectively.

To the Editor:

As a primary-care geriatrician, I began seeing frail elderly patients in their homes in Westchester County, New York, a few years ago. These homebound patients had no access to primary care. They are the oldest old with advanced illnesses and are often confined to hospital beds because of dementia and neurological, psychiatric, heart and respiratory illness.

These people struggled without preventive medicine or attention to their chronic illnesses. It made utmost sense to me to bring the care to their homes.

Requests for home care pour into my office daily from families. I hope that other doctors will read Dr. Ezekiel J. Emanuel’s article and join the ranks of visiting doctors. The work is incredibly rewarding!

CATHRYN A. J. DEVONS

Ardsley, N.Y., Sept. 6, 2013

To the Editor:

Ezekiel J. Emanuel suggests that house calls by doctors, once measures of mercy, be measured instead by money. As a medical student in the 1950s, supervised by professors, I made more than 50 house calls to sick welfare recipients. From them, and later from occasional postoperative visits to change dressings in homes, I learned that the conditions in which patients live are useful clinical data.

The motive for house calls should transcend both mercy and money. The transcendent motive, when safe and feasible, should be to observe the courses and outcomes of medical events under real conditions rather than under the artificial conditions of hospitals and doctors’ offices.

HUNTER H. McGUIRE Jr.

Richmond, Va., Sept. 6, 2013

The writer is a retired surgeon.

To the Editor:

Our health care system has thought of house calls at best as a quaint eccentric practice and at worst has ignored their relevance to good care.

Dr. Ezekiel J. Emanuel’s commentary highlights the importance and value of providing acute, continuing and transitional medical care in the home to frail or seriously ill adults.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

A major barrier to advancing the field has been a lack of quality metrics for house calls. House calls have been excluded from national efforts to define quality. In the post-Affordable Care Act world, if you can’t prove that the care delivered is of high quality, you’re dead on arrival.

The Commonwealth Fund and the Retirement Research Foundation are supporting efforts to develop such quality metrics and the development of a national registry to support the delivery of high-quality care in the home. This is a necessary step to providing the best care to America’s most vulnerable patients.

CHRISTINE S. RITCHIE

BRUCE LEFF

San Francisco, Sept. 6, 2013

The writer are geriatricians at the University of California, San Francisco, and Johns Hopkins.