FUN SHOW

Congratulations Aston Elementary fifth graders and parents on their great variety show.

PROUD GRANDPARENT

IN HEAT

A recent Sound Off claimed that Republicans would like us to be heating our homes with wood stoves and lighting them with kerosene lamps. I don’t know what that implies. Is it a metaphor for some GOP position? I do know that the Greens, most of whom are progressive (Hillary) or socialist (Bernie) Democrats, really do want us to heat our houses with windmills and cook with rays from the sun.

MORE MONEY

To “Joe In Upper Darby,” the only reason you are paying less than your old policy is if you have health problems. Your premiums would have been much higher before. But with Obamacare, the rest of us – you know, the healthy people that take care of ourselves – are paying higher premiums for you. It’s not fair.

THE INFORMER

YUMMY CHICKEN

I can’t wait for the new Royal Farms to open up on Route 452, so they can show that other convenience store what real chicken taste like.

Advertisement

CHICKEN AFICIONADO

RUSSIAN PLOT

The caller saying that bad weather is to blame on man going into space has to be one of the most ridiculous things I’ve ever read. We all know it’s due to the Soviets and their weather controlling machines.

TIN FOIL HAT MAN

RAINING MAN

If the comment about the recent rainfall being the result of space exploration is serious and not satire, it should be in the inaugural class of the Sound Off Hall of Fame. Also deserving is the one last week from the pro-union caller hoping that all the businesses go out of business, and those that think that all Republicans are wealthy and are out to “destroy the middle class.”

NO WOOD

It scares that there are really people out there like “GOP Values” who think this kind of stuff. Republican policies would have us heating our homes with wood stoves? Maybe if you’re talking about the Republican of the 1790s, in other words the predecessors of the modern Democrats. If it wasn’t for the conservatives parties in this country, we would have never industrialized, be it heavy industry or industrial agricultural.

TROUBLEMAKERS

I know when Trump had his rallies, the Bernie Sanders 99 percenters were out there disrupting everything and Trump got the blame for his “incendiary language.” What happened in Nevada for their Democratic convention? Same thing – Bernie’s people. They disrupted, they turned over tables, they bum rushed the stage, they made death threat against a woman. I don’t hear any condemnation against Bernie’s people from the Democrats. They’re brushing it under the rug – we’ll all get along, sing “Kumbaya” around the campfire on the hippie commune eventually. What say you, Bernie Sanders supporters? Are you “feeling the Bern?”

DON’T CUT ME

To illustrate how unqualified Donald Trump is for president, it would be like letting a carpenter perform surgery on you. A carpenter knows carpentry, but if you let him operate on you, it would be disastrous. Similarly, Donald Trump may know his business, but to let him be president of the United State would be disastrous for our country. And yet Republican voters don’t seem to understand how unqualified Donald Trump is. I wonder if these voters would let a carpenter operate on them.

BAD CREDIT

Be aware of giving your credit card to someone and not swiping it like you normally would do. I did that, and about a week later something was charged to my company’s credit card for purchase online. Luckily, the credit card company shut it down, but that just goes to show you that unfortunately you can’t trust anyone any more.

FIXING IT UP

“Real Fix For Our Education System” has no facts and figures to back up their insults they throw around. That’s because they’re a typical clueless right-wingers who doesn’t believe in facts and figures, just throwing around invective.

TRUMP’S MONEY

For the fool complaining about Donald Trump raising big money from big donors, he’s raising it for the GOP in the individual states. Last week he was in Camden raising money for the New Jersey GOP. And he will be going across the country to each state and raising money for each state GOP to run their campaigns in November. So wise up; don’t be ignorant.

VOTER WHO KNOWS