Did I say Bruce? My mistake. That was last year. This year he’s Caitlyn, meaning that he’s transformed himself into a woman.

This does not happen every day, you know. Most people, in this country at least, stick to what they know.

A man knows he’s a man. A woman knows she’s a woman. This used to be so simple. Now we have to guess.

Thanks to Liberals and their Progressive agenda, no girl or woman is safe anywhere in America particularly at school.

Privacy is out. Modesty is forbidden. Big Brother is watching. From the moment the Obama Administration ordered all public schools to allow transgender people to use any shower or bathroom facility -- boys must be permitted to undress with girls and girls with boys -- Big Brother has got you covered everywhere you go.

Your life, your comings and goings belong to the Government in what amounts to a war on women under this new policy enacted by Liberals.

The washroom used to be a zone of safety for women, so when Jewish sophomore Eliana Kopley ran for her life when she was being pursued by SJP and BDS Jihadist brutes at UC-Irvine – where was she supposed to hide when any Islamist crazed goon has the same rights to access the same ladies’ room?

Obama meant it when he talked about changing the very foundation of this country -- meaning that no longer does this land belong to you and me. It belongs to him and it belongs to Loretta Lynch, his attorney general, who came on TV to heatedly equate the transgender movement to the Civil Rights Movement.

Case closed.

So don’t you dare argue that your privacy rights come first. This makes you a bigot. Progressives will accuse you of this using hysteria rather than logic.

They need a cause. Without a cause, Progressives lose the means to hammer us with guilt and they lose their think tank foundations and all that money.

So as I have it figured, one fine day, a slow day, they sat around in search of something suitable to ruin the country…a new cause.

The old causes were not doing so well. The healthcare thing? Obamacare? Not good. It’s been a bust. Global warming? Also getting old and tiresome. Immigration and open borders? Americans were starting to resist, especially with Trump reminding us that the wrong people were getting in.

The attempts to diminish Israel and to humiliate its Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu – these too were missteps that backfired.



As one specialist explained, in a typical school of 2,000 kids, two will likely be transgender. Two!

Then, to top it off, Obama’s most trusted advisor, Ben Rhodes, confirmed what we always suspected, that the Iran Nuke Deal was a farce from the word go.

Yes we were tricked.

So they had to find something else to bamboozle us, something fresh, and along came Bruce Jenner making headlines for becoming a woman.

Now here was a minority in search of a Progressive cause. Were there more like him – or her? Yes, the most acceptable figure is 700,000.

That’s how many people there are in America who move from gender to gender and if that sounds like a fraction of the country – well it is.

The rest of us number 320 million, so to appease less than one percent of the population, all us have to relinquish our rights to privacy.

But a cause is a cause and without a cause Progressives have no reason to go on living.

As one specialist explained, in a typical school of 2,000 kids, two will likely be transgender. Two!

So if that’s your daughter in the public washroom or shower and you see a man about to enter, you have no right to stop him.

The law is on his side. All he has to say is, “Today, I am a woman.”

So we are all in this together, every single American. It began with Bruce Jenner and ends with an Obama legacy leading us all down the same toilet.

New York-based bestselling American novelist Jack Engelhard writes a regular column for Arutz Sheva. He is the author of the international classic “Indecent Proposal” now followed by the prophetic newsroom thriller “The Bathsheba Deadline.” Engelhard is the recipient of the Ben Hecht Award for Literary Excellence. Website: www.jackengelhard.com