The topic of religion is among the list of items that may possibly cause controversy between specific groups. It is something individuals feel passionately about, and overall it has a major impact on the way society operates. The Indianapolis Recorder Newspaper dug up the details on what the world would look like without religion.

Education

Religion plays a big role in education that many do not realize. Several schools in the U.S. are religiously affiliated and without religion, many schools and childcare facilities would not exist.

According to the National Center for Education Statistics, in 2012 there were 30,861 private schools in the U.S., serving 5.3 million Pre-K-12 students. This accounts for 24 percent of the nation’s schools. Most private schools students (80 percent) attend are religiously-affiliated schools.

The University of Notre Dame prides themselves on faith and service. In 2011 there were 982 full-time and 103 part-time employees. Without religion, several individuals may not have jobs in education.

Social Justice

A world without religion may result in less compassion for others and volunteering efforts. Feeding America, a nationwide member of 200 member food banks has 46,000 agencies that help operate 58,000 food programs. About 51 percent rely strictly on volunteers and 62 percent are faith-based organizations.

The Corporation for National & Community Service believes “People who give to and volunteer for religious organizations are more likely than others to donate time and money to non-religious charities.”

Spiritual

Without religion there would be no place for spiritual counseling or to go for confession for Catholics.

Catherine Sanderson, a psychology professor at Amherst College said religion gives people a sense of meaning because they may belong to a community, church group or synagogue. She said religion and faith helps individuals makes sense of tragedy such as “God only gives you what you can handle,” or “There is a silver lining in the suffering.”

Economic

Several businesses have faith-based foundations such as Chick-fil-a, Forever 21, Tyson Foods Inc., Hobby Lobby, In-N-Out Burger, Timberland and others.

It is reported that shoppers spent an average of $704 on religious holiday gifts and seasonal décor in 2011. When it comes to Christmas, the average Christmas tree was priced at just over $42 and $2.6 billion was spent on wrapping paper worldwide.

Health Care

Americans who have chosen not to participate in the Affordable Care Act, have turned to faith-based nonprofits to cover medical expenses. Joel Noble, public policy manager for Samaritan Ministries, a “Biblical, non-insurance approach to health care needs,” said Samaritan is adding about 1,000 families a month — up from about 700 a month, a year ago.

Experts say religion and faith may be linked to wellness and health treatment. “Many Americans rely on prayer and spirituality for the benefit of health,” said Stephen Straus, former director of the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine at the National Institutes of Health.

If there was no religion, the percentage in full health recovery may vary and ministries wouldn’t be around to assist those in need.