Health Reform: Americans unlucky enough to have to buy insurance through an Obama-Care exchange are increasingly finding their choices limited to highly restrictive and unpopular HMO plans. This isn’t by accident.

Despite the public’s clear distaste for HMOs, Democrats have been trying to force-feed them into the market for decades.

It was Ted Kennedy who sponsored the HMO Act in 1973 to promote health maintenance organizations. Among other things, the law exempted “qualified” HMOs from some state regulations and forced larger companies that provided health benefits to include an HMO plan. The health legislation proposed by first lady Hillary Clinton in 1993 was also designed to institutionalize HMOs.

It makes sense, since HMOs are basically the private sector’s version of socialized medicine — making health care look free to consumers but adding an elaborate behind-the-scenes rationing scheme to control costs.

For example: You can see only doctors who have been hired by the HMO. The doctors can get financially punished for providing “too much” care. The plans pay for only certain drugs.

For a while, the government’s promotional efforts seemed to work, and by 1996 HMOs accounted for almost a third of the employer market.

But then horror stories of limited networks, bureaucratic hassles and care denials spread, and by 2014 the HMO market share plunged to 13%.

Over those same years, PPOs — preferred provider organizations — took off. These plans offer better coverage if you stay in network, but still provide benefits for out-of-network doctors. Consumers get to choose and pay the difference.

Since 2005, when Republicans made them possible over stiff Democratic opposition, consumer-driven health savings account plans exploded in popularity.

These offer even more consumer freedom.

In exchange for taking a low-cost, high-deductible plan, consumers can put money aside, tax-free, in HSA accounts to pay out-of-pocket costs.

Today, HSAs enroll more than 17 million Americans and have nearly $3 billion in assets.

And they’ve been credited with holding down health spending nationwide.

Democrats, however, loathe the idea of free people spending their own money and making their own decisions, and ObamaCare is slowly shoving them back into the HMO plans most don’t want.

In today’s ObamaCare exchanges, PPO plans are an endangered species. Those enrolling in Houston last year had a choice of 19 PPOs; this year, they have none.

PPOs are also unavailable in Miami and New York City and in many places in New Mexico, Mississippi and South Carolina.

The number of PPOs offered in ObamaCare exchanges plunged 41% from 2015 to this year, according to GoHealth.

Even when PPO plans are available, prices shoot up far higher than HMOs, according to a Kaiser Family Foundation analysis.

This isn’t just a problem for ObamaCare enrollees. As Scott Gottlieb of the American Enterprise Institute points out, “in short order, private, commercial health plans will be conformed to match the benefits and networks offered in the exchanges.”

This has happened in the past with other government insurance programs, he notes. And as we’ve noted in this space, ObamaCare’s Cadillac tax poses a threat to employer-provided HSAs.

Meanwhile, ObamaCare is trying to turn Medicare into a giant HMO by calling them “Accountable Care Organizations.”

Democrats never explained this unseemly side of ObamaCare to the public, but it was clearly their intent all along. Unless ObamaCare is overturned, the nation’s health care system will soon look like an updated version of Henry Ford’s choice in Model T colors: You can have any type of health plan you want, so long as it’s an HMO.