For the first time in years, the NFL’s most valuable player award has no clear-cut favorite as the season moves into its final two weeks. Blame this uncertainty on Peyton Manning. Someday, they might name the MVP award after Manning in the way the league honored Vince Lombardi with the Super Bowl hardware.

Manning has been MVP five times, while no other player has won it more than three times.

He probably won’t win a sixth after this season. The problem with Manning’s case this season is that he’s merely topping the charts a year after his statistics went off the charts.

“He’s still extremely valuable to his team, but everybody compares him to 55 touchdowns,” said Tony Dungy, an analyst on NBC’s “Sunday Night Football” and an MVP voter.

Manning is tied for the league lead this year in wins (11), is second in touchdown passes (37) and fourth in yards (4,143). Yet, after obliterating all the significant single-season records a year ago, Manning isn’t getting much buzz for an unprecedented sixth MVP award.

“Listen to what we’re saying: The guy is probably going to finish with 40 touchdowns and 4,700 yards, and we’re going to say, ‘Ah, well. He had an OK year,’ ” said Shannon Sharpe, a Pro Football Hall of Fame player who has one of the 50 MVP votes and his own podcast at www.shannonsharpe.com.

“He set the bar so high. It’s like when Michael Jordan scored 35 or 40 points. Think about in the history of the game, how many guys have thrown for 40 touchdowns and 4,700 yards?”

Only five, including Manning in 2013. So if Manning is down the list among MVP candidates in 2014, who is at the top of the list?

“We’re not going to get down on Aaron Rodgers because of the Buffalo game are we?” Sharpe said.

Jim Miller has, somewhat. Among MVP voters, Miller is considered the lowest common denominator around these parts. Manning got 49-of-50 MVP votes last season. Miller voted for New England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady.

“I soured on Rodgers last week,” said Miller, a host on NFL Sirius Radio and former Chicago Bears quarterback. “He was my leader in the clubhouse. I need to see him rebound. I want to see how Dallas finishes with DeMarco Murray. And Tom Brady is on my list again. Those are my top three guys. And J.J. Watt would be the dark horse.”

Brady is Sharpe’s second choice. But he scoffs at the notion Rodgers’ zero-TD, two-interception performance in a 21-13 loss at Buffalo last week should cost him a second MVP trophy.

“What about all those drops?” Sharpe said. “Jordy Nelson had a 94-yard touchdown that Aaron Rodgers walked out there and placed in his hands. So is everybody going with Andrew Luck, who’s second in the league in turning the ball over?

“Now everybody has fallen back in love with Tom Brady. OK, Buffalo was Aaron Rodgers’ worst game. Did Tom Brady look any better against Kansas City? And those weren’t drops.”

Sharpe doesn’t think Murray should be MVP because he’s not carrying the Dallas Cowboys with Dez Bryant and Tony Romo the way Adrian Peterson did with the Minnesota Vikings in 2012.

“We’ve seen 1,800-yard seasons,” Sharpe said.

Nothing speaks to the unpredictability of this year’s MVP race more than Dungy’s choices.

“The guy I’m really looking at — and he won’t win it — but if you look at what’s happened, it’s Bobby Wagner,” Dungy said about the Seattle Seahawks’ middle linebacker. “They looked like an average team. He comes back and all the sudden they go on this binge, and they look like a Super Bowl team again. And he’s been the biggest difference.

“It will probably go to one of those quarterbacks. But if you’re voting on who made the biggest difference in their team, he and (Rob) Gronkowski made the biggest difference. Gronkowski was out and it looked like the Patriots were just an average team, and when he got back healthy and they took him off the pitch count, they’ve taken off.”

With Manning seemingly not a top contender for once, the MVP race is uncharacteristically wide open. Which might not be such a bad thing for the Broncos. Manning’s teams never won the Super Bowl in his five MVP seasons. He did not win the MVP in 2006, the year he was Super Bowl MVP.

“I got in an argument with a guy on Twitter last week,” said Dungy, who was Manning’s Indianapolis coach in 2006. “The guy was saying the Broncos can’t win like this. Something’s wrong with him. I said wait a minute, he threw 20 passes (in a 22-10 victory at San Diego) and averaged 11.6 yards per pass, which is going to be the league leader if you do that all year.

“He played great Sunday. They won by two touchdowns on the road — what do you want? We want five touchdowns and 400 yards.”

Mike Klis: mklis@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikeklis

MVP candidates

1. Aaron Rodgers, QB, Packers The case for: Despite a bad game at Buffalo last weekend, he’s still the NFL’s top-rated passer with a 111.2 rating, 35 touchdown passes, five interceptions. The case against: After his two-interception, zero-TD game against the Bills, Rodgers won’t win if he doesn’t play well in final two games.

2. DeMarco Murray, RB, Cowboys The case for: 1,678 yards rushing; leads the league by more than 400 yards. His 11 rushing touchdowns also lead the league. Broken hand could help win the award if he plays well in Dallas’ final two regular-season games. The case against: Probably won’t get the 2,000 yards needed to upend a QB.

3. Andrew Luck, QB, Colts The case for: No other player does more to carry a team. Leads the NFL with 4,492 yards passing and 38 TD passes. The case against: Only Jay Cutler and Blake Bortles have thrown more picks than Luck’s 14. Tied with Cutler for most fumbles lost (six).

4. J.J. Watt, DL, Texans The case for: Leads defensive players with five touchdowns (including three receiving). Also has 16½ sacks and 10 pass deflections. The case against: His team won’t make the playoffs.

5. Tom Brady, QB, Patriots The case for: Has a win over Peyton Manning and the Broncos. His 28 touchdown passes (six interceptions) in a 9-1 stretch could make New England the AFC’s top playoff seed. The case against: Struggled until tight end Rob Gronkowski returned; only the sixth-rated passer.