KRASNAYA POLYANA, russia — No matter how well Ted Ligety performs at the Sochi Olympics, he is unlikely to duplicate his stunning results at the world alpine championships a year ago in Austria. And he is quick to concede the point.

Ligety became the first man to win three gold medals at the world championships since Jean-Claude Killy did it at the 1968 Grenoble Olympics. He won the super combined and the super-G, then captured the third gold in giant slalom, an event he has dominated the past five years.

Talk about a hard act to follow.

“I think winning three gold medals at the Olympics is probably somewhat of an unrealistic expectation,” Ligety said with a wry smile. “There’s a reason it hasn’t been done in (46) years. There’s so many guys that are specialists, and in the sport of ski racing the best guy often doesn’t win. You have to have a quiet nonchalance about how you’re going to go about your races. It’s not swimming, where if you’re the best guy in the world, you’re going to win most likely.”

With giant slalom coming next week and the super-G on Sunday, Ligety makes his debut at these Games on Friday in the super combined, and he must be regarded as a medal contender. He finished first and second in two World Cup super combined races last month.

He won a gold medal in combined at the 2006 Turin Games, when combined consisted of a downhill run and two slalom runs. Now the super combined is a downhill with one slalom run.

“I want to be able to try to get on the podium or win,” Ligety said of Friday’s race. “I think that’s well within my grasp if I ski well. My downhill’s gotten better all year long, I’ve felt more and more comfortable, so hopefully (Friday) I can piece together a good run and then have a good run of slalom as well. Hopefully that equals something metallic around my neck.”

The super combined pits racers better in downhill against racers who are better in slalom. The race can favor “speed” racers such as Bode Miller or “technical” specialists like Ligety and Alexis Pinturault of France, depending on course difficulty and other factors.

“It’s a challenging downhill for sure, which in some cases gives guys that have the ability to turn the ability to stay closer,” Ligety said of the Sochi Olympic course. “We’ll see. That’s what is kind of cool about super combined. There’s never really truly distinct favorites, just because somebody like myself or Pinturault can have really big swings in downhill ability. Guys like Bode can have big swings in slalom ability. That’s what makes it cool.”