On Saturday, September 26, 2015 from 10:00 AM – 2:00 PM, the 8th Annual Health Summit will be held at the Jackie Robinson Community Center, 1020 N. Fair Oaks Ave in Pasadena, CA. The event is focused on providing FREE tests and screenings along with information on diseases that impact our community and resources that are available to our community. The event will be kicked off at 8 AM with a 5K Walk that will be led by members of Black Girls Run! Los Angeles.

This event is a Family Affair where there is something for everyone. The Annual Health Summit focuses on the health of the whole person – Physical, Mental, Financial, Nutritional, Professional and more.

Through the Affordable Care Act, many people now have insurance so you may think that you don’t need to come out to take advantage of the day. Even if you have insurance, you can still beneﬁt from the FREE eye, ear, dental and HIV tests/ screenings along with all of the resources and information.

There will be a Guest Appearance by Kathleen Bradley who is an American former model and actress. Bradley, who is primarily known as a “Barker’s Beauty” on the daytime game show The Price Is Right from 1990 to 2000, will kick-off the Panel Discussion and will be available to sell and autograph her book entitled Backstage at The Price Is Right: Memoirs of a Barker Beauty.

Kidz Zone is expanded this year to include games, School Supplies, Pediatrician’s Corner, children’s insurance information, Special Needs Network, ﬂ u shots and more.

The Special Needs Network was asked to join us because many children, especially those from lower income households, suffer from undiagnosed Special Needs like ADHD, Dyslexia, Asperger’s and much more. The typical school system is not ready to support these children and without a diagnosis, these children do not get the services and attention they need. They are often set aside, viewed as ‘a problem’ and eventually become disenchanted as they fall further behind in their education.

Unfortunately, our jail system is ﬁlling up with too many Black men where the problem started at this stage in their lives.

Men’s Corner is expanded this year to support the Total Man from a Professional, Financial and Physical perspective. Black men die from everything more than any ethnicity. Doctors will be available to answer questions and discuss male health issues. The Men’s Wearhouse will provide resume tips (bring your resume), interviewing tips and will discuss how to dress for success. They may also have a prize for you when you visit.

Fiscal Fitness is a large part of health. When we feel we have money to cover our current and rainy day needs, stress levels are down and conﬁdence is up. Wells Fargo will be present to discuss ideas that can help everyone at the Summit to become Fiscally Fit.

For all of you men that think you’ll miss some football if you come take care of yourself, we have an answer for you. College football viewing will be available throughout the day!

As an extension of Men’s Corner, a Panel Discussion entitled “I Am My Brother’s Keeper: Together, We Will Rise!” will take place in the auditorium at 10:45 AM. This topic will be approached by panelists from a Professional, Physical, Mental, Financial, Spiritual and Bridging the Age Divide Perspective. Pasadena, like many other parts of the country, is experiencing problems. What’s going on in our community? How can we change it? Come out and talk about it.

Happy, Healthy Seniors will provide information on Alzheimer’s, Eldercare Services, Home Health Services, insurance for seniors and more. Topical conversations on Alzheimer’s and the Importance of Exercise for Seniors will take place at 10:15 and 10:30 respectively within the Happy, Healthy Seniors Area. At 12:30 in the auditorium, Atty Will Rivera will talk about “Seniors, Fraud and How to Protect Yourself.”

Healthy Food, Healthy You Village will provide healthy cooking demonstrations and let you have fun while you learn about nutrition, reading labels and the importance of reducing processed foods in your diet.

Food companies play so many tricks that it is hard to know what is actually right and best for you. Did you know that many companies compensate for the loss in taste with low fat or non-fat foods by adding artiﬁcial sweeteners?

These are just a few of the highlights of the 8th Annual Health Summit. There is more information and resources available for everyone than we can describe in this article. We encourage you to not miss out on this event that was designed with the needs of the community in mind.

The sponsors for this event are The Pasadena Chapter of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc., Pasadena/Altadena Ivy Foundation, City of Hope, The Pasadena Journal, ChapCare, Friends of the Pasadena/Altadena Ivy Foundation, Ofﬁ ce of Senator Carol Liu, Ofﬁ ce of Assemblymember Chris Holden, First AME Church Pasadena, Taneka Shehee, Real Water, Ross Dress for Less, OneUnited Bank and D’Veal Family & Youth Services. Partners for Health Summit 2015 are City of Pasadena, Jackie Robinson Community Center, Council Member John Kennedy, USC School of Pharmacy, KJLH Radio Station, the Pasadena Chapters of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc., Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity & Gamma Zeta Boule and Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity, Inc. – Los Angeles.