Community Access Unlimited honored three community partners at the agency's 2015 annual gala. Those honored help fulfill its mission of enabling its members to

Bernadette Mueller, senior community reinvestment act officer and executive vice president at Valley National Bank, accepts the Ira Geller Award on behalf of the bank from Sid Blanchard, executive director of Community Access Unlimited (CAU), and Harold Poltrock of the CAU board of advisors at the agency's annual Gala. (Photo: Photo Courtesy of CAU) Story Highlights Honored were Union County Sheirff Joseph Cryan and Pastor Howard Bryant and Financial Literacy Program at Valley National Bank

CAU, celebrating its 36 year of success in 2015, supports people with special needs in achieving real lives in the community

CAU helps people with housing, life skills, employment, money management, socialization and civic activities

CAU serves more than 5,000 individuals each year

Community Access Unlimited (CAU) honored three community partners at the agency's 2015 Annual Gala Dinner Dance, conducted on Oct. 22 at L'Affaire in Mountainside. Those honored help CAU fulfill its mission of enabling its members to live independent lives within the greater community.

CAU is a statewide, Elizabeth-based nonprofit providing support programs and services to adults with disabilities as well as youth served under the Department of Children and Families (DCF) to enable them to live independently in the community, in areas including housing, vocational and life-skills training, education, advocacy and recreation.

Those honored were Union County Sheriff Joseph Cryan with the Public Leadership Award; the Rev. Howard Bryant with the Humanitarian of the Year Award; and the Financial Literacy Program at Valley National Bank with the Ira Geller Award.

"Community Access Unlimited cannot achieve our goals of enabling our members to live fulfilling and integrated lives within the community without the support of community partners such as those we are honoring tonight," said Sid Blanchard, CAU executive director.

Cryan was sworn in as Union County Sheriff on Jan. 1 after serving as administrative undersheriff for 11 years. Cryan also served in the New Jersey Assembly representing the 20th district for 12 years and as Majority Leader for two years. He has been an avid supporter of CAU during his time as an assemblyman and now in his role as county sheriff.

"I am honored and humbled to receive this award," Cryan said. "I don't think there's a greater organization in the state of New Jersey than Community Access. I'm not at all shy to say that Sid Blanchard is a hero of mine for the work this organization does. The people who work at Community Access do things others won't do and I'm privileged to be part of this evening."

Bryant has dedicated his career to helping others, both inside and outside the church. In addition to leading multiple churches in California and New Jersey, he has been the executive director of the National Black Presbyterian Caucus; the Protestant Campus Minister at Kean University; the coordinator and instructor of the Arthur Ashe Safe Passage Foundation Tennis Program; and the organizer and administrator of Achieve to Excel, an after-school program. Most recently, Bryant has taken a leadership position within the Union County Interfaith Coordinating Council, which was spearheaded by CAU.

"Being associated with CAU, it reminds me what I'm called to do – be a minister of the gospel," he said. "I'm awed by how this organization reaches out to those who otherwise would not be embraced. I'm honored to be involved with the Interfaith Council, encouraging people to embrace people with disabilities. Everybody is important and needs to have a role in society."

The Ira Geller Award is presented to someone or an organization with a significant commitment to CAU, including its members, and best reflects the concept of volunteerism. Through its Financial Literacy Program, Valley National Bank educates youth and adults in the community about the importance of financial literacy and awareness, including members of CAU at its Academy for Continuing Education.

"We're extremely honored to receive this award," said Bernadette Mueller, senior community reinvestment act officer and executive vice president at Valley. "It's very moving meeting CAU members and seeing the impact our work has on the people of this organization. We're very committed to all the communities we serve and look to enrich the lives of those around us."

The gala was attended by more than 620 members of CAU, their families, agency staff and community partners and supporters, including Union County Freeholder Alexander Mirabella.

The evening also featured a performance by Kayla Richardson, who is blind, a sophomore from Hillside High School and student of music at the Institute of Music for Children. She sang "What About the Children" and "Walking."

For more information about CAU and its services, call 908-354-3040, or visit www.caunj.org.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1Hep2o6