With some of the highest approval ratings in modern politics, President Barack Obama entered the presidential office with an optimism that made many Americans look forward to great things from an exciting new leader.

However, his inability to enact the changes that he promised has weakened the country’s political power. When Ronald Reagan faced a congress controlled by the other party, he found a way to unite the opposing forces, work together and enact positive change. Obama has made poor governmental decisions and has failed to make progressive change.

Obama has unjustly jumped the gun

Before Obama took office, he was being hailed as a “historic figure,” because people believed that electing an African American president would help put racially divided politics in the past. However, Obama has jumped into racially charged cases and made assumptions before solid facts were provided.

An example of this was when Trayvon Martin was fatally shot by George Zimmerman in 2012. Before Zimmerman was held under proper trial, Obama held a press conference where he said, “[Trayvon] could have been me 35 years ago.”

He appeared to support the belief that Trayvon’s shooting, something that Zimmerman was later acquitted of, was done out of racial hatred. A more prudent course of action would have been to wait for the jurisdiction before making this speech.

In 2009, when African American Harvard Professor Henry Louis Gates was arrested, Obama said that the police who arrested the professor “acted stupidly.” Yet Obama did not know the entire story of what happened and later admitted to being biased to the situation, according to CNN.

Obamacare doesn’t care

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, otherwise known as Obamacare, was first introduced under the impression that it would provide for 32 million people who didn’t have coverage.

In 2015, the Department of Health and Human Services reported that only 16.4 million people were covered. In several states, like California and Nevada, there is a shortfall in enrollment and the rates paid by Obamacare recipients are quickly climbing. If the current increase continues, healthcare rates will reach levels where even subsidized programs become unsustainable.

It was recently reported by governing.com that, “Almost half of the 23 health-care co-ops that opened with the health insurance exchanges in 2013 have already or plan to close in the coming months.”

According to governing.com, this would have left about 500,000 American citizens to find new health insurance for 2016. Forbes reported that 20 percent of the additional insured are through an expansion of Medicaid – an unsustainable burden because of its high cost- rather than Obamacare’s insurance exchanges.

The withdraw from Iraq was pre-mature

Obama lacks a solid strategy to deal with the Islamic State, and to date, he has failed to generate international support for a plan to overcome ISIL. According to The Federalist, Obama prematurely removed military presence in Iraq, even as the Iraqi government sent out several warnings about the Islamic State as it took over more territory. Because Obama didn’t send aid, the problem got worse.

In 2014, Obama told CNN, “I don’t want to put the cart before the horse. We don’t have a strategy yet.”

According to a study done by Pew Research Center in January 2015, the share of Americans who say the government is doing well in reducing the threat of terrorism has fallen by 26 percentage points, from 72 percent to 46 percent. This is the first time since 9/11 that the government rating on handling terrorism has turned negative.