STATEMENT: The following statements were reprinted in whole or part from NAMIC- and AIA-supplied statements.

The decision by the Financial Accounting Standards Board to abandon its convergence efforts with the International Accounting Standards Board on insurance contracts represents a major victory for the U.S. insurance industry, according to the National Association of Mutual Insurance Companies and the American Insurance Association. The FASB will instead retain the existing GAAP standards for insurance entities.

Both insurance trade groups issued statements on the issue.

Charles Chamness, president and CEO of NAMIC, said FASB made the right decision to keep what he called “the gold standard” of insurance accounting methods. “For the past year, we have forcefully advocated against changes to GAAP accounting for insurance contracts that would deviate significantly from current statutory accounting reporting requirements. GAAP are universally recognized as the gold standard in the world of accounting, and we’re obviously very pleased the FASB came to agree with us.”

Responding to initiatives by the FASB and IASB, NAMIC mounted a multi-faceted campaign to thwart the imposition of the new international requirements on U.S. GAAP. NAMIC engaged member companies to submit letters to both the FASB and IASB. More than 70 comment letters were filed, which unanimously objected to any shift away from the existing requirements.

NAMIC worked closely with staff at the National Association of Insurance Commissioners during its analysis of the IASB and FASB exposure drafts. In addition, it communicated concerns to the Federal Insurance Office and other federal agencies. NAMIC staff also participated in a FASB-sponsored roundtable discussion on the issue in December.

In addition, Phillip Carson, associate general counsel and director of financial regulatory policy for the American Insurance Association (AIA), issued a statement responding to the Financial Accounting Standard Board’s (FASB) recommendations issued for property-casualty insurers. During the past year the FASB has been working to develop an insurance Accounting Standards Update (ASU) and began its re-deliberations.

Carson’s statement follows:

“AIA commends the FASB for its decision today to only seek targeted improvements in the existing financial reporting model for short duration contracts. Rather than switching to a new model that our members believe would have been unsuitable for property-casualty contracts and that would be costly to implement without an offsetting benefit, the FASB has today indicated a desire to only make improvements to the disclosures associated with the financial statements of insurance products.

“As indicated in AIA’s October 2013 comment letter, we disagree with the proposed changes to the insurance ASU because they would not have improved U.S. GAAP. However, in the interest of providing better information to the financial statement users, we believe the FASB’s decision to consider making improvements in disclosures is a step in the right direction. This approach addresses users’ concerns for better information, while maintaining a transparent accounting framework that better reflects the economic reality of the property-casualty insurance business.

“AIA is committed to working with the FASB and its staff in achieving high-quality accounting standards, and we look forward to providing further assistance to the FASB as it continues its re-deliberations of the insurance contracts proposal.”