Donald Trump has staked out an uncharacteristically moderate position on one of the campaign’s hottest issues — bringing home some $100 billion in tax revenues on earnings U.S. multinational companies have parked overseas after moving their headquarters to tax-haven nations.

Trump, the presumptive GOP presidential nominee, proposes a special 10 percent tax on profits U.S. firms hold overseas, and reduces the U.S. tax on future overseas earnings from 35 percent to 15 percent to encourage compliance. Those rates are only slightly lower than what President Obama proposed, and higher than rates proposed by House Republicans two years ago.

“A 10 percent repatriation tax is a little low for my taste, but it is definitely in the realm of reasonable, relative to what else has been proposed,” said Edward Kleinbard, former Chief of Staff of Congress's Joint Committee on Taxation and a proponent of progressive tax policies who described himself as “on the other side of the political ledger” from Trump.

Kleinbard agrees with Trump’s call for an end to deferrals so foreign earnings are taxed in real-time instead of only when they’re declared in the U.S. as dividends.

“Much as it pains me to say it, I agree with that instinct,” Kleinbard said. “Worldwide taxation, eliminating deferrals, is the only stable place for the United States to end up.”

Special report: Donald Trump - Promise and Peril

A Washington Center for Equitable Growth study released this month determined profit-shifting by U.S. multinationals is reducing federal tax revenues by more than $100 billion each year. The problem has exploded in the past decade, during which the scale of lost revenue due to so-called inversions — U.S. companies relocating offshore or overseas — has increased five-fold, according to the study.

Like most inversion tax plans, Trump proposes allowing companies to receive a credit in the amount of any foreign taxes they pay.

Trump’s plan goes further afield, however, when he proposes to also drop the domestic corporate income tax rate from 35 percent to 15 percent, which the billionaire says “makes corporate inversions unnecessary by making America’s tax rate one of the best in the world.”

Kleinbard said that plan would “hemorrhage revenue.”

“Twenty-five (percent) is about as low as you can go without aggressively looking to new sources of taxation,” he said.

It’s unclear how appealing a 15 percent rate would even be to companies eyeing inversion. Many of the most popular destinations — Netherlands, Ireland, Luxembourg, Bermuda, Cayman Islands — have effective corporate rates of less than 5 percent, according to a report from the Center for Equitable Growth. Almost all of that $100 billion in revenue loss, the study found, came from shifting profits to countries with corporate tax rates under 15 percent.

But Robert Willens, a New York corporate tax consultant and former Lehman Brothers director, said inversion is such a complex undertaking for companies that even a 25 percent corporate tax rate might be enough to deter the practice.

“It’s very simple — if the tax rates in the U.S. were more competitive, why would anybody bother going through this brain damage that they have to go through, and getting criticized, and being subjected to political scrutiny?” Willens said. “Believe me, I’m sure they wouldn’t bother if the tax rate were competitive.”

Willens agreed a 15 percent rate would leave a big revenue hole, but said that could be mitigated by changing some tax preferences corporations currently enjoy, such as their ability to depreciate assets on an accelerated basis.

But other elements of Trump’s economic vision worry experts, including recent comments that the U.S. can’t default on its debt “because you print the money,” suggesting a strategy that would include simply making more cash.

“That’s Argentina,” said Michael Klein, an international economics affairs professor at Tufts University. “And that’s also his experience going bankrupt three times. That’s not a national policy. … Even to say things like that would spook the markets and lead to disruption.”

Bernard Weinstein, an economist at Southern Methodist University, gave Trump credit for acknowledging that the economy has to recover at a faster pace with more job creation, but warned that he lacks an actual blueprint for prosperity.

“He has touched on a real concern,” Weinstein said. “Normally, when you’re six or seven years out of a severe economic downturn, you’re growing a lot faster than we are. … (But) I haven’t heard any specifics I believe would do much to stimulate the economy.”

The same goes for another Trump promise — repealing Obamacare.

“He doesn’t have a plan for what he wants instead. Some of the other candidates did have very significant plans, ” said Joshua Archambault, a health care expert at the Pioneer Institute. “We don’t actually know what he would change on Day 1 or the first 100 days on health care because he’s been so all over the place.”