If there was any doubt that MSNBC is a mouthpiece for liberal activism, Chris Hayes should have erased it on Wednesday’s edition of his program All In. Hayes was discussing MSNBC’s favorite current topic – the Chris Christie “Bridgegate” saga – with Dan Cantor, national director of the ultra-liberal Working Families Party.



Near the end of the discussion, Cantor optimistically declared his belief that Christie will be defeated in the end, thanks in part to Cantor’s own organization:

I think it’s pretty likely Governor Christie will end up having to resign, because he clearly either knew about it – I mean, we called for his resignation, tens of thousands of people have already signed that petition, and we think there will be more.



Cantor forgot to plug the website for that petition, but not to worry – Hayes jumped in, noting for his audience, “That’s at ChristieJam.org.”



Way to help the cause, Chris.



Cantor said he expected more signatures, and with Hayes’ help, he almost certainly will get more (maybe a few hundred more if all of Hayes’ viewers sign the petition).



Forcing Chris Christie to resign over a traffic jam is apparently a cause for which Hayes can be "all in." But can you imagine him inviting on a guest who started a petition to impeach President Obama, let alone telling viewers where to find the petition? Our current president can get away with almost anything as far as Hayes and his MSNBC primetime colleagues are concerned. Benghazi, the IRS targeting scandal, the arbitrary and arguably illegal changes-by-fiat to the ObamaCare legislation – they don’t matter as much as a traffic jam that only impacted a sliver of the country’s population for a few days last summer.



Destroying any serious Republican presidential challengers to Hillary Clinton in 2016 seems to be a goal at MSNBC. In addition to the Christie coverage, Hayes led off Wednesday’s broadcast with 14 minutes devoted to the emerging controversy surrounding Gov. Scott Walker (R-Wis.) and his aides. You could see the joy on the host’s face as he declared, “It turns out that Scott Walker has more or less the exact same baggage that none other than Chris Christie has.”



That “baggage” for both governors includes plenty of unproven allegations at this point. It also includes one cable network that is obsessively hyping the stories in order to destroy both men before they ever have a chance to run for president. After all, obliterating Republicans and electing Democrats is what it means to “lean forward.”

Below is a transcript of the relevant portion of the discussion:

CHRIS HAYES: Do you suspect that we will see a ratcheting up of the legal battle here, that basically the first wave of stuff that was turned over happened kind of without a fight, partly because of the people at issue, but what we're going to see now is just sort of all out –



DAN CANTOR, National Director, Working Families: Yeah, this is war. You know, obviously the legislature has its own attorneys trying to get information. Presumably the press is going to try to get some. And Maestro, in theory doing the independent investigation, is going to be trying to prevent it all from happening, going on the offense in this kind of mind-boggling way you described at the outset. Pretty optimistic that at the end the truth will come out. I think it’s pretty likely Governor Christie will end up having to resign, because he clearly either knew about it – I mean, we called for his resignation, tens of thousands of people have already signed that petition, and we think there will be more.



HAYES: That’s at ChristieJam.org. Dan Cantor from the Working Families, thank you so much.