Previewing what's coming the first week of April to the Courier News, Home News Tribune and MyCentralJersey.com. STAFF VIDEO BY JOE MARTINO

Kathy Burns Rittwage, with her horse, Dreamy, near her home in Pasadena, Calif. Several of the paintings Burns Rittwage will be bringing to her first art show this weekend featured Dreamy and her other horse, Wildflower. (Photo: ~Photo courtesy of Kathy Burns Rittwage) Story Highlights Kathy Burns Rittwage, a Scotch Plains native, recently went on a 13-month, 43-state journey of self-discovery only to reconnect with her passion for painting

Although the open road was filled with dark clouds - her mother passed away during her trip and her father also died soon after the trip ended - she said the trip built her confidence

she’s taking 20 or so of her paintings to a show and sale for the first time this weekend near her home in Pasadena, California

Burns Rittwage said she would have never gone to art school or continued painting all these years if not for the mentoring and encouragement of her art teacher at Scotch Plains-Fanwood

Editor’s note: “The Secret Life of …” is a weekly feature looking at the fascinating people across Central Jersey

Kathy Burns Rittwage loaded her two horses in her trailer, gathered some acrylics, left her broken marriage in the rearview mirror and set out on a journey of self-discovery.

During her 13-month trek, which begun in 2013 and spanned 43-states and 30,000 miles across America’s campgrounds and national parks, she took solace in painting — a passion sparked during her senior year at Scotch Plains-Fanwood High School in 1972 when she completed her first piece as a study hall project.

With each brush stroke, she was not only creating scenes of Dreamy and Wildflower set against the wilds of Wyoming or the meadows of Massachusetts, she was also slowly finding her herself again.

Burns Rittwage may have limped back to her home in Pasadena, California, in 2014 with a broken trailer, a bad back and five states left on her list, but her spirit was on the road to recovery. And, she has kept right on painting.

In fact, she’s headed to her first show. Burns Rittwage is gathering 20 or so of her newer pieces to bring to the 26th annual Cattlemen’s Western Art Show and Sale in nearby Paso Robles this upcoming weekend.

“It’s just been a hobby up until now,” she said. “I’ve never tried to sell my work or show it. I went to the Philadelphia College of Art (now called the University of the Arts) and when I got out, I waited tables and painted and I really didn’t have the self-confidence that it took to pursue it as a career.”

READ: Our Secret Life of ... series

But she does now. She’s spending these days sorting through her paintings and getting them ready to show. In the secret life of an artist, she spends some time every day putting paint to canvas.

“I’m proud of the work,” Burns Rittwage said. “I think it’s some of my best work. It’s a lot different than the work I was doing before I went on the trip. Those had all been abstract. These are more realistic.”

Kathy Burns Rittwage will be taking 20 or so of her recent oil landscapes with her to her first show the weekend of April 9 and 10 in Paso Robles, California. This painting is titled "Colorado." ~Photo courtesy of Kathy Burns Rittwage (Photo: ~Photo courtesy Kathy Burns Rittwage)

In a bad place

Self-confidence is one of the things Burns Rittwage didn’t have a lot of when she left her marriage a few years ago. She was in a bad place in more ways than one considering she could no longer afford to live in California. She described that point in her life as “a desperate time.”

“So I had this idea like, ‘I feel like running away. I’m gonna go ride my horses across the country,’” she said. “My therapist said to me, ‘Well, I think that would be therapeutic.’ That was all the endorsement I needed.”

Burns Rittwage borrowed some money from her dad to buy a truck and a trailer, took some lessons from a driving school and summoned the courage to head out alone. It was painful leaving her three children behind, but she said she was of no use to Billy, now 25, Tommy, 22 and Rachel, 20.

It was a matter of needing to “jumpstart my life and find purpose and something enjoyable again,” she said. So, her plan was to visit all 48 contiguous states and eventually settle down in the place she liked most.

She dubbed the journey SHLEP: Soul-searching, Home-searching, Liberating Equestrian Party.

Kathy Burns Rittwage brought Dreamy and her other horse, Wildflower, with her on a 13-month, 43-state, 30,000-mile journey of self-discovery spanning 2013 and 2014. Along the way, she did an acrylic landscape from each state. (Photo: ~Photo courtesy of Kathy Burns Rittwageunknown)

Her dreams of a sun-splashed open highway of possibilities, however, were often wrought with pain and tragedy.

It was an omen when she arrived at her first stop, a campground in Utah, and there wasn’t a soul around. Loneliness was often her only companion, and things only got worst when her dog, Tucker, died in Arkansas.

An early winter forced her to turn south, so she made her way to her dad’s home in Florida. She stayed for four months with John Burns, who was battling cancer. She almost ended the journey there, but she couldn’t find a job and continued to press forward.

READ: Man has led life dedicated to community first

She returned to Central Jersey to try to comfort her mother. Dementia, multiple myeloma, kidney failure — it was all too much for Mary Burns. Kathy and her sister, Liza, were there when she passed away.

Several months later, just after Kathy had ended her trip, she received a phone call that her dad had also died.

Kathy Burns Rittwage will be taking 20 or so of her recent oil landscapes with her to her first show the weekend of April 9 and 10 in Paso Robles, California. This one is entitled "Missouri." (Photo: ~Photo courtesy of Kathy Burns Rittwage)

Flashes of light

And while it seems as if the road was full of nothing but dark places, she says there were a lot of bright moments, too. The beauty of the Big Horn Mountains in Wyoming, the kindness of fellow horse owners, the gentleness of her horses - they all were part of her healing process.

She also rediscovered her faith, and was attending services as a local Christian church in Florida. After she was baptized there one Sunday, she renamed the final part of SHLEP from Party to Praise.

The trip’s trials and tribulations also brought her closer to her sister. Liza, who joined Kathy for parts of the trip, has seen big changes in her sister.

“She’s definitely more independent and realistic,” Liza said. “She used to be pretty conscious of putting up a good image for herself and her family, which I could see through. I used to wonder why did she do that. But now she’s definitely more down to earth and more genuine, I’d say.”

And then there was the painting. Elinor Young, now Elinor Weiland afer marrying a few years ago and settling in Califon, was the art teacher at Scotch Plains-Fanwood High School who saw some talent inside Kathy. She encouraged her student to work on a self-portrait, which helped her get into art school.

Although Burns Rittwage eventually found work in the graphic arts field for years, she never lost her love for painting — she just needed to find the courage to show it to the rest of the world.

“I had this mission (that) I was going to get a painting done of each state,” Burns Rittwage said. “They’re very small and they’re more like studies. And just the accumulation of a body of work that had a continuity like that gave me the inspiration that I could have a show, that I could do something with my art. That’s what I’m trying to do now."

Kathy Burns Rittwage will be taking 20 or so of her recent oil landscapes with her to her first show the weekend of April 9 and 10 in Paso Robles, California. This one is entitled "Wyoming." (Photo: ~Photo courtesy of Kathy Burns Rittwage)

About the paintings

Kathy Burns Rittwage, who grew up in Scotch Plains, will be doing her first art show this weekend near her home in Pasadena, Calif. Several examples of her art, including acrylic landscape paintings she did during a 13-month, 43-state journey of self-discovery can be seen on her website. She is also open to taking commissions.

For more information, log on to http://krittwage.com

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1MMhefP