ECONOMY/HEALTH CARE

Hospital focused on being regional health center

By peter roper The pueblo chieftain

Parkview Medical Center is now the largest employer in the Pueblo area, with 2,600 employees and their salaries contributing $135 million a year to the local economy, hospital officials said Wednesday.

Mike Baxter

Parkview President Mike Baxter sketched in the financial and medical importance of the hospital in a meeting with The Chieftain editorial board.

Noting that Parkview has been highly ranked by U.S. News & World Report magazine for four consecutive years, Baxter said the hospital and its board have focused on building Parkview into a regional hospital center.

“We’re doing our best to keep high-technology health care from migrating out of Pueblo to cities up north,” he said.

One tool that’s been successful is Parkview’s three-year internal medicine residency program. It currently enrolls 10 new doctors a year in that specialty.

“We’ve been fortunate to be able to hire a number of those doctors as well for Parkview’s staff,” said Jamie McKinney, a member of the Parkview board.

Another benefit is those internists-in-training are able to treat the growing number of low-income Medicaid patients that Parkview is seeing because of the federal Affordable Care Act.

“Without those residents, many of those Medicaid patients would be coming into the emergency room for care and that is the most expensive way to provide care,” Baxter said.

The residency clinic treated 10,800 patients last year.

Baxter said it’s vital for Pueblo to maintain its hospitals and a high level of care as an economic anchor for the region.

For example, he said Parkview has continued to offer hospital treatment for mental health and substance-abuse patients — a service that isn’t profitable but is essential to a community.

“Many hospitals have stopped treating those patients but it’s not uncommon for us to get a call from Aurora or another city asking if we have room for a patient,” he said.

Similarly, Parkview maintains a Level II trauma center for severely injured people.

The hospital now has 50 doctors on its own hospital staff — a trend that is sweeping the industry as doctors turn away from the high cost of trying to run a private practice.

While Parkview is licensed for 350 beds, the hospital also has an emergency room clinic in Pueblo West and has a new partnership with Mt. San Rafael Hospital in Trinidad.

Baxter noted the Pueblo West treatment center sits on 35 acres of land — signaling where Parkview will probably grow in future expansions.

proper@chieftain.com