Obamacare enrollment delays, technical problems continue on Day 2

Consumers trying to view and compare new insurance plans on healthcare.gov, the federal website running the Illinois insurance exchange, were met with error messages or delays a day after the system launched.

Delays and technical problems continued to plague enrollment efforts on the online insurance marketplaces created under President Barack Obama’s health care law on Wednesday.

Attendees speak with heath care volunteers during the WeConnect Health Enrollment Information & Wellness Event in Oakland, California, U.S., on Saturday, Sept. 21, 2013. (David Paul Morris, Bloomberg)

Those who visit the overburdened website may see a “holding page” for a few minutes before they are able to enter the application process. Federal officials advised consumers to remain on the page and not refresh their browsers to hold their place in line.

Many ran into more trouble on the third step of the application process, which asks people to select security questions for their accounts. On several attempts late Tuesday night and Wednesday morning, the drop-down boxes that are supposed to populate a list of security questions were left blank, stalling the process.

Officials said the issue is the result of high volume rather than a programming glitch.

Some consumers, they note, have been able to successfully create accounts, compare insurance plans and sign-up for coverage, though the government would not provide any enrollment data.

In Illinois, the state landing page (www.getcoveredillinois.gov) had no issues Wednesday morning. The website has recorded 115,000 unique visitors since its launch at midnight Tuesday morning, a spokeswoman said.

Obama administration officials continued to blame the sluggish sign-up systems on a crush of consumers flooding to the federal site, which logged 4.7 million unique visits in its first 24 hours of operation. An additional 190,000 consumers called the 800-318-2596 help line, and more than 104,000 others requested online chats, officials said.

“Volume at healthcare.gov continues to be high,” said Fabien Levy, a spokesman for the federal Department of Health and Human Services, the agency running the 34 state exchanges, including the one for Illinois. “We expect to see similar volume as yesterday, and while this overwhelming interest is continuing to cause wait times, there will be continuing improvements in the coming hours and days.”

For more information about the Affordable Care Act, visit chicagotribune.com/health/aca/

pfrost@tribune.com | Twitter: @peterfrost