By the time Garmin-Sharp cyclist Alex Howes made his sprint finish down Broadway in Denver for Stage 7 of the USA Pro Challenge, he was all alone.

Typically, teams have a “lead-in” rider to help set up the win, but by then Boulder-based Garmin-Sharp had exhausted all of its options after leading off the front to set him up initially.

“We knew we had to get rid of the really quick guys over Lookout Mountain,” team manager Jonathan Vaughters said. “The problem with that is that there’s a good 40 miles of racing from the top of Lookout to (Denver). And so the team had to operate just right, and they had to go just fast enough to get rid of everyone else, but not so fast that we were blowing our own team up, because we needed the whole team to do what you guys saw.”

Garmin-Sharp rode off the front to catch the breakaway in Denver while holding off advancing riders from behind.

“The thing with Alex that makes him a special rider is when the team does an extraordinary effort like that, and he knows he’s the beneficiary of that, he comes through,” Vaughters said. “He comes through in high-pressure situations when it’s all on him.”

PHOTOS: 2014 USA Pro Challenge, Final Stage

WATCH: Alex Howes won the final stage of the USA Pro Challenge

Jersey winners. Aspen’s Tejay van Garderen of BMC Racing won the overall race leader’s yellow jersey and the best Colorado rider jersey. Boulder’s Kiel Reijnen of UnitedHealthcare won the green sprinter’s jersey. Ben Jacques-Maynes of Jamis-Hagens Berman won the king of the mountains (KOM) jersey. French rider Clément Chevrier of Bissell Development Team retained the best young rider jersey.

And Jens Voigt, the 42-year-old German rider of Trek Factory Racing competing in his final pro race, was awarded the most aggressive rider jersey.

Back for more. The Pro Challenge requires about $1.5 million per day to be put on successfully, race CEO Shawn Hunter said. The race plans to expand next year to include a women’s component, an announcement that drew applause from riders on stage.

Hunter reiterated that the race is on pace with its five-year plan to break even and said television ratings were the best they’ve been in four years, without providing specific figures.