In Lisa D’Amour’s “Detroit” — currently at the Curious Theatre Company — married couple Ben and Mary invite new younger neighbors Sharon and Kenny over for a backyard meal in a pleasant if fading suburban housing development.

What ensues between Mary and Ben, who are beginning to feel failed by the rules of middle-class aspirations, and their new friends (recovering addicts) is the stuff of plays featuring couples. There will be too much information shared. There will be shifting alliances. There will likely be dancing, drinking, arguing, a confusing kiss even. There will also be the truly unexpected.

Although it’s not an overcrowded genre, couples plays — especially those with only four characters — tend to be memorable. And volatile. Yes, even when they’re making us laugh. Of course, the couples are never simply representatives of relationships. And that’s likely why we’re drawn to them. Add a couple to a story and you exponentially expand its hothouse insights, whether they’re about love and desire, anger and forgiveness or status and thwarted aspirations.

Here are a few more arch works that challenge their romantic quartets — and us.

“God of Carnage”

Yasmina Reza’s 2009 Tony-winning play begins as two couples meet to discuss a school-yard incident in which one couple’s son hit the other in what appears to be an instance of bullying. The nastiness that follows between these upscale, educated, oh-so-mannered parents make whatever occurred between their sons mere child’s play. In 2011, Roman Polanski’s film adaptation opened, starring Kate Winslet, Christoph Waltz, Jodie Foster and John C. Reilly. As good as the cast is, the film could not do what theater does so well: lock us in a room and exploit the set-up for some surprisingly authentic insights.

“Closer”

British playwright Patrick Marber’s relationship tale — with its predeliction for blue language and sexual teases — might be described as very lovely people doing and saying quite unlovely things. Those people are a doctor, an obit writer and hobbled novelist, a photographer and a waif of a stripper. Over the course of four years, the quartet couples and uncouples in ways that school us in deceit, fear and most compelling, male competition.

Few can best Mike Nichols when it comes to taking a play to the screen. In 2004, he directed Julia Roberts, Clive Owen, Natalie Portman and Jude Law in a version of “Closer,” which earned Owen and Portman Oscar nominations.

“Your Friends & Neighbors”

While this 1998 indie comedy-drama didn’t originate as a play, it shouldn’t come as a surprise that this caustic tale of marital malaise and sexual politics came from a playwright: Neil LaBute. It has that kind of high, uncomfortable emotional humidity.

“(D)escribing who does what, and with whom, would be pointless,” wrote Roger Ebert in his four-star review. “The underlying truth is that no one cares for or about anybody else very much, and all of the fooling around is just an exercise in selfishness.”

“Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?”

Things do not get much more incendiary than Edward Albee’s 1962 domestic war games set in an associate professor’s on-campus home. Indeed, a certain play that shall go nameless actually burns down the house and still it cannot outdo George and Martha for fireworks. Or collateral damage. Poor Nick and Honey, they don’t stand a chance.

Need a refresher? Lakewood’s Edge Theater Company will be presenting the classic in late July.

Asked why audiences are drawn to relationship bonfires, Edge executive director Rick Yaconis replied by e-mail, “We love seeing the drama in other people’s relationships, and mostly try to avoid the drama in our own.” Indeed.

Lisa Kennedy: 303-954-1567, lkennedy@denverpost.com or twitter.com/bylisakennedy

“DETROIT”

Written by Lisa D’Amour. Directed by Chip Walton, featuring Karen Slack, Josh Hartwell, Brian Landis Folkins, Amanda Berg Wilson and John Ashton. Through June 19. 1 hour, 40 minutes. At Curious Theatre Company, 1080 Acoma St. Tickets $18-$44 via curioustheatre.org or 303-623-0524