A federal official on Thursday said the federally-run marketplace that opens on Saturday will perform far better than the glitch-plagued Obamacare exchange rolled out last year.

Roseanne Buccine of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services said people who go to healthcare.gov will find a streamlined application process that will require them to enter only their zip code and answer a few questions before viewing plans and prices. She further said the application process will involve substantially fewer screens and clicks, and take less time.

Federal officials have listened to consumers, she said, and conducted tests involving groups of consumers. "We've tested and re-tested and we've improved the testing process," she said.

People can begin signing up for coverage or renewing coverage at healthcare.gov beginning Saturday. Those who do so by Dec. 15 can have their coverage in place on Jan. 1. People can sign up for 2015 coverage until Feb. 15.

Buccine spoke during a conference call with Pennsylvania news reporters. The conference also included health care advocates and two Pennsylvania residents who described benefits they said they received as a result of coverage available through the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare.

Pennsylvania advocates noted there are more insurers selling plans to Pennsylvanians on the exchange than last year. Consumers in some parts of the states have dozens of plans to chose from, although residents of less populated areas have fewer offerings.

Buccine urged people who are renewing 2014 coverage to check the new plans, which might come with a better price or coverage. Those who don't renew will automatically be enrolled in their old plan, she said.

About 318,000 Pennsylvania residents obtained coverage through the exchange in 2014, the first year the coverage was available.

Neil Deegan, the Pennsylvania director for Get Covered America, said eight in ten received a government subsidy to offset some of the cost of their coverage, and nearly half pay $50 a month or less for their coverage.

He also said the fine for not having coverage increases in 2015, to $325 or two percent of income for an individual.

Karen Bernard of Pittsburgh said she and her husband are in their mid-50s. She works part-time and he sold his small business a few years ago after he got cancer. They had been using low-priced coverage that allowed only four doctor visits per year, she said.

The exchange connected them with coverage that is "much better than what we had and it's much more affordable ... We're very happy to have peace of mind," said Bernard, who added they also have dental coverage.

Carolyn Speranza, also from Pittsburgh, said she and her husband are 51. She said her husband lost his job as a government social worker, leaving them uninsured. He now works two part-time jobs. They found affordable coverage through the exchange, which she said is "actually better than what we had before."

Buccine, the CMC official, said the healthcare.gov call center at 1-800-318-2596

and TTY: 1-855-889-4325 will have 15,000 trained representatives, about 1,000 more than last year.

Pennsylvania also has many trained navigators who will be going to place such as community centers to help people sign up and will also meet with people individually.

Such help can be obtained by calling the Pennsylvania Health Access Network hotline at 877-570-3642, or by calling Insure PA at 855-486-9331, or by going to the PHAN website at pahealthaccess.org/gethelp.