As far as Georgia is concerned, the most important vote in Congress last week wasn’t the one that formally ended a 16-day shutdown of the federal government.

Rather, it was the agreement that punctuated a small group meeting held on Wednesday afternoon, hours before the House and Senate bowed to rationality. In that session, Sens. Johnny Isakson and Saxby Chambliss briefed most House Republicans from Georgia on the Democrat-heavy Senate compromise that was headed their way.

This was the same Isakson who, days earlier, had condemned as “a dumb idea” the GOP use of federal paralysis as a weapon to defund Obamacare. And the same Chambliss who had declared that, by demanding the moon, House Republicans had stripped their Senate brethren of all realistic negotiating power.

That night, Isakson and Chambliss would vote to send hundreds of thousands of federal employees back to work. But at their meeting, House Republicans from Georgia decided to stick together. All nine voted against both the end of the shutdown, and the (temporary) hike in the debt-ceiling.

This was no snub of Georgia’s senators – even if one of their number, Rep. Tom Graves of Ranger, was the most prominent House advocate of the “defund-or-bust” strategy. In fact, Georgia members of the House haven’t pushed back with a single word of criticism aimed at Chambliss or Isakson. Not in public, anyway.

No, this pact was a bet, pure and simple, with next year’s primary in mind. Especially the race for Senate.

One-third of Georgia’s House GOP delegation – Paul Broun of Athens, Phil Gingrey of Marietta, and Jack Kingston of Savannah — is running for Chambliss’ seat.

Theirs was a group wager that, in next year’s war between establishment Republicans who despair of their shrinking D.C. clout and the tea party supporters in their midst, the Republican nominee for Senate from Georgia is likely to be found on the Angry Bird side of American politics.

On Friday, the Senate Conservatives Fund, a group associated with Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas, endorsed the Republican challenger to Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., who helped negotiate an end to the shutdown.

Tea party heroine Sarah Palin is making noises about campaigning in Kentucky. And South Carolina, too, where Sen. Lindsey Graham has encountered GOP primary opposition.

Yes, a Democratic-leaning polling firm, Public Policy Polling of North Carolina, reports that the shutdown has given Michelle Nunn, the most financially viable Democrat in the Senate contest, a statistically measurable advantage in a race against any sitting Republican member of Congress.

But that is something that can be worried about next July, after the GOP runoff.

Which is what had the trio of Broun, Gingrey and Kingston advertising the bright side of closing down government, even after the effort collapsed.

“The shutdown has further revealed just how disorganized, unmanageable, overreaching and unfair our federal government has become under the Obama administration,” Gingrey argued.

“I think it was important to re-establish our brand as being against Obamacare,” Kingston said in an MSNBC interview after the shutdown ended. “I am telling you sometimes our base thinks we haven’t driven the point enough.”

Broun promised more to come. “This was actually the beginning of a three-and-a-half year effort to at least get Obamacare just put on hold,” he said in a WGAU (1340AM) radio interview on Friday – carefully mentioning that Kingston was not one of the original instigators of the movement, as he was.

It is clear that the shutdown has complicated the Senate race for those already in Congress. The budget/debt-ceiling agreement passed this week will resurface again in January. By that time, time we will be in an election year, and an Angry Birds strategy may not be the only approach out there.

Former secretary of state Karen Handel has been running as a non-congressional candidate, but endorsed the shutdown and its aim. So did David Perdue, a former Dollar General chief executive, who has raised more cash than anyone in the GOP race but Kingston. Perdue reported $800,000 in contributions – plus $1 million out of his own pocket — raised as of Sept. 30.

But Perdue, a political rookie, is moving toward an adult-in-the-room strategy. “I think you may see I’m parting ways with some of the other people in this race, because frankly, it’s time to start talking about the solution here, and not what’s best for one party or the other,” he said Friday in a telephone interview. “This is bigger than either party. We almost defaulted.

“There are two things that we have that nobody else has. We have a $16 trillion economy today. Second, we’ve got the good faith and credit of the United States of America. We cannot play around with that,” he said.