Five UTC students portrayed presidential candidates and sparred on ideas of political interest during a mock debate Monday.

The students received feedback from Dan Lothian, former CNN White House correspondent and Tennessee Temple alumnus, in order to better address issues at a similar debate in March.

The debaters took on the points and personas of Chris Christie, Jeb Bush, Hillary Clinton, Ted Cruz and Donald Trump.

The students picked up on obvious mannerisms of the real candidates—leveraging teasing quotes and hyperbolic gestures—to make their views known. They mimiced their candidate’s stances on education, healthcare and homeland security.

Nathaniel Brown, a freshman portraying Jeb Bush, talked about his experience as a governor and hammered out “conservative principles” in listicle-like fashion.

Brown said that he had fun acting as Bush, a candidate he actively supports.

“It was an immense amount of fun,” Brown said. “I get to work on Jeb’s campaign [as] campaign captain at UTC. It’s exhilarating playing someone with so much influence [who is] such a good politician and can connect with voters.”

During the 30-minute mock debate, Brown responded twice to the “low-energy candidate” comments levied against him by Seth Harrell as Donald Trump.

Harrell, UTC College Democrats president and East Tennessee Young Democrats vice chair, explained Trump's stance against common core and other policies. He said he, as Trump, was the "serious candidate" for education reform because of his business experience.

“I built buildings before, so I can build education,” Harrell said. “It’s gonna be a huge success.”

Blake Kitterman, a sophomore who works closely with Hamilton for Hillary, represented the stances of Hillary Clinton. Throughout the debate, Kitterman lauded President Barrack Obama’s Affordable Care Act and said he, as Clinton, closely identified with the president.

While he said he enjoyed playing the role, he said it was “a bit different” to portray Clinton.

“It was definitely interesting,” Kitterman said. “I did not prepare myself with the pant suits, but it was definitely fun. I think it went real well.”

When all was said and done, Lothian shared his experiences covering presidential debates in 2004, 2008 and 2012. He said that covering this year’s campaign cycle “would have been a fun one.”

Before a Q&A session with those gathered, he gave the competitors the following tips for their next debate:

—Keep the voters in mind as you present.

—Tell stories to get your points across.

—Explicitly tell your voters how a policy item would affect them.

—Always have a line or thesis ready for each various issue.

—Don’t be afraid to show emotion.

The Chattanooga Area Chamber of Commerce's downtown council hosted and moderated today’s debate.

UTC will host a mock debate with a larger field of candidates March 24.