LAS VEGAS – The Washington Post calls it “the greatest libertarian show on Earth.”

Who could argue?

Every summer, thousands of liberty lovers flock to Las Vegas for what’s called “FreedomFest,” where debates are contentious, discussions are heated and speeches are rallying cries for less government.

This year’s event at Planet Hollywood will be bigger and louder than ever as Glenn Beck, Steve Forbes, John Stossel and Joseph Farah light it up July 8-11.

For example, Nobel Prize-winning economist and New York Times columnist Dr. Paul Krugman has always turned down face-to-face debates.

Until now. After years of negotiations, he’s finally agreed to take on his No. 1 critic live, in person, TV cameras and all – Wall Street Journal columnist and Heritage Foundation’s chief economist Steve Moore, Thursday, July 9, 2015, at FreedomFest.

“I believe it’s going to be the most explosive debate in modern economic history and I want you to have a ringside seat with me when it happens,” says organizer Mark Skousen. “In fact, I’ll be the moderator to make sure we hold these two top economists to the fire.”

The two will square off on the most important economic topics:

Austerity vs. stimulus

Big government vs limited government

Easy money (the paper dollar) vs, sound money (gold)

Progressive vs. flat tax

Inequality vs. growth

Obamacare vs. market health care

Steve Moore and Skousen will hold a special debriefing the next morning to talk about the impact of this historic debate to the country, your business and your portfolio.

“FreedomFest is my favorite conference of the year, and I make sure to attend all three days,” says Forbes. “It’s non-stop action. It’s where the best ideas and strategies are fleshed out. You will be amazed at the people you meet. Can anything good come out of Vegas? You bet. Come and see for yourself.”

What kind of conference engenders so much enthusiasm and return attendance? FreedomFest is unique. As Robert Poole, Jr., co-founder of Reason magazine, puts it, “FreedomFest is the most intense, rewarding, intellectual, create-your-own three-day conference I have ever attended.”

One attendee dubbed it the Disneyland of the mind, an intellectual feast in the entertainment capital of the world. There are dozens of sessions, panels and debates – on topics ranging from philosophy, history, science & technology, money and investing, healthy living, geo-politics, law and religion.

“Barnum and Bailey said they were the greatest show on Earth,” said Harry Backmender of Connecticut. “They were wrong. FreedomFest is the greatest show on Earth! I can’t wait to be there.”

The full program has not yet been announced, but in addition to Beck, Forbes, Stossel and Farah, Whole Foods CEO John Mackey, billionaires Peter Thiel and Steve Wynn (the man responsible for the new Las Vegas) are lined up.

It’s Beck’s first appearance. The former CNN and Fox News star Glenn Beck, former Fox News anchorman and one of Time magazine’s “Top 100 Most Influential People in the World” will speak on the topic, “We Will Not Conform!” based on his new book, “Conform: Exposing the Truth about Common Core and Public Education.”

He will be joined by Sen. Mike Lee, who will speak on his new book, “The Long Constitution,” and Rep. Justin Amash, considered the next “Ron Paul” among libertarian Republicans.

Every year FreedomFest has theme. This year it’s “Discovering the New American Dream.”

“There’s a Dream Team of speakers I can’t wait to hear myself including philosophers, historians, scientists, economists, business leaders, financial gurus, artists, and healthy living experts,” says the ever-enthusiastic Skousen.

They include:

Dinesh D’Souza, author, filmmaker, and debater extraordinaire (he’s never lost a debate at FreedomFest in eight years) will be released from the “community confinement center,” where he has been assigned for violating federal election rules just in time to speak on “What It’s Like to be a Political Prisoner in America.”

Charles Murray, senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, on why he now advocates civil disobedience to fix government in his new book “By the People: Rebuilding Liberty Without Permission.”

Grover Norquist, president of Americans for Tax Reform and named the No. 1 most powerful broker in Washington by CNN, on “Flat Tax, Fair Tax, No Tax: The Future of Tax Reform Around the World.”

Joseph Farah, founder and Chief Executive Officer of WND.com will speak on the topic “The Free Press Unbound: America’s 200 Year Love Affair with Muckraking.”

Rich Little, the world’s No. 1 impressionist, will perform – lampooning politicians including the past six presidents, all of whom he has known personally.

FreedomFest attendees are eligible for a big break from Planet Hollywood if they act fast, with rooms for $109 a night.

You can register online or call toll-free at 1-855-850-FREE.