Wendell Potter on .... High-deductible health plans: “The whole idea is to shift costs and transfer insurance risk to employees and families. This began to happen at the end of my career (in 2008) and has accelerated. The theory is when people have more skin in the game, they will become more responsible. But most families don't have extra money to sock away in (health savings accounts). Account balances have not grown very large, except for the well-off.”

Co-insurance and co-pays: “This was set up by people who want to make money.”

The impact on health insurers from Obamacare: “We are already seeing record insurance company profits. Share prices are at 52-week highs. Right now, as a sector, this is the best they have seen. CEO compensation is skyrocketing. These companies are doing great because of the expansion of coverage” in the private market, Medicaid and Medicare Advantage.”

Highly paid health insurance CEOs: “When people become rich, they lose touch with the middle class. CEOs and top executives have chauffers. I know I did.”

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan's conversion to a mutual insurer: “They had to change their business model” when Obamacare prohibited all insurers from denying coverage to people for pre-existing conditions. “They may indeed be acquired by a Wellpoint” or other for-profit insurer like more than a dozen other Blues plans.

Health information exchanges: “This ultimately will provide more data for quality and price transparency.”

The future of private health insurance exchanges? “The trend continues for companies to cost-shift to employees.”

Health insurance executive turned health insurance industry critic Wendell Potter and I go back many years.



Wendell was vice president of corporate communications for Cigna from 1993 to 2008 and earlier at Humana from 1989 to 1993 when I was a reporter at Modern Healthcare, a sister publication of Crain’s Detroit Business.



A native born Tennessean, Wendell was always a very personable, friendly and efficient spokesman for his company. He knew the insides and outsides of the insurance business. He usually got me what I needed, either an interview with another executive or a quick quote to use in my story.



Most importantly, Wendell never lied to me. If he didn’t know, he would say so. If he couldn’t say, he would give me a “No comment.” Vague answer, but honest. I liked Wendell.



So I was very surprised to see him on the "Bill Moyers Journal" television show in 2009 ripping the insurance industry for deceptive practices.



In that interview and others he gave to CNN, MSNBC, Fox News, CBS, and in articles he wrote for the The Center for Public Integrity, where he is a senior analyst, Wendell was always careful not to talk directly about his former employers.



But he felt no inhibition about exposing what he said were common health insurance industry practices that he says have contributed to more than 50 million Americans not being able to afford health insurance.



Leading up to the March 2010 approval of Obamacare, or the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, Potter clearly advocated for massive health insurance reform.





And later, in November 2010, Wendell became a full-fledged whistleblower with his book, Deadly Spin: An Insurance Company Insider Speaks Out on How Corporate PR Is Killing Health Care and Deceiving Americans.



I always thought, what happened to make Wendell speak out?



A few weeks ago, I found out.





I had a chance to sit down with Wendell before his keynote address at the, or MichUCan, annual awards dinner. MichUCan promotes comprehensive health care and improved patient outcomes.

Said Marjorie Mitchell, MichUCan’s executive director, about Potter: “I met Wendell two years ago (in Washington D.C.) and always have been very impressed with him. He gave up a lot financially and probably emotionally to get the word out.”



After exchanging old stories and catching up on personal life changes, Wendell told me what happened to cause him to jump off the corporate bus and essentially become the nation’s go-to-guy when it comes to discussing destructive insurance industry practices.



“In 2007, things began to change for me. I had a crisis of conscience,” said Potter. “I saw "Sicko," Michael Moore’s documentary movie (about the nation’s health care delivery and insurance system).”



Potter said while Moore was making the movie in 2006, “he became enemy No. 1. We did not know what he was going to focus on” until it was released May 19, 2007, at the Cannes Film Festival.



“AHIP (America’s Health Insurance Plans) sent a person to France to see the film. He called back that night. Hundreds of us gathered and had our worst fears confirmed. (Moore) didn’t focus on the high-cost of insurance. He focused on who had insurance and who got coverage denied.”



Potter said he finally saw the movie in California.



“This guy (Moore) got it right,” said Potter, adding: “I knew I would be involved in an effort to discredit Moore.”



Over the next year, Potter said the insurance industry hired a national public relations firm, which also had worked previously for the tobacco industry, to present a case that Moore’s movie was incorrect.



In 2008, Potter said he went home to Tennessee and attended a free health care clinic where thousands of people showed up to get treated by dozens of volunteer doctors, nurses and dentists.



“I saw it and realized I was playing a role in preventing these people from getting health insurance,” he said. “I could be one of those people if my dad had not saved for my college education.”





Potter said two weeks later, he realized he needed a new job.“That was my wake-up call.”But it would be several more months and after a widely publicized controversy involving Cigna’s denial of a lifesaving liver transplant for 17-year-old Natalie Sarkisyan that led Potter to finally quit.It wasn’t too long before Wendell began getting offers by television stations and Congress to speak out about his experiences in the health insurance industry.Potter said very few Americans know how big a role Wall Street plays in the health care industry.“Today, health insurance industry is dominated by very large for-profit companies. Their objective is to pay as little as they can for medical care because their goal is to make money and try never to disappoint Wall Street.”“The increasing number of uninsured is directly related to policies catered to Wall Street.”Wendell’s attention currently is focused on helping the public understand Obamacare in an e-book published in December.“Someone needed to do this book,” he said.My thought is that someone needed to be Wendell Potter.