PITTSBURGH — There is a reason the Pirates keep hoisting the Jolly Roger.

A reason they have won 13 of their last 16 games. A reason they own the National League’s second-best record.

They make the plays that matter.

The Pirates did it again Friday night at PNC Park in front of 32,607 fans, beating the Rockies 5-3.

The loss snapped Colorado’s modest two-game winning streak.

“I think that’s a well-rounded team, not many holes. So they can beat you in a lot of ways,” Rockies manager Walt Weiss said of the Pirates. “They have a really good bullpen, and that’s been one of their strengths.”

The Pirates won the game in the eighth inning, making struggling reliever Scott Oberg pay for his mistakes. Oberg issued back-to-back walks to catcher Francisco Cervelli and Pedro Alvarez. Run-scoring singles by pinch- hitter Josh Harrison and right fielder Gregory Polanco gave the Pirates the victory.

Oberg, who took the loss, saw his ERA rise to 5.76. He has issued 21 walks in 46 innings this season.

In the top of the eighth, Polanco (3-for-5) made the kind of play that playoff teams make. With Rockies shortstop Jose Reyes perched on third base, Nolan Arenado hit a sinking line drive to shallow right. Reyes attempted to tag up and score, but Polanco made a running catch and threw a strike to Cervelli, who tagged out the sliding Reyes. Polanco received a standing ovation from the black and gold-clad crowd.

“Sometimes you have to take a chance,” Reyes said. “We know what kind of athlete Polanco is. But it was a shallow ball, not too deep, but he had to make a great throw. Not too many right fielders can do that.”

Weiss had no problem with Reyes trying to score.

“That’s the right play right there,” Weiss said. “I was glad he took off. It took a great throw by Polanco, and it was right on the money.”

Behind a competitive start from Jon Gray, the Rockies hung tough before falling to 24-39 away from home.

The Rockies had only five hits, but two of them were monsters.

Reyes hit a two-out, two-run homer in the fifth off starter Francisco Liriano. Reyes said he sat on Liriano’s changeup.

“I was looking for it, and I was able to put a pretty good swing on it,” Reyes said.

Carlos Gonzalez silenced PNC with a solo homer to right-center in the sixth, tying the game 3-3.

It was Reyes’ third homer since joining the Rockies in the trade that sent Troy Tulowitzki to Toronto. It was CarGo’s 31st homer of the season, his 27th since June 1.

Gray didn’t dominate the Pirates by any means, but he kept the Rockies in the ballgame and gave them a chance to win. The rookie right-hander departed with one out in the fifth, trailing 3-2, having thrown a season-high 89 pitches (55 strikes). After five starts, he has five no-decisions and a 6.00 ERA.

“I thought I pitched OK, maybe better than my line showed,” Gray said.

The Pirates tagged Gray for seven hits, and he stuck out six. It was a quantum leap of improvement over his last start when the New York Mets shelled him for seven runs and eight hits in just 1 innings, including a second-inning grand slam by Yoenis Cespedes.

“Jon threw the ball well,” Weiss said. “I wanted to give him an opportunity to get through the fifth there, but he started to get extended a little bit.”

Pittsburgh’s Andrew McCutchen used pure speed to score in the first. He singled to right, stole second and scored on Jung Ho Kang’s bloop single to right. The Pirates extended their lead to 2-0 in the third when Polanco singled, stole second and scored on Kang’s double.

Pittsburgh took a 3-2 lead in the fifth. Polanco ripped a leadoff double off Gray, scampered to third on a wild pitch and scored on Starling Marte’s sacrifice fly.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp