DSW, a Columbus, Ohio-based footwear retailer, said its Chief Financial Officer, Douglas Probst, will retire effective May 1. Mr. Probst has been with the company since 2005. According to the company’s latest proxy filing, Mr. Probst received an annual compensation valued at $1.6 million. Helen Betsy Wallace, the company’s senior vice president of finance will continue to serve as the company’s principal accounting officer.

Harris, a Melbourne, Fla.-based telecommunications equipment company, hired Miguel Lopez as CFO. Prior to this, Mr. Lopez served as CFO at communications software developer Aricent Group. According to a company regulatory filing, Mr. Lopez will receive a base salary of $525,000 and a one-time cash allowance of $10,000 to cover the legal fees incurred while negotiating the terms of his employment. He will be eligible to a performance-based target bonus of 75% of his base salary. He will also receive 12,500 restricted stocks which will vest on March 3, 2017, and an annual equity award with a target value of $1.2 beginning with its fiscal year ending in 2015. Mr. Lopez succeeds Gary McArthur, who has resigned from the company to pursue other opportunities.

Ligand Pharmaceuticals, a La Jolla, Calif.-based pharmaceuticals company hired Nishan de Silva as CFO. Dr. de Silva has been Ligand’s vice president of corporate development since February 2012. According to a regulatory filing, Dr. de Silva’s base salary for 2014 is $300,900 and he is eligible for an annual target bonus equal to 40% of his annual base salary. Dr. de Silva succeeds John Sharp, who has left the company for a position with a private company.

Normal

0

false

false

false

EN-US

X-NONE

X-NONE

MicrosoftInternetExplorer4

DSW Inc., a Columbus, Ohio-based footwear retailer, said its Chief Financial Officer, Douglas Probst, will retire effective May 1. Mr. Probst has been with the company since 2005. According to the company’s latest proxy filing, Mr. Probst received an annual compensation valued at $1.6 million. Helen Betsy Wallace, the company’s senior vice president of finance will continue to serve as the company’s principal accounting officer.

Harris Corp., a Melbourne, Fla.-based telecommunications equipment company, hired Miguel Lopez as CFO. Prior to this, Mr. Lopez served as CFO at communications software developer Aricent Group. According to a company regulatory filing, Mr. Lopez will receive a base salary of $525,000 and a one-time cash allowance of $10,000 to cover the legal fees incurred while negotiating the terms of his employment. He will be eligible to a performance-based target bonus of 75% of his base salary. He will also receive 12,500 restricted stocks which will vest on March 3, 2017, and an annual equity award with a target value of $1.2 beginning with its fiscal year ending in 2015. Mr. Lopez succeeds Gary McArthur, who has resigned from the company to pursue other opportunities.

Ligand Pharmaceuticals Inc., a La Jolla, Calif.-based pharmaceuticals company hired Nishan de Silva as CFO. Dr. de Silva has been Ligand’s vice president of corporate development since February 2012. According to a regulatory filing, Dr. de Silva’s base salary for 2014 is $300,900 and he is eligible for an annual target bonus equal to 40% of his annual base salary. Dr. de Silva succeeds John Sharp, who has left the company for a position with a private company.

/* Style Definitions */

table.MsoNormalTable

{mso-style-name:”Table Normal”;

mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0;

mso-tstyle-colband-size:0;

mso-style-noshow:yes;

mso-style-priority:99;

mso-style-parent:””;

mso-padding-alt:0in 5.4pt 0in 5.4pt;

mso-para-margin:0in;

mso-para-margin-bottom:.0001pt;

mso-pagination:widow-orphan;

font-size:10.0pt;

font-family:”Times New Roman”,”serif”;}