“What’s the glory in living? Doesn’t anybody ever stay together anymore? And if love never lasts forever, tell me, what’s forever for?”

The question posed by Rafe Van Hoy’s “What’s Forever For,” made famous by Michael Martin Murphey in 1982, resonates today.

Recently, when a newspaper headline hit my heart, I remembered those lines. The headline read, “First gay divorce finalized in Colorado.” The article said a recent court ruling will enable same-sex couples who made vows in another state to divorce here “without uprooting their lives.”

Juli Yim and Lorelei Jones entered a legal same-sex marriage in Massachusetts in 2009. According to Yim, the relationship soured and she found a new partner in Colorado, necessitating dissolution of the Massachusetts marriage. Yim’s was among seven same-sex divorce cases filed here since May 1, when Colorado’s new civil union law took effect.

The article says Yim plans on marrying her new partner next year, but it’s difficult to imagine either woman finding much to celebrate in making legal history while losing someone she loved.

What’s forever for?

We’ve become a nation bitterly divided over human sexuality, marriage and reproduction, but could we collectively ache for just a moment?

The national marriage debate rarely considers context. It simply asks whether everyone should have the right to marry who they love. But the first attempt at redefinition occurred well before anyone challenged the historic understanding of marriage. Decades ago, heterosexuals decided to discard marital permanence for a more convenient “no fault” approach to divorce.

“No fault” sounds a lot like “no worries,” but where sexual relationships are concerned, it’s never that simple. Psychological complications around bonding and breaking wound even the so-called winners.

Sadly, human inclinations often derail their best intentions. Infidelity and abuse are tragic realities. That’s why the law, favoring permanence, once protected the vulnerable spouse, usually a woman, from being quickly cast aside for a more appealing partner.

Courts also protected children from hasty marital dissolution. The kids, who often experience devastating emotional trauma when parents decide to split, were thought to deserve more than cavalier consideration about where their pillows would be at night and what kind of financial support they deserved if their parents called it quits.

The presumption of permanence was inconvenient, but it protected the innocent. It made for a more stable society. It helped those entering marriage to take their vows seriously.

Since the admittedly imperfect time when marital permanence was the norm, advocates of the revolution seduced us into preferring sexual freedom. But each victory along the way has been accompanied by increases in societal instability, emotional insecurity and children’s vulnerability.

One more win may make headlines, but it won’t make broken hearts mend. Nor will it support our young, many of whom, having experienced more familial disruption than any other generation, have begun to mask the pain of hooking up and breaking up by calling it “the new normal.”

It all seems so reasonable. Our sexuality begs to be expressed, and desiring to pursue our passions without shame or legal hindrance, we’ve spent decades pushing against the things that limit our opportunity for perceived happiness. We laugh and we label. We love and we leave.

“Doesn’t anybody ever stay together anymore?”

The now-classic song reminds those of us who lived through the last few decades that we still long for lasting love. We just haven’t worked very hard to preserve the things that improve our chances.

“What’s forever for?”

A union of love and responsibility.

We’ve undermined it for too long, and our wounded hearts know it.

Peggy Haslar writes from Monte Vista. She was a member of the 2002 Colorado Voices panel.