Radio and TV personality Tom Martino spoke on social media Sunday about his arrest on a domestic-violence charge Saturday.

Denver police arrested Martino at about 5 a.m. Saturday near Interstate 25 and Auraria Parkway. The woman, who has not been identified, was taken to a hospital.

“I realize I have many detractors … and they will use this as ‘ammunition’ as always,” Martino wrote to the 5,567 followers on his Facebook feed. “That is part of life. But for those who know my heart and soul … for those supporting and loving Holly and I through this and other rough times recently, we want you to know how much we appreciate you.”

Reached on his cellphone by The Denver Post, Martino hung up. He did not return a subsequent call asking for a comment.

Details about the incident weren’t yet available Sunday, but the arrest report is expected to be made public Monday morning, said Detective John White.

Booking information shows Martino, 60, is free on $550 bail on charges of assault and disturbing the peace. He is scheduled for a Jan. 16 appearance in Denver County Court.

On Dec. 14, Martino mentioned stress in his family on his Facebook page, referencing his wife, Holly.

“Haven’t posted in a very long time,” he stated. “Been going through a lot of family stuff. My wife’s brother recently passed away. He and his family had been living with us through the treatments for cancer. He and Holly grew up like ‘twins’ just a year apart.”

Martino, who calls himself “The Troubleshooter,” has been a fixture in Denver media for three decades. He provides consumer advice, often taking combative stands, on 630-AM KHOW from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. weekdays.

The station had no news about Martino’s arrest on its website Sunday.

Clear Channel Communications, KHOW’s owner, released a statement saying the company had no comment on the arrest.

“As far as Tom’s show is concerned, it is presently on its pre-scheduled vacation,” the company stated. The station’s program director, Dan Mandis, said he did not know Sunday when Martino’s vacation would end.

Martino also has been the consumer advocate reporter for KCNC-CBS4 and KDVR-Fox31 during his career. He no longer works for either station. Martino threatened to sue Fox31 after he was let go in 2011, alleging wrongful termination and age discrimination while he was fighting off bankruptcy allegations.

Martino’s Facebook post Sunday drew reaction from supporters, including 86 people who “liked” his comment four hours after it was posted.