Movies

The actor whose career was once synonymous with wholesome roles is now taking a crooked path.

Replay Video Icon Trailer: Sin City: A Dame to Kill For The town's most hard-boiled citizens cross paths with some of its more reviled inhabitants. PT3M19S http://www.smh.com.au/action/externalEmbeddedPlayer?id=d-3crbn 620 349 July 29, 2014

You'd think having a happy marriage, a couple of kids and a wholesome, thriving business outside acting might make Hollywood superstar Jessica Alba return to the lighter films more synonymous with her career. After all, her big-screen breakthrough came as the eponymous dancer in the teen-friendly Honey (2003) and she has since been best known as a romantic lead in films such as Valentine's Day (2010).

Instead, Alba has lately chosen a more testing path, returning to the noir, comic-book world of Frank Miller she first visited in 2005's Sin City, with her role expanded from, in her words, "a bit of a damsel in distress" to a "crazy, depressed, betrayed ... alcoholic" in the long-awaited sequel Sin City: A Dame to Kill For.

Night stalker: Alba as a "crazy, depressed, betrayed ... alcoholic" in Sin City 2: A Dame to Kill For.

"I like to not play it safe any more," Alba says from her kitchen in Los Angeles. "I realise now why so many of my performances are so boring. It's because I was always playing it so safe.

Advertisement

"I was always so unsatisfied, I hated watching them. Not that I'm sitting there, like, 'Oh my God, I can't wait to see myself!' now; it's just not as awful as it was before."

Even for someone who might not exactly be Meryl Streep in the acting stakes, that's quite a harsh self-assessment.

Jessica Alba: "I realise now why so many of my performances are so boring." Photo: Mark Davis

"Maybe," Alba says. "I don't know. I'm kind of real with it. It is what it is, ha ha ha! I don't think I'm the worst, but I was certainly making really safe choices and I really think that it was pretty boring for the most part. Not every role but most of 'em.

"Now my approach is different ... I have a confidence that I didn't have before where taking risks was scary. Now it's necessary."

While she is still a hardly ancient 33, this year marks the 20th anniversary of Alba's screen debut in the Disney movie Camp Nowhere. She went on to do the rounds of children's television with a recurring part in The Secret World of Alex Mack and then a starring role in an update of Flipper before catching James Cameron's eye to play the lead in, and eventually score a Golden Globe nomination for, his more adult TV show Dark Angel (2000).

Sin City 2: A Dame to Kill For let Alba return to Frank Miller's noir, comic-book world.

Averaging two films a year since Honey, and with five (and a TV mini-series) due for release this year alone, Alba is still in great demand. But in a town as fickle as Hollywood, is she conscious of the fact there is always someone younger and perhaps prettier coming through?

"Absolutely, every day," she says. "But that's always been the case. I mean, Natalie Portman's been doing it for the same amount of time as me, so has Scarlett Johansson. Y'know, we all started as kids."

Does Alba feel any pressure as a result?

First inking: Jessica's character as she was drawn in Frank Miller's Sin City.

"I don't care about it. At all," she says, a little tersely. "I mean, really? Ha ha ha! I actually feel like I got better with age! I think I look better now than I did when I was in my early 20s."

She certainly, ahem, convinces as the exotic dancer Nancy Callahan in Sin City: A Dame to Kill For. Like the 2005 film, it is based on co-director Miller's brooding graphic novels about the sordid (fictional) Basin City and its unsavoury inhabitants, and features an extraordinary ensemble, again including Mickey Rourke, Rosario Dawson and Bruce Willis.

This time, however, there are a couple of new tales – including Alba's – that have been written directly for the screen ("so it's not like you can look at the graphic novel and you know what's gonna happen"). And what the whole film lacks in subtlety, it more than makes up for with ultra-stylish and -stylised action.

Sue Storm: Jessica Alba with Ioan Gruffudd, Michael Chiklis and Chris Evans in Fantastic Four. Photo: Kerry Hayes

"This is one of those movies where if I wasn't in it, I would have wanted to be in it," Alba gushes. "The characters are so rich, the world is completely insane."

It marks Alba's fifth collaboration with Miller's co-director Robert Rodriguez, who has an uncanny knack of getting actors back to work with him even on films such as these that are shot almost entirely using green-screen technology – meaning environments get added later and the actors have to work extra-hard to imagine them.

"I guess you can liken it closest to theatre," Alba says. "It's all about the performance and you really have to know what you're doing, what you're saying and how you want it to come across, and hope to God that you don't look like an idiot."

Dance off: Alba played a choreographer in the 2003 film Honey.

On top of that, there must have been some big egos to deal with, in Willis, Rourke and more. Alba laughs. "They're amazing actors and there's a reason why they're movie stars ... They're both very professional and gave so much in their performance.

"And they're both so interesting. I did a lot of scenes with Mickey and just to have this big, like, barrel-chested, manly, rough dude, but he is like a sweet little puppy ... When you see in his eyes and they water up and he has all this emotion and so much heart, it's just amazing."

Alba, too, bares her soul – but, it is worth noting, little else. It has been rumoured that she has a no-nudity clause in her contracts, which might have caused problems given her role as a stripper. She explains otherwise.

Rorschach test: Alan Moore's graphic novel Watchmen was long considered unfilmable.

"It's actually just a standard clause that every actress has ... You modify your contract based off of the role. I never needed to modify it from what it is because I never felt like I needed to do that to get across what I needed to get across.

"And the way that Frank draws the strippers in Sin City, they're more like burlesque dancers ... there's more fantasy involved and role playing. It was fun to do that and I think you do get the sexuality, the raunchiness, the toughness – all of that – in the dance."

In fact, Alba is enjoying her roles in all aspects of her life. First there are her coming films. "I've done a lot more independents," she says. "I've done smaller roles and lots of parts for friends who have directed movies" – such as for Kyle Newman, who made the documentary Fanboys and cast Alba as the villain in his imminent action flick Barely Lethal; and Entourage star Kevin Connolly, who will make his directorial debut with Dear Eleanor, in which Alba cameos as "this crazy character" called Daisy.

Then there is her mulitmillion-dollar business. "It's called The Honest Company," she explains. "I make household cleaning products, personal care products, diapers and wipes, hard goods and soft goods, all with – they're all non-toxic, beautifully designed, affordable products."

Notably, Alba does all this without overly catching the ubiquitous eyes of the paparazzi. "I don't go to parties ... I have, like, a pretty normal life," she says. "The paparrazi, they park outside of my house, so they just follow me to work or to the grocery store or to lunch or whatever. But I can't do anything about it, it just is what it is.

"It's like, if you're gonna be angry about it all the time, you're gonna have anxiety about it; then your kids are gonna have anxiety about it."

Alba finds herself, then, in a good place in 2014. Is there by now a particular film she has made that she hopes to be remembered for?

"I feel like the best is yet to come – just because I finally feel comfortable in my skin and I feel like I can tackle roles as an actor in a way that I've always wanted to and really be fulfilled in the process," she says.

"But I don't know if I need to be known for anything. Hopefully I'll be known more than anything for my company. And to my kids, I'm hoping that they will know me for always being there for them and loving them unconditionally.

"You know, the film business is great, and I love that I can entertain, but it's not my be-all end-all."

Sin City: A Dame to Kill For is released in cinemas on September 18.

Screen adaptations of graphic novels we've loved ...

American Splendor (2003)

Paul Giamatti is a terrific Harvey Pekar in this engaging and original biography-cum-adaptation of the cult writer and his most famous comic-book series. The heroes in American Splendor are ordinary folk from Cleveland, Ohio, and its stories distinctly everyday tales – but its celluloid representation proved funny, warm and wholly loveable.

Kick-Ass (2010)

When every studio baulked at such a violent tale, director Matthew Vaughn backed himself to make this story of the world's least likely superhero (of the title) and his brutal, foul-mouthed, 11-year-old sidekick, Hit Girl. We're glad he did. Kick-Ass proved to be a movie based on a graphic novel like no other before it, even if the inevitable sequel came up short.

Road to Perdition (2002)

Some thought this adaptation of a graphic novel about a Depression-era American assassin – director Sam Mendes' wildly different follow-up to his celebrated debut American Beauty – was overwhelmed by the late Conrad L. Hall's sublime, moody cinematography. They were, of course, wrong. Road to Perdition is as absorbing as it is handsome.

Red (2010)

Now this really shouldn't have worked as a movie, let alone a comic book. Would anyone really want to see a bunch of balding and/or greying actors playing "Retired, Extremely Dangerous" action heroes? Well, when one of them is Bruce Willis in vintage form and another is perhaps the sexiest sexagenarian on the planet, Helen Mirren – most definitely.

Scott Pilgrim Vs the World (2010)

We won't get to see the endlessly inventive filmmaker Edgar Wright do a more traditional superhero movie yet, his having fallen out with Marvel over Ant-Man, but at least we got to see him take on legend-in-his-own-mind Scott Pilgrim – who in turn takes on his beloved girlfriend's "seven evil exes". Plenty of witty casting in this one, too.

Watchmen (2009)

Man of Steel director Zack Snyder earned his comic-book-movie stripes with his sensational job adapting for the screen Alan Moore's epic graphic novel Watchmen – which was long considered to be "unfilmable". Even at 161 minutes its story, following a dysfunctional team of vigilantes, was riveting and beautiful (the latter especially on the IMAX screen).

... and a couple we'd rather forget

300 (2007)

Before Watchmen, Snyder had a crack at Frank "Sin City" Miller's graphic novel based on the mythical Battle of Thermopylae in 480 BC, where 300 Spartans supposedly defeated 300,000 Persians. The preposterous number of buff male torsos on display did wonders for gym memberships. For quality comic-book movies? Not so much.

The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen (2003)

This tale of a team of fiction legends including Dr Jekyll/Mr Hyde, Captain Nemo and Dorian Gray – not to mention Sean Connery as their leader, Allan Quatermain (of King Solomon's Mines fame) – should have been a smash hit. Instead it sank like the bomb it was, apparently taking Connery with it.