ENLARGE Derek Jeter during the game against the Tampa Bay Rays at Yankee Stadium on July 28, 2013. Getty Images

Yankee captain Derek Jeter will retire after the 2014 season, bringing an end to a remarkable career that saw him evolve into the face of baseball, and closing one of the most successful eras in the history of baseball's signature franchise.

Jeter announced the news Wednesday via a letter on his Facebook account. His agent, Casey Close, confirmed that the letter is real, and the retirement genuine. "2014 will be his last season," Close said.

Yankee captain Derek Jeter will retire after the 2014 season, he announced today via a letter from his Facebook account. Matthew Oshinsky reports on the News Hub.

"I could not be more sure," Jeter wrote. "I know it in my heart. The 2014 season will be my last year playing professional baseball."

Jeter, who will turn 40 in June, is the undisputed face of baseball, a shortstop renowned for always saying and doing the right things in the nation's toughest market. He is beloved by Yankee fans and respected by his opponents, a larger-than-the-game figure who has dated starlets and used his considerable name recognition to anchor major advertising campaigns.

A Look at Derek Jeter's Career

He will leave the game after 20 seasons in the major leagues, all with the Yankees. His 3,316 career hits are already the most in Yankee history, and he also leads the club in games played, at-bats, hits and stolen bases. Leg injuries limited him to just 17 games last season, the first since 2008 that the Yankees didn't reach the playoffs.

Jeter is a 13-time All Star and five-time Gold Glove Award-winner. He has hit .343 in 10 American League Championship Series and .321 in seven World Series. His final regular season game will come Sept. 28, fittingly against the Boston Red Sox at Fenway Park. Ticket prices for that game, and the others during his final week, suddenly skyrocketed on Wednesday, according to Seatgeek.com, with many selling for 10 times their prices only hours before.

Jeter is the last remaining member of the "Core Four," the group of homegrown Yankees who carried the team to five World Series titles from 1996 to 2009. The other three, Jorge Posada, Mariano Rivera, and Andy Pettitte, have all retired.

Said Posada, "It was an honor and privilege to have Derek next to me for all those years. He made me a better player and a better person. I'm so proud of our friendship and I love him like a brother. Derek was a true champion and the greatest teammate I ever had."

Jeter is known for keeping things close to the vest, and his retirement announcement came as a shock to nearly all. Yankee owner Hal Steinbrenner said Jeter called him Wednesday morning to break the news, but the team at large was left in the dark. Setup man Shawn Kelley has been working out alongside Jeter all week, and said none of the players had any clue that Jeter would soon announce his retirement.

The Long Goodbye ENLARGE

"None at all," Kelley said. "He said nothing to us."

Kelley said the players are still in shock, only starting to digest the idea of life without their captain. "Since I can remember, baseball has always had Derek Jeter, so I imagine baseball without Jeter would be comparable to basketball without Jordan or boxing without Ali, just not the same," Kelley said. "As for the Yankees, I can't even imagine what it will be like without him."

After Jeter's announcement, accolades poured in from all over baseball.

"In the 21-plus years in which I have served as Commissioner, Major League Baseball has had no finer ambassador than Derek Jeter," Bug Selig said. "Since his championship rookie season of 1996, Derek has represented all the best of the National Pastime on and off the field. He is one of the most accomplished and memorable players of his—or any—era."

Jeter's highlight reel has few equals in baseball history: He has a play named after him (the "flip play"); he has a unique nickname ("Mr. November"); he hit a controversial home run that was famously snared by a young fan ("The Jeffrey Maier game"); and he got his 3,000th hit in signature fashion, with a home run on a day when he also drove in the game-winning run.

But from a baseball standpoint, Jeter's time has likely come. The list of even marginally successful 40-year-old shortstops can be counted on one hand, and it's unclear what Jeter has left after missing nearly all of 2013 with leg injuries stemming from a broken ankle suffered in the 2012 playoffs.

"Last year was a tough one for me," Jeter wrote. "As I suffered through a bunch of injuries, I realized that some of the things that always came easily to me and were always fun had started to become a struggle. The one thing I always said to myself was that when baseball started to feel more like a job, it would be time to move forward."

He said he is ready to explore business and philanthropy. (He recently announced his own publishing imprint.) Jeter the famed bachelor also noted that he's looking forward to family life.

When Rivera announced his own retirement last spring, it touched off a season-long farewell tour during which he was celebrated and received gifts in every road city. Jeter is in line for similar treatment. He has always shunned attention, but will now receive plenty of it. That element of his announcement surprised some around baseball, said one high-ranking official.

"I thought he would retire at the end of the year, because he usually doesn't like adulation, and now he's going to get it anywhere he goes," the official said.

Of all Jeter's gaudy statistics, the most important number has always been five—his World Series championships. He closed his retirement letter in typical fashion. "I want to soak in every moment of every day this year, so I can remember it for the rest of my life," Jeter wrote. "And most importantly, I want to help the Yankees reach our goal of winning another championship."

Write to Daniel Barbarisi at daniel.barbarisi@wsj.com and Matthew Oshinsky at matthew.oshinsky@wsj.com