Topics: amc, halt and catch fire, kerry bishé, Lee Pace, mackenzie davis, Mad Max: Fury Road, scoot mcnairy, TV, Entertainment News

This season of “Halt and Catch Fire” has an exuberance the first season struggled to reach, and it’s because of a storytelling device that has more popularity in fan fiction archives than Hollywood studios: the gender swap. It’s a thought experiment that pops up in fervent fandoms, ones that are also eagerly reimagining beloved characters in different settings or with new adventures. The gender swap is even simpler than any of that—it merely asks, well, what if all the female characters were men, and the male characters were women? What might change about them? What might stay the same?

As with so many elements of fandom, it’s casually subversive—a re-creation that grapples with the social construction of gender and imagines its infinite fluidity. And as with so many elements of fandom, it is a long-standing tradition—one that Shakespeare made regular use of in his plays, which itself was a commentary on the fact that all the female roles were played by men. As storytelling, though, it’s not always cogent. Even for Shakespeare, swapping genders just because you can isn’t story, it’s stunt. And on television, it’s understandably kind of difficult to get average viewers on board with a new episode of “Downton Abbey” where Lady Mary is all of a sudden dressed in a smart waistcoat and trousers, going by “Lord Mark,” and Cousin Matthew is instead distant, middle-class cousin Mattie, taking on the daring task of riding a bicycle while wearing a dress and three petticoats.

But what you do see happening in mainstream narratives is the gender-swapping of characters’ roles, if not of the characters’ genders, themselves. It works best in a setting that has traditionally quite strong gender roles. “Mad Men,” for example, did this with Peggy (Elisabeth Moss), starting out by writing her character into the cookie-cutter secretarial role before inserting her into the traditionally male role of copywriter and creative director. She was swapped, and in later seasons, her relationship with Stan (Jay R. Ferguson) highlights that—he’s her employee, content (mostly) with not being in charge, and more naturally maternal and sensitive than Peggy ever demonstrates. Especially in the 1960s, it’s an illustrative dynamic, one that is thoroughly at odds with nearly every other relationship in the series. (Joan is so stymied by the era that she ends the show as she began it: single.)

And for an entirely different example, take “Mad Max: Fury Road,” the post-apocalyptic action film that has dominated critical conversation in the weeks since its release. There’s so much to say about the film, but above all, what’s astounding is how the film upends—reverses—the prevailing ideas of what a male character is supposed to do versus a female character. As my friend Genevieve Valentine wrote for the Dissolve, “’Fury Road’s” plot is nothing special. (It is, in effect, a gloriously kinetic U-turn.) Its narrative interest stems from the shift it brings to the context of the desert itself, from Max’s masculine to Furiosa’s feminine.” The narrative U-turn is in part a manifestation of the film’s emphasis on reversal—it’s Imperator Furiosa (Charlize Theron) who is the action-star hero, not Mad Max (Tom Hardy). It’s not just a revealing commentary on gender, it’s a vision of a different, better world, made from the ashes of one much worse.

Texas in 1984, the setting of AMC’s “Halt and Catch Fire,” isn’t exactly post-apocalyptic America—but then again, it’s not so far off, is it? Desert still reaches to the horizon, and even worse, patches of suburbia bloom like mold, in green-and-brown enclaves amid the tumbleweeds. It’s hardly the lush valleys of what will become known as Silicon Valley—indeed, one of the most confusing and interesting things about “Halt and Catch Fire” is that it’s not set in San Francisco (yet) but instead takes place in the Silicon Prairie, that collection of telecom corporations taking up space in the vast reaches around the most boring city in the world, Dallas-Fort Worth. This is the era before tech was cool, or to be exact, before this industry desperately branded itself as cool. And trying to make money off of bulky, beige cubes of plastic, wiring and blank glass screens seems about as impossible and alchemical as turning lead into gold. In season one, “Halt and Catch Fire” attempted to build a narrative around Joe MacMillan (Lee Pace), former IBM company man who is now trying to build a company that can compete with the computing giant. Pace is the show’s biggest star, and his story, on paper, had the satisfying beats of a Man Trying To Do A Thing that has characterized many other successful dramas, including AMC’s own “Mad Men” and “Breaking Bad.”