Former Massachusetts Republican U.S. Sen. Scott Brown's decision to explore entering the 2014 U.S. Senate race in New Hampshire is likely to turn an expected easy victory for Democratic incumbent Sen. Jeanne Shaheen into an expensive and protracted battle.

"The Shaheen organization goes from being basically favored to be reelected with significant advantages in a fairly easy race to being in something that could be a knock-down drag-out race, where there's tens of millions of dollars being spent, and they're going to be have to be at the top of their game," said former New Hampshire Republican Party chairman Fergus Cullen.

Brown's expected entrance also changes the tenor of the race. It brings national money and attention to New Hampshire. Republicans are highlighting national issues, like the Affordable Care Act, while Democrats hope to focus on New Hampshire issues, to highlight Brown’s recent move from Massachusetts. Both sides are turning up the vitriol, anticipating a difficult seven months.

“The first thing (Brown’s entrance) does is it removes the prospect of a Republican candidate from New Hampshire,” said Peter Burling, a member of the Democratic National Committee and former New Hampshire state senator. “It is now a race that’s on the Republican side entirely about gaining control of the U.S. Senate, so the Koch brothers and their affiliated economic interests can get what they want.” (David and Charles Koch are major conservative donors, whose family money comes from oil and other industries.)

Brown won an upset victory in a 2010 special U.S. Senate election in Massachusetts, due in large part to anger over Democratic President Barack Obama’s health care reform. Brown lost his seat to Democrat Elizabeth Warren in 2012 by eight points. That race was the costliest Senate contest in history, with Brown spending $35 million and Warren $42 million, according to the Center for Responsive Politics.

Brown quickly started courting New Hampshire voters, showing up at political events. He sold his house in Massachusetts last year and moved to Rye, N.H., where his summer home became his primary residence.

New Hampshire, a political swing state, is more friendly territory for Brown than overwhelmingly liberal Massachusetts. Although three Republicans are already running for U.S. Senate – former state Sen. Jim Rubens, conservative activist Karen Testerman and former U.S. Sen. Bob Smith, who recently moved back to New Hampshire from Florida – polling finds that Brown is the most well-known of the Republicans. A recent Suffolk University/Boston Herald poll put Brown far ahead of his GOP competitors.

At the same time, several recent polls show Brown trailing Shaheen by around 10 points.

Outside groups have already involved themselves in the race. The conservative group Americans for Prosperity launched a $750,000 TV and radio ad buy in January, when Brown was still ambivalent about the race, attacking Shaheen for supporting the Affordable Care Act. This week, American Crossroads, the group founded by GOP strategist Karl Rove purchased $600,000 in ads against Shaheen, also focused on her support for the Affordable Care Act.

The pro-environment League of Conservation Voters spent $220,000 on anti-Brown ads in February.

“With Scott Brown in the race, it brings a significant amount of national interest here beyond what had been,” said Greg Moore, state director of Americans for Prosperity in New Hampshire and a long-time Republican activist. Moore said since Brown announced his exploratory committee, Moore has gotten calls from reporters for Politico, The Hill, National Journal and Fox News.

Shaheen tried to blunt the impact of the conservative groups by proposing a People’s Pledge, like the one Brown and Warren signed in 2012, barring outside advertising. Brown rebuffed her, calling Shaheen “hypocritical.”

For Brown, the key to race will likely be tying Shaheen to unpopular national policies – in particular, the implementation of the Affordable Care Act. In his remarks to the Northeast Republican Leadership Conference launching his exploratory committee, Brown focused heavily on the health care law. “Here’s the message Americans are waiting for right now: ‘If we don’t like Obamacare, we can get rid of it, period,’” Brown said, according to his prepared remarks.

Brown and national Republican groups have focused on a pledge Obama made that those who like their doctor can keep their doctor. In New Hampshire, Anthem, the major health insurer selling individual policies, has dropped 10 hospitals from its network for individual policies sold under the Affordable Care Act.

“(Shaheen) made a very firm statement like the president did, if you like your doctor you can keep your doctor,” said New Hampshire State Senate Majority Leader Jeb Bradley, a former Republican U.S. Congressman. “I think Obamacare is going to be a very difficult issue for Sen. Shaheen.”

Andy Smith, director of the University of New Hampshire Survey Center, said Obama’s approval rating in New Hampshire has been dropping and is now around 42 percent. The number of people viewing Shaheen unfavorably has risen since last fall – something Smith said is typical before an election and also represents the impact of the ads that have run against her. Midterm elections also typically favor the party opposing the president.

New Hampshire Republicans hope national factors combined with local distrust of the health care reform will work in their favor. “I think more and more, all elections take on a national flavor, and that’s certainly been the case in New Hampshire,” said Jamie Burnett, a Republican strategist who founded the Profile Strategy Group in New Hampshire. “It certainly seems like the national mood is shaping up to favor Republicans, and a great deal of that has to do with the Affordable Care Act.”

Already, Republicans are talking about how having Brown atop the ticket could impact elections down the ballot – both congressional races, where there are Democratic incumbents, and the State Senate, where Republicans hold a slim majority. Cullen predicated that a Brown candidacy would increase turnout among Republicans and turn out moderate Republicans, rather than only the most conservative parts of the base. “It’s got lots of ramifications well beyond the Senate race,” Cullen said.

But Brown will not have an easy time. He has already faced protests from pro-gun rights groups, who dislike his support for a federal assault weapons ban. His favorability ratings are significantly lower than Shaheen’s, according to a UNH Survey Center poll.

Democrats say the election is about who can best represent New Hampshire, and Brown is a so-called “carpetbagger.” Though Brown was born in Portsmouth and spent summers in Rye, his adult and political life was spent in Massachusetts.

Jackie Cilley, a former Democratic state senator and gubernatorial candidate from New Hampshire, said she has no problem with people moving to New Hampshire and getting involved in civic life. But, she said, for Brown, “It couldn’t in my mind be any clearer that this is simply a staging area for him.”

“If he had been elected a year ago in Massachusetts, he’d be serving in the U.S. Senate as the U.S. Senator from Massachusetts,” Cilley said. “The only thing that changed is the fact he lost that election, so now he’s in New Hampshire. I haven’t heard him say anything specific about New Hampshire and how he’s going to fight for us and why he wants to fight for us.”

In a UNH Survey Center poll from January, 28 percent of voters, including 11 percent of Republicans, said they would be less likely to vote for Brown because he was a former Massachusetts senator. Shaheen moved to New Hampshire in the 1970s and served as a state senator and then a three-term New Hampshire governor from 1997 to 2002. She lost a U.S. Senate race in 2002, then won in 2008.

“If 5 percent of Republicans decide to vote for Shaheen because (Brown’s) a ‘carpetbagger,’ then that could cost him an election,” Smith said. “It’s going to be a significant issue.”

Democratic National Committeewoman and former New Hampshire Democratic Party Chairwoman Kathy Sullivan pointed out that Brown told the New Hampshire news station WMUR during the first day of his statewide listening tour that he had not yet taken a position on the Northern Pass, a controversial electrical power line project that has been major news in New Hampshire for years. (Brown said later in the day that he opposed the Northern Pass project.)

“I think we’re going to see (the election) really focus on New Hampshire: who’s best to represent New Hampshire’s interests, who knows our state, who’s trusted by the voters of our state,” Sullivan said.

In Brown, Sullivan said, “You have someone who doesn’t really know New Hampshire issues.”

This story has been updated to reflect that Brown said later that he opposed the Northern Pass project, although that was not included in the original WMUR story.