For nearly 20 years, Mickey’s Dairy Twist has been a spring and summer staple on West Michigan Avenue near downtown Saline.

That could change in the near future.

Husband and wife owners Pete and Laurie Toarmina recently listed the building and the business at 751 W. Michigan Ave. for sale, saying that it’s gotten to be too much of a task to run both Mickey’s and their Mangiamo Italian Grill restaurant which opened in 2011.

“It’s just too much to try to continue to run both places properly. My wife was very much Mickey’s Dairy Twist,” Pete Toarmina said. “Since we’ve been at the restaurant we just can’t get down (to Mickey’s) as much as we used to. We’re not up against any kind of wall, but we just think it’s time to sell it.”

The Toarminas – who opened the Saline Mickey’s location in 1995 – said the sale comes with both buildings on the property for a price tag of $595,000.

The business is listed at 1,350 square feet, and it comes with all of the furniture, fixtures and equipment. The second building, listed at 1,264 square feet, has been used by the family as an office building and is located next to Mickey’s. Inventory will also be added to the sale price at the time of the sale.

Swisher Commercial listing agent Tony Caprarese said that it’s hard to tell how long the business might take to sell.

“We’re hoping to find an interested party who will want to continue with the Mickey’s tradition. The property could also be redeveloped, but the highest and best-use in value comes with selling it as the business,” Caprarese said.

“The place was impeccably managed and has a great reputation. They will work with the new owner for about a month in order to get them off to a good start. There’s a lot of tradition and memories there. It’s been a great social gathering place for people in the community and they’re hoping to sell it to someone who has that same intention.”

Pete Toarmina made the decision to sell Mickey’s over Mangiamo because he thought the ice cream parlor would be easier to sell than the restaurant.

He noted that the investment into the restaurant is about four times greater than the investment into Mickey’s, and the fact that there are some ongoing projects in place would make a sale of Mangiamo even harder.

“We intend to open Mickey’s like normal in the spring and run it the same as we’ve always run it,” Pete said.

“We’ve had some people that have become close friends and we’ve been involved in their lives. Many customers have become close friends over the years and we have some employees who have become like children like us over the years.”

The family considered a blind listing, but thought that the name notoriety of Mickey’s might encourage a potential buyer to come forward.

“This was an emotional decision for the family, and it wasn’t some spur-of-the-moment decision,” Caprarese said.

“They had thought about this move for at least six months before deciding to sell, but it was the best decision for the family going forward.”

The Saline location is one of four family owned Mickey’s still in existence. Two are located in Westland and another is located in South Lyon.