Mercator Buys Catapult International, as Logistics Services M&A Continues

The Warburg Pincus-backed buyer serves a long list of carriers, including United Airlines, Thai Airways, Qantas, British Airways, Singapore Airlines, JetBlue, Westjet and South African Airways

Aviation software business Mercator has acquired Catapult International, a services provider for freight forwarders, shippers and carriers accross the globe. Financial terms remain undisclosed.

Dubai-based Mercator has been backed by Warburg Pincus since April 2014. The deal was Warburg’s first in the Middle East. At the time, Warburg's co-CEO Joe Landy unveiled plans to grow Mercator through acquisitions over the course of five to seven years before looking for an exit.

Mercator assists airlines move passengers and cargo to their destinations. It was launched in 1995 by the aviation services unit of Emirates Airline, and grew by offering software services to airlines in emerging markets in Asia and Africa. By 2007, it served a long list of carriers, which today include United Airlines, Thai Airways, Qantas, British Airways, Singapore Airlines, JetBlue, Westjet and South African Airways.

With a presence in more than 80 countries, Mercator handles financial accounting, cargo tracking, baggage handling and safety services. By acquiring Kansas City-based Catapult, the company can expand its services in San Francisco, Hong Kong, Hamburg, Germany and the Philippines.

As a result of the deal, Catapult will be able to leverage Mercator's technology and aviation experience.

"We will provide broader functionality across the multi-modal logistics industry delivering deeper efficiencies for operations,” says Catapult chief executive Matt Motsick.

For more coverage on the logistics space, read the feature Logistics, Logistics, Logistics as well as the recent deal activity of XPO Logistics (NYSE: XPO) and Roadrunner Transportation Systems (NYSE: RRTS).

For more information on related topics, visit the following: