Southern California's three largest supermarket chains and the union that represents most of their employees will move to the negotiating table in about a week, renewing what has been, for more than a decade, usually a dramatic and difficult process.

The contract between more than 60,000 members of the United Food and Commercial Workers and the Ralphs, Albertsons and Vons chains expires in five weeks, on March 2.

The two sides have been at arm's length for the past few months but will have their first face-to-face meetings on a new deal this week.

Bill Lathrop, president of the Bloomington-based Local 1167 of the union, which represents most of inland Southern California's workers, said several meetings in February have been arranged and that the union hopes to add more dates. Lathrop said the union would not be making demands that will surprise the chains when the negotiations start.

“It won't change much,” Lathrop said of UFCW's negotiating strategies. “We still want to hold on to our affordable care, solidify our pensions and maybe get our members a raise.”

The three major chains have, over the course of the last three contracts, bargained as a group, and Lathrop expects that format will remain when talks begin in February.

Stater Bros. Markets usually negotiates with the union separately.

Kendra Doyel, vice president for public affairs at Ralphs, confirmed the start of talks in an email.

“We look forward to working together to reach a fair agreement for sustainable jobs for the future,” Doyel said in the email.

The union contract covers workers at about 700 stores, from the Central Valley to the Mexican border, including 377 in Orange County, about 70 in Riverside and San Bernardino counties, and 12 in Long Beach. More than 20,000 grocery workers in the area are covered by these deals.

Both sides are mindful of the situation that boiled over into a 141-day labor dispute in 2003 and 2004 when contract talks quickly became acrimonious.

Vons locked out its employees in October 2003, and the union countered that by calling a strike at Ralphs and Albertsons.

By the time the clash ended in March 2004, picket lines in front of the three chains and most of their distribution centers had cost them an estimated $2 billion in lost sales.

Workers, most of whom were not paid much more than $15 per hour, were forced to live on small union-funded strike benefits for 4½ months.

It was widely regarded as the highest profile and most damaging labor dispute in Southern California in the last half-century.

The two rounds of negotiations that followed, in 2007 and 2011, were ultimately successful but not easy. In 2011, the two sides agreed to extend the contract when it expired in March, but it took more than six months after that, with help from a federal mediator, to reach an agreement.

The cost of health care and the deductibles workers were asked to shoulder for medical insurance were considered the biggest issues.

Ralphs had said they would close all their stores in the event of a strike, and Albertsons and Vons were openly recruiting replacement workers.

When the deal was finally reached in September 2011, insiders said the two sides were possibly less than an hour away from throwing up their hands and dealing with a walkout.

Changes in the overall situation in Southern California since then include a better economy and the advent of the Affordable Care Act. Lathrop, the Local 1167 president, believes this round of talks will be different.

“I do believe that the companies are doing fine, although they always have been reluctant to let go of any money,” Lathrop said. “But the economy is pulling out of it, and I think they see that.”

Kroger, the parent company of Ralphs and Food 4 Less, reported a net profit of $299 million in its most recent quarter. Safeway, the corporate parent of Vons and Pavilions, had more than $65 million in profit.

Albertsons, which had been owned by Minnesota-based Supervalu, was one of several chains sold to investor group Cerberus Capital Management last year. The deal was for $100 million in cash, and the buyer assumes about $3.2 billion in debt.

However, some recent contract talks across the country, in the Seattle and New York City areas, went down to the wire before a deal was announced, much like the 2011 scenario in Southern California.

The Albertsons sale underscores some of the changes the grocery industry has seen in the last few years. The chain, which had been struggling, closed five inland stores in 2012.

A few weeks ago, the chain's new owner announced it was shuttering 26 more Albertsons stores nationwide.

At the same time, the lingering effect of the recession has given rise to discount grocery chains such as Family Dollar and WinCo increasing their footprints.

Aldi, a Chicago-based discount supermarket chain, recently received approval from Moreno Valley planning officials for a distribution center. Aldi plans a West Coast expansion but has not announced any store sites.

It adds up to a supermarket landscape with new players, most of which do not have workers represented by unions – a factor they use to keep prices low. It is something that management of the traditional groceries will be taking into account as talks with UFCW begin.

“The employers will be working to negotiate a contract that makes economic sense for the companies and our employees in an increasingly challenging marketplace,” Carlos Illingworth, a Vons spokesman, said in an emailed statement.