How health care played in New Hampshire

With help from Paul Demko, Sarah Karlin, Erin Mershon and Brett Norman.

HOW HEALTH CARE PLAYED IN NEW HAMPSHIRE — According to exit polls, 25 percent of Democratic primary voters said health care was their most important issue, and 63 percent of respondents said they want a single-payer health system. But an NBC News exit poll suggested that Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton may have canceled each other out: About half of respondents said they trusted either candidate with health care, and only a slight majority leaned toward Sanders on the issue overall.

Story Continued Below

— Sanders doubles down on his single-payer plan. "The Affordable Care Act has been an important step forward," the Vermont senator said in his victory speech, "but we can and must do better."

— Kasich's Medicaid expansion doesn't sink him. The Ohio governor surged to second place after spending a week verrry carefully threading the needle on the ACA — saying that he found a way to cover the uninsured while "rejecting Obamacare" in his state — and it didn't appear to hurt him among primary voters.

— Trump vows to 'end' opioid problem. In his victory speech, the New York billionaire said that his immigration plan would solve the opioid and heroin epidemic in New Hampshire and other states by making it harder to get drugs into the United States. "We're going to work like hell to make that happen," Trump promised.

— One place where Trump and Sanders agree? "Single-payer wins both races in New Hampshire," Washington Examiner editor Philip Klein tweeted. "Gives whole new meaning to 'Live Free or Die.'"

ONTO SOUTH CAROLINA AND NEVADA — One issue that's sure to come up in the coming days — South Carolina's decision not to expand Medicaid. More than 160,000 South Carolinians stand to gain if the state opts into the ACA expansion. It's an easy talking point for the Democrats, and on the Republican side, it gives Kasich a window to carefully tout Ohio's Medicaid expansion — especially after his relatively strong finish in New Hampshire.

South Carolina polls, as of Tuesday:

— Trump had a 16-point average lead over Cruz, with Rubio and Bush both polling in double digits, ahead of the Feb. 20 GOP primary.

— Clinton held a nearly 30-point average lead on Sanders, ahead of the Feb. 27 Democratic primary.

The Nevada caucuses will be held on Feb. 20 for the Democrats and Feb. 23 for the Republicans.

WELCOME TO WEDNESDAY — and let me share one of the quirkiest stats from last night's primary.

In 2008, Clinton got about 39% of the New Hampshire primary vote — and won.

In 2016, Clinton got about 39% of the primary vote — and lost.

Found some funky electoral math of your own? Pass it along: Find me at ddiamond@politico.com or on Twitter @ddiamond.

BUDGET-BUSTER EDITION — Pro's health care team broke down more fallout from Tuesday's budget proposal:

ADMINISTRATION WOULD CUT NIH BASE BUDGET BY $1 BILLION — The research community was up in arms over a White House budget that would take $1 billion from NIH’s discretionary budget and replace it with $1.8 billion in mandatory funding. Researchers worry the proposal would weaken the agency's funding base in the long term, Pro's Brett Norman and Sarah Karlin report.

While Congress may well approve funding outside of the budget caps to pay for specific proposals such as the cancer moon shot and Precision Medicine Initiative — a prospect that HELP Chairman Lamar Alexander said he was open to Tuesday — it would be basically unprecedented to give up appropriators' oversight for NIH’s general budget, which is what the White House was seeking. NIH Director Francis Collins said the administration was “forced into” resorting to mandatory money by the caps.

… Even cancer research advocates were dismayed, despite the much-ballyhooed inclusion of $680 million to fund the VP’s moonshot. “It's almost like being told your salary is being cut but you can make up the difference if Congress believes you deserve a bonus at the end of the year, and there's not much money for bonuses,” said Jon Retzlaff, director of government affairs at the American Association for Cancer Research.

It may not matter. The bright side for NIH boosters is that Congress delivered the agency’s biggest boost in over a decade two months ago — $2 billion — roughly double what the White House had sought in last year’s budget. And GOP appropriators have said that they hope to deliver an increase again, “but it takes a village,” said Ellie Dehoney of Research!America. “And this puts a lot of weight on Congress.” Our story for Pros.

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): More transparency is needed into generic drug pricing and reimbursement rates set by drug plan middlemen. Bipartisan legislation (H.R. 244) would enhance oversight of federal health programs and help ensure pharmacy reimbursement for generic drugs reflects market fluctuations. Visit www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **

NOT MUCH LOVE FOR FDA — The agency got a meager $15 million boost in funding from the White House for a total of $2.74 billion. Agency advocates said they were “disappointed” and “alarmed.” “The budget request fails to acknowledge FDA’s vital role in food and drug safety and innovative medical product development,” Cynthia Bens, an executive at the Alliance for Aging Research, said in a statement.

RETRACKING RACs — The budget didn't request oodles of new funding to address the massive Medicare appeals backlog that draws heavy criticism from hospitals, Pro's Erin Mershon tells PULSE — but it did include a few interesting proposals to rein in the Recovery Audit Contractors that police provider payments, including one that would withhold payment to the contractors if a provider appeals their audits.

It's something but probably not enough to satisfy hospitals, which were just trumpeting a Tuesday appeals court decision that called on Congress and HHS to make meaningful progress toward addressing the backlog.

— Burwell defends her budget. The secretary testifies at 2 p.m. in front of the House Ways & Means Committee. Up next: The Senate Finance Committee on Thursday at 10 a.m.

Here are three more proposals from HHS' budget in brief that caught PULSE's eye:

— Competitive bidding for Medicare Advantage. The budget would set payment rates based on plans' bids — a way to control the fast-growing program's spending, and also a guaranteed hot button for the health insurance lobby.

— $30B in new Medicaid funding for territories. A funding infusion is especially notable given that Puerto Rico is dealing with a fiscal crisis — partly because current Medicaid funding is capped — and also one of the biggest transmission vectors for Zika virus right now.

— Proposal to strengthen IPAB. After years of relatively slow growth, CMS is proposing to lower the target rate for triggering IPAB in 2018 and after, from GDP per capita growth plus 1 percentage point to GDP per capita growth plus 0.5 percentage points. The White House has previously offered to strengthen the still-inactive Medicare payment board. More on the health savings the administration wants from Pro's Rachana Pradhan here.

HHS: PROPOSAL ON PART B DRUG PAYMENT WAS 'PREMATURE' — Monday's PULSE reported that HHS had posted a notice to test new payment methods for Medicare Part B. But on Tuesday, the agency walked back the proposal, Pro's Sarah Karlin writes. "As we have said, we are examining potential ways to support increased access to information, drive innovation and strengthen incentives to improve quality care," a senior administration official told POLITICO. "We continue to look at a number of options in this area. Posting of this document was premature."

QUALITY OF CARE AT VA — The VA health system has faced several years of scrutiny, and the department has come under fire on the campaign trail. But a new JAMA study found that the outcomes of older men with heart attack, heart failure or pneumonia at VA hospitals was comparable to — or even better than — non-VA hospitals.

"These findings are important because they suggest that despite all of the challenges that VA hospitals have faced, they are still able to deliver high-quality care for some of the sickest, most complicated patients," Harvard's Ashish Jha writes in an accompanying editorial. And "although there are large variations in outcomes among VA hospitals, on average, the system seems to be performing reasonably well."

CENTENE MAKING MONEY ON EXCHANGES — Centene remains bullish on the ACA’s fledgling exchange markets, Pro's Paul Demko reports. The St. Louis-based insurer nearly doubled enrollment in 2015, with 146,000 members in a dozen states, and is turning a profit on its Obamcare customers. The company expanded to New Hampshire for 2016, and expects to meet or exceed sign-up goals for this year, with total enrollment to top 400,000 members.

'We are achieving margins within our target range,' CEO Michael Neidorff said on a call with investors yesterday, adding that Centene’s not having problems with customers taking advantage of special enrollment periods to acquire coverage when they get sick — a concern voiced by many other health plans. Centene is in the process of acquiring Health Net, which would make it the largest Medicaid managed care plan in the country.

DIGNITY HEALTH, URGENT CARE PROVIDER STRIKE DEAL — GoHealth, a fast-growing developer of urgent care clinics, will enter the California market through a joint venture with Dignity Health. It's an intriguing deal, especially given investors' burgeoning interest in the urgent care sector, Melanie Evans reports for Modern Healthcare.

FDA PANELS BACKS SECOND U.S. BIOSIMILAR — Agency advisors voted 21-3 in favor of approval of Celltrion and Pfizer’s copy of Johnson and Johnson’s biologic medicine Remicade, which racked up $4.5 billion in sales last year. The panel was OK with FDA approving the biosimilar for use in all of the disease areas that Remicade is approved for, even though Celltrion and Pfizer only tested it in patients with two of the diseases, Pro's Sarah Karlin reports.

— Tuesday’s vote bodes well for other biosimilar makers, The Wall Street Journal reports. It's a signal the FDA will use looser criteria for biosimilar approvals than some expected. FDA approved the first biosimilar product under the ACA-created pathway to speed cheaper copies of biologics last year, but that biosimilar — a copy of Amgen’s Neupogen — was seen as easier to copy and not as lucrative. FDA still has to approve the biosimilar, and as the WSJ reports, there are patent battles ahead that could delay Celltrion and Pfizer’s product.

ALEXANDER OPEN TO NIH FUNDS, BUT PROSPECTS GRIM FOR BIG SENATE 'CURES' — The HELP Committee on Tuesday advanced seven medical innovation bills, Pro's Brett Norman reports — but it appeared even less likely than before that a deal for mandatory NIH/FDA funding could be included as part of a broader package that would bring Democrats along.

Chair Lamar Alexander said he was open to it, but made clear he spoke only for himself and that no offsets were possible in the committee's jurisdiction. Sen. Richard Burr strongly suggested he wouldn't go along with any mandatory funding program and Sen. Elizabeth Warren said she would support no more "so-called innovation" bills on a "vague promise" for finding funding when the legislation reached the floor — the path Alexander laid out. In short, Brett tells PULSE, the prospects for a big Senate "Cures" package appeared bleak after the first of three markups scheduled on relevant legislation.

GOOD NEWS REPORT: TENS OF MILLIONS COULD DIE IN PANDEMIC — An advance copy of a United Nations report suggests that the World Health Organization isn't ready to face a potential global pandemic. "The high risk of major health crises is widely underestimated," the report concludes, and "the world's preparedness and capacity to respond is woefully insufficient."

AROUND THE ADMINISTRATION — Vice President Joe Biden is at Duke University today, his latest stop to talk the White House's cancer moon shot.

WHAT WE'RE READING, by Rachana Pradhan

A study in Brazil has linked the Zika virus to eye damage in babies, according to the New York Times. http://nyti.ms/1Q6ghKr

The Cincinnati Enquirer dives into what it means to defund Planned Parenthood, ahead of a vote in the Ohio legislature to pull $1.4 million from clinics. http://cin.ci/20KjHhf

Novartis will set its price for a new heart drug with two health insurers based on health outcomes, Reuters reports. http://reut.rs/1RlMQt1

Wonkblog reports on why Zenefits' troubles demonstrate a larger problem that Silicon Valley has with health care. http://wapo.st/1WbrSMS

Fast Company examines whether a new primary care doctor app, Amino Health, will succeed. http://bit.ly/1TR4C88

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **