CENTENNIAL — Sara Donegan visits her son’s grave weekly. She’ll now be able to tell him justice has been served.

On Friday in Arapahoe County District Court, Almeda Sullivan, 52, pleaded guilty to second-degree murder in the death of Donegan’s son, 21-year-old Carter Higdon.

Higdon died in October 2011 in Sullivan’s Centennial home of a prescription drug overdose.

Three other people connected to Sullivan also died of drug overdoses prior to Higdon’s death.

The plea agreement presented Friday to District Court Judge Michelle Amico resulted in an 18-year prison sentence for Sullivan.

Donegan addressed the court, reading from a prepared statement. She shared the happiest day of her life: Feb. 2, 1990, the day her son was born.

She recalled cradling him in a hospital room shortly after birth, looking into her child’s eyes and promising she “would always be there for him … always love him.”

Donegan told the packed courtroom, which also included family of the other victims connected to Sullivan, about raising her son, a daredevil of a boy who enjoyed sports, being active and visiting the Colorado mountains.

She also shared the worst day of her life: Oct. 1, 2011, the day her son died.

“My life, as I had come to know it, was over,” Donegan said. “My child was dead. Nothing can prepare you for that.”

After Higdon’s death, Arapahoe County sheriff’s investigators watched Sullivan closely, eventually building a case against her in which they cited three other deaths.

In January 2008, Sierra Renee Cochran, 19, died at Sullivan’s home after she accidently overdosed. Nine months later, Lindsey Jo Saidy, 28, and Martynas “Tez” Simanskas, 20, died after overdosing on prescription medications they got from Sullivan, prosecutors said.

All died of overdoses of Opana, a narcotic painkiller similar to oxycodone. Sullivan was described in court as an addict who shared her love of the drug with others, especially younger people. She coached them on how to use the drug as well as supplying it.

The plea deal dismissed charges related to the other victims.

Sullivan, crying at times, apologized to Donegan and others in the courtroom, saying she “cared so much” for Higdon.

“I’m extremely sorry. I hope one day (Donegan) will be able to forgive me.”

After the emotional hearing, Donegan stood outside the courthouse and talked with the media.

“Justice has been served,” Donegan said. “I forgive her,” she added. “I am not going to hold hatred. There is no reason not to forgive her.”

Kieran Nicholson: 303-954-1822, knicholson@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kierannicholson