Topics: Editor's Picks, Life stories, New Year's Day, new years resolutions, Life News

“All that alcohol ruins your liver,” said a co-worker I called “the Fun Police” at a holiday soiree.

During the years I partied, I rolled my eyes at prudes who made New Year’s resolutions to get healthier. They warned that smoking causes wrinkles and lung cancer, booze bloats your face, marijuana fries your brain, and too much candy destroys your teeth. I never listened, drinking, toking, smoking and sugar-rushing all through high school, college and my graduate studies.

Without quitting anything, I was able to get two degrees, marry, launch an exciting career. That seemed proof that my substance abuse wasn’t really a problem. But what was cute in my twenties wasn’t as adorable by my fourth decade. That’s when I had a full-blown midlife crisis, unhappy marriage, family issues, debt and debilitating job rejections. I needed help. “Your addictions are keeping you from getting everything you want in life,” said my substance abuse specialist.

I was surprised that he blamed my employment and relationship failures on my habits. He seemed sure that my inability to be close to my husband, complete a long project, be financially solvent or get what I most wanted were all insidious byproducts of being addicted. Hearing horror stories of what over-imbibing did to your body or reading that higher percentages of middle-aged white Americans were dying of overdoses, I rationalized that I wasn’t shooting heroin or popping Oxycodone. I cited studies showing that a glass a day of wine was healthy and marijuana wasn’t addictive. Nobody told me that daily use of benign substances (like alcohol and pot) could actually mar your mind, creating a direct barrier to success – in work and love. My specialist explained his theory, that addicts depended on substances, not people. Instead of allowing myself to feel pain, discomfort, depression or awkwardness, I was sucking in smoke, sipping booze or eating my frustration and sadness away. “Underlying every substance problem I’ve ever seen is a deep depression that feels unbearable. But it’s not,” he said.

Here’s how I stopped several damaging habits and what I recommend:

NEW YEAR’S IS ACTUALLY A BAD DAY TO QUIT: In case you’ve already blown your resolutions, no problem. Resolving in a fervor that everything will be different on a big national holiday when you’re away from work, school and your routine might be setting yourself up for disappointment. “Beware all excitement because it takes you out of yourself and you always have to go back to yourself,” my addiction specialist warned. Most people who try to quit anything on January 1 fail, perhaps because vague, general promises to yourself (like “I will lose weight”), without a solid plan already in effect, don’t work. When I was really ready to stop my 27-year smoking and drinking habits, I picked a more personal quitting date, Oct. 7, 2001, which stuck.

SEE AN EXPERT: I never even knew there were addiction specialists until I’d stumbled on a brilliant Ph.D. with that expertise. I also didn’t know that with a “substance abuse” diagnosis, my health insurance would cover three times as many sessions. (A coworker confirms this is also true with his Obamacare.) Google to find social workers, psychologists and psychiatric experts in your area. If you don’t have medical coverage, ask if they’ll use a sliding scale, since some practitioners will reduce their rate to as little as $20 a session. If you can’t afford that, there are free daily AA, NA and OA meetings (for alcoholics, narcotics abusers and overeaters) where you can find a sponsor, or online recovery groups where you don’t have to leave your house. If you hate meetings and therapy, ask a sober coworker or relative for advice. I’ve been happy to help other addicts who’ve approached me by listening and sharing my techniques. One student emailed me every day to tell me her progress.

DON’T JUST SWITCH ADDICTIONS: Since I’d smoked two packs a day and cigarettes were ridiculously expensive and banned almost everywhere, I decided to stop smoking first. Without realizing it, I immediately started drinking more. When my addiction specialist insisted I monitor my liquor intake, I turned to Blow Pop lollipops incessantly. “If you gain 20 pounds you’ll use this as a reason you can’t quit smoking,” he said. I switched to chewing on cinnamon sticks instead (which have zero calories), watched my diet and exercised. I miraculously lost 10 pounds while quitting. So that blew the “but I’ll gain weight” excuse. It’s fairly common for addicts to do the “substance shuffle.” But despite popular misconceptions, it’s entirely possible to drop weight while abstaining from cigarettes, drugs or alcohol, especially with an addiction expert to guide you.