Raul Acosta

Party: Unaffiliated

Website: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=trjJdKvdBLE

Email: acosta4senate@gmail.com

Age: 48

Family: My wife, Tracie, and I have nine children: three are in college (one is a Marine reservist); three in high school; one in middle and our last two children are in elementary.

How long have you lived in Colorado: I have been in Colorado for 19 years and I'm descended from the Ortiz/Salazar family that were Spanish settlers before Colorado became a state.

Professional background: Since 1998, I've worked in IT. For the last two years, my job focus is in strategy and innovation. I believe innovation will create a future of better jobs and life for all Americans!

Political/community experience: I am active in the community through church, schools, etc. In 2004, I was a state delegate for the Republican Party. Now independent, I offer classic values with an innovative approach!

Advertisement

Education: I have an MSCIS degree, Regis; and a BA in English, LMU.

Name a person you admire and explain why: I admire Mother Teresa for her charity, kindness and love.

Do you believe any aspects of the Affordable Care Act should be repealed? Has anyone read all of it? Aren't we forced to buy a product and is it constitutional? Is this all about money and control or is this about health care? These are valid questions and we should consider the tax aspect of universal health care and how this has created a new "standard" where religious groups and other groups are being asked to partake in aspects they find immoral. No government should force all citizenry to choose between their morality and the law.

If current measures fail to neutralize the threat of ISIS and associated terrorist groups, should the U.S. commit a significant number of ground troops to that effort?We should commit troops to protect our embassies and direct interests. Regarding terrible terrorist groups like ISIS, a coalition of countries need to unite to end them and such barbaric groups like them. We need to also end the funding of such groups and also sanction the countries that buy seized oil, etc. and keep these terrorist groups functioning. Terrorism spreads like a cancer that grows more evil with each act, and this sickness is becoming present in almost every nation today. People of goodwill need to treat the underlying ideology that allows this growth and stop this evil that wants to sicken and destroy us as a people.

Should marijuana be removed from Schedule 1 of the Controlled Substances Act, paving the way for a decriminalization of pot at the federal level? I support the legalization of medical marijuana that is prescribed by licensed doctors. Conversely, I may support a less-punitive classification of marijuana in general and also would like to discuss decriminalization of 1oz or less possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia. (This would only be for 1oz or less as mentioned above). Then it would be up to the States to pass laws allowing marijuana (though I would recommend the medical aspect to be available in all States). Further discussion should include the related subject of Americans in prison on petty drug-related charges that did not harm another person. "In the land of the free," do you know how many Americans are in prison for drug use and possession of even small amounts?