British citizens seeking a stronger economy and a sunny lifestyle are flocking to Australia

AUSTRALIA is in the middle of a British invasion and on track to receive the largest intake of Poms since the 70s.

Exclusive analysis of data from the Department of Immigration and Border Protection reveals we are set to receive 290,000 immigrants from the United Kingdom this decade - more double the arrivals from the 90s.

The data also reveals different waves in which countries have arrived in Australia, with Italians peaking in the 50s, the Vietnamese in the 80s and Indian and Chinese migrants since the turn of the century.

But this decade will be the largest number of UK migrants since the 1970s, when more than 400,000 arrived on our shores.

"The numbers don't surprise me," said Alistair Thomson, professor of International Studies at Monash University.

According to Professor Thomson, Britons are often attracted to Australia's idyllic quality.

"When things get tough economically, their numbers always pick up. The UK has struggled since the global financial crisis and Australia escaping relatively unharmed makes us attractive," he said.

"People are coming out of UK universities and struggling to find work. Australia not only provides jobs, but an adventure."

Claire Buckingham moved to Sydney from London two years ago and loves the lifestyle.

"I can leave the office at 5.30 and go out into the sun, she said.

"It feels like I'm on holidays."

For Craig Williams, the decision to move to Melbourne with his partner four years ago is a permanent one.

"We're both going to become citizens this year," he said. "Australia has been good to us."

But despite the surge, the data suggests for the first time in Australian history the UK will not be our main source of migrants.

The list of new arrivals for the decade so far is topped by New Zealand, China and India.

RMIT associate professor Val Colic-Peisker said Australia's migrants now come from more than 200 different countries.

"Australian source countries are changing all the time," she said.

But the United Kingdom has always remained number one.

In the 50s, 60s and 70s, the government was focused on population building more than 1.4 million UK citizens settled in Australia.

But the focus shifted in the 80s as the government looked to deliver migrants to the labour market - causing a 45 per cent drop in immigrants from the UK.

By the 1990s, their numbers had dropped to 136,000.

"Migration from the developed world has been affected by global financial downturns, such as the recession of the 1980s" said Dr Jim Hammerton from the Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences at La Trobe University.

And this allowed other cultures to stamp their mark on Australian society.

"From the developing world, the trend since the 1940s and 1950s has been in continuing migrations of austerity," said Dr Hammerton

"Regions of instability, strife and war drive demand. There were 10 million refugees in Europe post World War 2. Today this is a larger scale and global."

Vietnam and India first appeared as a prominent source of Australian migrants in the 1970s.

The following decade, five out of our top ten source countries were Asian and by the 2000s, the UK narrowly beat New Zealand as our main source of migration by a mere 24,000 people.

Today China, India, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Vietnam and Korea are all our top ten, and the diversity of the 190,000 migrants settled in Australia last year can be seen in our states and territory.

China was the main source of migration in New South Wales and Victoria last year.

New Zealand topped the list in Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern Territory.

India was tops in South Australia and the ACT.

And Bhutan was the top source of migration in Tasmania.

Raj Khanna immigrated to Australia from India seven years ago. Now founder of the Sydney Expat Club, he is helping a diverse mix of cultures feel at home in Sydney.

"We have recently had people from Armenia, Colombia and the United States join up," he said.

Their reasons for coming to Australia vary, from bad breakups, moving with family or work.

###