Weather Bulletin #3 December 23

Winter has only just officially begun but already cold weather has claimed the lives of five Marylander’s between mid-November and Mid-December.

Most of the U.S. is currently experiencing a break from record low temperatures, but the same can’t be said for other parts of the world.

The Japan Times reports that six people died during extremely heavy snow which blanketed much of Japan December 5-7. The blizzard left more than 1,200 people in the Tokushima Prefecture cut off from the rest of the nation as roads were blocked due to snow, falling trees and rocks. More than 45 inches of snow fell in the Sukayu area of Japan, and 38 inches of snow covered the village of Okura.

Just across the Sea of Japan, South Korea also suffered from bitterly cold weather and unusual amounts of snowfall with Seoul experiencing fall temperatures of 13 degrees below zero. Snow and strong winds knocked down power lines in eight towns across two districts leaving more than 37,000 families shivering in the cold.

Korea Meteorological Administration (KMA) issued heavy snow warning for the South and North Jeolla regions. Mokpo in South Jeolla received nearly a foot of snow, the most snow that had fallen in nine years and Wando also in South Jeolla received 9 ½ inches of snow, the most that has fallen in the province since the KMA started keeping records in 1970. Halla Mountain received more than 51 inches of snow in the same time period.

Meanwhile parts of India are also experiencing unusually cold weather. Mountainous tribal areas were 15 to 20 degrees below freezing point while Keylong, Manali and Kalpa recorded a low of 19 degrees , 26 degrees and minus 29 degrees respectively. As a result, lakes and other natural sources of water like springs, creeks and tributaries of major rivers are frozen in high altitude areas.

Even the nation’s capital experienced temperatures seven degrees below average for this time of year. Four peoples deaths have been attributed to the cold weather.