Monday's day at the office was a tale of two meetings. The first was requested by a coalition troubled by laws that have made Louisiana the world's leading incarcerator. You can travel the whole world and not find another state or country that locks up more people per capita than the Bayou State. The second meeting featured two former elected officials who are passionate in their support of the Louisiana Scholarship Program. Poor students who are chosen to participate can use tax dollars to attend private and parochial schools. You can travel our country and find few places with public schools that perform worse than Louisiana's.

The scandal of mass incarceration -- especially Louisiana's uniquely awful record -- should upset all of us. So should awful schools that are doing little more than preparing children for prison. But we have grown used to divvying up the outrage. Black people shake fists at a system that's profiting from locking up black people. And white people - especially conservatives - shout for alternatives to the public schools.

That's what made Monday's meetings remarkable. The group that came in to talk about the problems of incarceration was made up entirely of white men. And the two former politicians who came to lend their support to school choice are black Democrats -- Ann Duplessis, the former state senator from New Orleans, and Kevin Chavous, who once sat on the city council in Washington.

I told them that most of my life has been spent in Mississippi or Louisiana, states where black people have learned to be suspicious of conservative politicians. Why should they trust this latest conservative-driven movement?

Duplessis said she had a light-bulb moment at a Georgia meeting where somebody told her of the need for more school-choice advocates like her. "I had no idea," she said, "this was a white Republican issue!" As she tried to convince the Louisiana Legislature's Black Caucus to work to rescue poor children trapped in bad schools, she said she told them, "Guys, by any means necessary." That's right. Duplessis quoted Malcolm X to lobby support for Republican Gov. Bobby Jindal's education agenda.

Chavous said he's met black Southern politicians who agree in principle with school choice but can't stomach standing beside white conservatives with sorry civil rights records.

Duplessis sounded like Kenneth Campbell, the national president of the Black Alliance for Educational Opportunities, who in a June interview about vouchers said that "some of the people that we may have to partner with and work (with) on this issue, we ain't working with them or supporting them on anything else. And we tell them that." Duplessis says that just because she's for school choice doesn't mean she's opposed to President Obama's Affordable Care Act.

Pres Kabacoff, the developer who's developed several mixed-income apartment complexes, organized the mass incarceration meeting. He said when he read "Louisiana Incarcerated," The Times-Picayune's 2012 series on the topic, he realized how fortunate he was not to be born black and poor in New Orleans.

The racial implications of mass incarceration cannot be denied. According to those 2012 stories, one of every 14 New Orleans black men was in prison and one of every 7 was either in prison, on parole on probation. So what's with the absence of black people at a meeting called to discuss proposed legislative solutions? Does it mean black people, black groups haven't been consulted? Is having white people make the argument good strategy, one that's more likely to persuade the Louisiana Legislature?

Rabbi Ethan Linden said Micah Project, a non-denominational faith-based organization in New Orleans, is mostly black but that he happened to be speaking for the group Monday. Kevin Kane, president of the Pelican Institute for Public Policy, which champions "individual liberty and limited government," acknowledged that different lawmakers will be persuaded by different arguments, and that it is important to be strategic to a mostly conservative Legislature.

Jay Lapeyre, former chair of the Business Council of New Orleans, expressed concern for our worsening labor shortage. Kane cited the Republican philosophy that mass incarceration is government run amok. Marc Levin, the director of Texas' Center for Effective Justice, noted that even the swaggering Gov. Rick Perry has taken the forefront in prison reform in Texas. Stopping mass incarceration is fiscally responsible.

Whatever arguments work. Louisiana has got to stop thinking of prisons as economic development, and it has got to stop sending people to prison possessing small amounts of weed. I'm not as excited about school choice as I am upset at lock-em-up ways, but I respect those folks who want to do what's best for the children.

Louisiana schools or prisons, take your pick. If you're trapped inside, you probably think: It is the worst of times. It is the worst of times.

Jarvis DeBerry can be reached at jdeberry@nola.com. Follow him at twitter.com/jarvisdeberry.