An 1800s milkmaid in the village also inspired Tess of the D'Urbervilles

They are led by neighbour Lord Fellowes, president of the Hardy Society

Villagers picketing college behind scheme say he would 'turn in his grave'

In the cottage he wrote Madding Crowd, his first major success in 1874

Hardy went to school there and grew up in thatched cottage a mile away

Scheme would more than treble the size of Lower Bockhampton, Dorset

Julian Fellowes is fighting to stop a tiny hamlet which inspired Thomas Hardy's most famous books from being 'obliterated' by a housing estate.

Hardy wrote Far From the Madding Crowd in his parents' cottage near Lower Bockhampton, Dorset - which is also where he went to school and saw a milkmaid who inspired Tess of the D'Urbervilles.

Now an agricultural college has lodged plans to build 70 new houses in the tiny settlement, which currently has just 28 homes.

Maddened crowd: Villagers (pictured) are protesting plans by an agricultural college to more than treble the size of Lower Bockhampton, Dorset, where Thomas Hardy went to school and which inspired his novels

Picturesque: Hardy grew up in this thatched cottage a mile from the threatened Dorset village of Lower Bockhampton, and it was here that he wrote his famous novel Far From the Madding Crowd in 1874

Downton Abbey creator Julian Fellowes (left) is leading the fight and said the houses would be like an 'atom bomb'. Right: Christopher Vulliamy, who lives in Hardy's old school, said the proposal is 'bonkers'

Downton Abbey creator Lord Fellowes, who is the president of the Hardy Society and lives a mile away in West Stafford, said the rolling hills immortalised in Hardy's books would be ruined.

'The residents of Lower Bockhampton are about to be hit with an atom bomb,' he said. 'This development will obliterate the village.

'This is a hamlet of 28 houses which will almost quadruple in size in one go, having been the same size for hundreds of years.

'Five to ten houses could be absorbed by the village but 70 is a sledgehammer blow.

'People from around the world come to visit to see where Hardy lived and where he wrote and the places that inspired him. One cannot understate how much the local area inspired Hardy.'

Pilgrimage: The Victorian novelist walked every day down this lane from his cottage home to Lower Bockhampton, and it inspired the idyllic country atmosphere of the fictionalised county Wessex in his novels

Outrage: Villagers are campaigning against the development, which would more than treble the hamlet's size

Plans: The site of the proposed development and Hardy's cottage, near the town of Dorchester in Dorset

Nestled among history: The planned housing (in red) is a stone's throw from Hardy's old school (purple)

Rolling hills: A satellite image of the same site handed to the council. The college is on the far left in yellow

He added: 'We have a real responsibility to protect the environment of one of England's greatest global writers.

'Can you imagine plans to build almost 100 houses at Chawton (Jane Austen's home) or Haworth (the home of the Bronte sisters)?'

The housing plans - which have also been slammed by English Heritage and the Open Spaces Society - have been put forward by the Kingston Maurwood agricultural college, which owns the land.

The college's bosses say selling the plot for housing is the only way it can raise enough money to expand and redevelop.

Outline plans are being considered by West Dorset District Council and have attracted more than 50 objections.

Born in nearby Higher Bockhampton in 1840, Thomas Hardy grew up in his parents' thatched cottage a mile from the village currently under threat.

Lord Fellowes said: 'The residents of Lower Bockhampton are about to be hit with an atom bomb'

Idyll: The plans for the 28-home hamlet prompted anger from English Heritage and the Open Spaces Society

Pretty: Hardy's Wessex was shaped by his years spent in the picturesque Dorset village in the mid-1880s

It was there that he wrote Far From the Madding Crowd, which proved to be his first major literary success when it was published in 1874.

The cottage is now run by English Heritage, and is far from the only mark Hardy left on the landscape.

The beautiful countryside of Dorset was repeatedly immortalised in his novels as the fictional county of Wessex, whose idyllic rural perfection became the focus of years of literary criticism.

He was inspired by regular walks down the tree-lined lane to Lower Bockhampton, where he went to school in a building which still exists as a private home - together with the Victorian school bell.

Lower Bockhampton itself became the fictional village of Melstock in Hardy's 1872 novel Under the Greenwood Tree, which depicted romantic tanglings in tight-knit village life.

Homespun: The protests began on a small scale, but have extended beyond the tiny village

Published anonymously, it focused on a new schoolmistress named Fancy Day who arrives in 'Melstock' and attracts a number of suitors to the school house where she lives.

In 2005 the BBC produced an adaptation of the novel starring Keeley Hawes.

It was later in life that Hardy saw an 18-year-old milkmaid in Lower Bockhampton - and she became the inspiration for the central character of his 1892 masterpiece Tess of the D'Urbervilles.

Neighbouring Dorchester also became the town of the title in Hardy's 1886 work The Mayor of Casterbridge.

Along with Higher Bockampton - Hardy's birthplace - and nearby Stinsford, historians say the three villages act as a 'pilgrimage route' for fans of the writer.

Hardy's heart was removed before he was cremated and buried in Stinsford - while the rest of his ashes were interred in Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey.

Kate Ashbrook, the chairman of the Open Spaces Society, said: 'Thomas Hardy would turn in his grave at the prospect of this massive development in his native hamlet. The peace and quiet of this lovely area would be ruined.

'This is of course a popular tourist destination because of its association with Hardy and it would be an outrage if the council were to allow such alien and overpowering development.'

Retired paediatrician Dr Christopher Vulliamy has lived in Hardy's former school house - just 30 yards from the proposed houses - since 1962.

He said: 'The peaceful and rural setting of the school house, which so many Hardy fans pause to look at from the river path that Hardy used to walk, will be blighted by this.

'Seventy houses is disproportionately large for a hamlet that has only 30 houses. This development would overwhelm Lower Bockhampton.'

Clare Davison, the principal of Kingston Maurwood College, said: 'We want to provide additional state of the art agri-tech facilities and expand our Higher Education offer enabling more students to study degree programmes on their doorstep.

'The capital released from the sale of land will enable the college to embark on a programme of redevelopment and will have a positive impact on meeting local housing needs.'

The plans are by the Kingston Maurwood agricultural college (above), which is selling the land to raise money

The principal of the college (above) said it was the only way to ensure it could compete in the modern world