As Twitchy reported, President Obama is blaming climate change for his daughter Malia’s childhood asthma. Because his smoking habit clearly couldn’t’ve had anything to do with it.

Anyway, Obama’s not taking this climate change stuff lying down:

President Obama launched an initiative Tuesday aimed at highlighting the connections between climate change and public health, bringing both medical and data experts to the White House this week. … Speaking to a group at Howard University, which included the school’s College of Medicine Dean Edward E. Cornwell, III and Tyra Bryant-Stephens, who directs the community asthma prevention program at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Obama that warmer temperatures contribute to health problems such as asthma both by increasing smog-forming pollutants and by fueling wildfires that emit fine particles, or soot, into the air. “And so there are a whole host of public health impacts that are going to hit home,” Obama said. “So we’ve got to do better in protecting vulnerable Americans. Ultimately, though, all of our families are going to be vulnerable. You can’t cordon yourself off from air or from climate.”

Really? Because judging by what we’ve heard from this president for the past six-plus years, we could’ve sworn he was cordoning his brain off from oxygen!

Now, we could sit here and bust Obama for his climate change fear-mongering … but why would we, when there’s someone who can do it even better? Outspoken AGW skeptic Steven Goddard was more than up to the task, and we weren’t about to stand in his way:

Here is a better idea – let's explore how @WhiteHouse insanity is making our republic sick pic.twitter.com/0ZnJhCD9y8 — Steve Goddard (@SteveSGoddard) April 8, 2015

Does Obamacare cover global warming now? "I can't come to work today – I have acute and contagious global warming" pic.twitter.com/tWkC6LMXUz — Steve Goddard (@SteveSGoddard) April 8, 2015

This third rate acting job two years ago was one of the last hot days we had in DC, and it wasn't that hot pic.twitter.com/b7TF5eRa3S — Steve Goddard (@SteveSGoddard) April 8, 2015

Is global warming considered a pre-existing condition under Obamacare? pic.twitter.com/5sjruGdvGR — Steve Goddard (@SteveSGoddard) April 8, 2015

The 0.7 degree increase in temperature is making us all sick. Humans simply can't handle such extremes. pic.twitter.com/pBDmCFYiYe — Steve Goddard (@SteveSGoddard) April 8, 2015

Warm climates are just bad for human health. That is why half of the people living on the Yucatan Peninsula travel to Ontario for Christmas. — Steve Goddard (@SteveSGoddard) April 8, 2015

That can't be Dave. No series 9000 climate scientist has ever made a mistake — Steve Goddard (@SteveSGoddard) April 8, 2015

Angry about climate deniers, the Emperor strikes back pic.twitter.com/GuQt4wTfOF — Steve Goddard (@SteveSGoddard) April 8, 2015

"Why do you resist? We only wish to raise quality of life, for all species." pic.twitter.com/vWrDGxNrus — Steve Goddard (@SteveSGoddard) April 8, 2015

New research shows that exposure to CO2 is 100% fatal over a 130 year time period. Unless you work for Google, of course. — Steve Goddard (@SteveSGoddard) April 8, 2015

NASA's top climate scientist warns that @BarackObama only has until 2012 to save the planet http://t.co/vcHgNT63jN pic.twitter.com/FBRRlOv9Uw — Steve Goddard (@SteveSGoddard) April 8, 2015

Well, shoot.

Climate experts say that warmer climates are more extreme, which is why the the climate in the Arctic is so much more agreeable than Hawaii. — Steve Goddard (@SteveSGoddard) April 8, 2015

The temperature went up 0.7 degrees in the office, and I had to leave for fear of having an asthma attack. — Steve Goddard (@SteveSGoddard) April 8, 2015

Teehee! Bravo, sir!

And now, an exit question, if we may:

@SteveSGoddard @TwitchyTeam Can we explore how Obama is making me sick? And, how he has prevented me even seeing a doctor for it? ? — Tested Limits (@Myhiddenmadness) April 8, 2015

***

Related:

‘BOOM!’ Obama’s ‘personal’ story of climate change gets smoked

Twitter account of ‘prominent AGW skeptic’ Steven Goddard suspended; Joe Bastardi asks ‘who’s next?’; Updated

‘Just got serious’: Iowahawk drops a bomb on Twitter over @SteveSGoddard suspension

‘Welcome back!’: Steve Goddard’s Twitter account restored