Charles David Viera's paintings will be featured in the new NBC mini-series, "The Slap," starting on Thursday

This self-portrait of Raritan Township artist Charles David Viera may be used in “The Slap,” a NBC mini-series that debuts on Thursday. (Photo: Charles David Viera) Story Highlights Viera teaches at the Arts Council of Princeton and the Hunterdon Art Museum.

Production company found Viera's works on the Internet.

'There are so many paintings to paint and so little time.'

The works of Charles David Viera have enjoyed renown and respect for years around the Central Jersey arts community, but now, starting later this week, his works will have national exposure.

Some of Viera's abstract expressionist paintings have been chosen to be featured in the NBC mini-series, "The Slap," which debuts at 8 p.m. Thursday.

Viera, who teaches art classes at Arts Council of Princeton and the Hunterdon Art Museum, said he doesn't know why his paintings were chosen from the "thousands and thousands" of paintings on the Internet.

"Sometimes even a blind squirrel finds a nut!" Viera joked.

"A representative of 'The Slap' contacted me as they wanted to use some of my images on the set," he said. "It seems that they have an artist in this series and they would like to use my work to add authenticity to those scenes."

When a show representative said the paintings may have to "tweaked," Viera agreed and sent high-resolution digital images that can be seen, along with his other works, at charlesdavidviera.com or at the Artists' Gallery in Lambertville.

Viera said he will be watching all eight episodes of the series to see when his paintings will appear.

"As an artist for over 40 years, you struggle to try to get your art some kind of national exposure and often those efforts are not rewarded," said Viera, who will celebrate his 65th birthday in three weeks. "And some times opportunities just fall into your lap."

Viera, who moved here more than two decades ago, said he literally draws his inspiration from Hunterdon County, especially for his landscapes and paintings of wildlife. He likes to watch the birds that visit the three feeders in his backyard, where he once saw a fox run by with a rabbit in its mouth.

"That's one of the beauties of Hunterdon County," he said.

He and his wife, an anesthesiologist at Hunterdon Medical Center, raised their two children in Hunterdon. One son is a artist-musician while the other is a weekend sports anchor at an El Paso television station.

Viera has studied at the Skowhegan School of Painting and Sculpture, the Parsons School of Design, the Swain School of Design, where he earned a bachelor's degree, and Brooklyn College , where he received a master's degree.

Viera has taught at the Parsons School of Design, the Brooklyn Museum Art School, Pratt Institute, the New York Figurative Academy and Long Island University.

He now teaches painting classes at the Arts Council of Princeton and the Hunterdon Art Museum in Clinton Town.

"I love my teaching," Viera said. "I love my students."

He said that his "accumulation of experience" has made me him a better artist and a better teacher.

"The longer you live, the more you learn," he said.

And there still is more work to be done.

"There are so many paintings to paint and so little time," he said.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1Dd3G5n