NEW LONDON, N.H. — Ohio Governor John Kasich is calling for the United States to forge an international coalition similar to the first Gulf War to fight ISIS on the battlefield as well as from the air.

At that time, in 1990-91, the United States organized a broad-based international coalition to repel Iraqi forces from Kuwait. That coalition included not only NATO allies, but also such Middle Eastern countries as Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Syria.

Advertisement

“We need to go and destroy ISIS, and you cannot just do it by bombing people,” Kasich told an audience of about 150 people Saturday at Colby-Sawyer College. “We need to be putting a coalition together of people with similar aims, and we need to be in the air, on the ground. … We need to destroy them wherever they are, plain and simple, with no discussion. Because the longer we wait, the more complicated and more costly it’s going to be.”

Kasich’s call for escalating the fight stopped short of the heightened rhetoric of some rivals for the Republican presidential nomination after Wednesday’s mass shooting in San Bernardino, Calif. New Jersey Governor Chris Christie, for example, suggested to The New York Times that “what I believe we’re facing is the next world war.”

Despite his call for escalating the fight against ISIS abroad and at home, Kasich, like members of his party in the US Senate, rejected Democratic calls to ban the purchase of weapons in the United States by anyone whose name appears on a terror watch list. (The Senate defeated such a ban Thursday by a vote of 54 against and 45 for it. Just one Republican supported the measure.)

“Should we figure out a way to keep people like that from being able to get firearms? I think the answer would be yes,” Kasich said in response to a question.

But, he added, blocking those on the list from buying firearms might tip them off that they are being watched. “We have to figure out how to do this without changing … their lives.”

Advertisement

Steve Fraidstern, a self-identified Democrat who asked the question, said he wasn’t satisfied with Kasich’s answer.

“If someone wanted to fly on an airplane, they wouldn’t be able to fly, so they know they’re on a terrorist list,” he said. Furthermore, he said, “I would rather have them know that they are on the watch list, rather than [for them to] be able to get” the weapons.

Several other questioners asked Kasich about the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. Rescinding the law has long been a goal of the GOP majority in Congress. Kasich said that while he agreed it should be repealed, he said Republicans should first have something with which to replace it. He defended Medicare, the health care program serving senior citizens, as something that is “vital for us.”

After hearing Kasich’s presentation, Chris and Roger Berger said that they were fully committed to voting for him.

“I think he’s a very measured thinker. He won’t plunge into something impossible,” said Chris Berger. “He will take the bold leadership we need. I feel we need something more than we have now.”

Kasich, who has campaigned frequently in New Hampshire, has polled between 7 and 9 percent in the last four poll results reported there, according to RealClearPolitics.com. His 8 percent average puts him fifth in the Republican race.

The state’s primary will likely take place Feb. 9.