Raritan Bay Medical Center, with locations in Old Bridge and Perth Amboy, NJ, has joined hospitals across the U.S. by allowing patients access to their own medical test results online through a new patient portal. “This new technology allows patients to access their lab and radiology results giving them the opportunity to better manage their health,” says Jo Ann Ferrara, MBA, RHIT, CHP, director of Health Information Management at Raritan Bay Medical Center. “Patients can access and track lab and test results by registering at myrbmc.rbmc.org, then share them with their family physician, consulting physicians and other providers involved in their care.”

The medical center partnered with InteHealth, a leading provider of strategic solutions, to provide this technology for its patients. InteHealth recently achieved 2014 Edition Modular EHR Inpatient and Ambulatory ONC Health IT Certification. “We are pleased to welcome Raritan Bay Medical Center to our growing list of providers using the InteHealth Patient Portal. The Medical Center is a leading provider and we are proud of our new partnership with them,” said InteHealth CEO Anthony McCarley.

The Affordable Care Act outlines the importance of transitioning patient medical records from paper charts to computerized data for providers and patients. A digital or electronic medical record (EMR) is inherently more easily shared across healthcare providers, can contain more personal health information and allows for increased efficiency and organization of care. Equally important, EMR coupled with online ‘portals’ enables individuals to access their own information, ensure its accuracy and better monitor their health.

A patient portal is a secure online website that gives patients convenient 24-hour access to personal health information from any location with an Internet connection. Accessing the portal through a username and password, patients can view information such as laboratory and radiology results, and chart these results over time. MYRBMC is regulated by a set of standards defined by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) Incentive Programs that governs the use of electronic medical records. The goal of the CMS program is to reduce cost and improve quality as envisioned by the Affordable Care Act.

“This new patient portal MYRBMC.rbmc.org greatly enhances patient-hospital communication and patient safety, empowers patients, supports care between visits, and, most importantly, improves patient outcomes,” says Ferrara. “We are pleased to be providing secure access to healthcare information that’s just a click away for our RBMC patients and their families.”

About Raritan Bay Medical Center

With hospitals in Old Bridge and Perth Amboy Raritan Bay Medical Center (RBMC) is a New Jersey state-designated primary stroke center, a recipient of the American Stroke Association and American Heart Association Get with the Guidelines® - Stroke Silver Plus and Heart Failure Gold Performance Achievement Awards, recognizing the optimal care of stroke and heart failure patients. The hospital is one of few hospitals in the world to achieve Magnet Recognition for nursing excellence three times and is ranked in the top 10 percent of New Jersey hospitals in surgical care according to the 2012 NJ Hospital Performance Report. RBMC is also an affiliate Joslin Diabetes Center, providing some of the latest advances for treating diabetes and its complications as well as patient education and support services. Among its flagship programs are the Human Motion Institute, a comprehensive musculoskeletal program, and Institute for Weight Loss, specializing in bariatric surgery. For more information, visit rbmc.org.

About InteHealth

Founded in 1997 as specialized interface consultants, InteHealth has evolved into a leading HIE vendor, verified by KLAS. The InteHealth Exchange Platform is a cloud-based solution processing millions of transactions on behalf of thousands of providers annually. In addition to solving basic and complex data integration problems for its users, the Exchange Platform serves as the foundation for two major portals: the InteHealth Physician Portal and the InteHealth Patient Portal – ICSA Labs (ONC_ACB) certified applications. These solutions allow InteHealth’s clients to fulfill CMS Stage 2 Meaningful Use requirements for Eligible Hospitals and Eligible Professionals. For more information, please visit our web site at http://www.intehealth.com.