Martin Feldstein's analysis successfully raises some doubt regarding the empirical basis for Thomas Piketty's conclusions and recommendations. It should also be noted, however, that even if the gap between the rich and the poor is growing in the industrialized world, it is at least in part due to the fabulous success of several noble goals of our societies ("Piketty's Numbers Don't Add Up," op-ed, May 15).

The average life span of our citizens has been greatly extended. Older people tend to have accumulated more wealth than younger people. Far more women now obtain college and postgraduate degrees. Studies have shown that this increase has resulted in more marriages between men and women with advanced degrees, and that these couples have substantially higher incomes than those in which only one party has an advanced degree.

The world has, through diplomacy and other advancements, managed to avoid another world war. Mr. Piketty notes that the world wars reduced the gap between rich and poor. While the world still has a lot to learn about economic policy, as evidenced by the Great Recession, the world has managed to avoid another world-wide Great Depression. Mr. Piketty also cites the Great Depression as reducing the gap.

Surely, we don't want to undo any of these fabulous successes, and any policies designed to address the alleged growing inequality must acknowledge these successes and be sure not to undermine them.

Frank Peretore

Sparta, N.J.

What seems to be missing from the criticisms of Mr. Piketty's work is the relationship of after-tax return on investment to the willingness of those with the capital to risk it. If there was no expectation of a higher return, say, for investing in Google than a 10-year Treasury, would there be a Google?

Prof. Feldstein's prescription for higher growth instead of confiscatory taxes needs to be amended. It is certain that you can tax away the wealth and some investment with it. What isn't certain is how doing so helps anyone except those who will help the rich avoid taxes. This reminds me of an observation Margaret Thatcher made about how the left would prefer a policy that made everyone poorer as long as the gap between rich and poor was reduced.

Dave Kennamer

Heber City, Utah

Another aspect Mr. Piketty appears to have ignored is the role of philanthropy in the distribution of wealth in U.S. society. The wealth of previous generations, most notably Carnegie, Rockefeller and Ford, were largely recycled to society instead of being used to build dynasties. Warren Buffett and Bill Gates have pledged to contribute the bulk of their wealth and they have persuaded, at recent count, 120 other billionaires to make similar pledges. Much of this wealth will go to helping the poor and the promising, who, perhaps one day, will do the same.

Arthur D. Clarke

Boston, Mass.

Mr. Feldstein posits that persistent poverty is the enemy to slay, not confiscatory taxes. It isn't quite clear to me that increasing taxes on the wealthy, which might arguably benefit those at the bottom, is a bad idea. The increased taxes proposed by Mr. Piketty are hardly confiscatory. The wealthy will remain so. Mr. Feldstein's criticism of Mr. Piketty for apparently not taking into account the various tax changes in the 1980s and wealthier individuals' reaction to such changes in the manner in which they received income and invested is quixotic at best. Regardless of those laws and investment behavior, there is no question, regardless of how measured, that those at the top significantly increased their share of the nation's wealth in the U.S., France and other wealthy nations.

Marc Chafetz

Washington

Mr. Piketty's most basic error is to compare the return on capital with the growth rate of the economy. The apt comparison would be to compare the growth of Ebita with the growth rate of GDP. Since the growth rate of Ebita is mean-reverting and, in the long run never greater than the growth rate of GDP, Piketty is demonstrably wrong. In fact, history shows that inequality is greater whenever government is more powerful, so his "solutions" would just lead to more inequality.

Lanny Herron

Graham, N.C.

Mr. Piketty's core thesis is that you can't count on the market to reduce income inequality. Yes, taxes and transfer payments can ameliorate inequality, but public policy has to consistently push against the concentration of income and assets.

More interestingly, inequality isn't between the rich and poor. The bottom 50% has never received significant wealth or income, whether now or in 1900. They seem to be stuck at 5%. What is an open issue is how the remaining 95% of income and wealth is divided between the middle class and the top 1%.

It makes complete sense to me that in a capitalist system, short of world wars and global depressions, capital gets stronger over time. Capital buys up assets at distressed prices in recessions and so ratchets its way upward.

Teddy Roosevelt argued that if the political system didn't respond to these pressures, we'd end up with socialism. Americans listened to him; the Romanovs of Russia did not. We should be duly instructed.

Robert Perkins

Pound Ridge, N.Y.