CROAKER, Va. (AP) - Down a country lane, not far from where interstate traffic whips past Williamsburg, the giant heads of 42 American presidents appear to sprout from a weedy field - a scene that’s nothing if not surreal.

Remember those big heads? The massive presidential busts that had such a hard time finding a home a decade or so ago?

They were sculpted Texas-size by a Houston artist and trucked east to create Presidents Park, a $10 million attraction near Water Country USA.

But zoning issues - and outcries of “too tacky” - held things up, causing the first shipment of sculptures to wander the countryside on flatbeds for a while.

Six found temporary refuge at Norfolk Botanical Garden until Presidents Park opened in 2004.

It closed in 2010, unable to reliably draw enough visitors to cover the mortgage. The land - 10 acres - wound up occupied by an Enterprise car rental outfit, which wanted the sculptures gone. Two years ago, Enterprise turned to Howard Hankins, a road builder and developer whose company had worked on the original park.

When asked to demolish the busts - once appraised at $100,000 each - Hankins “just couldn’t see breaking them up.”

So he offered to take the presidents off the company’s hands.

To move them, he had to punch a hole in the concrete head of each commander in chief so a chain could be dropped inside its hollows, attached to its steel frame, then hooked to a crane. The sculptures were rocked to break them free from their pedestals. Most cracked around their necklines the moment the crane started to lift.

Hankins isn’t sure how much the monuments weigh. Stories from back in the day put them at 7,500 pounds apiece, but he thinks they’re a lot heavier: His crane is rated for 26,000 pounds, and “it could barely pick them up.”

Height was another problem. Originally shipped in two pieces, with heads separate from shoulders, they range from 16 to 20 feet tall in the assembled state Hankins had to deal with.

Trial and error - the back of Lincoln’s skull took a terrible bashing - combined with careful measuring of overpass clearances and a week’s worth of hauling ultimately landed the sculptures at Hankins’ 400-acre farm, 10 miles from the park.

There, he placed the presidents - from George Washington to George W. Bush - in a field behind the house, hoping to someday return them to the spotlight.

A nearby shipping container is stuffed with other items: biographical signs for each president, dresses and photos of first ladies, a small model of the bust intended for Barack Obama before the park turned off its lights.

Surrounded by corn crops and piles of logs in various stages of mulching - a Hankins side business - the presidents are looking pretty rough. Paint peels, hornets build nests in mammoth nostrils, stains run like tears down colossal cheeks.

Hankins says all can be restored, once the sculptures find a real home. He’s looking for investors to help build another monument park. He says he’s in negotiations for possible locations in Williamsburg, Richmond, even Virginia Beach.

In the meantime, the big heads wait, an Easter Island-like mirage in the middle of nowhere. Letters arrive now and then from people asking to visit. A bride wanted to hold her wedding next to Lincoln.

Hankins has to say no. His property isn’t zoned for a roadside attraction.

It’s enough that - at least for now - Howard Hankins has saved the presidents.

___

Information from: The Virginian-Pilot, http://pilotonline.com