Mike Fiers, pitches during the top of the seventh inning of the game against the Washington Nationals on Friday. Credit: Katie Klann

The Brewers will give Kyle Lohse one more chance Monday night in San Francisco to pitch well enough to attract an offer — any offer — on the trade market.

One way or the other, it likely will be Lohse's last start for the Brewers. Wily Peralta returns from the disabled list the next day and it's time to move this team forward and past the giddy thoughts that a hot July actually will get the Brewers back in the playoff hunt.

That ship has sailed, and the new ship's rotation should be manned by pitchers with a promising future. Accordingly, if Lohse isn't traded, the 36-year-old veteran likely will be moved to the bullpen or released on the final year of his contract.

Nothing against Lohse, a true pro. He was everything the Brewers expected him to be on the mound for two years as well as a positive influence in the clubhouse. But he has been lost this season (5-11, 6.29 ERA, 23 home runs allowed) and it's time to give somebody else a chance.

Lohse has followed the pattern of previous free-agent signings of veteran pitchers Jeff Suppan and Randy Wolf. They weren't able to make it to the end of their contracts, either, getting released before their final seasons were done.

Another free-agent signing, Matt Garza, didn't make it to the final season of his four-year, $50 million deal before backtracking. In only the second year of his contract, Garza is 5-10 with a 5.23 ERA in 18 games (17 starts) and has allowed 17 homers in 105 innings.

The Brewers should have learned their lesson by now after watching three-year and four-year deals for free-agent pitchers go south before their expiration. The inclination to do those deals stemmed from their inability to develop starting pitchers from their farm system.

Ben Sheets, a first-round draft pick in 1999, made it to the majors in 2001 and pitched for the Brewers through the 2008 season. The Brewers had to wait until 2007 until another homegrown pitcher, Yovani Gallardo, made any impact in the majors.

For most of the first dozen years of the millennium, that was it. Manny Parra came and went, Mark Rogers couldn't stay healthy, and high draft picks such as Eric Arnett and Kyle Heckathorn were complete busts. Thus, the bulk of the starting pitchers to wear Milwaukee uniforms, including Dave Bush, Chris Capuano, Doug Davis, Tomo Ohka, Braden Looper and Chris Narveson, were acquired from other organizations.

To get to the playoffs for the first time in 26 years in 2008, the Brewers needed a superhuman effort from midseason acquisition CC Sabathia. To return to the postseason three years later, a slew of prospects were traded for starting pitchers Zack Greinke and Shaun Marcum.

Brewers general manager Doug Melvin often points out, and accurately so, that most teams fill their rotations with pitchers acquired from other organizations. But the San Francisco Giants dominated the postseason in recent years behind the pitching of homegrown starters Madison Bumgarner, Tim Lincecum and Matt Cain.

And, while Adam Wainwright came from outside the St. Louis organization, the Cardinals developed effective starting pitchers such as Lance Lynn, Michael Wacha, Jaime Garcia, Joe Kelly and Shelby Miller, though the latter two have moved on.

"You look around the big leagues and few rotations are homegrown," Brewers manager Craig Counsell said. "Every team wants to develop some pitchers and some hitters. But look at the Cubs. Are the Cubs mad right now they developed only position players?

"Scouting wants to hit on every player. It doesn't always happen. Player development wants every player to get to the big leagues. It doesn't always happen. It's not that easy to get pitching to the big leagues."

It certainly hasn't been for Melvin and his staff. Sheets arrived before Melvin took over as general manager in September 2002. Until Mike Fiers joined the rotation in 2012, Gallardo was the only homegrown starting pitcher to emerge from the farm system and make any impact.

Developing one effective starting pitcher over 10 years is an abysmal track record by anyone's standards. Which is why the Brewers are hoping they are finally seeing the light at the end of that long, dark tunnel. When Peralta rejoins the rotation, assuming he replaces Lohse or Garza, the Brewers will have four homegrown starters, including Fiers, Jimmy Nelson and Taylor Jungmann.

As high-round draft picks, Nelson (2nd round, 2010) and Jungmann (1st round, 2011) were expected to make impacts at some point. It has been a battle for Nelson, but he is beginning to smooth out the rough edges (2.08 ERA in July). Jungmann's fight was merely getting to the majors but once he arrived this year he has lived up to prospect status (5-1, 2.04 in his first eight starts).

Not that any of the foursome is an established winner just yet. Peralta is 31-32 with a 3.85 ERA in 78 starts and the 30-year-old Fiers is 21-27 with a 3.67 ERA in 70 games (55 starts), so there is still work to do. But at least they have a chance to fill the Brewers' long void in homegrown starters.

Teams with $100 million budgets such as the Brewers need to develop starting pitchers to be competitive and control costs. As an example, the Brewers are paying Lohse and Garza $21.5 million combined this year, plus $2 million deferred, while Peralta, Fiers, Nelson and Jungman are pulling down just over $2 million total.

Which is why Melvin has been trying to trade Lohse and/or Garza, not the other pitchers who have drawn inquiries from other clubs.

"We're not interested in moving the younger guys unless you're overwhelmed with a deal you like," Melvin said. "It takes time to develop pitchers. We're one of the few teams that has four guys out of our own system.

"We keep them in the minor leagues a little longer. We try to develop them so that when they get up here, they're here to stay. You can rush guys sometimes. We like to try to get them fully developed first.

"I know we take criticism for not developing pitchers but compared to other teams, I'd match our (current) guys up against them."

That criticism was more than fair because for so long it was just Gallardo. Now, at long last, the outlook has changed, including a group of promising pitchers in the system's pipeline. As the Brewers look to retool during and after this disappointing season, some of those arms will be counted on to lead the way.

Better late than never.

Send email to thaudricourt@journalsentinel.com