Clinton Mayor Janice Kovach said she'd been considering a run for Congress for some time, but the federal government shutdown in 2013 was the deciding factor.

And it was a bipartisan group of women in Congress who crafted the framework to reopen government because they understood the impact the shutdown was having on their communities, she said.

"I'm not saying that it's a better conversation, but I think there's a different conversation when there's more women at the table," Kovach said.

The Democrat and one-time New Jersey state Assembly candidate will face three-term incumbent Rep. Leonard Lance to represent the state's 7th Congressional District. The district, which was redrawn following the last census, includes the Phillipsburg area and Franklin and Harmony townships in Warren County, all of Hunterdon County and portions of Somerset, Union, Morris and Essex counties.

Affordable Care Act

The two candidates stand on opposite sides of the Affordable Care Act, with one hoping to eliminate it and the other believing tweaks and adjustments can be made.

Lance, a Republican who eventually did vote to end the shutdown, said he voted against the Affordable Care Act and has voted for its repeal each time it's come before the House of Representatives. But he does not support simply repealing the law, but rather proposes axing "Obamacare" in favor of a more palatable plan.

The Clinton Township resident said he supports some components, including not denying coverage for pre-existing conditions and allowing children to remain on a parent's policy until age 26. But he also supports health savings accounts, tort reform, permitting the purchase of insurance policies across state lines and allowing like businesses to pool their insurance purchasing power.

And Lance vehemently opposes the medical devices tax, which taxes gross revenue on medical device companies. The 7th District is in the heart of the country's pharmaceutical and medical technology industries, and Lance said he routinely hears complaints that the tax eats into companies' research and development budgets.

Kovach differs from the incumbent in that she would rather see Congress work to reform the Affordable Care Act instead of repeal it entirely. The ability for everyone to secure health insurance can reduce costs, for instance, at the state level by limiting the need for charity care.

"If people are going to the doctor versus the hospital, those costs become much less," Kovach said. "It's about looking at a preventative opportunity versus a reactive situation."

As for the medical devices tax, Kovach said she'd be willing to "have a conversation" on whether Congress should eliminate the tax.

Immigration

The two differ on nearly every other front as well, including immigration reform.

Congress cannot implement immigration reform until the country's borders are fully secure, Lance said, and he does not favor citizenship for those who came to the country illegally, although he's willing to examine residency.

The U.S. should not have a special classification for the thousands of Central American children who have flooded the border, and the president should press for reform in the those countries from which the children hail, Lance said.

"I think the impression has been given that if young people can get into this country they can stay," he said, adding the necessary resources must be given to process and decide these immigration cases.

The U.S. immigration system is a broken one and lawmakers must decide how they create a clear path to legal residency or citizenship, Kovach said. If someone is here illegally and contributing to their community, they should have an opportunity to stay, she said.

As for the children amassing at the border, Kovach said the U.S should provide resources to their home countries to stem the exodus and provide refuge to children.

"When we look at the children coming over, they are fleeing an unsafe situation that is unhealthy for them," she said.

Common ground

The one issue on which the candidates appear to agree is the proposed PennEast pipeline that would carry natural gas through Northampton County in Pennsylvania and Hunterdon County in New Jersey. Kovach and Lance oppose a natural gas pipeline cutting through preserved farmland in New Jersey.

Lance said he's not opposed to shale gas, but he's opposed to the proposed route.

"New Jersey preserved land should remain preserved," he said. "That was the promise that was made."

Kovach, who's not necessarily a supporter of fracking, said she too is disappointed at the proposed route.