Marlon Peek (Photo: Courtesy of South Plainfield Police Department) Story Highlights Marlon Peek of Plainfield was wanted in connection with two bank robberies in South Plainfield.

Peek was arrested Wednesday after a bank robbery in Linden.

He is being treated for injuries after allegedly fleeing the bank.

City police have apprehended a man wanted in connection with several bank robberies in Central Jersey.

FBI Special Agent Celest Danzi confirmed that the man apprehended Wednesday following a robbery at the Bank of America, 1100 S. Stiles St., Linden, is Marlon Peek of Plainfield.

Peek is wanted in connection with two South Plainfield bank robberies. South Plainfield police had issued a warrant for his arrest.

Around 1:57 p.m. Wednesday, Linden police received a report of a bank robbery at Bank of America 1100 S. Stiles St.

Linden Police Capt. James Sarnicki said the alleged robber fled the bank on foot and attempted to carjack at least two victims, near the Starbucks and GameStop stores in the Aviation Plaza shopping center, before fleeing on foot across Routes 1&9, jumping a fence and entering a warehouse, where he was apprehended by Linden officers.

Sarnicki said the alleged robber was armed with a semiautomatic handgun, and he complained of difficulty breathing and a laceration on his hand. The suspect was tended to by Linden Fire Department medical personnel before being turned over to officers. Sarnicki said he was taken to a local hospital, where he is being treated under police guard.

The FBI is assisting Linden police with the investigation.

Peek, 39, of East 6th Street, Plainfield, was wanted in connection with the April 14 Wells Fargo Bank robbery in South Plainfield, as well as the April 21 PNC Bank robbery in South Plainfield. Borough police had issued a warrant for Peek's arrest.

In South Plainfield, Peek allegedly entered the PNC Bank, demanded money and fled with the proceeds.

Plainfield police said the PNC bank robber bailed out of a vehicle in the area of Woodland Avenue and East 7th Street in Plainfield. As a precautionary measure, Woodland School, 730 Central St. and Maxon Middle School, 920 E. 7th St., were placed on lockdown.

Police searched the area but were unable to locate the alleged bank robber at that time.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1PpuORK