WASHINGTON, D.C. - House Republican leaders on Wednesday selected Texas Congress member Kevin Brady to replace Wisconsin's Paul Ryan as chair of the influential House Ways and Means Committee. The top post at the tax-writing committee was vacated when Ryan took over the Speaker's job from Ohio's John Boehner.

Columbus-area GOP Rep. Patrick Tiberi, who currently chairs the Ways and Means trade subcommittee and previously chaired its subcommittee on select revenue measures, ran for the chairmanship against Brady, who chairs its health subcommittee.

A steering committee composed of several dozen GOP leaders, committee chairmen, newly elected members and Republicans from different geographic regions of the country picked Brady for the job after both candidates made presentations on why they should have it.

"It was a really tough one, because they're both really good people," said steering committee member Greg Walden of Oregon, who chairs the National Republican Congressional Committee.

Although Brady has more committee seniority than Tiberi, Tiberi's backers noted he raised more campaign cash than Brady and donated more of it to other Republicans.

They also argued Texans already chair six House committees – those that oversee Agriculture, Armed Services, Financial Services, Homeland Security, Rules and Science - which gives the state inordinate sway. Only one other Ohioan currently chairs a committee: Cincinnati's Steve Chabot, who heads the Small Business Committee.

Brady discounted that argument after making his case to the steering committee, saying the Republican party is "not the party of quotas."

"I'm confident they'll judge me on my leadership and expertise," said Brady, who pledged to work with Tiberi regardless of who was named chairman. "The Ways and Means Committee will play a crucial role in moving the big issues forward."

Brady also sought the post when Ryan won it in 2014. Brady's advocates cited his more conservative voting record, as measured by the American Conservative Union, and noted that Tiberi has voted with organized labor on issues like preserving the Davis-Bacon "prevailing wage" law, which reflects his representation of a heavily unionized state.

Brady cited tax reform, increasing jobs, and opening up new markets for U.S. businesses through trade deals as his priorities for the chairmanship, as well as setting up Social Security and Medicare for the long term, and replacing the Affordable Care Act "with patient centered care."

"We need a tax code that's built for growth," Brady told reporters.

House Republican Whip Steve Scalise predicted Brady will be an excellent chairman, citing his work ethic, passion for lower tax rates and interest in doing "real health care reform."

Tiberi issued a statement after the vote to congratulate Brady.

"We share the goal of passing pro-growth legislation that provides certainty for employers and families," said Tiberi ."I will continue doing the work needed to put our country on a better path for our children and grandchildren."