The 911 calls and arrest video from February's massacre in Kalamazoo, Michigan, depict the horror and chaos as a gunman struck again and again, leaving six people dead.

Jason Dalton had his family dog in the car with him when he allegedly began his shooting rampage, WDIV-TV reported. Dalton apparently was working as an Uber driver and taking fares during his shooting spree. He blames the Uber app he was using for the violence, telling police after he was arrested Feb. 20 that the app took him over "like artificial intelligence that can tap into (your) body," according to a police document.

About seven hours before Dalton's arrest, a man in a Chevrolet Equinox confronted Tiana Carrouthers, who was the first victim, at an apartment complex. Reports released Monday revealed 10 shell casings were found at the scene. Five casings were found in the Equinox that Dalton was driving, suggesting the gunman emptied his extended magazine at her and the four children she was with. She was trying to protect them even as she lying down wounded.

Dalton allegedly was involved in a hit-and-run accident and called his wife to exchange vehicles. She found him evasive and, after questioning him further, the report states Dalton told his wife: "She couldn't go back to work anymore and the kids could not go back to school. She would see what he was talking about on the news."

Dalton left his wife in a dark colored Chevrolet HHR, which was identified in a final shooting three hours later at a Cracker Barrel, where four people were killed, WDIV reported.

Dalton told police he has no memory of the shootings at the car dealership where a father and son were killed. However, he said he "never even aimed" when he shot the people at the Cracker Barrel. He didn't remember feeling the gun, but he recalls hearing the pop, pop, pop. He told investigators he is not a killer, but he knows he killed.

Dalton, 45, is charged with murder and attempted murder for the attacks.

Copyright 2016 Cable News Network/Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.