Candie Schey, left, and Jan Kanemoto reminisce about the past while having a cup of coffee and entertaining Jan's grandson, Branton Benard, 3, at Kanemoto's home on Tuesday. Both women were born on Jan. 1, 1949, and have two children and two grandchildren ( Kira Horvath / Staff Photographer )

The fact that Jan Kanemoto and Candie Schey are friends after growing up and living in the same area all of their lives isn't particularly remarkable. The fact that both women were born Jan. 1, 1949, and have never left Longmont is unusual. Add to that the fact that Schey's grandfather and his mother were both also born Jan. 1, and it's starting to sound a little made up.

But those are the facts. The two women met in junior high, though Kanemoto was a year ahead because Schey was bused in from Frederick, a town that at the time had different school start dates.

While they weren't immediately close friends because of that year gap, a friendship did develop over time. However, for many years, neither was aware that they shared a birthday.

"You used to do a feature in the Times-Call almost every year about New Year's babies, so I probably would have discovered then that she was born on the same day," Schey said. "I taught her daughters, and my husband and her grew up going to school together, so there was a connection there too."

Kanemoto, born Litzenberger, was born in Longmont and, but for a brief amount of time when she went to school in Washington State, has never left.

"My husband and I have a second home in Phoenix and we travel there in the winter," Kanemoto said. "But Longmont is a great place, it was a great place to raise children, we've seen a lot of changes. I was born on a farm, and that farm is totally developed now into a residential area, east of town. I've sold a number of properties there."

Advertisement

In the decade since the Times-Call last spoke to Kanemoto for a "New Year Baby" feature, she has retired from a career in marketing and, later, real estate.

Jan is married to Realtor Ed Kanemoto, with whom she went to school. Her children from her first marriage are now grown, and she has two grandchildren living in Denver.

Candie Schey, left, and Jan Kanemoto were both born Jan. 1, 1949. They met in junior high school. (Kira Horvath / Staff Photographer)

"Longmont has maintained its small town feel and yet it is evolving into quite an eclectic community," she said. "I'm involved in the arts. I'm a metal artist as well as a Realtor. I'm really devoted to working with the Arts Longmont group and the Firehouse group, and now I'm a member of the board of Trustees at the Longmont Community Foundation. So I have a lot invested in this community. It's because of arts, food, and there are a lot of people who care about the community."

Schey has recently retired from her position as a schoolteacher, and now spends a lot of her time volunteering with the St. Vrain Historical Society. She just finished co-chairing and organizing the home tour at Hover Home

"I stay really busy doing things in town," Schey said. "I was on the Callahan House Board for nine years right after I retired. The terms are limited, so I had to sit out for a year and I have reapplied and I just had an interview with the city council to see if I get to go back on the board for another term."

Schey has never left the area, having grown up in Firestone and then going to high school in Longmont, before later moving to the city. Her husband's family was part of the Chicago colony that came here early on, and his great-grandfather was treasurer for the colony.

"We were married in 1970 and were married at the church downtown which was formerly the Episcopal Church and now is the office of the St. Vrain Historical Society," Schey said. "Our reception was in the gardens at Callahan House. We both graduated from Longmont High School."

Schey simply says that this is home. She and her husband both went to college at CSU, and their two daughters graduated from Longmont High School.

When it comes to birthday/New Year celebrations, Schey said that she used to insist that the family went out to party, but things are more muted now. Her son-in-law is the receivers coach for the University of Wisconsin football team, "so now we often attend a ball game," she said.

Kanemoto and Schey exchange birthday texts and regularly cross paths, though the former feels that she has the edge in regard to being first because she was born in Longmont proper, while Schey was born on that same day in Firestone.

"I was the first baby because I was actually in Longmont," Kanemoto said. "Back then, there was a distinction between that. There's kind of an interesting story to that in that my parents were expecting a boy, and my dad had to go home and feed the cattle. They came in and said, 'This is the first baby, what are you going to name her?' My mom said, 'I guess we'll call her Janice for January.' My dad didn't know what my name was going to be because they were expecting a boy."

Schey was born at 11:55 p.m., so she came close to being born on Jan. 2. That would have been a shame, not least because of the aforementioned family connection.

"My maternal grandfather, Conrad Uhrich, was born Jan. 1, 1903, and his mother, Anna Margaret Fahrenbruch Uhrich, on Jan. 1, 1869, both in Germany," Schey said. "For the longest time, I thought maybe I was going to have a kid on Jan. 1 too, but nope."

While they're both retired, though still active in the community, both Schey and Kanemoto continue to be happy and settled in Longmont. Their lives might be an inspiration to many who perhaps feel that they have to move elsewhere in order to achieve their life goals. The two ladies have had successful careers and have reared their children in comfort.

Their lives began the same day 66 years ago, but it's what they did after that which makes them impressive, and it's the fact that they did it in tandem that makes them so unusual.

Brett Callwood: 303-684-5274, callwoodb@timescall.com or twitter.com/city_slang