Marquette guard JaJuan Johnson (23) and Wisconsin guard Josh Gasser battle for a loose ball Saturday. Gasser helped the Badgers pull away from the Golden Eagles in the second half. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By

The Wisconsin Badgers took the Marquette Golden Eagles' best punch midway through the second half Saturday afternoon, then responded with a knockout blow of their own.

Riding the wave of that quick seven-point run, the No. 2-ranked Badgers wrested back control of the teams' annual grudge match en route to an ugly yet satisfying 49-38 victory at the BMO Harris Bradley Center.

Playing with a hobbled Sam Dekker, UW (8-1) shot an icy 32.7% and was on the wrong end of a big second-half foul disparity, yet managed to keep its composure when it mattered most.

It was pretty much what one would have expected from a Badgers team hardened by last year's Final Four run and probably still a bit salty from Wednesday's loss to No. 4 Duke at the Kohl Center.

"Yeah, we've seen all that kind of stuff before," senior center Frank Kaminsky said when asked about facing adversity Saturday. "We've got a bunch of seniors, we've got some fifth-year seniors on our team, so they've seen everything.

"When things aren't going our way, we know we can't just sit there and pout about it, we've got to keep playing basketball and fight through it, and we did that."

The Golden Eagles (4-4), playing in front of a full house of 18,573, mucked the game up sufficiently from the start thanks to a stingy 2-3 zone defense that kept them within striking range despite their offensive shortcomings.

UW held a 25-15 halftime lead and a 32-23 advantage on a putback by Dekker — who was a game-time decision due to a sore ankle coming in — before MU made its move.

Starting with a Matt Carlino layup and ending with a pair of free throws by Sandy Cohen III with 8 minutes 57 seconds remaining, the Golden Eagles had narrowed the Badgers' lead to just 35-33.

With the crowd in full throat, there were disbelieving stares from coach Bo Ryan and his charges as the fouls mounted. Kaminsky's foul on Cohen left the Golden Eagles in the bonus while having only committed one to that point themselves.

But still, no panic. And then, just like that, UW's seniors regained control.

Josh Gasser got things going with a three-pointer from the left corner, his career-high-tying fourth of the day. A little over a minute later, Traevon Jackson scored on a driving layup. Then, off the missed front end of a one-and-one by Juan Anderson, Kaminsky hit a runner in the lane.

Game, set, match — in just under two minutes' time.

"Every time the crowd got into it, every time they chipped to within two, three, four points, we always made a shot," said Gasser, who scored 12 points.

"We're a veteran club and we've got some tough guys. We expect nothing less, it just would have been nice to make them all throughout the game instead of just the times when we needed them.

"But, like I said, we made enough to get the job done."

It was another terrific all-around day for Kaminsky, who finished with 15 points, 10 rebounds, four steals and three blocked shots. He also provided the final dagger, hitting a three-pointer from the right wing with 47.3 seconds remaining to put what was a two-possession game out of reach at 47-38.

Overall, the bigger Badgers ruled on the boards, 41-28, with 14 of those coming on the offensive end. Nigel Hayes chipped in nine total, while all five of Dekker's rebounds were on his own end.

UW also offset its own poor shooting day by limiting the Golden Eagles to just 28.9% shooting and 38 points. Both those figures were MU's worst since an ugly loss to another Big Ten team, Ohio State, last November.

Ryan, whose team got the 1,500th victory in program history, was pleased with the way his players handled the ups and downs of the traditionally emotional affair with MU.

"Will we always be able to let a nine-point lead get to two and then come back? No, that doesn't always happen," Ryan said. "(Jackson) has been through a lot, Josh has been through a lot at the guard position. Same thing with our front line. For them to maintain their composure when their coach was pulling his hair out, yeah, I thought that was pretty good.

"I'm proud of my guys."