NEW YORK _ Gov. Tom Corbett might have little more than a month left in his term, but the Republican says he's not giving up on his signature heath care program and will continue the push to enroll Pennsylvanians without health coverage.

"I'm governor until Jan. 20," Corbett said, referring to Gov.-elect Tom Wolf's inauguration on that day. "I believe it is the right thing to do."

Corbett's remarks on the third day of the annual Pennsylvania Society gala in Midtown Manhattan, came less than 24 hours after Wolf told a group of black business leaders that he intended to scrap Corbett's s "Healthy PA" program and move toward the full Medicaid expansion authorized under Obamacare.

Wolf, who ran on a promise to accept the full expansion, told the Forum for a Better Pennsylvania Friday that he "will make it my job as governor to expand Medicaid."

The Republican administration is already well underway in its efforts to enroll the uninsured in what some have referred to as "private option" program.

And, faced with long waits and busy signals, the state Department of Human Services said last week that it had added staff to deal with the influx of calls.

Corbett's program provides low-cost health insurance for people earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level, which is $16,105 for a single person and $32,913 for a family of four.

Corbett negotiated for months with the U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services to obtain the necessary waivers to implement his alternative to the federal Medicaid expansion. Corbett believes the expansion authorized under Obamacare istoo expensive and would ultimately stick state taxpayers with the burden of funding it.

During an interview in the lobby of the Metropolitan Club on the edge of Central Park, Corbett told reporters he favored his program because premium requirements encouraged the uninsured to have annual check-ups and because it gave breaks to "voluntary" job-seekers.

Corbett predicted that costs for dismantling the program, which could be harder than Wolf envisions, would run to the "millions of dollars."

He curtly declined comment when he was asked whether he was personally upset that Wolf planned to move ahead with the full expansion.

jmicek@pennlive.com/@ByJohnLMicek