Alicia Brady Smith will host book signing from 1 to 3 p.m. April 18 at Hastings.

Alicia Brady Smith talks to sixth graders Friday at Harrison K-8 School about the re-release of her book, 'Thread,' and her journey to recovery after being shot in 2008. ( Carie Canterbury / Daily Record )

Alicia Brady Smith talks to sixth graders Friday at Harrison K-8 School about the re-release of her book, 'Thread,' and her journey to recovery after being shot in 2008. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

If you go What: Book signing by Alicia Brady Smith When: 1-3 p.m. April 18 Where: Hastings, 1811 Fremont Dr. More info: Her book, 'Thread,' was re-released in January.

Her dreams were diverted and her priorities have changed, but her spirit hasn't broken.

Alicia Brady Smith, just a few years ago, thought a day never would go by that she wouldn't think about the night she nearly died in a drive-by shooting in Tucson, Ariz. She was in a car with friends when an AK-47 bullet entered her back, went through her liver and exited out front. Nearly seven years and 15 surgeries later, her scars simply are a part of who she is, and the incident no longer dictates her identity.

Her book, "Thread," released in January through Tate Publishing and written with Debbie Bell, details her steady journey of physical, mental, emotional and spiritual healing. The book first was published in 2012 and sold more than 700 copies. Tate Publishing released the revised version that is moderately edited, has a new cover and contains an endorsement from Dr. Peter Rhee who treated Smith at University Medical Center. He also in 2011 treated former Congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords after an assassination attempt on her life.

Because the shooting was gang related, "I.M. Thread" was Smith's alias name given to her at the hospital to protect her identity. Detectives knew she was not the shooter's target, but it took them a while to confirm that because of the number of shootings in the area that night.

Advertisement

The message that Smith, now 27, wants readers to take away from the book is the power of forgiveness and the knowledge that actions of other people can't be controlled.

"The one thing we can control is ourselves and how we react to things," she said. "As much as you wish someone hadn't shot at you, you can't change it."

There wasn't enough evidence to charge a suspected 17-year-old man for the October 2008 shooting, and the case soon was closed. Smith eventually found peace by letting go and forgiving her offender. Smith talks in her book about the night she shared her story with offenders serving time in prison, and a man facing life without parole for shooting and killing someone when he was 17, approached her. He never had the opportunity to ask his victim to forgive him, but that night was a freeing moment for him and Smith, who offered forgiveness.

Looking back on the shooting and her journey, Smith said everything happens "for a reason."

"I hate to say I wouldn't change it, because I would never want to go through that pain again, but I can't see my life being any different than it is right now," she said.

Since the release of her first book, Smith has had a number of changes in her life. She married Scott Smith in July 2014, and she has three stepchildren. Smith works with Title 1 reading at Harrison K-8 School, and she is a dance instructor at e B. Box, LLC School of Dance & Kinetic Expression. Beginning in the fall, she will be the new Tigers dance instructor at Cañon City High School.

"Before the accident, I never wanted to do anything else but dancing, and I wanted to do it professionally," she said. "That's why the teaching is so important to me. It's a way to stay involved in dancing, and I love it."

"Thread" is available for purchase at Hastings, tatepublishing.com, Amazon.com and barnesandnoble.com. Smith plans to share her story with groups across Colorado and in surrounding states. Those interested may schedule her for a speaking engagement through her website, http://aliciabradysmith.tateauthor.com.

She will have a book signing from 1 to 3 p.m. April 18 Hastings, 1811 Fremont Drive.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com