ONWARD & UPWARD

The Broadway Columbia — A DoubleTree by Hilton has announced the following new hires: Jesus Mendez has been selected as hospitality/banquets manager; Denise Gordon has been appointed director of housekeeping; and Ralph Green has been named chief engineer. Mendez will lead the banquet staff for ElevenEleven Hospitality with emphasis on audio-visual needs and ensuring the room is set correctly. Mendez has 18 years of experience in the hospitality industry. After moving to Columbia in 1993, he began working at the Holiday Inn Select Executive Center. Mendez continued his work there until 2012, during which time he filled multiple positions, including assistant banquets manager, banquet preparation cook and restaurant manager. In her role, Gordon will hire and manage housekeeping staff, set schedules and inspect rooms. Gordon, from Des Moines, Iowa, who helped open the Courtyard by Marriott, worked there for more than eight years. Green will be responsible for general physical maintenance of the hotel. Having worked as a chief engineer at other properties, including most recently the Courtyard by Marriott, Green brings more than 13 years of experience to The Broadway. Before becoming a chief engineer at previous properties, he worked as a master electronic, appliance and HVAC technician for more than 20 years. Originally from Bowling Green, he comes to Columbia from Escondido, Calif.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

David Shipper has been hired to be debit card manager for Landmark Bank. Shipper, who joined the Bank in February, came to Columbia from Birmingham, Ala. In his new position, he is responsible for promoting and improving the bank’s debit card product. Most recently, Shipper managed multiple marketing programs and products for the BBVA Compass Banks in Birmingham, Ala. Before that, he was involved with the marketing of banking products for Birmingham’s Regions Financial Corp. Shipper is a graduate of Auburn University at Montgomery with a bachelor’s degree and MBA in marketing.

Landmark Bank has announced the following promotions: Jay Alexander to senior vice president; Heather Clark to vice president, security risk officer; Leighanne Lamb to vice president, real estate lender; Megan Schawo to vice president, wealth management; John Findley to assistant vice president, commercial lending; Jill Thompson to assistant vice president, Stadium West Banking Center manager; Robert Hill to banking officer, real estate lender; and Tyler Phillips to banking officer, Motor Banking Center manager. Alexander, who joined the bank in October 2010, has more than 18 years’ experience serving as a commercial banker and wealth management strategist. In his current role as wealth strategist, Alexander is responsible for working with clients to build, preserve and protect their assets through appropriate financial solutions. As the bank’s fraud department manager, Clark leads the department in assisting customers dealing with identity theft and fraud. She also serves as the Bank Secrecy Act officer, Office of Foreign Assets Control officer, privacy officer and assistant security officer. She joined the bank in 1997 and worked in banking center management at two Landmark locations. She was promoted to security risk officer in 2004 and fraud department manager in 2012. Lamb, who serves as a real estate lender, joined Landmark Bank in 2006 and was named the 2010 Banker of the Year. Schawo will continue her role as relationship manager. Her job responsibilities include assisting clients with wealth management, trust administration and retirement planning, as well as managing the department’s retirement services. Schawo joined the bank in 2002. Findley, who will continue in his role as a commercial lender, joined the bank in March 2008. Thompson manages the Stadium West location, overseeing new account development, lending, customer relations and daily operational activities. She joined the bank in 2000. In 2011, Thompson was awarded the prestigious Banker of the Year award. Hill, who will continue as a real estate lender, joined the bank in September 2012. Phillips will continue to manage the Motor location, overseeing new account development, personal lending, customer relations and daily operational activities. Phillips has been at Landmark since October 2009.

KUDOS

Ken Frevert, vice president and senior portfolio manager with Central Trust & Investment Co. in Columbia, has been granted the AWMA certification by the College for Financial Planning. Frevert has been in the financial services industry for more than 30 years. People who hold the AWMA designation have completed a course of study encompassing wealth strategies, equity-based compensation plans, tax reduction alternatives and asset protection alternatives. Designees renew their designation every two years by completing 16 hours of continuing education, reaffirming adherence to the Standards of Professional Conduct and complying with self-disclosure requirements.

Will McWilliams, a Raymond James financial adviser with Williams Keepers Financial Services LLC, recently was ranked 25th on WealthManagement.com’s list of Top Next Gen Independent Broker Dealer Advisors. The national list ranks advisers younger than 40 exclusively by assets under management. McWilliams offers investment and financial planning alternatives for individuals and businesses. McWilliams is a native of Columbia and earned a degree in sociology and business from the University of Montana. He has seven years of experience in the financial services industry.

John Rentschler, a wealth management adviser with Northwestern Mutual in Columbia, has qualified for Court of the Table and membership in the Million Dollar Roundtable, an international, independent association of nearly 19,000 leading life insurance producers. The roundtable indicates sales and service achievement. Members must meet strict ethical and production requirements to qualify. Rentschler has qualified for membership for 19 years. Rentschler has been affiliated with Northwestern Mutual since 1986. He is a member of Physicians Nationwide, a group of Northwestern Mutual Financial Representatives who specialize in serving the financial needs of physicians.

John Bailey, vice president and wealth management adviser with Central Trust & Investment Co. in Columbia, has been granted CFP certification by the Certified Financial Planner Board of Standards. Bailey has worked with Central Trust & Investment Co. since 2008. The CFP marks identify people who have met the rigorous experience and ethical requirements of the CFP Board, have successfully completed financial planning coursework and have passed the CFP Certification Examination covering the following areas: the financial planning process, risk management, investments, tax planning and management, retirement and employee benefits, and estate planning. CFP professionals also agree to meet ongoing continuing education requirements and to uphold CFP Board’s Code of Ethics and Professional Responsibility, Rules of Conduct and Financial Planning Practice Standards.

Jess Brodhacker, Boone County Farm Bureau insurance agent, was named to the Court of Excellence by the Missouri Farm Bureau Insurance Cos. This is Brodhacker’s first year to win the award. He competed for the honor with more than 200 professional agents throughout the state. The presentation was made during the company’s All Star Sales Conference held March 6 through 8 at Chateau on the Lake in Branson. Brodhacker also was recognized as a member of the Issued Life Applications Pyramid.

Country Meat Shop of Moberly once again received top recognition for its smoked meat products at the Missouri Association of Meat Processors 75th annual convention and trade show held March 7-9 in Columbia. The shop received Grand Champion Smoked Sugar Cured Boneless Ham, Grand Champion Ring Bologna, Grand Champion Hotdog and Grand Champion Smoked Pork Chop. Champion status was awarded for its Smoked Dry Cured Bacon and Reserve Champion honors went to their Smoked Sugar Cured Bacon and Fresh Bratwurst. The competition — the only Missouri state contest of its kind — selected the finest example of cured and smoked items from nearly 200 products entered into 20 different classes.

Delta Systems won seven ADDYs as part of the American Advertising Awards at the RADDYS, held March 1 at the Diamond Room in Springfield. The American Advertising Awards exemplify the best of the best in advertising. Delta won the following awards: Silver Award for MizzouRec website; Silver Award for Discover the District website; Silver Award for MU Licensing and Trademarks Office website; Silver Award for Columbia Performing Arts Centre website; Silver Award for D. Rowe’s Restaurant website; Silver Award for Connect’s Digital Faculty Consultant Showcase; and Silver Award for the 2013 True/False Film Festival Website.

Columbia College’s online master’s degree in business administration has been recognized as a “Best Buy” by GetEducated.com. The ranking is based on a nationwide survey of distance learning costs at 124 regionally accredited institutions that offer online master’s degrees in business administration, with 59 institutions being recognized as most affordable. GetEducated.com is a consumer group dedicated to publishing objective rankings and reviews of the best online colleges and universities along the dimensions of higher education cost, reputation and employer acceptance.

A collaborative effort between the Boone County Public Works, Resource Management and Geographic Information System departments has earned them the 2013 Excellence in Operations Management Award from Cartegraph, provider of operations management system technologies for the public sector. Boone County is one of only 10 municipal organizations to receive the award, which Cartegraph plans to grant annually as part of an initiative to promote and recognize the use of technology within municipal organizations to work smarter for the improvement of the community.

BUSINESS CALENDAR

Columbia Chamber of Commerce events are scheduled for:

SATURDAY