Republican presidential candidates will gather Tuesday night in Milwaukee for the latest GOP primary debate. To help the Fox Business Network moderators, I have compiled a list of acceptable questions:

1) ____________

That's all. No questions are acceptable.

If we learned anything from the last debate and the chaotic weeks that followed, it's that questions — with their inherently secular progressive agenda — place an undue burden on those running for public office. They must be stopped.

Because of questions, one of the GOP front-runners, Ben Carson, has had to spend time vehemently assuring the American people that he did, in fact, attempt to stab someone and also tried to attack his mother with a hammer. That has unfairly distracted the candidate from telling voters about how the pyramids were geometrically curious grain silos and how the Founding Fathers had no political experience, despite what secular progressives or actual details of the Founding Fathers' political careers might tell us.

Carson blames sudden interest in the veracity of his life story, around which he has built his presidential campaign, on the "secular progressive movement." The term "secular progressive" is a polite way of saying "godless liberal heathen," and was made popular by Fox News pundit Bill O'Reilly. (I would ask O'Reilly if that's true, but asking a question would be secularly progressive of me.)

After the last GOP debate, during which the CNBC moderators embarrassed themselves by speaking in sentences that attempted to elicit information, considerable anger was directed at the liberal mainstream America-hating politically correct secular progressive media.

But the moderators themselves were not the real culprits. It was the queries coming from the moderators' mouth holes that were to blame.

Questions, aside from being secular progressives, are inherently biased because they require politicians to know something about something, an expectation that has proved time and again to be measurably unfair.

Questions leave candidates with three options: answer truthfully, which would be an absurd capitulation to secular progressives; lie, which is something only a secular progressive would do (looking at you, Hillary Clinton #Benghazi); or blame the media.

Now there are, of course, good questions. Those can be classified as "non-secular regressive" questions, the type that Carson and others wish the media would ask Democratic candidates.

For example, Carson has complained bitterly about how details of his past are being scrutinized, saying: "I do not remember this level of scrutiny for one President Barack Obama when he was running."

Secular progressives will point out that Obama is the first candidate to ever have to produce his long-form birth certificate, that several parts of his biography were drawn into question — including a girlfriend who turned out to be a composite of several girlfriends — and that many used Obama's association with a Christian church in Chicago to claim he's a radical unfit for office while simultaneously insisting he's a Muslim.

Those non-secular regressive questions are perfectly reasonable, as are any questions asked of Hillary Clinton, who has received absolutely zero scrutiny outside of the standard 11-hour congressional hearing and roughly three decades of being told that everything she has ever said is a lie.

To make things perfectly clear, here are examples of appropriate ways to answer questions:

Secular progressive question: Did you take my stapler?

Answer: Please take your secular progressive attitude elsewhere, hippie, I've got stapling to do.

Non-secular regressive question: My ideology differs from yours. Why in God's name do you want to destroy America?

A: You're right, and I'm sorry. I will immediately end my campaign and leave the country.

That's not so hard, is it? (Oops, sorry. That question is secular and borders on being progressive.)

Now I'm sure you're wondering (not in the form of a question, of course) how a debate can happen without questions. That's simple.

The moderators Tuesday night can simply present issues in a non-interrogatory manner, and the candidates can be given time to discuss their undoubtedly accurate views on those issues.

For example:

Moderator: The economy.

Donald Trump: I will fix it. It will be so huge.

Carson: Obama has destroyed it. I will make it better because I was once told by a person who I won't identify that I have a brilliant economic mind. I also invented the calculator.

Jeb Bush: I eat nails for breakfast.

Moderator: Guns.

Carson: More.

Trump: I have many. They're all gold.

Ted Cruz: I use them to cook bacon.

Moderator: We're out of time. Thanks.

Now THAT would be a fair and reasonable debate, untarnished by secular progressive inquiries. The candidates would be free to share their ideas for the future, and those ideas wouldn't be restrained by verifiable details.

Then the only question we'd have to ask ourselves, as a nation, would be a perfectly non-secular regressive one: What in God's name have we done?

rhuppke@tribpub.com