Please consider disabling it for our site, or supporting our work in one of these ways

We can't seem to agree about whether social media fuels, merely facilitates, or actually hinders protest movements. But in Venezuela, where five people have now died in political unrest over soaring inflation, widespread crime, and chronic shortages, Twitter is undeniably serving as a parallel platform for protest. Its dueling hashtags echo the dueling demonstrations in the streets. In a country with one of the highest Twitter adoption rates in the world, and at a time when independent Venezuelan news outlets have been muffled, the social network has become a critical forum for political activism. For evidence, just compare the timeline of Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro, Hugo Chávez's handpicked successor, with that of opposition leader Leopoldo López, the primary organizer of the student-led protests. Maduro's Twitter feed is a frenetic mix of threats to his "fascist" rivals, exhortations to carry out Chávez's Bolivarian Revolution, and retweets of messages from sympathizers (including, eerily, a series of tweets written by Chávez shortly before his death last year). López's is more spartan—informing supporters about the logistics for marches and urging them to fight non-violently for human rights.

In a dramatic showdown on Tuesday, López led a rally in Caracas before handing himself over to authorities to face terrorism charges. Mash up the two Twitter feeds in the days before the arrest, and you get the impression of two camps approaching one another for an epic clash—a kind of West Side Story rumble. I've included translations in bold above each tweet. Maduro: "Leopoldo López, coward, fascist surrender because we are looking for you!" @NicolasMaduro: Leopoldo López, cobarde, fascista ¡Entrégate que te estamos buscando! pic.twitter.com/9xKv4f6rXC — Delcy Rodríguez (@DrodriguezMinci) February 15, 2014 López: "I tell you Maduro, you are a coward. You are going to break neither me nor my family. To my family: strength, I love them." Te lo digo Maduro, eres un cobarde. Ni a mi familia ni a mi nos vas a doblegar. A mi famila: fuerza, los amo. — Leopoldo López (@leopoldolopez) February 16, 2014 Maduro: "Tomorrow we will have a work day in the Federal Council of Government to implement the actions of the National Plan for Peace and Coexistence." Mañana tenemos jornada de trabajo en el Consejo Federal de Gobierno para implementar las acciones del Plan Nacional de Paz y Convivencia.. — Nicolás Maduro (@NicolasMaduro) February 18, 2014 López: "The government is increasing repression to sow fear. Tomorrow we leave peacefully at 10 AM. We'll see each other [at the starting point for the march] in Chacaito!" El gobierno aumentando la represion busca sembrar miedo. Mañana salgamos pacificamente a las 10 am. Nos vemos en Chacaito! — Leopoldo López (@leopoldolopez) February 18, 2014 Maduro: "All day I will be at work in Miraflores, the House of People's Power Governing and protecting the Peace from the attacks of Fascism." Estaré todo el día en mi puesto de trabajo en Miraflores,la Casa del PoderPopular Gobernando y protegiendo la Paz de los ataques delFascismo — Nicolás Maduro (@NicolasMaduro) February 18, 2014 López: "Let's all go in white to the first point. Then I will walk alone. I will not put the life of any Venezuelan at risk. Venezuela Strong!" Vayamos todo de blanco, hasta 1 punto. Luego yo caminare solo. No pondre en riesgo la vida de ningun venezolano. Fuerza Venezuela!! — Leopoldo López (@leopoldolopez) February 17, 2014