Last week, I criticized the uber-secretive Gov. Rick Scott for presuming to lecture the Republican National Committee on the need to be "transparent." This week, it's President Obama's turn.

Speaking last week at the White House Correspondents Dinner, Obama said of the assembled reporters that "your power and your responsibility to dig and to question and to counter distortions and untruths is more than important than ever." He meant to be serious. Coming from Obama, though, it might have been his biggest howler of the evening.

One can debate the Affordable Care Act, the opening to Cuba and executive actions on immigration. There is no need to debate the Obama administration's record on press freedom: It stinks.

Where to begin? Restricting access to administration officials and, when occasionally granting it, having a White House minder present? Failing to tell reporters about events at the White House, and then producing the administration's "coverage" of those events? Using social media and websites to create administration-friendly stories?

In 2013, New York Times reporter David Sanger called Obama's "the most closeted, control freak administration I've ever covered." Sanger has been covering them since the Reagan administration.

Ah, but those are mere annoyances compared to Obama's more serious assaults on press freedom. The president considers national security information leaks to be the equivalent of spying. The administration has used the Espionage Act seven times to find out who leaked information. Past administrations had used it a total of three times.

In 2012, after the Associated Press reported on CIA operations in Yemen, the Justice Department secretly obtained phone records of 100 AP staffers. Their work phones. Their cellphones. Their home phones.

The AP also reported that the Obama administration set a dubious record in 2015. Seventy-seven percent of requests for documents under the Freedom of Information Act came back with nothing or had been redacted. Yet after taking office Obama had signed an executive order pledging his administration to "creating an unprecedented level of openness in government." He got the "unprecedented" part right.

In 2013, former Washington Post Executive Editor Leonard Downie Jr., compiled a report for the Committee to Protect Journalists. Downie got to it in the first paragraph, writing of the " 'Insider Threat Program' being implemented in every government department (that) requires all federal employees to help prevent unauthorized disclosures of information by monitoring the behavior of their colleagues."

The term "chilling effect" has become a cliché, and thus has been devalued. It regains its full, appropriate meaning when applied to the effects of such intimidation at the highest level of American government. That intimidation is one reason why Reporters Without Borders ranks the United States 49th in press freedom. Among those ahead of us are El Salvador and Botswana.

Downie called the Obama administration's "war on leaks and other efforts to control information ... the most aggressive I've seen since the Nixon administration, when I was one of the editors involved in The Washington Post's investigation of Watergate." Let's hope that Donald Trump, who has called for eliminating the nation's libel laws, doesn't get the chance to do even worse.

Obviously, 9/11 made the last two administrations much more wary of leaks, especially regarding national security. The crackdown started with the Bush administration. Yet reporters said they still had regular contact with top officials.

Under Obama, such contact happens far less often, if at all. It doesn't affect just the West Wing. Reporters complain about access problems at executive agencies. ABC's Ann Compton called the Obama administration the "least transparent" of seven she has covered.

The Obama administration demonstrated that attitude in its pursuit of New York Times reporter James Risen. Prosecutors wanted Risen to divulge his source for information about a failed CIA attempt to sabotage Iran's nuclear program. Risen prevailed at trial, but lost at the federal appeals court and the Supreme Court before the Justice Department finally decided not to compel his testimony.

Whenever you get the urge to hate the press, remember that when dictators seize power they go first for the courts and the media. Maybe Obama wouldn't have so badly lost his communications touch the last two years if he had spent less time trying to shape the news.

Randy Schultz is the former editorial page editor of The Palm Beach Post. He also blogs for Boca Raton Magazine. randyshultz@bellsouth.net