Tanner McEvoy makes a pass during the Wisconsin spring game Saturday. Credit: Joe Koshollek for the Journal Sentinel

By of the

Madison — Not long after his arrival last summer from Arizona Western College, it was clear quarterback Tanner McEvoy wasn't ready to run Wisconsin's offense.

He appeared tentative and overwhelmed and eventually played most of the season at safety.

Today, McEvoy looks like a quarterback capable of challenging returning starter Joel Stave.

"He carries himself like a quarterback," UW coach Gary Andersen said Saturday after the Cardinal's 6-0 victory over the White in the annual spring game at Camp Randall Stadium. "I think when he walked in here before, he carried himself like a quarterback that was absorbing a very difficult offense and new terminology.

"So much of the run checks that he has to handle and the demeanor that he carried himself with last August and the way he carries himself today is really completely different."

McEvoy's numbers in the half during which official statistics were kept were modest. He completed 4 of 10 passes for 55 yards — with two drops and one throwaway — and rushed three times for 9 yards.

However, during a controlled scrimmage in the first half McEvoy threw a 27-yard touchdown pass to Kenzel Doe and had runs of 35 and 7, the latter for a touchdown.

"I think I played pretty good today," McEvoy said. "I left some things out there but any player would say that. I think I had a pretty well-rounded day."

McEvoy got all the reps with the No. 1 offense because Stave (shoulder) missed the last week of spring ball.

Stave, who has 19 starts, and McEvoy appear set to battle for the No. 1 job in camp. The battle for No. 3 likely will be between Bart Houston and freshman D.J. Gillins.

Houston acknowledged Saturday he struggled trying to force balls into coverage midway through the spring because he was pressing. Gillins has a live arm and can run but remains a raw prospect.

A breakdown of the team after 15 practices.

Offensive line: Dallas Lewallen and Dan Voltz, either of whom could be the No. 1 center in the fall, were held out of spring ball to recover from off-season surgery.

That allowed freshman Michael Deiter to work at center with the No. 1 unit. He likely will be a reserve at center or guard but the staff liked what it saw.

Andersen and offensive line coach T.J. Woods also liked what they saw from Ray Ball at left guard. The 6-foot-7, 321-pound Ball, who will be a redshirt junior, could compete for a starting job.

However, the No. 1 line will look completely different with the return of Lewallen, who can play center or guard; Voltz; and right guard Kyle Costigan, who was limited in the spring to rest his right knee that has undergone several surgeries.

Depth still could be an issue, however. There are no experienced reserves behind left tackle Tyler Marz and right tackle Rob Havenstein.

Wide receiver: The staff won't know what it has until five freshmen arrive during the summer.

Alex Erickson (knee) was held out all spring. Jordan Fredrick (arm) and Robert Wheelwright (knee) missed time. Wheelwright, who had two receptions for 9 yards last season, was held out of the spring game because he isn't fully healthy. He needs all the work he can get and missed too much time.

This unit is arguably the most uncertain on the team.

Tight end: Sam Arneson, entering his senior season, is the undisputed leader of an inexperienced unit. Andersen believes Arneson can be one of the better tight ends in the Big Ten.

How well the unit performs overall will depend on the development of Troy Fumagalli, Austin Traylor and Eric Steffes. Look for fullback Derek Watt to get work at tight end also. The staff wants to use his ability to catch the ball and block.

Running back: Melvin Gordon and Corey Clement, who combined for 2,159 yards, 7.9 yards per carry and 19 touchdowns last season, emerged healthy. That was the staff's No. 1 goal. Both backs worked on pass-protection and pass-catching during the spring.

With Watt getting work at H-back and fullback, Austin Ramesh got valuable work at fullback and tailback. He rushed 12 times for 71 yards Saturday, all against the No. 2 defense. Brookfield Central graduate Jeff Lewis, unable to crack the tailback rotation, has decided to transfer.

Defensive line: Despite the loss of three starters and two key reserves, this could be the deepest unit.

Warren Herring worked at nose guard for most of the spring but played end Saturday. He could play either position next season. One reason behind the move is that the staff feels comfortable with Bryce Gilbert or Arthur Goldberg on the inside.

Herring and Conrad Zagzebski could give UW two solid ends. The staff is also high on Chikwe Obasih, though the Brookfield Central graduate was critical of his performance Saturday.

End Jake Keefer has come back nicely after missing last season with a knee injury. Brookfield East graduate Alec James, moved from outside linebacker to end, is expected to help provide a more consistent pass rush.

Linebacker: The staff understands no one player will fill the void created by the departure of Chris Borland, a tenacious defender and emotional leader who led UW in tackles. But the unit lost three other key linebackers who finished third, fourth and seventh in tackles.

So who is left to make plays?

Derek Landisch and Marcus Trotter manned the starting inside positions in the spring. Trotter plays with fire but his lack of speed/quickness remains an issue.

The staff moved Leon Jacobs inside from the outside, in part to get more speed and build depth at the position, and Michael Trotter from safety. Jacobs showed his speed Saturday by tracking down Gordon from behind to prevent a touchdown.

The top three players at the outside positions are Joe Schobert, Vince Biegel and Jesse Hayes, who has the opportunity make his first significant contribution at UW.

Defensive back: UW entered the spring with two dependable cornerbacks — Sojourn Shelton and Darius Hillary. The staff found a third in Devin Gaulden, whose ability to contribute so far has been scuttled by leg and knee injuries. Andersen loves his quickness and football IQ.

Safety is a huge question mark. Michael Caputo moved back to safety after an early experiment at outside linebacker. Caputo is more productive near the line of scrimmage, however.

The candidates for the second safety spot appear to be freshman Austin Hudson, former cornerback Peniel Jean, Joe Ferguson and Leo Musso, who did not play Saturday because of a leg injury.

Specialist: UW has a talented freshman kicker (Rafael Gaglianone) joining the program and Saturday showed he may be needed.

Jack Russell hit field-goal attempts of 30 and 41 yards in the second half. However, he missed badly to the left from 44 and during the controlled scrimmage in the first half missed a 36-yarder to the left.

Walk-on Andrew Endicott made the 36-yarder in the controlled scrimmage but missed right from 44 in the second half.