The Democratic Party is perceived as being only for blacks and the GOP for whites, according to Jaime Harrison, chairman of the S.C. Democratic Party. Harrison said he wants the party to make sure it is more inclusive in the future.

COLUMBIA - Democrats woke up Wednesday morning to a hangover far more severe than they expected.

In South Carolina and beyond, Election Day 2014 will be remembered as a day of epic gains for the GOP and equally epic losses for Democrats. It is being described as a tsunami of voter disgust aimed primarily at Washington and President Barack Obama that took nearly anyone else with a "D" after their name with it.

And while a Democrat losing in deep red South Carolina doesn't exactly shock anyone, the margin of victory has Democrats reeling from a gut punch they hope isn't fatal.

In the race that was supposed to be closest, Gov. Nikki Haley thumped Democrat Vincent Sheheen by nearly 15 percentage points - and that was one of Democrats' closest finishes statewide.

Now Democrats across the state are taking a hard look in the mirror.

'This is our plan'

No one knows what South Carolina Democrats stand for, said Dick Harpootlian, who ran the state Democratic Party the last time it controlled the governor's mansion, in 1998. The party's representatives at the Statehouse have grown too comfortable, unwilling to confront Republican leaders, he said.

"They're as happy as a pig in slop over there," Harpootlian said of Democrats. He said legislators are too busy cozying up to Republican leadership who can provide them with everything from a budget item for their district to a plum committee assignment or even a good parking spot. It's no wonder, he said, no one knows what a Democrat in South Carolina stands for.

"Where are we on healthcare? Education? Roads? Democrats need to say this is our plan . and we need to vote on it," Harpootlian said. "If it doesn't pass then we've drawn a contrast. That's how you define a party. It's not 'Oh please Mr. Speaker . Mr. Pro Tem (leader) of the Senate . please, please, please make sure I get this appropriation."

Some in the party were privately miffed when one of the most visible leaders of the state Republican Party, former House Speaker Bobby Harrell, dropped a pre-election gift, pleading guilty to criminal campaign finance charges two weeks before the election. Harrell still garnered nearly 4,200 votes, or 39 percent, despite having withdrawn from the race.

Many Democrats praised and sympathized with him.

"When you have a historic situation of a speaker that is . convicted of multiple crimes and nobody stands up and says anything, that is odd," said Lachlan McIntosh, a Democratic strategist who ran Brad Hutto's U.S. Senate campaign.

Rep. James Smith, D-Columbia, a former minority leader widely seen as a big part of the party's future, pushed back on the nation House Democrats should be more confrontational. He said voters expect both parties to work together.

"I think we do what the voters expect us to do, which is to focus on the challenges that South Carolinians face and to lead providing responsible, reasonable and thoughtful solution to those challenges," he said. "They expect us to do our job and that's what we need to be focused on."

As much as Democrats see an opportunity for change, they also stressed that they don't believe 2014 is indicative of the future.

If Democratic candidates for governor can lose in deep blue Maryland, Illinois and Massachusetts, there's little hope for them in the Palmetto State. Pendulums swing in politics, and the national and local mood will swing again, they said.

This week's election, though, does create a perception problem that running as a Democrat isn't viable, McIntosh said. If the party doesn't make reforms, South Carolina Democrats could take a turn toward obscurity.

"I don't think this election fundamentally changes the dynamics of this state," McIntosh said. "This isn't a new normal. This was part of a (national) tidal wave. But the perception is going to make it that much harder to overcome. Unfortunately, we took a step toward (becoming minority parties in) Mississippi and Alabama."

Election strategy

Earlier this fall, Democrats were optimistic while acknowledging that the odds were stacked against them. In the governor's race, they faced a Republican incumbent with a huge fundraising advantage in a year in politics known as when voters scratch their six-year itch - the sixth year of a president's term is historically devastating for those running on his party ticket.

But the 4.5 percent gap that was Haley's margin over Sheheen in 2010 had Democrats doing some quick math. The 60,000 votes he lost by could be made up by targeting voters who voted in 2008 but not 2010, they figured.

They targeted some 350,000 such voters and had one of the most energetic get-out-the-vote initiatives in years, Democrats said. If only a third of those turned out, the thinking went, Sheheen should have a chance.

Election officials' analysis of who went to the polls is not yet available, but Democrats know that many who they thought would go to the polls probably stayed home. Tuesday's turnout was the lowest in 40 years -only about 43 percent of registered voters went to the polls.

Jaime Harrison, chairman of the state Democratic Party, said he wants the party to make sure it is more inclusive in the future. In South Carolina, the Democratic Party is seen as being only for blacks and the GOP for whites, he said.

"That is so far from the truth," Harrison said. "(The Democratic Party is) a party of opportunity. We need to make sure that's the message and that's the image that's portrayed."

Advantage GOP

Republicans also did a lot right.

One strategy was tying state races to polarizing national figures. Republican mailers showed people how to sign up for an absentee ballot and carried messages to urge their party base to do so.

One showed a scowling Obama and his quote, "I'm not on the ballot this fall, but make no mistake, these policies are on the ballot- every single one of them."

Another showed an angry-looking Obama and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and said, "Your ballot will bring America one step closer to reversing the liberal policies of the Obama Administration."

Republican Lt. Gov.-elect Henry McMaster tied his election to Obama at points, as did U.S. Sen. Lindsey Graham.

Democrats saw the strategy as unfair and disingenuous - but effective.

"They know how to scare people, and scared people vote," said Democratic operative Tyler Jones. "And that's what happened."

On the other side, Sheheen did little to distinguish his candidacy, strategists said.

Scott English, a Republican strategist who was chief of staff to former Gov. Mark Sanford and is now a top education administrator, said the Democrat never explained what he was about -what he would differently than Haley.

"When you pose yourself as the alternative you actually have to be an alternative," he said. "Nobody's ever won a race by not being the person who won the job."

The last Democrat to hold the governor's seat, Jim Hodges, ran on establishing a lottery to raise revenue for education. Aside from promising to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, a relatively contentious issue, Sheheen had no such platform.

There are some silver linings, said Democratic Secretary of State candidate Ginny Deerin. Deerin ran a widely-praised, unconventional campaign. She secured endorsements from conservative groups and was good at generating headlines to make up for the fact that she had little money to spend.

She didn't get any closer than the rest of the Democrats, though, but she said that is not necessarily bad.

Deerin said there are more ways to be successful than getting a 'W," adding that her candidacy encouraged women to run, made connections with conservative groups and criticized her opponent in ways that she said will improve the Secretary of State's office.

If Democratic candidates run with those expectations, little by little they can begin to gain voters' trust. And eventually, she said, those wins can come.

"I am feeling victorious," Deerin said.

Reach Jeremy Borden at 708-5837.