Downtown San Jose's newest public art installation -- which looks like a giant dream-catcher out of a science fiction movie -- was activated in front of the San Jose McEnery Convention Center on Thursday night during the expanded center's Community Day Celebration.

Soo-in Yang, an artist and architect based in San Francisco and Seoul, created the piece, called "Idea Tree," and there's more to it than meets the eye. If you're walking beneath or near the piece's tall canopy, you'll hear a mishmash of sounds and words that create a polyphonic poem coming from its centerpiece, which Yang calls "the fruit." The sounds are created by people who leave short messages by speaking into a nearby sound booth, appropriately enough called "the seed."

A new public art installation, "Idea Tree" by artist Soo-in Yang, was activated Oct. 10, 2013, at the San Jose McEnery Convention Center's Community Day. (Sal Pizarro)

At night, the piece will be lit from within by LEDs that will change along with the sound.

San Jose Mayor Chuck Reed spoke into the seed Thursday night at the piece's activation, adding the first public voice to the mix, though I couldn't quite make out what he said.

GOODALL AND GOODBYE: Keri Procunier McLain, who stepped down Friday as executive director of the YWCA of Silicon Valley, had a personal reason to be thrilled that famed primatologist Jane Goodall was the keynote speaker at the last annual luncheon of her tenure. Her daughter, Heather McLain, studied chimpanzees with a colleague of Goodall's and had encouraged her mother to secure her as a speaker for the past several years.

Advertisement

Goodall was often in another part of the United States or another continent advocating for the environment or for chimpanzees, but McLain encouraged event director LaDonna Curteman to keep trying because she thought it would be a wonderful way to wrap up her 16-year career at the YWCA.

Finally, the stars aligned and Goodall gave a fascinating talk at the Santa Clara Convention Center on Thursday to about 1,700 people -- and delighted everyone by bringing to the podium a stuffed monkey called Mr. H, who has traveled around the world with her on speaking engagements.

'CHARISMA' ARRIVES: A lot of local talent went into making "Zero Charisma," a feature film about fans of sci-fi and tabletop games like "Dungeons and Dragons" that won the audience award for narrative film at SXSW. The movie, which opens Friday at Camera 3 in downtown San Jose, was written and directed by Andrew Matthews and Katie Graham, who went to UC Santa Cruz, and produced by Thomas Fernandes, who attended Piedmont Hills High School and UC Berkeley.

There's a premiere party planned for Oct. 19, with an after-party at Blackbird Tavern. And among the revelers, expect to see former San Jose City Councilwoman Margie Matthews -- she's the aunt of Andrew Matthews and the mother of Thomas Fernandes.

QUICK FLICKS: The fifth annual San Jose International Short Film Festival is back at Santana Row, with its opening night event taking place Thursday night at the CineArts theater. Festival founders Bill Hargreaves and Sinohui Hinojosa picked out several selections from the weekend's 120 short films to give the opening-night crowd an eclectic mix of what the festival has to offer.

The red carpet festivities start at 6:30 p.m., with an after-party at Thea Mediterranean. Tickets are available for individual screening blocks, or you can buy them for an entire day or the whole weekend. Get more information at www.sjsff.com.

SCARY GOOD TIME: The fourth annual Broomstick Ball, a fundraising event that includes dinner, music a silent auction and casino games, will take place on Oct. 19, at the Hayes Mansion in San Jose.

Tickets to the 7 p.m. event are $125 each and benefit Silicon Valley Cares, a nonprofit that is providing support this year to the Assistance League of San Jose, Almaden Valley Counseling Service and Live Oak Adult Day Services. Get tickets and more information at www.siliconvalleycares.org -- and you can bet that costumes are being encouraged.

Contact Sal Pizarro at spizarro@mercurynews.com. Follow him at Twitter.com/spizarro.