Christopher Tramantana (left) and David Cecsarini star in Next Act’s “Bravo, Caruso!” Credit: Timothy Moder

By ,

Even before David Cecsarini comes on stage as Enrico Caruso, David Cecsarini the sound designer has already made himself heard in Next Act Theatre's just-opened production of William Luce's "Bravo, Caruso!," which is being directed by Edward Morgan.

Reflecting Caruso's status as a recording superstar, we first hear Caruso's voice. But with no prompting from Luce's script, Cecsarini adds a lonely train whistle and a forlorn foghorn — both symbolizing the sacrifices Caruso made, in keeping an impossible, globe-trotting schedule allowing him to share as much of himself as he did with his legion of adoring fans.

Luce's play catches up with this whirlwind on a night when the health-related consequences of his schedule finally caught up with him.

It's Christmas Eve 1920 at the Metropolitan Opera, where Caruso is preparing for what he didn't then know would be his final performance. Pleurisy and abscessed lungs had resulted in a throat hemorrhage on stage just two weeks earlier; before Luce's play has run its two-hour course, we'll see Caruso coughing blood.

The first notes from Cecsarini's sound design give us the context for this aria; the first entrance of Mario (Christopher Tramantana), Caruso's meticulously dressed valet, gives us our first hint of how the still-not-seen Caruso will sing it.

Mario quickly transforms a Met dressing room into Caruso's home away from home, from the statuette of the Madonna and the picture of Caruso's mother to strategically placed slippers into which Caruso will soon change. The dressing room becomes a sanctuary — even considering the intrusion of two never-seen reporters whom Caruso and Mario are supposedly addressing.

That's the clunky conceit framing Luce's sometimes wobbly script, which also flirts with sentimentality and resorts far too frequently to tired tropes and overused jokes, including one involving Caruso continually demanding that Mario redo the ironing of Eléazar's shawl.

But to an even greater degree than I recall from his first go-around with this play in a 2003 Next Act production, Cecsarini's smart and nuanced presentation of Caruso rises above these scripted shortcomings.

Music may, as this Caruso movingly tell us, be his "paradiso." But whether he is remembering his mother as the lights dim or recounting a dream presaging his own death, this Caruso is preternaturally aware that time is fleeting — and that paradise won't last forever.

Even with Mario working so hard to keep the darkness at bay.

Instead, Tramantana — who is tremendous — himself darkens the glass through which we see his boss. Tramantana's Mario is frustrated and sometimes sarcastic because a man he dearly loves won't take better care of himself.

Mario is, in short, afraid Caruso will die — making us all the more appreciative of the way Cecsarini embodies this legend's fierce determination to live on through his art.

IF YOU GO

"Bravo, Caruso!" continues through Dec. 6 at Next Act Theatre, 255

S. Water St. For tickets, visit www.nextact.org.

TAKEAWAYS

Art Imitates Life: Caruso's final performance was as the Jewish goldsmith Eléazar, from Fromental Halévy's "La Juive." It's a story framed by anti-Semitic violence in the fifteenth century — a world and context seemingly light years removed from Caruso's own. But Eléazar dies because he refuses to renounce his faith and his principles. Ditto Caruso, dead less than eight months after his Christmas Eve 1920 performance — in part because he refused to compromise his faith in art and his consequent commitment to going all out and giving everything, instead of canceling performances and resting. Caruso tells us late in this play that his voice is "cold and heavy" and that he doesn't feel like singing. But sing he will. Sing he must. Sing he does.

Art Demands Perfection: Luce's script makes clear that warm as Caruso could be, he was willing to be less than perfect in life. But from those around him as well as from himself, he demanded precision and perfection when it came to making art.

A seemingly insignificant but illustrative example from Luce's script involves a done-to-death joke suggesting Caruso could be sloppy about details involving numbers and dates; Mario constantly sets him straight. But Caruso has no trouble remembering dates that matter to his art rather than his life, including the precise year in which Halévy's opera is set (1414) or the year it was composed (1835). With details like these, he is as exacting as he is with his makeup, which we see him apply as he speaks with us.

Art as Paradiso: "Music is my paradiso," Caruso says, during one of the show's most moving moments. "When I sing, I forget where I am, who I am." It's a telling reflection — offered at the moment when Caruso is recalling his mother's death and wondering whether he might somehow be reunited with her even though she resides in the great beyond.

It's through art, Caruso suggests in this moment, that he transcends the limits of the self and his finite life on earth, with all its frustrations and disappointments. There's a reason that Luce, to his credit, doesn't overwhelm us in this piece with biographical detail. It's not because Caruso is some happy-go-lucky caricature of an Italian who doesn't take life seriously. Just the opposite: It's because for all the clowning he does, Caruso is deadly serious about his art — even at the ultimate cost of his life.

Roseann Sheridan said it well, in her program notes as director of Next Act's first "Caruso" in 2003: "This play is more than a biographical portrait. It is a story about devotion and dedication — of the artist to his art, and of those who love and support the artist along the way."

Art as Fleeting: For all that, Caruso recognizes that even art is bound by time. His brief vision of reunion with his mother — inextricably intertwined in his account with the act of singing — is ultimately acknowledged to be only a dream.

What came to mind for me in hearing this rueful admission during Friday's opening night performance was Prospero's similar acknowledgment in "The Tempest" that art will no more last than we will; it, too, is ultimately reduced to an "insubstantial pageant," leaving not a trace behind.

Caruso has intimations of immortality through his art. And when Mario hears Caruso sing, he can briefly imagine that death might be vanquished. But under Morgan's dark-hued vision of this play, Cecsarini and Tramantana never let us forget what Caruso and Mario clearly know: Nothing lasts forever. It gives this "Caruso" a gravitas that's not always apparent on the page.

Bravo, Tramantana! Trying to placate a Mario who feels unappreciated, Caruso analogizes to how critics write about him: When he sings well, critics treat the performance as what one expects and simply report that Casruso sang. When he sings poorly, critics pounce. Similarly, Caruso suggests, the fact that he says little to Mario about his service means that Mario is doing a splendid job.

Given his decades of memorable performances on Wisconsin stages, Cecsarini finds himself in a comparable position; we expect him to be solid here, and he is. Moreover, many of us saw Cecsarini's first performance in this same role; he was good then, and we had no reason to think he'd let us down this time. He doesn't.

Conversely, Tramantana has done almost all of his work elsewhere; I don't recall ever having seen him on stage before his star turn in Next Act's recent "Back of the Throat." It's therefore his performance in this "Caruso" that took me most by surprise, in ways that are all good. Informed by Morgan's vision of the play, Tramantana gives Mario texture and depth, making "Caruso" a true two-person play rather than a more singular and simple-minded homage to an icon. Bravo, Next Act for bringing Tramantana to Milwaukee; here's hoping we see more of him in years to come.