More young parents have been able to work part time this year thanks to the Affordable Care Act, which is cutting employees’ reliance on their bosses to provide health benefits, according to soon-to-be-released research.

There’s been an 11% jump in average monthly employment during the first half of 2014 compared with the year-earlier period in the number of young workers with kids who are voluntarily part-time employed, according to a draft of findings by Helene Jorgensen, senior research associate at the Center for Economic and Policy Research, a left-leaning think tank in Washington. That increase outpaces 3% growth in the number of young workers without kids who voluntarily work part time.

“By allowing people to buy insurance through the exchanges and extending Medicaid coverage to millions of people, the ACA also largely ends workers’ dependence on their employer for insurance. This gives tens of millions of people the option to change their job, to work part-time, or take time off to be with young children or family members in need of care, or to retire early,” Jorgensen wrote.

The study examined whether key portions of Obamacare that kicked in this year and expanded health-insurance coverage impacted workers’ choices about how many hours to put in at their job. Employees who no longer need to put in a full day to earn benefits may choose to cut hours.

Among those who voluntarily work part time (as opposed to those who are in a part-time job because they can’t find a full-time spot), the greatest year-over-year employment growth was seen among workers between 16- and 35-years old. Voluntary part-time employment in this group during the first half of the year was up 5% from the year-earlier period, far outpacing other age groups, CEPR found.

Among these young workers, the greater the number of kids, the greater the growth in voluntary part-time employment. Those with one or two children saw voluntarily part-time employment growth of 10% in the first half of 2014 this year compared with the year-earlier period, while those with at least three kids saw growth of 15%.

“Overall the data are consistent with the view that many workers are now able to work at jobs that are more consistent with their family responsibilities as a result of the fact that they don’t need to get health insurance through their jobs,” Jorgensen wrote. “If these results hold up in coming years this will mean that workers are now able to more easily reconcile family obligations with work.”

–Ruth Mantell

Follow Ruth on Twitter @RuthMantell

Follow the Capitol Report blog on Twitter @CapitolReport

Check out these Capitol Report links:

Despite slowdown in hiring, jobs conditions index improves in August

Mortgage gauge hits 14-year low, but that doesn’t mean housing is dead