Advertisement - story continues below

According to a recent poll conducted by the Washington Post and ABC, more than half of all voters believe Barack Obama has been a failure, a full 10 points higher than the number of respondents who labeled it a success.

Nearly four in 10 stated that they feel strongly that the current administration has failed.

When broken down by issue, the areas in which most Americans believe Obama has fallen short become even clearer. While 56 percent disapprove of how Obama has handled both international affairs and ObamaCare, nearly six in 10 think he has botched his response to immigration concerns.

Advertisement – story continues below

Overall, 65 percent responded that the nation is headed in the wrong direction.

Some have predicted that disappointment with Obama will lead to trouble for Democrats across the board in the upcoming midterm elections. Though slightly more than half of all respondents affirmed their opinion on the presidency will not have any bearing on how they will vote in November, more than one quarter confirmed they plan to cast a ballot in opposition to Obama.

The news is not necessarily great for the GOP, either. More than seven in 10 said they disapprove of how Republican legislators have handled their job. Of course, that number is five points lower than those who disapprove of the current Congress altogether.

The poll seems to suggest voters are anxious to find new representatives in D.C., with two-thirds expressing an interest to “look around for someone else to vote for” compared to just 23 percent who plan to support a congressional incumbent.

Advertisement – story continues below

By a slim 46-44 margin, the poll found that voters are more likely to vote for a Democrat in November than a Republican; however, 45 percent believe the GOP will take back the U.S. Senate, while only 40 percent think it will remain under Democrat control.

Four in 10 voters believe there will be no noticeable difference if the controlling party in the Senate changes. Of those who think a big GOP win will bring about changes, though, a majority think it would be a positive shift.

While more voters trust Republicans to actually handle the issues facing the nation, they tend to believe Democrats are “more concerned with the needs of people” like them.

Photo credit: Ron Foster Sharif / Shutterstock.com