Several leading lawmakers are set to speak at a conference on sentencing as Congress pushes a criminal justice reform package.

Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley Chuck GrassleyOvernight Cybersecurity: Guccifer plea deal raises questions in Clinton probe Could Romanian hacker ‘Guccifer’ assist FBI’s probe of Clinton? Senate panel delays email privacy vote amid concerns MORE (R-Iowa) is scheduled to speak Tuesday at the Alternative Sentencing Key Stakeholder Summit in Washington, D.C.

The event, at Georgetown University on Monday and Tuesday, is being hosted by the Aleph Institute, a Florida-based Jewish group that provides religious and humanitarian resources for incarcerated people and their families.

ADVERTISEMENT

Grassley is slated to speak Tuesday at 2 p.m. Sen.(R-Utah) and Rep. Sheila Jackson-Lee (D-Texas) are also expected to address the conference alongside federal judges and state prosecutors.

On Capitol Hill, lawmakers are negotiating how best to reform the nation's criminal justice system.

Bills in both the House and Senate are awaiting floor action. Supporters are looking for ways to win over more Republican support amid concerns from skeptics that the reforms could lead to higher crime.

Discussions at the two-day summit will focus on how to expand effective alternative sentencing policies while keeping the public safe.

"Alternative sentencing has been at the heart of improving public safety and includes successful sentencing, reentry and other fiscally responsible criminal justice policies and programs both in the U.S. and around the globe," the Aleph Institute said in an online overview of the event.

"As the U.S. starts 2016 with commitments from the president and Congress to pass meaningful federal criminal justice reform legislation, the time is right to evaluate the role alternative sentencing can play in furthering the key objectives of public safety and fiscal responsibility."

Senators have a busy week ahead while the House is in recess.

The Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works is scheduled to hold a hearing Wednesday, chaired by Sen. James Inhofe James InhofePaul blocks chemical safety bill in Senate GOP senators propose sending ISIS fighters to Gitmo Overnight Defense: VA chief 'deeply' regrets Disney remark; Senate fight brews over Gitmo MORE (R-Okla.), on some of the most controversial regulations from the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and what role states should play in the rulemaking process.http://1.usa.gov/1QqFF0G

The hearing comes after the EPA scored a win over states that were trying to block implementation of its air pollution rules. Chief Justice John Roberts denied that request. The EPA, though, suffered a set back last month, when the Supreme Court stopped the agency's climate rule for power plants from taking effect while legal challenges move forward.

On Wednesday, Attorney General Loretta Lynch is scheduled to testify before the Senate Judiciary Committee as part of an oversight hearing for the Department of Justice. http://1.usa.gov/1WZZ7mI

Lynch can expect questions on the FBI's fight to force Apple to help unlock an iPhone that belonged to one of shooters who attacked a holiday party last year in San Bernardino, Calif.

Also on Wednesday, the Judiciary subcommittee on antitrust plans to hold an oversight hearing on the enforcement of antitrust laws, where William Baer, the Justice Department's top antitrust official; and Federal Trade Commission Chairwoman Edith Ramirez are scheduled to testify. http://1.usa.gov/1L7rBu1

Lawmakers are set to also press ahead with hearings on the fiscal 2017 budget.

On Tuesday, A Senate Appropriations subpanel is scheduled to hold a hearing on the budget for Customs and Border Protection and Immigration and Customs Enforcement.

Recent stories:

GOP bill to block 'midnight regulations' advances in House. http://bit.ly/1oWwpJ1

Congress appalled as feds lose hundreds of guns. http://bit.ly/1po8mCC

Obama administration bans e-cigarette use on flights. http://bit.ly/1QmGVBY

Dems push SEC on diversity rules for boardrooms. http://bit.ly/1oRFH8v

Supreme Court appears split in abortion arguments. http://bit.ly/1T8JYkL

Chief justice rejects plea to block air pollution rule. http://bit.ly/1Tb2nNY

Lights go out at Supreme Court. http://bit.ly/1ngHGSv

Justice Thomas asks questions from bench for first time in 10 years. http://bit.ly/1oTK97m