FARGO – After Katie and Patrick Lamb had their second child a few months ago, the Fargo couple began looking for a birth control option through their health insurance plan. She assumed that with passage of the Affordable Care Act, contraception would be covered by insurance. Lamb says she was shocked to hear that wasn't the case, because their particular Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Dakota employer group benefit plan is "grandfathered," or exempt, from many of the required changes.

Under their grandfathered plan, contraceptives aren't covered for birth control purposes; only for certain medical conditions—extremely painful menstrual periods, for example.

"It's really frustrating," Lamb said. "I want to get the word out. I imagine I'm not alone," she added.

A grandfathered group plan is one that existed before March 23, 2010, the date President Barack Obama signed the ACA, often referred to as "Obamacare," into law. Under the law, health insurance providers can keep their existing plans as long as they don't make changes that substantially increase costs or cut benefits for plan holders.

According to the federal government's healthcare.gov website, grandfathered plans may not offer the same rights and protections that other plans offer. For example, they don't have to cover preventive care for free, guarantee your right to appeal a coverage decision or protect your choice of doctors and access to emergency care.

Wimmer's Diamonds in Fargo also has a grandfathered plan through BCBS of ND for its dozen or so full-time employees, and co-owner Brad Wimmer says while most seem satisfied with the plan, the company reviews it with a representative annually.

"We kind of have a team meeting to decide if everyone is happy with the situation," Wimmer said.

Bob Lunneborg, controller at Wimmer's Diamonds, says the business periodically gets a quote from another insurance company to see if employees want to make a change.

"Nobody wants to," Lunneborg said.

"They all like what we're doing," Wimmer said. "We make the final decision, but they do have a great deal of input."

Grandfathered plans diminishing

The percentage of employees enrolled in grandfathered group health plans has declined steadily since the Affordable Care Act took effect, according to a survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation, a nonprofit organization that tracks and studies health care trends nationwide.

In 2011, 56 percent of all firms had grandfathered plans, compared to 25 percent in 2015. Small firms with fewer than 200 workers were more likely than large firms of 200+ workers to have grandfathered plans.

Luther Stueland, manager of Group Underwriting and Health Policy at BCBSND, isn't surprised by the decline in grandfathered plans.

"We knew it would be a pool that would shrink," Stueland said.

Each year, Blue Cross loses about ten percent of its grandfathered business due to employers significantly raising copayments or deductibles and thus losing grandfathered status, or to some buying plans from the Blues' competitors, he said. Grandfathered business now makes up less than 50 percent of BCBSND enrollment.

Stueland said Blue Cross has discontinued some of its grandfathered plans on its own.

"Once a plan has an enrollment that's very small, it doesn't make sense to continue it," Stueland said. "We have to ask, is this a viable pool to maintain?"

Stueland says most large employer groups offer non-grandfathered ACA plans, often referred to in the industry as "metallic" plans because of their bronze, silver, gold and platinum levels. However, if a small employer group plan is being discontinued, that business is eligible to choose a metallic plan.

A bronze plan is one where the insurance company pays 60 percent and the employee pays 40 percent of health care costs, while a platinum plan is a 90-10 percent split.

Time for re-evaluation

Katie and Patrick Lamb decided to switch insurance plans about two years ago when he started his surgery residency at the University of North Dakota School of Medicine and Health Sciences. The school pays salary and health insurance premiums for its residents, and since the couple would have the benefit of not having to pay out of pocket, she could cut back on her hours as a nurse and be at home more with their children.

However, word that they'd have to pay the full cost of her chosen birth control option, about $2,000 for an IUD, didn't sit well with her.

"I thought it was something that had to be covered now," Lamb said. "It just doesn't seem fair."

She learned she had no grounds to appeal under her plan, and said she's now waiting for the re-enrollment period to come around to re-evaluate their options.

At Wimmer's Diamonds, they're also going to take a closer look in 2016. Wimmer said he and his wife recently had some preventive care tests done and were surprised to learn they were not covered. He set up a meeting with his insurer for later this month to address that.

Stueland says Blue Cross does cover some preventive services, although there is a member copayment. He said adding more of those preventive services will bring higher costs and people haven't asked for them 'en masse' yet.

"While we believe there are a lot of benefits for preventive services in the long term, it's (hard to justify them) in the short term," Stueland said.

Covered Workers Enrolled in Grandfathered Plans

(2011-15, all firms, large and small)

2011 – 56 percent

2012 – 48 percent

2013 – 36 percent

2014 – 26 percent

2015 – 25 percent

Source: Kaiser Family Foundation