Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

David Irving’s first career stop in Tulsa didn’t last long.

He arrived in June 1980, during one of the hottest summers on record, and in short order suffered a broken thumb and a fractured cheekbone. Then a 28-year-old striker, Irving played in seven games for the old Tulsa Roughnecks, scored three goals and soon moved on to the North American Soccer League club in Atlanta.

Irving said he hopes for a longer stay this time.

The first manager of the new Tulsa Roughnecks, Irving spent much of the past six weeks looking for players to fill out a roster capable of competing in the USL Pro league.

“The level of play is higher than most people give it credit for,” said Irving, a member of the USL Pro Hall of Fame.

“If I had to pick a team of players out of our league to play in MLS, I think we could make the playoffs.”

MLS, or Major League Soccer, is the top tier of U.S. and Canadian soccer. USL Pro is the third tier — roughly the equivalent of baseball’s Double-A — behind a new version of the North American Soccer League.

Irving said he hopes to have a core squad of 10 to 12 players under contract when preseason practice begins in mid-February. The season begins in March.

“We’ve got to make (games) a fun night out,” he said. “We’ve got to score some goals. I don’t like to sit back. I hope we can find enough quality players to be competitive right from the start.”

People to watch in 2015