JEFFERSON CITY — A developing plan for office assignments could move the Missouri Department of Transportation headquarters to the soon-to-be-empty St. Mary’s Health Center building, freeing space in the agency’s building adjacent to the Capitol for lawmakers or their staff.

Last year, lawmakers set aside $38 million for the stated purpose of building a new headquarters for MoDOT. The language controlling that money is flexible enough to renovate existing space if available, Budget Director Linda Luebbering said. The plan for using the money or the space in St. Mary’s has not been finalized, she said.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

Gov. Jay Nixon in January announced he would seek $10 million to renovate a portion of St. Mary’s for use by Lincoln University. Discussions of how to use the rest of the property now include possible space for Linn State Technical College and MoDOT.

“The broader issue I think is all too fungible” to discuss a firm plan, Luebbering said.

SSM Health Care, which owns St. Mary’s, is building a new hospital in southwest Jefferson City to replace its current facility near Highway 50 and Missouri Boulevard. House Budget Committee Chairman Rick Stream, R-Kirkwood, and Senate Appropriations Committee Chairman Kurt Schaefer, R-Columbia, both said they have been briefed on the ideas.

“Every year we have new projects that come forward that frankly supersede what we passed last year, or what we thought was needed last year,” Stream said. “In this particular case, St. Mary’s Hospital, they want to give it to the state. … We are in discussions with the governor’s office on what exactly we would like to do, what the timeline is and what the cost is.”

The current MoDOT headquarters is 112,000 square feet at 105 W. Capitol Ave. It houses many MoDOT administrative offices and the hearing room for the Highways and Transportation Commission but does not have enough space for all central functions, said Roberta Broeker, chief financial officer.

The department did not ask for a new headquarters building and will be able to work in renovated space if a move occurs, Broeker said.

“It is one of those grand dreams that everybody could be together in one place but that would be a real economic challenge to the state,” she said. “We think this will all work out now but don’t know because it is all moving parts.”

State finances are easing as the economic recovery continues. Lawmakers appropriated $50 million for repairs and renovations of buildings in the Capitol complex, but Luebbering said that money will be consumed almost entirely by stonework and window replacements.

The most crowded Capitol office areas are assigned to Democratic House members. The last time legislative office space was expanded, offices for about 20 junior members were stacked in a mezzanine level on the first floor. The offices are tiny and inaccessible to some people with disabilities.

Removal of current Capitol tenants to the MoDOT building or to space leased last fall in the U.S. Post Office building will provide room for accessible offices, Schaefer said. Other areas of the Capitol also need work to meet modern accessibility standards under the Americans with Disabilities Act, he said. No elevator in the Capitol can accommodate a gurney in the event of a medical emergency, Schaefer said.

“It is going to take that additional space to make the Capitol ADA compliant,” he said.