Buy Photo Chelsea Clinton, center right, meets attendees following a rally in support of Hillary Clinton in Poughkeepsie Sunday. (Photo: Geoffrey Wilson/Poughkeepsie Journal)Buy Photo

Chelsea Clinton touted her mother, Democrat Hillary Clinton, as the only presidential candidate who can continue President Barack Obama's work, and slammed her mother's political opponents during a rally in Poughkeepsie Sunday.

The younger Clinton received a standing ovation from a packed room of around 100 supporters at the Civil Service Employee union's office in the Town of Poughkeepsie.

Clinton told those in attendance for the "get out the vote" event that her mother plans to continue Obama’s efforts at expanding health care and the Affordable Care Act. Clinton also took a shot at her mother’s opponent for the Democratic nomination, U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont, who spoke in Poughkeepsie last Tuesday. The two will vie for delegates in the New York primary on Tuesday.

"When we look at health-care reform or any other issue really, my mom is the one who has the strong track record of actually being able to make a difference," Clinton said.

READ MORE:Planned Parenthood CEO explains support of Clinton

Chelsea Clinton framed a number of ways in which her mother differs from Sanders, accusing the Senator's campaign of being too focused on simply finance reform, and noting Hillary Clinton's record on gun control.

The daughter of former President Bill Clinton also cited Sanders and Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump, who was likewise in Poughkeepsie for a rally Sunday, in saying both misunderstand how the presidency works and the need for compromise.

"It matters to me that my mom understands how to make government work on behalf of our values when in office and when out of office," Clinton said, adding that "(Hillary Clinton) didn't let the perfect be the enemy of the good."

Buy Photo Chelsea Clinton takes questions from the audience at a Poughkeepsie rally in support of Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton Sunday. (Photo: Geoffrey Wilson/Poughkeepsie Journal)

Shifting her focus squarely on the Republican Party, Chelsea Clinton discussed abortion rights — "A woman's right to chose is at the core of our human rights and what should be equity in our country," she said — and blasted the rhetoric used throughout the Republican primaries, which "isn't representative of the country I want my children to grow up in."

"The racism, the sexism, the Islamophobia, the homophobia, the anti-immigrant rhetoric, the anti-worker's rights rhetoric, the rhetoric against Americans with disabilities — the list goes on and on and on," Clinton said.

The upcoming presidential election, Clinton said, is the "most important" in her lifetime.

During a lighter moment that sparked laughter, Chelsea, pregnant with her second child, was asked by a supporter if she would live close to the White House if her mother is elected president, so Hillary Clinton can see her grandchildren.

Chelsea Clinton's stop in Poughkeepsie marks a return to Dutchess County. She married her husband, Marc Mezvinsky, at Astor Courts, an estate on River Road in Rhinebeck, on July 31, 2010. She also appeared in Kingston on Sunday.

"The Clintons are very much a part of the state and this area," said Poughkeepsie resident Connie McLaughlin.

Nicholas Dedring, of Beacon, came up to volunteer for Hillary Clinton and said his biggest concern is division in the Democratic Party.

"We need civility and unity among the people we fundamentally agree with," Dedring said.

Geoffrey Wilson: gwilson@poughkeepsiejournal.com, 845-437-4882, Twitter: Geoff_LW

Read or Share this story: http://pojonews.co/1NhbhaN