Katie McGinty is looking to make history in the fall. The former environmental adviser to President Clinton and chief of staff to PA Governor Tom Wolf is running to unseat Pat Toomey and become Pennsylvania’s first female senator.

In an interview with Pittsburgh’s Action News 4 on Friday, McGinty spoke about her excitement at the prospect of making Pennsylvania history.

McGinty should be excited — we all should. In 2012, the number of women in the Senate reached a record high, 20 out of 100. While that doesn’t exactly make the Senate a bastion of gender equality, even that small improvement has made a difference.

In 2013, it was the women of the Senate who led the effort to reopen the government following the shutdown. While Ted Cruz was reading Green Eggs and Ham on the floor to filibuster Obamacare, the women of the Senate were leading a bipartisan group to do the people’s business, leading John McCain to joke that “the women are taking over.”

And thank goodness. As Senator Susan Collins said of the struggle to come to agreement on the budget in 2012, “I think if we [women] were in charge of the Senate and of the administration, we would have a budget deal by now,” adding, “with all deference to our male colleagues, women’s styles tend to be more collaborative.” Sen. Claire McCaskill agreed: “By nature we are less confrontational and more collaborative,” McCaskill said. “Not only do we want to work in a bipartisan way, we do it.”

McGinty, the ninth of ten children, was the first person in her family to go to college. Now, as an executive who has run a $100 million business and a public servant who has run a major White House office, she has focused her campaign on supporting working families. Her message has resonated, with endorsements from EMILY’s List, Sen. Bob Casey, President Obama, and Vice President Biden. She is supported by senators like Kirsten Gillibrand and Jeanne Shaheen, who said, “Katie’s spent more than 20 years shattering glass ceilings.”

We’re all for that. With Hillary Clinton on track to win the Democratic nomination, 2016 is shaping up to be a year of shattering glass ceilings at every level.

(AP Photo/Matt Slocum)