The University of Michigan Health System had a good 2014-15 fiscal year, announcing that the organization had a surplus of $86.9 million, or 3.2 percent, on its $2.66 billion budget.

The previous year, UMHS ended with a $17.3 million surplus, or 0.7 percent, while the margin was just 0.1 percent two years ago.

Tony Denton, the acting chief executive officer and chief operating officer of U-M Hospitals and Health Center, presented the numbers to the Board of Regents during a Thursday, June 18, public meeting.

Denton said the positive financial performance was due to "strong patient volumes" and" high levels of engagement of physician faculty, nurses and support staff" at the health system's locations.

"We are very pleased with our fiscal year 2015 results. Our talented and dedicated people are the difference," Denton said.

Denton said the boost was helped by the health system's new Northville Ambulatory Health Center, the Adult Emergency Critical Care Center and the new operating room capacity for adult patients.

The regents also approved the UMHS's 2016 proposed budget of $2.9 billion. Officials said they expect an even greater surplus this year, with a target 4 percent margin. The margin is based on increased patient activity and more "effective management to reduce the rate of expense growth."

UMHS Chief Financial Officer Paul Castillo said the health system's leaders are continuing to work on providing high-quality care while still containing cost growth.

He said the Affordable Care Act had an impact on clinical operations and financial health during the past year. The percentage of care paid for by Medicaid increased more than one percentage point, to 16.24 percent. That contributed to a decrease in uncompensated or "charity" care.

In the 2014 fiscal year the Health System provided more than $152 million in uncompensated care, while that number is expected to drop to $110 million by the end of the 2015 fiscal year.

"We can be very proud of achieving our financial target. We plan to continue to focus on adding value while improving operational efficiencies in the coming year," Castillo said.

The approved budget comes just weeks after the Health System confirmed with The Ann Arbor News its plans to cut about $13 million from its budget over the next two years.

UMHS, with more than 22,000 employees, is about seven months into a two-year "value margin improvement effort" in which the network is focused on improving clinical capacity, improving efficiency and growing revenue, among other efforts.

"While our financial position is strong, like any well-run organization we continue to look for ways to manage costs and increase our contribution to our financial margin. Among our efforts are work teams in several parts of the health system (that) are looking at ways to work smarter," said Mary Masson, a spokeswoman for UMHS.

Masson said no immediate plans call for job cuts within the health system, but if there is a reduction in staffing it will likely be from attrition.

Jeremy Allen is the University of Michigan reporter for The Ann Arbor News. Follow him on twitter at @JeremyAllenA2. Contact him at 810-247-4625 or jallen42@mlive.com.