A conservative super PAC that spent more than $4 million last year to oppose Sen. Jeanne Shaheen’s successful re-election campaign is setting its sights – and money -- on a potential 2016 U.S. Senate match-up between Gov. Maggie Hassan and incumbent Kelly Ayotte.

Rove-backed group to begin airing radio ad blasting... The State House budget battle is prompting a second out-of-state conservative group to take to the airwaves to criticize Gov. Maggie Hassan for her threat to veto the Republican-backed spending plan. More

WMUR.com has learned that the Ending Spending Action Fund on Wednesday will announce “Commitments Kept NH,” an effort it says will include an aggressive grassroots component and a “multi-million dollar, multi-platform paid media effort, including television, radio and online advertising.”

The chief consultant for the project, veteran Republican strategist David Carney of Hancock, said the super PAC’s spending on the Senate race will likely surpass last year, particularly if Hassan is Ayotte’s Democratic opponent.

The effort is being launched after two conservative issues advocacy groups attacked Hassan in television and radio ads this month.

"Washington Republicans are clearly terrified that Kelly Ayotte is going to lose," said New Hampshire Democratic Party spokesman Aaron Jacobs, "and they should be."

"All the dark money in the world can't hide the fact that as Ayotte continues to focus on playing the Washington game and looking out for her special interest backers, she's completely turned her back on the people and business of New Hampshire," Jacobs said.

Ending Spending Action Fund, founded in 2010 by former TD Ameritrade chairman Joseph Ricketts, spent $22 million in the 2014 election cycle, according to the Center for Responsive Politics’ OpenSecrets.org website.

The super PAC became involved in the New Hampshire U.S. Senate race early in 2014 with television advertising urging Republican Scott Brown to run against Shaheen.

During the bitter campaign, Ending Spending aired several ads attacking the Democratic incumbent on issues, including the Affordable Care Act. At least two ads attacked Shaheen over her and her husband’s personal wealth, prompting the Shaheen campaign to demand that they be taken off the air.

Working with Carney in a joint general consulting role is his partner at Norway Hill Associates, James McKay.

The executive director of “Commitment Kept NH” is Andrew Demers, who was the national director of voter contact for former U.S. Rep. Ron Paul’s 2012 presidential campaign and political director for Sen. Rand Paul’s 2010 U.S. Senate campaign. Demers headed the Republican National Committee’s absentee ballot program in 2008.

Carney told WMUR.com Tuesday night that the first television ad of the effort will begin airing “right after the Fourth of July weekend.” He said a grassroots field program is already underway, training activists, organizing field staff and going door-to-door. A website, CommitmentsKeptNH.com, was launched on Tuesday.

“We have been working to identify people who vote in presidential years but don’t vote in mid-term elections,” he said.

Presidential elections in New Hampshire have for many years been highly successful for Democrats up and down the ticket. To try to counter that trend, Ending Spending said its new effort will “utilize the best technologies to identify, persuade and turn out right-of-center voters in 2016.”

Carney said that while Hassan has not yet said whether she will run for the U.S. Senate next year, Ending Spending Action Fund is operating under the assumption that she will.

“We don’t know what the governor will do, but we are being prepared and will continue the project regardless of what she does,” Carney said. “We plan to focus on her as the main opponent right now, and if she were not to run, we’ll continue in support of Sen. Ayotte.”

He said he expected spending on the effort to at least match last year’s $4.5 million in spending on the Shaheen-Brown race.

“We’re starting earlier, so it could be more,” Carney said. “It will depend on the environment. And since it’s a presidential campaign year, advertising will probably cost more than last year. We intend to spend what it takes to accomplish our mission.”

“New Hampshire is a state that prides itself on grassroots politics," Ending Spending president Brian Baker said. "This program, run by a New Hampshire-based team, will take grassroots politics to the next level by using the latest tactics and technology to speak directly to the voters. Keeping Kelly Ayotte in the United States Senate is a priority and this project is an important first step.”