I was glad to stop by Pines of Sarasota this week, where national dementia expert Teepa Snow led two days of training for caregivers. I've maybe seen her speak a dozen times now, and I always learn something new.

This time she was telling folks who look after their loved ones how important it is that they get out of the house — even though dementia can give rise to behaviors that don't always play well in public.

For these potential embarrassments, Snow has come up with what she calls "companion cards" — little notices you can slip to a restaurant host or store manager that might help smooth over a rough time.

"I'd like you to know my companion is living with a form of dementia," the business-sized card reads. "Please know their behavior and ability is a result of brain change due to the effects of dementia. I apologize in advance if something said or done might surprise or distress you. Sincerely ..."

You can steal the idea and make your own cards — she won't mind — or order a pack of 50 for $10 at teepasnow.com.

LONG LIVE LEMURS

Lots and lots of aging research news items clog my email queues and Twitterfeed. I would have to live forever just to read through all these attempts to crack the longevity code.

But mention lemurs and you have my attention.

Duke University tells the story of Jonas the lemur — the oldest of his kind, as far as anyone knows — who died in January, just five months short of his 30th birthday.

Dwarf lemurs live two to three times longer than similar-sized animals, so of course they're being studied for clues. These hamster-sized lemurs pack a secret weapon — the ability to put their bodies on standby mode. A study of the correlation between this hibernation and longer lifespans, even in captivity, was published in the March Journal of Zoology.

Can this mean that, despite all the advice to keep moving to stave off the ravages of age, there could be hope for us who prefer the state of suspended animation known as curling up with a good book?

"How long the animals live and how fast they age correlates with the amount of time they spend in a state of suspended animation known as torpor, the data show," says the Duke press release. "Hibernating lemurs live up to 10 years longer than their non-hibernating cousins."

In order to access this benefit as a couch potato, though, it seems you'd have to develop some swami skills. Hibernating dwarf lemurs apparently reduce their heart rate from 200 to eight beats per minute, while their breaths come farther apart and their thermostats unplug.

"Everything gets slower," says study co-author Sarah Zehr, a researcher at the Duke Lemur Center.

Co-author Marina Blanco suggests that that torpor could be protecting lemurs' cells against the kind of oxidative wear and tear that happens when they move and breathe.

"If your body is not 'working full time,' metabolically speaking, you will age more slowly and live longer," she said.

Unfortunately, scientists have not yet discovered a way to make torpor compatible with earning enough money to afford that longer lifespan.

HAPPY BOOMDAY

We keep hearing this amazing statistic: U.S. baby boomers are turning 65 at the rate of 10,000 a day. Makes you almost feel sorry for the folks down at the Social Security office.

When that birthday rolls around for you, check out the Florida Department of Elder Affairs' wonderful program SHINE — Serving Health Insurance Needs of Elders — where volunteers provide free, confidential guidance on Medicare and other related health insurance.

SHINE reminds us that when you're new to Medicare, you can enroll during the seven-month period (birth month plus the three months before and after) surrounding your 65th birthday. For more information, call (800) 963-5337, or go to floridashine.org.