Topics: Books, Editor's Picks, Fleetwood Mac, Lindsey Buckingham, Mick Fletwood, Music, Peter Green, stevie nicks, Entertainment News

The Mick Fleetwood pictured on the back of his new memoir, “Play On: Now, Then and Fleetwood Mac,” looks fabulously content. This is the rock star as elegant dandy, stylish in tails, draped in an accent of gold jewelry, a trim white beard. It’s an advertisement for the good life, if not living right.

Crazy, isn’t it? Because the Fleetwood on the cover has a wicked gleam in his eye, as he peers out from under a rakish hat, hair down around his shoulders. This is the Fleetwood of the mid-t0-late ’70s, the drummer whose band was re-energized by the arrival of Lindsey Buckingham and Stevie Nicks, who recorded 1975’s “Fleetwood Mac” with “white powder peeling off the walls of every room” in the studio.

But the madness was only beginning: The relationships of Buckingham and Nicks, along with John and Christine McVie, were unraveling amidst angst, affairs and mountains of cocaine. “Rumours” chronicled the dissolution of it all, selling tens of millions of albums worldwide. They were among the biggest bands in the world, and they lived every moment of it to the extreme. “The drugs of course were plentiful,” Fleetwood writes, “and we partook of the finest Peruvian flake quite a bit, both to numb the pain and to find the energy to persevere.”

Even grander extravagance followed, and I don’t just mean “Tusk.” Their contracts required fleets of limos to be available on demand. Nicks and McVie wanted their hotel rooms freshly painted in specific colors before they arrived; Nicks also required a white piano. Cocaine was measured out to the entire touring party after the show — “everyone who lined up got their packet” — at a specific announced time in each city. “It was fabulously expensive, wonderful and sometimes depraved,” he admits.

The hits, of course, have fueled presidential campaigns and never gone away. Even the albums you think you know are studded with gems. The albums get discovered and rediscovered and continue to influence new generations. (Note to anyone in high school, or ahem, later than that, who I made of fun for loving them, from behind the righteousness of my Smiths shirt: Sorry about that!) And the five-piece band from those iconic albums is now back together and touring into next year — Fleetwood calls it a “victory lap” in the book, so you might check it out while you can — but he also reveals that the band is working on new material.

All of this, of course, is the stuff of great rock memoir, and “Play On” doesn’t hold back on the stories behind the songs or the dramas on the road and in the studio. Fleetwood is also deeply reflective on the relationships he sacrificed to the band, whether as a father, a husband or a son. We talked last week in New York. There was only 20 minutes and he gives long answers. The interview has been lightly edited and condensed for clarity.

You have had a very outgoing, friendly persona in this band, and yet you also reveal yourself here to really have been a difficult person to live with, to have been married to — it’s a revealing, intimate book, but perhaps the person who comes off the harshest is usually you.

I think it’s fairly evident that I’ve discovered I like to be liked. If I had to fall down on a weakness, I’d prefer that to be one of them. But you can go too far the other way, which became evident working on the book. There were times where I caused problems by not speaking enough and just thinking like some child that everything is always going to be okay. After some quiet reflection, that felt like unbelievable naiveté.

How important — and difficult — is it to put all these relationships straight? The band seems to be back in a place where people are friendly and functioning and happy, reunited with Christine again, but you also go back through your personal relationships and marriages, which were difficult and affected by drugs and drinking. You took the rock lifestyle seriously, you loved it, and picked the road over family. Perhaps you found a family of sorts on the road, but when faced with actual family choices, you usually chose yourself.

Yes. It’s really good to hear that people are going straight to the reveal — I wanted to take responsibility, and not get too heavy, and, “Oh, I’m the worst person in the world, and I’m sorry,” and all this stuff. But I wanted to be open and that it’s OK to run yourself down a bit, because you need to own certain things. If it feels really personal, well, that’s really, really, really what I wanted to do.

The word you often use in the book is the “lifestyle.” And there are times when you’re selfish, maybe even cruel, all in the service of that lifestyle.

It was hard to do, but it was OK. That’s going into a whole other… that could be a bit of stepping up on a podium or something, but I’m quite changed from about four years ago. I went back and I started drinking again, and my relationship with my now ex, Lynn, we were unhappy. There was no relationship going on with her or myself, we just weren’t developing as people, and I look at some of that in terms of slipping into my old drinking habits — not by any means back to where I used to be when I was in my 20s or something, but it wasn’t cool, and I wasn’t able to listen. And that’s painful.

Winston Churchill’s line over the years was always something like “I’ve gotten more out of the gin that the gin has gotten from me.” Christopher Hitchens always echoed that as well.

Oh, yeah. Yes, yes, yes.

So if one was to substitute cocaine for gin, or wine — do you feel you’ve gotten more out of the drugs and the drink than it took from you? I don’t mean to romanticize it, but you all made some landmark albums under some sustained influences. But there were personal consequences as well.

No, I understand. But it’s part of, God knows, this band’s legacy. And majorly with me. Stevie’s been very outspoken about her journey, and you know, I think a lot of that is always romanticized … especially because we were really quite naive and we were very overly open about probably too much. In retrospect, that’s okay, because I think people really identify with the vulnerability, with the realness. None of this stuff is fabricated, but having said that, by being an open, slightly naive book, I think we did pay the penalty of being aggrandizing — and the war stories became completely untrue, the proportions of the depravity and God knows what.

But there’s nothing you can do about it. I would say that, having prefaced that, I’m damn lucky I never killed anyone when I was driving or any other thing. Emotionally and socially, in terms of relationships with family, those are real not good marks. Lots of love, but that lifestyle definitely took a toll. Again, I’m not sitting around whipping myself, you know, with fish hooks and stuff about it, because you’ve just got to move on and take responsibility.

How about the music?

The music and the fun, I’m loath to say, I don’t think was impaired at all for a while by our lifestyle. The whole of “Rumours” — I doubt there was one track that I ever played on that I wasn’t high. It sounds OK to me.

Could it have been done otherwise?

I’m sure it could have, you know, but it wasn’t. And that’s the age-old fascination of looking back. I still enjoy my wine. But I stopped drinking for 14 years, and then I went back and started, you know, drinking too much. Now I drink moderately and I think, I think, we have that all in line. I truly believe that. I’m also very leery about it, because the great thing is now, you can’t go on living like that. You won’t be alive. I’m enjoying being fit. And being able to play and be conversive with my 13-year-old, nearly 13-year-old daughters, and not have to turn around 10 years later, and say, I’m sorry I read you so many fairy tales drunk that you couldn’t understand me. You know, it’s not cool.

So there’s a bit of both, and I’m not hedging answering you, but we’ve already gone into something that’s romanticized; it’s something that actually turned really shitty. So you’re reining yourself in, and yet here I am, doing what we originally did by being, I think, completely open and frank, and as we were back in the day. And you pay some form of a price maybe for doing that. Now, it’s A-OK, because we have a much better perspective, or certainly I feel that I do.

I think it’s reining yourself in. There is definitely some romance to the war stories, you know — it’s literally like war stories, where you go, “Well, I know the guy was a hero.” The hero eventually says under his breath, “Well, yeah, I did do pretty good, and I did haul three people on my back actually — but they think I hauled 40 on my back now. And I didn’t.”

Well, one thing that’s true with all these war stories is that you held people together. What people forget sometimes when talking about mythological rock and roll stories is that there are very real people and very real human emotions attached. One of the essential roles you play, time and again in this book, is to hold the band together, hold people together, when they were fractured or emotionally drained and perhaps not in the right mind to do the kind of work that had to be done.

Well… I think there were moments — they’re not too many — and I haven’t ended up like Scrooge, where you mutter, “What have I done?” and you wake up in a cold sweat in the middle of the night and go, “I should have let the whole thing just go, and no one would have had all this trouble.” So I’m OK with that. I really am OK with it. In a humorous moment or two, I go, “Wow, I never looked at it like that. Maybe that wouldn’t have happened.”

That’s interesting — you mean you have thought that you might have saved people some pain if you had simply cared less about keeping the band together? There’s a story in here about seeing a devastated Lindsey Buckingham in the studio, morose and distraught, and you laid it out to him: “As a musician, you’re either in a band or you’re not, and he needed to decide which he wanted to be.”