Johnnie: I have taken the roundabout on Martin Street near Ken Pratt many times. When I am leaving the shopping area on the north side (Best Buy, etc.) and trying to circle the roundabout and head north on Martin, I have nearly been broad-sided more times than I care to remember. Cars coming off Ken Pratt totally fail to yield before entering the circle and just zoom through as though they have the right of way.

Today I was in the circle and three cars zoomed through the yield sign and nearly hit me. I had to circle a second time to avoid getting run into. This happens way too often. I wonder if the city could put larger yield signs, or do something to make drivers more aware they are to yield to cars already in the round-about? — A Northbound Driver

Northbound Driver: The yield signs at this roundabout are hard to miss. There's one on each side of the street, each with another sign that says "to traffic in roundabout." The pavement is marked, too.

The problem, it appears, is drivers who choose to ignore the signs or who are confused about how roundabouts work.

I checked with city traffic engineer Bob Ball about this particular intersection. He said that he could recall only one or two complaint calls about that roundabout, and that those were not long after it opened in the summer of 2010. In fact, he said, there's been only one accident — a rear-end collision — at that intersection since it opened.

Still, he noted in an email, "some drivers along busier approaches to a roundabout think they have priority over the lower volume approaches."

That can happen on Martin when northbound traffic arrives in groups from the Ken Pratt traffic signal just to the south. "So when these groups of traffic arrive some drivers may just follow each other into the roundabout without yielding," Ball said.

Despite signs that clearly state they should yield to traffic already in the roundabout, northbound motorists enter the Martin Street roundabout in front of a car, at left, that had just left the Best Buy parking lot in Longmont on Saturday afternoon, Dec. 4, 2015. The white car at left waited five to 10 seconds while a line of cars that had just turned onto Martin from Ken Pratt Boulevard rolled northbound through the roundabout. (Johnnie St. Vrain / Longmont Times-Call)

In fact, when I stopped by Saturday afternoon to take a look at traffic in the roundabout, that's exactly what I saw. A motorist who had just left the Best Buy shopping center parking lot had to yield while a line of cars headed northbound from Ken Pratt Boulevard rolled past her as if they had the right of way.

Ball said that the traffic engineering department will look at "a minor striping modification that should help some."

(And I trust that traffic cops are reading this, too.)

Hello Johnnie: I hope that you are having a wonderful holiday season!

This is Edwina Salazar of the OUR Center. I want to clarify that the OUR Center does not collect used toys and dolls. We do have a "Warm and Cozy" program that works with donors to provide items of warmth such as blankets to individuals and families who are struggling during the holiday season to maintain their utility payments. Potential donors may phone Elaine Klotz, development director, at 303-772-5529, ext. 225 or email her at elaine@ourcenter.org.

Thanks for your service to the community through your column! — Edwina

Hello Edwina: Thank you for the clarification (it didn't look to me like you accepted "well-loved" toys for children), for information on how local residents can help those who are less fortunate, and especially for the work you do in our community.

Readers, the OUR Center refers families to Kindness for Kids for new toys for Christmas. You can learn more at www.kindness-for-kids.org.

Send questions to johnnie@times-call.com.