Topics: Infidelity, Life stories, Love and Sex, Life News

It was Gina who put the affair in my mind. We’d gone out for drinks the night before. After two glasses of wine, Gina admitted she wouldn’t mind having one. We were in this little Brooklyn Heights, N.Y., bistro with red-checkered tablecloths.

“That is, if the man was European, and he went back to his own country after a couple of lovely afternoons together. Maybe he could be French.” Gina sipped her pinot.

I agreed I’d like to have an affair. “I mean, in the vaguest possible sense with the most generalized of men,” I said. “Not with a real man who exists, mind you. I don’t want to have an affair with someone who gains weight or doesn’t pick up after himself. A European gentleman sounds nice to me, too.”

The next day, I happened to be on the second floor of my building to sign up for Lunchtime Toning and Stretching. I had been spending too much time writing about the world’s latest earthquake at the relief organization where I worked, and I was ready to get back on an exercise regimen. I also knew it was the floor that Dag worked on, so I poked my head into his office to say hello. (Dag is not his name, by the way. I changed his name, along with others, to protect his identity.) I’d met Dag a few weeks before, when our sons had a play date at my house, and we discovered we worked in the same Upper West Side office building. Not long after, he’d called me and we’d lunched in the cafeteria together.

“Oh, this is a pleasant and welcome surprise,” he said when he saw me. He leaned on his R’s, kind of like Sean Connery, although he wasn’t Scottish or Welsh. He was some non-English speaking European, Swiss or Dutch. Not French, I thought.

He leaned back in his chair with his arms folded behind his head. A very inviting and open posture. He was clean-cut, boyishly good-looking in a Tim Robbins kind of way.

“I just had to sign up for exercise,” I said. “I thought I’d stop in and say hi.” I tried to look relaxed as I took a seat. I realized my hands were cold, so I sat on them. “I didn’t know if you’d be in your office. You travel, right?”

“Oh, I go to Mystic one day a week. I told you that, right?”

And that was it. My mind was already off and running: Why does he keep telling me about Mystic? Is that where he wants to have our liaison? Mystic sounds very romantic. Did he mention it for some reason? Mystic, Mystic: Is it code for something? I could get away one day a week, couldn’t I?

“Do you have to spend the night away?” I asked.

“No, I go back and forth by train,” he said.

I was deflated. How silly of me. There was no deeper meaning to Mystic. I wasn’t going to have an affair on the commuter train. I wished Gina had never opened her mouth last night.

“Your office seems kinda empty,” I said. His son’s artwork hung up on the wall — a rainbow.

“We’ve just moved in. And we’re moving the rest of the staff here. From Mystic.” He leaned forward and looked into my eyes when he said it.

There it was again. That same sly, flirty tone. Oh, all right already. Mystic, it is!

I mean, Dag and I should be friends at least. We had a lot in common. We both had wild 7-year-old sons. We both worked for Christian relief organizations in the same building. We were both totally burned out and sick of our work.

We had bonded on that point for the whole 45 minutes at the cafeteria. That day, Dag was talking so close to me that my friends looked over quizzically from a nearby table, as if to ask, “Who are you talking to? And why are you talking so close?”