Having seen countless kids get enrolled in music lessons at Miller Music, owner Seth Miller said that young ones, around 5 years old or so, typically start on piano or vocal, even if they express an interest in the guitar.

For many reasons, especially finger strength and the weight of the instrument, 5-year-olds simply can't handle a guitar, he said.

"Typically they've got to wait until they're 7 or 8 right now, and they can start out with a fractional classical guitar, which are nylon strings," Miller said. "It makes it a little easier for them to press down on the strings."

Aaron Burch puts one of his guitars on Jade Maddox during his music workshop on Saturday. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

But that's about to change, Miller said, with the introduction of the Rock and Roll High Guitar, designed and built specifically for kids. As of Saturday, Miller Music became one of only two retailers in the country to carry the Rock and Roll High Guitar, although more will come later.

Rock and Roll High is a band camp for kids in California, and Seth Miller's shop was chosen early thanks to his relationship with its founder, Aaron Burch.

They met when Miller was working in real estate in California, before he moved to Longmont to take over his late father Ken's store, which is now in its 40th year.

"He actually taught me how to sail on a sailboat," Miller says of Burch.

"I met Seth through a mutual friend and he and I struck up a friendship," Burch said. "He's just been a huge help along the way."

Burch said he came up with the idea for the guitar after recognizing some of the struggles his students were having. He contacted noted guitar designer Paul Janowski and they decided to invent their own.

The result debuted in public on Saturday at Miller Music, where Burch led a group of kids through a three-hour clinic playing the Rock and Roll High Guitar.

The five practiced, including a singalong with Burch of The Clash's "Should I Stay or Should I Go" as they played the special guitars he'd helped design.

Showing up for the clinic, according to Heather Fausnaugh, Miller Music's academy director, were: Alura Fausnaugh, 12; Cheyanne Maddox, 11; Jade Maddox, 8; Jadelyn Rehder, 7, and Millie Springer, 5.

"These young ladies are going to form their own band," Burch said.

The youngsters' morning was to include writing of their own song, recording it, and then performing it for friends and family members at the conclusion of the clinic early Saturday afternoon.

"The quality of the components is definitely a factor," Burch said in describing his guitar's advantages. "The weight is drastically lighter than anything else on the market.

"Another thing we're really proud of on the guitar is the input jack placement. Kids would break their input jacks all the time."

The guitar also comes with what's called a "zero fret," which is a fret at the top of the neck, next to the headstock, that's not used for playing but is critical to both helping keep the strings in tune on the shorter necked-guitar and making it easier for very young fingers to press down on them to form chords.

"You typically don't see a zero fret until you get closer to the $1,000-range guitar," Miller said.

He and Burch have met at the past couple of National Association of Music Merchants — NAMM — conventions, where Burch has updated Miller on the progress of the guitar. He said Miller's input both on the design of the guitar and how to bring it to the retail market have been a huge help to him.

Miller said he has urged Burch to keep the price under $300, and Burch said Saturday that the retail price will be $249.

"There's a lot of things in the guitar world that (manufacturers) really neglected for children, and Aaron saw that need and corrected those things and solved those issues," Miller said. "I'm really excited."

Times-Call staff writer John Fryar contributed to this report

Contact Times-Call staff writer Tony Kindelspire at 303-684-5291 or tkindelspire@times-call.com