Topics: Editor's Picks, Mysteries, Psychology, Research, Science, Innovation News, Technology News, Life News

“In Art there is only one thing that counts;

the thing you can’t explain.”

— Georges Braque

It drives you crazy — sends you down dark alleys, around blind corners. The sense of mystery, that dangling unknown, opens your heart and mind to twisted possibilities, even the desire to prove beyond a shadow of a doubt that you do understand this world. There’s nothing new here.

That promise of a doubt leaves you suspended between reality and unreality, a space described by saying: “Well, maybe?”

It’s the sweet spot of consciousness. In art and literature it’s called suspense. As you chase down solutions, trying to figure out the mystery, your mind embraces new thoughts. You examine the problem from a different perspective, challenge yourself to think outside the proverbial box. As one graffiti artist said:

“Think outside the box, collapse the box,

and take a fucking sharp knife to it.” ­

— Banksy

And slashing it up drives you onward. British neuroscientist Daniel Bor, author of “The Ravenous Brain,“ says that, “Human brains have an extreme form of consciousness: they’re ravenous for new innovative solutions to problems in the world, ravenous for optimizing our lives, for building pyramids of knowledge.”

Paint-on Electronics: The Twisted Noodle Mystery

Dr. Jinsang Kim of the University of Michigan imagined high-performance micro-electronics that he could paint onto whatever he wanted. Working with a full research team and rigid, rodlike polymers, he hit a snag. Dr. Kim needed the polymers to follow the direction of his strokes like paint follows a paintbrush. But his polymers weren’t cooperating.

“I imagined aligning logs on a river — along the flow direction of [that] river,” said Dr. Kim. But he hit a major problem. “Once logs are bundled together into a raft they cannot be aligned along the flow direction because a raft does not have a large enough aspect ratio.”

His team tried giving the polymers a little twist. It was an elegant, logical solution but that only made the polymers behave like sticky, curvy noodles. Instead of painted-on high-performance circuitry, they created a a clumpy mess. But the “failure” drove the team on.

“Research is always challenging,” Dr. Kim said. “I haven’t seen any research effort give perfect results right away. We learn from failures and come up with better ideas … As usual we had partial success. We analyzed the results and came up with alternative designs. Once we built modified designs we became very curious to know the results from the new ideas. Unceasing curiosity is our driving force to achieve interesting novel material systems.”

Dr. Kim’s team came up with three systems that helped the superconducting polymers to align with brush strokes, including one that gave his logs little arms to help them self-assemble along the proper flow lines.

“From this imagination and analysis,” he explained, “we design polymers in such a way that they can attract each other to be self-assembled but not attract each other too much.”

After much experimentation, the polymers aligned along the brushstroke and Dr. Kim’s team painted their first transistor this spring. After imagining a goal, then pushing through several design problems, grasping for solutions where none seemed to exist, the team made paint-on electronics a reality and shared their results with scientists all over the world. Their breakthrough could redesign our whole relationship with electronics.

Everyday Extreme Consciousness: The Challenge and a Brown Idea

We all have the ability to enter the aforementioned sweet spot of consciousness, we just need a mystery or challenge to throw ourselves into suspense. The human brain doesn’t enter that state until faced with a need to solve a problem, to make sense of that one little fact contradicting the others or figure out why that singular object is out of place.