Taxpayers have more options than ever to complete their federal tax returns. Tax experts advise taxpayers to consider their individual situation and the complexity of their returns before choosing an option.

Taxpayers can choose to fill out paper returns available at a variety of locations, including public libraries, they can purchase online software to file returns, they can take their information to a tax professional and some taxpayers can receive help from the Internal Revenue Service to file returns.

Thomas Parish is a CPA who operates a local accounting firm, ATC Services. He said taxpayers who only have a simple W2 form and who don’t itemize their deductions can do just fine on their own or with online tax preparation software. Taxpayers with more complicated finances – income from rental homes, business income, investment income, etc. – need the services of a qualified professional.

“Many, many times I have saved a client enough tax by using my 30 years of experience to more than pay my fees for the next five, ten or twenty years,” Parish said “There is also the risk of audit and if you are audited you’ll feel much better if that return was prepared by a professional that can deal with the IRS in your place. If you have a business or rental property or get a 1099 for income it’s a no-brainer that you need an expert to make sure you don’t pay too much tax. I wish I had a dollar for every time someone told me they wished they had come to me years ago.”

When taking taxes to a professional preparer, Parish urged taxpayers to use discretion when choosing a provider.

“There are tax filing companies that will flag you down as you ride by and those that will help you buy a car with your refund,” he said. “Those generally are there to get a lot of returns out in bulk and their preparers tend to have much less experience. I don’t know the specific numbers but I’d easily say that CPA’s returns for individuals are audited much less than for those who just work in the business two or three months a year.”

Alejandra P. Nunez Castro, an IRS spokesperson, said the IRS offers some free help to taxpayers who meet certain income thresholds.

For taxpayers who earned less than $54,000 last year, the IRS Volunteer Income Tax Assistance program can help. Under the VITA program, IRS-certified volunteers will help qualifying taxpayers prepare their tax returns at no charge. To find a VITA site, go to irs.treasury.gov/freetaxprep.

The IRS has also partnered with several tax preparation software providers to offer free help to people earning $62,000 or less (https://apps.irs.gov/app/freeFile/jsp/index.jsp?ck). Even if you make more than $62,000, you can file your taxes for free online using the service’s free fillable forms (www.irs.gov/uac/Before-Starting-Free-File-Fillable-Forms). Taxpayers using this option will need to know how to do their own taxes.

For older taxpayers, the Tax Counseling for the Elderly program provides help for people ages 60 and up. The program specializes in tax issues relevant to older taxpayers, such as pension and other retirement income. To find a site, visit irs.treasury.gov/freetaxprep.

Nunez Castro said that even if you are unable to pay your taxes, it’s important to file a return to avoid failure to file penalties. Failure to file penalties are often much harsher than failure to pay penalties.

With regard to changes in filing requirements, the Affordable Care Act is adding some additional paperwork to preparing your tax return.

“We have been in a slow period of tax change for a few years now. The biggest recent changes are the filing requirements for the Affordable Care Act,” Parish said. “Those changes can be a headache for people that file their own taxes and weren’t covered by health insurance the whole year.”

Parish also noted that for taxpayers who electronically file their Alabama state income taxes, the driver’s license information for both the taxpayer and the spouse must be entered on the Alabama return.