Good old Tom Friedman has a question he'd like to ask the various Republican candidates tomorrow night.

"As part of a 1982 transportation bill, President Ronald Reagan agreed to boost the then 4-cent-a-gallon gasoline tax to 9 cents, saying, 'When we first built our highways, we paid for them with a gas tax,' adding, 'It was a fair concept then, and it is today.' Do you believe Reagan was right then, and would you agree to raise the gasoline tax by 5 cents a gallon today so we can pay for our highway bill, which is now stalled in Congress over funding?"

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Silly Tom Friedman. The answer to your question will be, "Overtaxed! Socialism! Benghazi! I Am Reagan and I disagree with earlier Me."

However, Friedman's heart is in the right place, so we'll help him out. The staff of the shebeen has developed personalized questions for each of the 10 candidates in tomorrow night's Main Event. (The unfortunate souls in the JV contest all will be asked the same question: "Are you in it for the money?") Here we are.

Most Popular

Jeb (!) Bush: In 2003, you intervened in a private family matter in contravention of a state law that had been enacted several years earlier. How many life-and-death decisions are you preparing to make for individual American families after you are president?"

Scott Walker: Why do so many of the people who work for your campaigns wind up in jail?

Chris Christie: Do you still believe that so many people in New Jersey won't vote for you for president because they want you to remain governor? If so, have you sought professional help?

Marco Rubio: Whatever happened to that immigration-reform bill of yours? Is it buried in the backyard, under a rake?

Mike Huckabee: Please explain, in detail, how an arms deal with Iran is similar to the doors of a crematorium?

John Kasich: Please explain, in detail, how a Balanced Budget Amendment would have allowed the United States to win World War II. Please show your work.

Ben Carson: Please explain, in detail, how is the Affordable Care Act like slavery—specifically, illustrate the similarities between the Middle Passage and a Bronze-level plan.

Rand Paul: How long have you been afflicted with invisibility and is it a chronic condition?

Ted Cruz: What if I want sausages with my waffles instead?

Donald Trump: Dude, seriously?