Democrats Accusing Republicans of cutting programs for students while giving tax breaks to the rich GOP schooled on education politics

This story is part of an ongoing POLITICO series on how national policy issues are affecting the 2014 midterm elections.

Republicans thought this would be the year to make education their winning issue. The plan was simple: Talk up the GOP’s support for school choice — including vouchers to help parents pay for private school — and win the hearts of moms everywhere.

Story Continued Below

It hasn’t worked out like that.

Instead, in Florida, Kansas, Michigan, Pennsylvania and elsewhere, Republicans are on the defensive about education. It isn’t usually a top-tier concern for voters, but Democrats see issues such as college affordability and K-12 funding as their best chance to motivate the on-again, off-again voters who often sit out midterms.

“The plethora of education messages hitting races at every level is unprecedented,” said Karen White, political director for the National Education Association, which plans to spend as much as $60 million this cycle. “I really do believe it’s the perfect storm around every officeholder in the country.”

Just this week, the NEA’s political action committee went on the air with two new attack ads: One accuses Arkansas Senate candidate Tom Cotton of seeking to cut student loan programs. Another blames Hawaii gubernatorial candidate Duke Aiona for budget cuts that closed K-12 schools on Fridays for months.

And there’s more to come.

( Full coverage: All Policy Is Local series)

Democrats’ top targets are “drop-off voters” who are ambivalent about casting ballots next month. They include hundreds of thousands of young adults, single women and minorities in key battleground states. In testing messages that might push them to the polls, Democratic strategists have found that education plays extremely well.

Accusing Republicans of cutting programs for students while giving tax breaks to the rich motivates diffident voters more than similarly partisan messages on reproductive rights, the economy or health care, veteran Democratic political strategist Celinda Lake found in a series of focus groups and polls.

Lake’s research, commissioned by MoveOn.org, included a survey of 1,000 Democratic voters who said they weren’t sure they’d bother to vote in the key states of North Carolina, Michigan, Kentucky, Colorado and Iowa. Coupling the education theme with talk about the middle class falling behind was “nearly a slam dunk with these targets,” Lake wrote.

Democratic strategists James Carville and Stan Greenberg came to a similar conclusion after polling 2,200 likely voters in battleground states. They found that unmarried women in North Carolina and Georgia were particularly swayed by messages about expanding access to early childhood education. In Iowa and Colorado, affordable college loans hit the mark. Combining those issues with an appeal to raise the minimum wage, they wrote, creates a “powerful, populist opportunity to shift the vote.”

( Also on POLITICO: The GOP's new take on pre-K)

Republican strategists aren’t exactly quaking.

Christine Matthews, a partner at Burning Glass Consulting, has spent a lot of time this fall studying women in battleground states. Yes, they care about education. But it’s hardly top-of-mind, she said, in an election season brimming with frightening headlines about terrorist threats, health threats and even threats to the security of the White House.

“These women are very unsettled about what’s happening in the world right now,” Matthews said. “They’re feeling a distinct lack of confidence in President [Barack] Obama’s leadership and the way the country is going.”

She advises Republicans to focus on national security, border security and the economy.

Democrats and their allies, however, are trying very hard not to let Republicans stay in that comfort zone.

( Also on POLITICO: Under GOP, education plan could stall)

The NEA, the nation’s largest teachers union, has run TV ads in several battleground states, including a Spanish-language spot targeting Republican Senate hopeful Cory Gardner in Colorado and two scorching attack ads against Kansas Gov. Sam Brownback.

The union also plans to mail hundreds of thousands of fliers this month with positive messages about how their favored candidates would lower class sizes, keep student loan interest rates low and invest more in education. And, in a more personal touch, NEA members are mailing thousands of handwritten postcards to friends and neighbors reminding them to get out and vote. The front of the postcard offers a further nudge, printed on bright yellow: “Our Community. Our Children. Our Future. Vote Nov. 4.”

The American Federation of Teachers is also playing big this cycle. AFT President Randi Weingarten said the union plans record expenditures of more than $20 million. One in-your-face initiative: a Tumblr page called “you got schooled” that regularly calls out Republican leaders for policies the union believes hurt students and teachers. This week, the AFT bought airtime in Philadelphia for an ad blaming Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Corbett for problems from “old textbooks to outdated equipment to overcrowded classrooms.”

But it’s not just teachers unions talking education. Democratic candidates are emphasizing the issue, perhaps none more than Sen. Kay Hagan in North Carolina, who even ran radio ads on the subject specifically targeting African-American voters. Environmental groups and women’s groups are also running education spots.

Even unionized steelworkers canvassing for Democrats have learned that education resonates. When they knock on voters’ doors, they might talk first about the need to boost construction jobs by investing in infrastructure — but then they’ll pivot to college affordability.

“Almost everyone has a child, a grandchild or maybe it’s themselves trying to pay back student loans,” said John Shinn, director of United Steelworkers District 4, which covers nine states and Puerto Rico. “It’s a big issue.”

Political analysts say the focus on education is clearly having an effect, based on the number of Republican candidates scrambling to address the issue when they’d rather be talking about the economy or Obamacare.