Jenna Tosh, CEO of Planned Parenthood of Greater Orlando, is leaving her post after nearly three years. She's moving to California to lead the Planned Parenthood of Santa Barbara, Ventura and San Luis Obispo counties.

Her last day is Friday and she begins her new job on Feb. 9. Tosh started at Orlando's Planned Parenthood on March 2012.

Under Tosh's leadership, the Orlando office opened a $2 million clinic in Kissimmee in 2014, which spurred protests and break-ins.

Later, a judge issued a temporary junction barring abortions and some other procedures from being performed at that clinic. An appeals court eventually lifted the injunction.

Martha Haynie, board chair of Orlando's Planned Parenthood and Orange County Comptroller said in a statement that the board is contracting with Planned Parenthood of Southwest and Central Florida to manage the office for now.

"During the next few months, the Board will be working to select the best next step for PPGO, continuing our forward momentum to ensure that women and families in Florida have access to necessary healthcare, and that Central Florida can continue to rely on us as they have for the last 20 years," Haynie said in a statement.

In a phone interview on Wednesday, Tosh talked about her time in Orlando and her future plans:

How would you sum up your time here?

When I accepted this role, I was determined to increase the size and impact of this organization to best serve our community and we've done that. Over the past years, Planned Parenthood of Greater Orlando has effectively prepared for the Affordable Care Act by implementing electronic medical records and enhancing our sophistication with insurance billing and contracting.

We've also expanded our educational programs. Our partnership with Orange County public schools has effectively reduced the incidence of teen births here in Orlando, and this past year we opened a brand new health center in Osceola County, a community which previously had no access to Planned Parenthood's high quality health services.

What was the most challenging part of your time here?

This is a challenging time for health care generally. The health-care landscape is changing very rapidly with the advent of the Affordable Care Act. While it's been a great opportunity for us to serve our patients, it's required a lot of us as health-care providers to really be sure to position our selves for the patients and the community we serve.

What's your proudest accomplishment here?

I'm most proud of the team I've put in place together here. We have really caring nurses, top-notch doctors, fantastic administrative, fundraising and education staff. And we've accomplished a lot together. I'll be sad to leave my friends and colleagues in Orlando but I'm proud to leave the organization in great hands.

What are your plans in California?

California has its challenges and opportunities. While there is more access to health care and stronger partnership with the state, Medicaid reimbursement is quite low, which is a challenge.

But there's also a lot opportunity, because it's a much more supportive political environment, which means it's the opportunity and I think the responsibility to set the standard for reproductive health care. California was the only state last year that actually expanded access to reproductive health care by allowing qualified mid-level providers to provide early abortion care. So I think there's a lot of work that can be done in California to really push forward the reproductive health agenda for the country.