Please enable Javascript to watch this video

AURORA -- Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, a 2016 presidential front-runner and the de-facto leader of a Democratic Party eager to distance itself from the current president, urged Coloradans to support the Democratic ticket during a rally here Tuesday afternoon.

Clinton told a ballroom full of supporters that Gov. John Hickenlooper and U.S. Sen. Mark Udall are effective leaders with proven records.

Clinton, who could pick Hickenlooper as a running-mate should she run for president in 2016, touted his performance as governor, noting that the state's economic recovery "speaks for itself."

She also made a strong case for Udall, who is fighting hard to stave off a formidable opponent in GOP Congressman Cory Gardner, portraying Colorado's senior senator as a "work horse," not a "show horse" who is focused on getting on cable TV news.

"He's got a big heart and spine of steel," Clinton said. "His work may not make a lot of headlines, but it makes a huge difference in the lives of all of you," Clinton told the crowd at the Radisson Hotel Denver Southeast.

Clinton, who was in Denver to raise money for Udall just last week, also offered a lengthy defense of the Democrats' campaign focus on women's issues, which the Denver Post editorial board, in its endorsement of Gardner, panned as "insulting."

In response to the editorial's assertion that women's reproductive rights are a settled matter that Udall was merely trying to use as a political wedge, Clinton argued that access to abortion and birth control is under attack like it hasn't been in the 41 years since Roe v. Wade.

And she implictly went after Gardner, drawing a distinction between his position -- or positions -- on personhood and those of Colorado Democrats on this year's ticket.

"These Democrats will never support the so-called personhood laws that would outlaw common forms of birth control and ban abortions even in cases of rape and incest," Clinton said. "And I'll tell you something else they won't do: they won't tell the people of Colorado one thing about personhood and tell their colleagues in the Republican House of Representatives the exact opposite thing about personhood."

Gardner, after disavowing Colorado's personhood initiative just weeks after launching his Senate bid, remains a sponsor of the federal Life at Conception Act, which supporters, opponents and independent fact-checkers all deem to be the exact same thing.

Clinton also took aim at Gardner's proposal to repeal the Affordable Care Act, which covers contraception without a co-pay, and to make birth control pills available over the counter.

"These Democrats will never deny women health insurance for contraception for women and then just tell them to buy it over the counter without even wishing them good luck in paying for the bill, because our Democratic leaders understand that access and affordability go hand in hand," she said.

Clinton also pushed voters in Aurora to support Andrew Romanoff, who is trying to unseat Republican Congressman Mike Coffman.

"Wouldn't it be nice to have someone who knows how to get things done?" she said.