Starting today, Tuesday, May 24, West Virginia residents older than age 21 may carry a concealed weapon within the state without a permit.

Starting today, Tuesday, May 24, West Virginia residents older than age 21 may carry a concealed weapon within the state without a permit.

Three West Virginia fire departments will receive more than $887,000 in federal grants for equipment upgrades.

Three West Virginia fire departments will receive more than $887,000 in federal grants for equipment upgrades.

West Virginia House of Delegates Finance Committee Chairman Eric Nelson had a dire prediction for the future of the state’s budget plan after the House killed a proposal to raise the state’s tobacco tax. “We put (the state’s $270 million deficit) on the rainy day (fund),” said Nelson.

West Virginia House of Delegates Finance Committee Chairman Eric Nelson had a dire prediction for the future of the state’s budget plan after the House killed a proposal to raise the state’s tobacco tax. “We put (the state’s $270 million deficit) on the rainy day (fund),” said Nelson.

The secretary of the Libertarian Party of West Virginia and the party's candidate for the office of secretary of state is angry that Libertarian candidate David Moran is being excluded from a proposed debate between Democrat Jim Justice and Republican Bill Cole.

The secretary of the Libertarian Party of West Virginia and the party's candidate for the office of secretary of state is angry that Libertarian candidate David Moran is being excluded from a proposed debate between Democrat Jim Justice and Republican Bill Cole.

RUSTY MARKS / The State Journal — David Moran, newly-nominated Libertarian Party candidate for governor, speaks to the crowd at the nominating convention in Flatwoods.

RUSTY MARKS / The State Journal — David Moran, newly-nominated Libertarian Party candidate for governor, speaks to the crowd at the nominating convention in Flatwoods.

A bill that would repeal the prevailing wage was advanced to a third reading with the right to make amendments in the West Virginia Senate Feb. 11.

Senators said they wanted to reach a compromise before passing the legislation, which would eliminate prevailing hourly wage requirements for the construction of public improvement projects.

“We've been working on some provisions of the bill we can get some agreement to,” Hall said. “We're trying to fix the issue of whether it's falsely inflated or not.”

Sen. Daniel Hall, R-Wyoming, said prevailing wage is about being smart with the state's money.

“We are working on those issues, and I would think we'll be ready by tomorrow for a vote,” he added. “We can always lay it over another day if we need to.”

Previously, and when the bill was first introduced, several groups stood against the measure. A policy analyst group, West Virginia Center on Budget and Policy, released a study as to why repealing the law would be a bad idea.

West Virginia's prevailing wage has been in place since the 1930s and provides a minimum wage and benefit level for construction workers working on public projects.

Sean O'Leary, fiscal policy analyst with the WVCBP, said evidence shows the state's prevailing wage law is “not only a good deal for the state's construction workers, but for the taxpayers as well.”

O'Leary said states with or without prevailing wage have no difference in construction costs, and workers being paid a higher wage means the job will be done efficiently.

However, Republican lawmakers have said the wages should be up to the free market.

Construction workers and unions also have spoken against the bill.

The West Virginia Democratic Party said it has circulated two petitions to “fight back” against what it is calling the GOP's war on hardworking West Virginians as well as the Republican Party's “attack” on more than 170,000 West Virginians by taking aim at their health care obtained by the Affordable Care Act.

“With the extreme, radical Republican agenda that includes repealing prevailing wage, making West Virginia a “right to work” (for less) state, statewide regulation of health care that risks over 170,000 West Virginians of their health care, and many more attacks on hardworking West Virginians, it's time to fight back,” said newly appointed West Virginia Democratic Party Chairman Belinda Biafore. “They are taking money out of your pockets, safety out of your workplace, and the ability to provide for your family out of your home.”

The petitions have been circulating throughout the past week and have obtained nearly 2,000 signatures, the party said.

"The new Republican leadership has launched its attack on West Virginia families, and over 170,000 West Virginians are at risk of losing the health care they were able to obtain through the federal Affordable Care Act," said Senate Minority Leader Jeff Kessler, D-Marshall. "We are talking about access to health care for families and children who the Republican leadership is putting at risk. That's radical, reckless and wrong. We are standing with the hardworking West Virginia families and fighting back against this extreme right-wing agenda that is gutting the quality of life for West Virginians."

Kessler also called on West Virginians to come the Capitol Feb. 16, Presidents' Day, to "show up and stand up" against the Republican agenda that is risking too much for hardworking West Virginia families.

Previously, Republican lawmakers said time was being wasted not passing more legislation.

“This bill, if passed, will create jobs in this state,” Sen. Charles Trump, R-Morgan, said about the prevailing wage measure earlier this month. “Mr. President, people of West Virginia are waiting; they've been waiting for generations. The time to act is now. The time for delay is over.”

A vote is expected on the measure in the Senate Feb. 12, with Republican senators saying they will take all recommendations from the Democrats to come to a compromise.