Michael Nixon is on a mission from God.

A journey beginning while a student at Florida State University, and that's taken him all throughout the state of Florida.

And in front of a packed congregation at St. Dominic Catholic Church Sunday, hundreds saw the priest take his next step forward by becoming the parish's new leader, after being installed as its third pastor in almost 50 years.

"To be the pastor it's an honor, but it's also a real joy because the people here are so welcoming and so encouraging," Nixon said. "It's definitely a legacy and a great consistency in the priests that have been involved in the parish."

For Nixon's mother Jean, Sunday marked a day of accomplishment for her son, who she says had been wanting to pursue Holy Orders since he was little.

"From a young age, actually five years old or so, Mike seemed to have a calling to the priesthood," Jean said. "We encouraged him, but he pursued that on his own. So, this was really a fulfillment of what his vision was I think for his life from a very young age."

Now 32 years old, and the youngest pastor in the Diocese of Pensacola-Tallahassee, Bishop Gregory Parkes says the move assures the future of the parish is in good hands.

"I think that's just an expression of my confidence in him to be a good priest, to be a holy priest, to be a passionate priest about the gospel, to preach the gospel at all times, and to help others come closer to Jesus Christ," Parkes said.

According to Nixon, he'll hope to provide energy to sustain his passion, while spreading the word of God.

"One thing that people might say is that I have a lot of enthusiasm," Nixon said. "I definitely bring joy and enthusiasm to what I do, because I love what I do. If I had 100 lives to live, I would choose to be a priest every single time because it's an amazing life."

Nixon has served at St. Dominic for about two years.

He follows Father Pete Zalewski who served as pastor at the church for about 15 years, before being re-assigned to Blessed Sacrament Catholic Church in Tallahassee.