Into the Mind: Bob Trent, media relations director for Alliance Defending Freedom, weighs in on the practical side of freedom.

Rev. Clyde Reed, pastor of Good News Presbyterian Church in Gilbert, puts up a sign a day after the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in his church's favor against the Town of Gilbert (Photo: Alliance Defending Freedom)

What exactly does Alliance Defending Freedom do?

Alliance Defending Freedom is an alliance-building legal organization that advocates for the right of people to freely live out their faith. Recognizing the need for a strong, coordinated legal defense against growing attacks on religious freedom, ADF launched in 1994.

Over the past 20 years, we have brought together thousands of attorneys and like-minded organizations that work tirelessly to advocate for the right of people to freely live out their faith in America and around the world.

You won the Gilbert church signs case. What other high-profile cases have you handled?

Most of our cases deal with protecting the sanctity of life, freedom of conscience and religious liberty. We handle each as if they were high-profile cases because they protect Americans' most basic freedoms of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.

Right now we are handling a number of cases in which the government is telling our clients to either give up their deeply held beliefs or face jail time, huge fines and massive fees. Pastor Reed's case is really one of freedom of speech, and we have won a number of cases in which schools and universities have tried to limit student speech because the message was unpopular.

Recently we have taken on the fight against government coercion of churches, ministries and family business owners to subsidize abortion through Obamacare mandates. For more information, people can go to www.alliancedefendingfreedom.org.

Is there a common theme in your cases?

Freedom in the United States begins with the First Amendment of the Constitution, which recognizes our freedom to speak, believe and live according to our conscience. Alliance Defending Freedom wins cases that protect the First Amendment for all Americans. Most often we protect it from the encroachment of government.

What does the Fourth of July mean to you?

Bob Trent, media relations director for Alliance Defending Freedom (Photo: handout)

The Fourth of July celebrates our declaration as a people that we are all created with freedoms endowed by our Creator. On July 4, 1776, our Founding Fathers announced their intention to create a completely new form of government that derives its power from the consent of the governed. The primary use of that power would be to protect the inherent freedoms of the people, not for the government to limit them. In a time of kings and tyranny, this was a revolutionary idea.

Where would you rate the state of freedom in the U.S. today? What is its greatest threat?

Court decisions and bad laws can certainly be a threat to freedom, but the greatest threat is when Americans forget what freedom is and allow it to slip away. Right now, it seems too many people are bystanders as one group or another tries to elevate its own freedom and belief at the expense and submission of others.

What is the best assurance that freedom will stand?

The best assurance that freedom will stand is for Americans to remember that their own freedom is dependent upon allowing others to live and act according to their beliefs.

Freedom is both a blessing and a responsibility that we all share. Not enough people take the time to understand the God-given nature of our freedom and government's role in recognizing and protecting it.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1M0exSI