Let couples pay surrogate moms

McLean, Va.: Thank you for bringing attention to an important piece of legislation (“Gay rights advocates fight to lift ban on paying surrogate moms,” Jan. 15). Not only will this bill help gay couples build their families through surrogacy, it will also open this family-building option to all New York couples who are diagnosed with infertility and choose to use a gestational carrier to build their family.

Why would someone with infertility need a gestational carrier to have a baby? Perhaps cancer has taken a woman’s uterus, she has abnormalities of her reproductive organs, or she suffers from another health condition where pregnancy would negatively impact her health and well-being.

Just because she lives in New York State, gestational carrier surrogacy is not open to her and her partner, nor do the current laws provide all the protections necessary for the intended parents, gestational carrier, and most of all, the newborn child. Barbara Collura, President/CEO, RESOLVE: The National Infertility Association

A poem for Martin

Bronx: Martin Luther King has long been at rest. He joined Kennedy, Lincoln and all of the best. St. Peter can’t say, “You’re not allowed here, ’cause you’re black and we’re white.” No segregation up there. When we’re destined to die, we all die the same. Regardless of color or poorness or fame, we all end up buried in one way or another. So remember this, mister: You are my brother. But how can you know resentment if you weren’t born black? Has a man ever told you, “Hey, you, get to the back”? King had a vision that someday this would cease, and his children would live in a world full of peace. For some people, I know, this is hard to conceive, but some day men will be judged not by color but deed. Catherine Santarpia

Not child’s play

Brooklyn: Some call pre-K for 4-year-olds “taxpayer-funded day care.” As a recently retired Education Department pre-K teacher, I’d like to know where they “learned” this information. I taught reading, writing, math, science and social studies. I taught music and art. I was required to meet pre-K Common Core learning standards. Rigor was the buzzword. The students learned to sit, raise hands and participate in lessons — no easy task for 4-year-olds. (Did I mention that most children in each of my classes were non-English-speaking students?) Perhaps we expect too much, too soon. By the way, by the time the 5-year-olds get to kindergarten, there is practically no time for play. Gail Seif

A Bill of goods

Astoria: Bill de Blasio has to be the first person to win an election promising to raise taxes! I’m not in the upper crust, but I’ve seen enough waste in this city to know that it needs to be eliminated before anyone is taxed any further. And before any money is spent on pre-K for 3- and 4-year-olds — who belong home with at least one parent, enjoying just being a kid — the city should use some of those funds to clean up the streets. Tale of two cities? You bet it’s been that. How do billion-dollar apartment towers get built with 25- and 30-year tax abatements? Vincent Scaldaferri

Where’s the outrage?

Brooklyn: After reading all the fuss about Gov. Christie’s “mistake,” I wonder why the same fuss is not made about the pack of criminals in Washington who take money from anyone with a cause, give themselves pay raises, waste our money, etc. Where are the calls for impeachment? Leslie Hulkower

Get over it

Jamaica: To all you Voicers: You cannot compare Gov. Christie’s job to President Obama’s job. Christie deals with the state of New Jersey, and Obama works for all people in the United States. I wish you all would get over Fast and Furious, Benghazi, IRS and the Affordable Care Act (which some of you are calling Obamacare). You all need to get a life and help poor and middle-class Americans. Let Christie’s fate be in the hands of the courts and attorneys. Soon the truth will be told. Obama is trying to help all the people in the United States, not just the rich. Charlene Black

O Captain! My Captain!

Douglaston: I can’t believe Tom Hanks was not nominated for best actor for “Captain Phillips.” What a disgrace! He did a superb job. I guess a great performance by a really decent guy doesn’t cut it in Hollywood. Irene Hughes

Pot, meet kettle

Baldwin, L.I.: S.E. Cupp makes good points about marijuana and gun control policies (“Pot could put progressives in a tough spot,” Jan. 7). But while the theory that less control leads to more safety is iffy when speaking about guns, it’s quite true for marijuana. With legalization, many users may stop because they only sought the edgy, rebellious rush that came with smoking the illegal substance. Another benefit is the taxes to be raked in. As long as there are specific regulations and restrictions, like age and general mental and physical health, I don’t see a real downside to the legalization of marijuana. Celeena Carrington

Why?

Forest Hills: Why was Myls Dobson awarded to his father, who had a rap sheet of 13 arrests? Why didn’t the judge notify the Administration for Children’s Services or give the child to a grandmother or aunt or uncle? Why did this stupid father give his child to a woman he barely knew? Did she enjoy starving and beating him? Was she on drugs? She deserves to be in prison for life. Didn’t someone see the child out on the balcony in the bitter cold, and if so, why didn’t they call the police? What is wrong with the people in this world? Lillian Zimmerman

When?

Staten Island: My heart goes out to little Myls Dobson and any family member who actually cared about him. I wonder how long it will be before the family announces a multi-million-dollar lawsuit. Keep in mind, this is the same family that was not too concerned about the welfare or whereabouts of this poor child until he died. John L. Patane

Black-and-white TV

North Massapequa, L.I.: In a commercial for the movie “Ride Along,” a black man makes fun of white people. A satellite TV commercial depicts a riot scene with looting; the looter is an elderly white man who then gets mugged by, that’s right, another white man. An insurance company commercial shows a house break-in where two people are stealing property; not one but both robbers are white. If any of these situations were reversed, there would be outrage, apologies and community activists holding press conferences. The political correctness has gotten ridiculous. James Jacobs

An education

Manhattan: I’m confused. If rent is charged to some charter schools, will this mean less money goes into Eva Moskowitz’s pocket? Also, the Daily News compares charter school test scores and public school test scores on a regular basis — but don’t they have different populations? For example, some lower-performing students don’t last in charter schools but have to be taken in by public schools. Does this not skew the data? Mitch Chaitin

Horse sense

Bloomfield, N.J.: Why hasn’t anyone considered the condition of the city’s mounted police animals? Can their housing and work conditions be much different than those of carriage horses? They walk the same streets, and I am sure, if there is good reason, they are called upon to work unusually long hours. Fred Naturale

Baby boom

Manhattan: Voicer Frances Villardi’s belief that God made man and woman so they could procreate is narrow-minded and archaic. With more than 7 billion people on this earth and a baby being born every 8 seconds, our earth is already bursting at the seams. As far as I see it, gay people are doing us all a favor! Mas Ichida

It is written

Brooklyn: To Voicer Sarah Alboher, who has wondered all her life why Jews do not celebrate Christmas: Perhaps you should be asking yourself why Christians do not celebrate all of the Jewish holidays, as Jesus himself did. Jesus was a real historical person, who was born, lived and died as a Jew in the land of Israel during the Roman occupation. His name was actually pronounced “Yeshua,” and his followers, who were also Jewish, called him “rabbi.” He lived a Jewish life from the time of his birth to his last Passover seder — which you know as the “Last Supper” — and he tried to teach others how to do the same. So why do we, as Christians and believers in Jesus, not follow his example? Daniel Colón