I just got this e-mail message from a reader:

"You won't believe this, but the telephone # for Obamacare is 1-800-F..K YOU (I-800-382-5968). It looks like our Washington finally got something right. Don't believe it? Take a minute to call before they figure out what they've done."

Sure enough, when I tried the number I found this really is a number that will get you through to Obamacare.

At first I thought some wise guy inside the administration did this on purpose as an inside joke. Or perhaps, it was a coincidence and some computer nerd with way too much time on his hands matched the letters to the numbers.

Then I discussed it with one of my fellow op-ed guys at the paper, Jim. Jim told me that this is an old internet joke. He also told me that the number actually leads to a sex hot line.

I did a search and came up with this piece on Salon Oct. 4 about how the right-wing media began this base canard. it also said the number leads to a sex hot line.

I decided to try the number again. Maybe I misheard the message the first time.

Nope. When I followed the instruction to "Dial 1 for Obamacare," I really got the Affordable Care Act telephone line. After I worked through the menu a bit, the representative I got was quite helpful. He explained to me why my prior attempts to log in to the infamous Obamacare website didn't work: The software sucks.

He didn't say it in those exact words, but that was his drift.

When I called Jim back again, he theorized that the owners of the sex line must have gotten tired of all the crank calls. So they just forward the serious ones to Obamacare. He suggested I try dialing No. 2.

I did. It did indeed lead to the sex hot line. Unfortunately you can't get a live human being on that line without submitting a valid credit-card number, which is about the dumbest thing a human could possibly do.

So I didn't get a chance to ask just how that link to Obamacare was made.

But it's there and it works. Talk about life imitating art! This is the best example of that phenomenon I've ever seen.

It's pretty funny - unless of course you actually have to get health insurance under threat of a fine.

In that case, it has the ring of truth.

UPDATE: It looks like the fun is over. When I checked the site Thursday the No. 1 choice was to proceed to the porn site. No. 2 is now a message telling the caller to call the official number for the Obamacare.