Bachelor of Arts in computer science enrollment going 'berserk'

Alexandra Okeson, a sophomore in computer science, uses the whiteboard and her computer to work on a homework assignment at a computer lab at the University of Colorado in Boulder. ( Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera )

Bachelor of Arts in computer science undergraduate enrollment 2013 (program's first year): 222 2014: 457

After studying biochemistry at the University of Colorado for a year, Jessica Delaney realized she wanted a career after college with more space for creativity.

This year as a sophomore, she switched into computer science, a Bachelor of Arts degree she's earning through the College of Arts and Sciences.

"I'm a gamer," she said, waiting outside an introductory computer science class on the Boulder campus. "I play a lot of video games. I want to be a graphic designer and producer of video games. As of this semester, I'm doing what I feel like I'll actually enjoy forever."

Delaney is one of many students taking advantage of the College of Arts and Sciences degree in computer science, which launched in the fall of 2013.

When campus officials first pitched the idea in late 2012, they said they expected 30 students to enroll in the program's first year in 2013, a number they predicted would grow to 150 total students by 2017.

Instead, enrollment skyrocketed. This fall, at the start of the program's second year, there are 457 undergraduates enrolled.

"This degree program has gone berserk," said Jim Martin, chair of computer science. "Clearly there was a lot of pent-up demand for it, we knew that was there, but nevertheless we were surprised by the numbers."

The computer science Bachelor of Science in the College of Engineering and Applied Science also grew, from 379 undergraduates in 2013 to 421 in 2014.

The Bachelor of Arts, compared to the long-standing computer science Bachelor of Science, gives students more flexibility to explore other disciplines.

Because their degree lives in the College of Arts and Sciences, students can more easily double major and combine computing with other fields, such as linguistics or art history.

All computer sciences classes are taught in the College of Engineering, but students in the Bachelor of Arts program take fewer math classes and more elective courses.

"There are students who have an interest in computer science who aren't particularly interested in engineering," said Steve Leigh, dean of arts and sciences. "The rationale is that you can combine it with a liberal arts and sciences degree and there's obviously pretty significant demand for that."

Leigh said he knows of one student who's majoring in computer science, French and dance — a unique interdisciplinary combination that could produce creative results, he said.

"We have students who are deeply engaged in multiple fields," he said. "They're going to have ideas and perspectives that are rare."

College grads with computer science degrees of any kind are in high demand, said Martin, noting that nearly all computer science seniors have multiple job offers early in the year before graduation.

According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the field of software development alone is expected to grow by 22 percent in the coming years and other computing-based fields are growing, too. These types of jobs are also well-paying — in 2012 the median salary for software developers was $93, 350.

Outside of more traditional computer science fields, jobs everywhere are requiring employees to have some knowledge of data analysis, computational methods and programming, Martin said.

Though he wasn't keen on studying engineering, junior Kyle Schriver said he's been watching his dad's marketing company shift more of its focus online. He said he hopes to go into information technology after graduation.

"There's been a shift to the digital world and I just wanted to hop on that train," Schriver said. "There are a lot more jobs popping up."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Sarah Kuta at 303-473-1106 or kutas@dailycamera.com