Willimantic, CT - Julie Chavez Rodriguez, deputy director of the White House's Office of Public Engagement, will deliver the keynote address when Eastern Connecticut State University presents its Cesar Chavez Distinguished Service Awards on April 1. The awards ceremony will take place at 3 p.m. in the Betty R. Tipton Room of the Student Center. The ceremony is open to the public. Admission is free.

The Cesar Chavez Distinguished Service Awards recognize individuals whose actions demonstrate distinguished service in promoting the ideals of legendary Farm Workers of America union leader Cesar Chavez. Since 2003, Eastern has presented Latin American Distinguished Service Awards to 36 individuals; in 2013, the program was renamed in honor of the late union leader.

Three awards will be presented, one each to a member of the faculty or staff; a student; and a member of the community-at-large. The awards will recognize distinguished service in one or more of the following areas: 1) demonstrated act that represent a commitment to positive Latino youth development, activities that go beyond one's work obligations; 2) demonstrated leadership in a program serving the needs of the Latino community; and 3) demonstrated activity to promote educational opportunities and/or advancement for members of Latino groups.

Rodriguez, the granddaughter of Cesar Chavez, joined President Barack Obama's administration in 2011, where she serves as the White House's primary liaison to the Latino community on immigration-related issues, the Affordable Care Act, jobs, the economy, education reform and other Presidential domestic priorities.

Prior to her current White House role, Rodriguez, who earned her degree in Latino Studies at the University of California, served as director of programs at the Cesar E. Chavez Foundation in California; director of youth employment at the Department of Interior; and deputy press secretary to former Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar. Rodriguez also has participated as a fellow in the National Service Learning Emerging Leaders Initiative, the National Service Learning Partnership and the National Youth Leadership Council.

In 1962, Cesar Chavez turned down an offer from President John F. Kennedy to head up the Peace Corps, opting instead to organize the United Farm Workers of America. He died in 1993 at the age of 66. "My grandfather didn't just start a union; he galvanized a movement," said Rodriguez, leading to boycotts across the nation.

"To have the granddaughter of the man whose life we celebrate in presenting our distinguished service awards is an honor," said Kemesha Wilmot, coordinator of Eastern's Intercultural Center. "All of our students will benefit richly from her presentation."



This item was posted by a community contributor. To read more about community contributors, click here.