LAS VEGAS, Feb. 29, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Today at the Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS) Conference, Salesforce [NYSE: CRM], the Customer Success Platform and world's #1 CRM company, announced the general availability of Salesforce Health Cloud, a patient relationship management solution that enables providers to deliver higher-quality care and engage their patients in entirely new ways.

In a world where everything and everyone is connected, patients are demanding new ways to communicate with their caregivers through mobile and social channels. In addition, new regulations, such as the Affordable Care Act, give patients more options in choosing a provider. At the same time, innovative technologies -- such as fitness trackers and connected medical devices -- are empowering people to take healthcare into their own hands. Providers who want to thrive in this new era need to move from patient records to patient relationships, integrating their existing EHRs with cloud-based systems designed for personalized engagement with patients.

Salesforce Health Cloud -- Patient Relationships, not Records

Generally available today, Salesforce Health Cloud enables more personalized care through:

Complete patient views: Health Cloud puts all patient information in one place, including a Timeline view, demographic and family information and a functional diagram of the extended care team. Health Cloud also integrates with EHRs to make real-time patient data easily visible and actionable from any device, giving caregivers the information they need to manage patients anytime and from anywhere.

Health Cloud puts all patient information in one place, including a Timeline view, demographic and family information and a functional diagram of the extended care team. Health Cloud also integrates with EHRs to make real-time patient data easily visible and actionable from any device, giving caregivers the information they need to manage patients anytime and from anywhere. Smarter patient management: Health Cloud provides a single console for managing patients, allowing caregivers to create more efficient workflows and improve the quality of patient experiences, while also reducing costs by improving collaboration across teams. Care teams can take action on open tasks, create customized care plans for individuals and manage groups of patients, such as those with high-blood pressure or diabetes.

Health Cloud provides a single console for managing patients, allowing caregivers to create more efficient workflows and improve the quality of patient experiences, while also reducing costs by improving collaboration across teams. Care teams can take action on open tasks, create customized care plans for individuals and manage groups of patients, such as those with high-blood pressure or diabetes. Connected patient engagement: Health Cloud enables caregivers and patients to send and receive messages, get reminders and complete surveys from any device, encouraging them to stay on top of their health goals.

Rapidly Expanding Ecosystem Extends Salesforce Health Cloud

Salesforce is leveraging a comprehensive ecosystem of partners, systems integrators (SIs) and independent software vendors (ISVs) to extend and implement Health Cloud:

Platform integration: The Philips HealthSuite digital platform provides personal and medical device connectivity, rich clinical data storage and exchange and advanced data analysis tools to spur collaborative care models for patients and providers.

The Philips HealthSuite digital platform provides personal and medical device connectivity, rich clinical data storage and exchange and advanced data analysis tools to spur collaborative care models for patients and providers. EHR integration: Apigee, Catalyze, Jitterbit, MuleSoft and Redox offer services to integrate Health Cloud with leading EHRs, ensuring patient information can be managed and viewed within the Health Cloud console.

Apigee, Catalyze, Jitterbit, MuleSoft and Redox offer services to integrate Health Cloud with leading EHRs, ensuring patient information can be managed and viewed within the Health Cloud console. Health education: Healthwise provides health education and resources so the care team can deliver tailored health information to help people understand, manage and improve their health.

Healthwise provides health education and resources so the care team can deliver tailored health information to help people understand, manage and improve their health. Implementation services: Accenture, Deloitte Digital, PwC, Persistent Systems and Silverline deliver professional services for implementation and customization of Health Cloud.

Accenture, Deloitte Digital, PwC, Persistent Systems and Silverline deliver professional services for implementation and customization of Health Cloud. Patient feedback: GetFeedback provides integrated, mobile-ready surveys and forms that empower healthcare organizations to quickly and effectively collect patient feedback.

GetFeedback provides integrated, mobile-ready surveys and forms that empower healthcare organizations to quickly and effectively collect patient feedback. Secure messaging: TigerText adds secure text messaging capabilities to Health Cloud, allowing care teams to communicate together in a HIPAA-compliant way.

Customers Achieving Success with Salesforce Health Cloud

Health Cloud, built on the Salesforce Service Cloud -- the world's #1 customer service and support platform -- helps build stronger relationships between providers and patients. The Genen Group, a multi-specialty mental health practice located in California, is using Health Cloud to develop a mobile application that allows patients to verify their insurance benefits in real time, view out-of-pocket pricing estimates and immediately schedule an appointment, all from their mobile devices. It also allows Genen Group clinicians to check-in with patients through push notifications, giving instant feedback to patients and enabling them to make smarter care decisions.

Comments on the News

"In this digital era, healthcare providers need to go beyond records to create strong and meaningful patient relationships," said Joshua Newman , M.D., Chief Medical Officer, GM, Salesforce Healthcare and Life Sciences. "The Salesforce Health Cloud delivers a powerful platform that connects patients and providers in entirely new ways, improving outcomes and personalizing care."

, M.D., Chief Medical Officer, GM, Salesforce Healthcare and Life Sciences. "The Salesforce Health Cloud delivers a powerful platform that connects patients and providers in entirely new ways, improving outcomes and personalizing care." "We truly want to change the way the mental health industry operates and be on the forefront of innovation," said Lawrence Genen , founder of The Genen Group. "At the end of the day, our core goal is to make our patients happy, and Health Cloud is giving us the capabilities to provide better experiences for everyone involved."

Pricing and Availability

Salesforce Health Cloud is generally available today starting at $150 per user, per month.

Additional Resources

Like Salesforce on Facebook: http://www.facebook.com/salesforce

Follow Salesforce on Twitter: https://twitter.com/salesforcehttps://twitter.com/salesforce

Salesforce Health Cloud Website:http://www.salesforce.com/healthcloud

About Salesforce

Salesforce, the Customer Success Platform and world's #1 CRM, empowers companies to connect with their customers in a whole new way. For more information about Salesforce (NYSE: CRM), visit: www.salesforce.com.

Any unreleased services or features referenced in this or other press releases or public statements are not currently available and may not be delivered on time or at all. Customers who purchase Salesforce applications should make their purchase decisions based upon features that are currently available. Salesforce has headquarters in San Francisco, with offices in Europe and Asia, and trades on the New York Stock Exchange under the ticker symbol "CRM." For more information please visit http://www.salesforce.com, or call 1-800-NO-SOFTWARE.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130612/SF30598LOGO

SOURCE Salesforce