From left to right: Brian D. Agnew, senior vice president for development at Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital, Paulette Crabiel Wahler (David Crabiel’s daughter), Carol Herbert, president of the Crabiel Scholarship Foundation, and Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital and Robert Wood Johnson Health System President and CEO Stephen K. Jones formally dedicate the newly named “David B. Crabiel Fireplace” at Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital. (Photo: Photo courtesy Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital )

The trustees of the David B. Crabiel Scholarship Foundation, along with friends, family and colleagues of former Middlesex County Freeholder Director David B. Crabiel gathered on Oct. 7 to formally dedicate the newly named “David B. Crabiel Fireplace” at Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital (RWJUH).

Crabiel formerly served as mayor of Milltown and Middlesex County freeholder for almost 50 years. He started his political career as a councilman in 1960 before serving as Milltown’s mayor from 1968 to 1978. After serving as mayor, Crabiel moved to the Middlesex County Board of Chosen Freeholders where he served 28 years. During that time, he served as freeholder director from 1994 to 1995 and again from 1998 to 2008.

At the ceremony, his daughter, Paulette Crabiel Wahler, delivered heartfelt remarks about her father’s life and legacy.

“Dad always used to say that he came from Milltown, the greatest town in the land, and from Middlesex County, the greatest county in the land, and if he were still with us today, he would say that Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital is the greatest hospital in the land,” she said.

The Crabiel Scholarship Foundation was established by Crabiel’s friends and family in 1992 to provide scholarships for students in Middlesex County. Since its inception, a total of 35 scholarships ranging from $500 to $10,000 have been awarded to students in the county, students attending Middlesex County College and to graduates of the New Brunswick Health Sciences Technology High School in New Brunswick. Through the Health Professions Scholars Program at RWJUH, students at the high school participate in mentoring and shadowing activities at the hospital, as well as summer internships, to prepare them for careers in healthcare. Because of the Crabiel Scholarship Foundation, RWJUH will be able to provide graduates of the New Brunswick Health Sciences Technology High School with additional financial support to pursue their college degrees in health-related professions.

After obtaining their degrees, many alumni of the New Brunswick Health Sciences Technology High School have returned to continue their careers with RWJUH. Alumna Stephanie Torres-Olivos is one such student who spoke during the dedication. Stephanie graduated from the school in 2009, and after obtaining her Bachelor of Arts and nursing licensure in 2013, she joined the RWJUH family as a registered nurse on 4 West, where she recently celebrated her one-year anniversary.

“On behalf of all my fellow alumni and future alumni of New Brunswick Health Sciences and Technology High School, thank you to the Crabiel Scholarship Foundation for your wonderful donation.,” Torres-Oliveros said. “Your generosity is helping students just like me pursue their dreams, and for that, we are forever grateful.”

Carol Herbert, president of the Crabiel Scholarship Foundation, noted that she and her fellow board members are very proud to have supported these students and watch them as they achieve incredible heights.

“Several former scholars have gone on to very successful careers, and since the David B. Crabiel Scholarship at RWJUH has been established as an endowment, it will continue to provide financial support for future generations of students,” she said.

“The Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital Foundation is delighted to honor David and the Crabiel Scholarship Foundation for their generosity to the hospital,” said Brian D. Agnew, Senior Vice President for Development at RWJUH and Executive Director of the Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital Foundation. “We chose the fireplace to bear David’s name because as a source of light, comfort, and warmth available to all, it serves to reflect David’s true spirit.”

To learn more about RWJUH, visit www.rwjuh.edu.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1wgeCe7