Updated Dec. 22: Revised to include a Sept. 12 attack to the list.

About 50 people rallied outside Dallas police headquarters Sunday night following a string of recent attacks in Oak Lawn that have put the neighborhood’s gay community on edge.

The rally was organized by Citizens for a Safer Oak Lawn after at least a dozen assaults and robberies in and around the neighborhood since September. Most recently, a bartender suffered a skull fracture after he was attacked while walking in the area Thursday night.

On Friday, Dallas police assigned a special task force of uniformed and undercover officers, intelligence detectives and investigators from assault and robbery units to the neighborhood.

But Daniel Cates, an LGBT activist and organizer for Citizens for a Safer Oak Lawn, said what’s been done so far isn’t enough.

“I am personally angry, and I think a lot of people are angry, that it took two and a half months, and 12 to 15 … attacks,” he said. “It has taken protests, it has taken marches, it has taken threats of vigilante groups patrolling Cedar Springs to get DPD there. For us it really highlights a shortcoming in law enforcement and the way these things are prioritized in minority communities in Dallas.”

Community organizer Daniel Cates addressing the group outside @DallasPD HQ about Oak Lawn attacks pic.twitter.com/yd0q868s2U — Claire Cardona (@clairezcardona) November 23, 2015

Cates expressed frustration that arrests were made within weeks after the robberies on the Katy Trail, but none have been made in the Oak Lawn attacks.

Dallas police spokeswoman Monica Cordova said Sunday that police “understand their concerns and we are doing everything we can to address those concerns.”

Police have only described one of the attacks as a hate crime. On Sept. 20, a man was hospitalized with a fractured skull and cuts and bruises after four men attacked him and made derogatory statements about the victims “perceived sexual orientation” following the Alan Ross Texas Freedom Parade and Dallas Pride Festival.

“It’s about understanding that people want to feel safe in Oak Cliff, Bishop Arts or Oak Lawn or Highland Village, it doesn’t matter what creed, nationality or sexual orientation,” said Jacob Clark, 34, a gay man who is concerned about the effect the attacks may have on the victims down the road.

Eddie Morgan, 59, stood in the crowd Sunday wearing a target affixed to his jacket. Morgan, who has lived in Oak Lawn for 35 years, said he feels like a target when he goes to the grocery store or library.

Citizens for a Safer Oak Lawn holding rally outside @DallasPD HQ after 10+ attacks and robberies in Oak Lawn area pic.twitter.com/7AVN9KBwwf — Claire Cardona (@clairezcardona) November 23, 2015

Cates said the community has come together to identify areas that need additional lighting, and local businesses have installed cameras.

He read a statement to the crowd from Michael Dominguez, who was knocked unconscious and stabbed several times as he walked home from a club on Oct. 2. Dominguez said in the statement that the community has fought too hard and long to be fearful to walk in their own neighborhoods.

“We refuse to allow another one of our brothers or sisters to be murdered or to lay at night awake in a hospital replaying every second of their assault over and over in their head. Today I say we refuse to shed another drop of our tears — or our blood — on the streets of Oak Lawn.”

After several speakers, the group joined hands and sang “We Shall Overcome.”

Incidents in and around the Oak Lawn area

Nov. 19: Geoffrey Hubbard, a bartender at the Cedar Springs Tap House, was attacked in the 3200 block of Knight Street after leaving work Thursday night. He was hit in the head and suffered a skull fracture. Hubbard said he rolled under a parked vehicle to protect himself.

A few hours after the attack, two other people reported robberies on Maple Avenue.

Nov. 1: Two victims stated they were robbed. One man did not report the robbery to police, but police found him. And in the second one a man reported being robbed at gunpoint after walking back to his car with friends. He told reporters the gunman used anti-gay slurs, but police Maj. Max Geron said the police report did not mention any such language.

September-October: Police report five other robbery and aggravated assaults occurred in or near Oak Lawn after dark.

Oct. 2: Michael Dominguez, 32, was knocked unconscious and stabbed in the eye, behind the ear and on his side as he walked home from Station 4, a nightclub on Cedar Springs Road. Dominguez said he doesn’t remember the attack and can’t say whether it was a hate crime.

Sept. 30: Another man, identified only as Michael, said two people punched him as he was walking to a bar on Cedar Springs Road last month, KDFW-TV (Channel 4) reported. The man said he did not immediately call police because he had been drinking.

Sept. 20: A man was hospitalized with a fractured skull and cuts and bruises while he walked in the Love Field neighborhood after the Alan Ross Texas Freedom Parade and Dallas Pride Festival. Police are investigating the attack as a hate crime.

Sept. 12: Two men approached a victim as he walked on the sidewalk in the 2700 block of Douglas Avenue in Oak Lawn. One of the men punched the victim in the faace, knocking him to the ground. The men fled with the victim’s cell phone.

Anyone with information about the incidents is asked to contact the Dallas police at 214-671-3584. Crime Stoppers is offering up to $10,000 for the arrest and indictment of the individuals responsible for these offenses.