It costs the Marin County Jail about $15,000 a year to provide each inmate with health care services — a figure the Marin County Civil Grand Jury says is unnecessarily high.

A number of other Bay Area counties pay $8,000 a year per inmate for medical services, according to a report issued Friday by the grand jury. The 12-page report — "Jail Checkup: What's the Price of a Clean Bill of Health?" — serves as a followup to the jury's 2005 report on jail health care.

The new report suggests the county lower its costs by contracting for medical, dental and mental health services with a correctional medical care provider, a suggestion made in the previous report.

It also recommends finding a local service provider to administer emergency psychiatric medication and enrolling all eligible inmates in Medi-Cal, the state's free or low-cost health coverage program.

With the implementation of the state's public safety realignment program, AB 109, certain felons are sentenced to county jails instead of prisons. This means many inmates are serving longer terms at the jail than the building is designed for.

The report said jail workers think the number of inmates with mental illness has been on the rise, leading to additional care costs.

"(The) Marin County Department of Health and Human Services has requested an expansion in hours of service to meet the mental health needs of inmates. This is in addition to the 50 percent increase in hours provided at the jail in the last year or so," the report says. "The transition from public employees to contractors has been made successfully in 30 jails around California, and it can be done in Marin as well."

About one-quarter of the jail population takes prescribed psychiatric medications and there are times the inmates need to be involuntarily medicated, according to the report. Currently, inmates in need of involuntary psychiatric medication during a psychotic episode are sent to the Santa Clara County Jail in San Jose because there is no comparable facility in Marin.

Transporting these inmates isn't cheap and it costs $1,500 a day per inmate to house them at Santa Clara's jail. Thus the grand jury is proposing the county find a local provider, possibly the county's Health and Human Services Psychiatric Emergency Services department, to administer psychiatric medications on a one-time emergency basis.

"A single injection of appropriate medication could calm the inmate and permit a staff member to have a discussion with the inmate, leading to voluntary acceptance of medication," the report reads.

As another way to lower costs, the grand jury suggests enrolling eligible inmates in Medi-Cal. The health care program has expanded under the national Affordable Care Act to allow some inmates to join.

"It would provide eligible inmates with a transition to health care coverage upon their release from the jail," the report says.

The director of the county Department of Health and Human Services, the county sheriff and the county Board of Supervisors have been asked by the grand jury to respond to its report.

"I received and read the grand jury's report earlier (Friday) and the Sheriff's Office will be preparing a formal response within the next 60 days," said Undersheriff Mike Ridgway.

The full report can be found online at www.marincounty.org/depts/gj/reports-and-responses.

Follow Megan Hansen's blog at http://blogs.marinij.com/bureaucratsandbaking.