Mike Lucas for Dow Jones

From this morning’s LBO Wire:

Abraaj Group is sewing up a new deal in Turkey. The firm has taken a stake in Yü-Ce Tıbbi Gereçler İthalat İhracat Mümessillik Sanayi ve Ticaret AS, a maker of disposable medical supplies, in the firm’s latest growth investment in Turkey, Amy Or reports. Abraaj is investing from Anatolia Growth Capital Fund, which closed with €20 million in 2013. Yü-Ce, the fund’s second investment, produces medical gauze, sponges and surgical sutures.

More stories available to LBO Wire subscribers: Crestview Partners along with Chinese firm CITIC Capital Partners and company management have agreed to sell Stackpole International to Johnson Electric Holdings for up to 867 million Canadian dollars ($659 million)…Arlon Group receives antitrust approval to sell Kettle Cuisine LLC, a maker of frozen and refrigerated artisanal soups, to Kainos Capital…and CRGT Inc., a software developer that caters primarily to government agencies, has reached an agreement for a cashless, all-stock merger with fellow privately backed information technology contractor Salient Federal Solutions Inc.

(LBO Wire is a daily newsletter with comprehensive analysis of all the investments, deals, fundraisings and personnel moves involving private equity firms. For a two-week trial, visit http://on.wsj.com/DJPEVCNews, scroll to the bottom and click “try for free.”)

Elsewhere on the Web:

Symantec said it has agreed to sell its Veritas data-storage and recovery business to a group of investors led by Carlyle Group for $8 billion, Chelsey Dulaney reports for The Wall Street Journal.

Permira’s Just Retirement Group PLC and Cinven’s Partnership Assurance Group PLC will merge into a new company called JRP Group PLC, Simon Clark reports for the Journal.

Blackstone Group is exploring the sale of GCA Services Group Inc. in a deal that could value the provider of janitors and cleaners to schools and businesses at more than $1 billion, including debt, according to Reuters.

BC Partners, Carlyle and Onex are among firms to submit first-round offers for Ardagh Group’s metal-containers unit, which has been valued at about €2.4 billion, according to Bloomberg News.

Write to Thomas Dunford at thomas.dunford@wsj.com