Kristen Bell's rather advanced stage of pregnancy didn't stop her from chipping for the charity Habitat for Humanity on Saturday.

The Frozen and Veronica Mars actress was working as part of an event held in Lynwood, California for the stars of Showtime programming.

In addition to Bell's current show, House Of Lies, actors from Showtime's Shameless took part.

Baby bump: Despite her pregnancy, Kristen Bell took part in a Habitat for Humanity event with other Showtime stars on Saturday

Other actors holding hammers throughout the day included William H. Macy, Emmy Rossum, Ben Schwartz, Larenz Tate, and more.

Some of those stars were apparently impressed with Bell's size – a photo shows Macy using a tape measure on Kristen's baby bump.

In addition to the red T-shirt that seemed to be the day's uniform, Bell kept out of the sun with a brown cowboy hat and sunglasses.

Ready to pop: Bell kept busy on the job, even though her large stomach may have gotten in the way

Although looking like she might be ready to pop, 34-year-old Bell was seen to be hard at work putting up siding on one of the seven homes being built for low-income families in the Habitat for Humanity project.

Other stars were involved with roofing and painting, according to the Habitat for Humanity of Greater Los Angeles website, but those were probably not jobs given to an expectant mother like Bell.

The only other project Kristen has been busy at this year - besides her pregnancy - is season four of House Of Lies.

Safety concerns: Bell worked on siding one of the houses in the project, a safer activity for a pregnant woman than many in construction

This current pregnancy is the second for Bell with her husband, actor Dax Shepard, 39 – their daughter, Lincoln Bell Shepard, is 18 months old.

A political couple devoted to causes, Kristen and Dax refused to get married until California legalized same-sex marriage.

Working with Habitat for Humanity would make sense for an activist-oriented actor like Bell.

How big? William H. Macy measured Kristen's sizable bump when the Shameless and House Of Lies stars worked together