People who protect pollinators have some very strong adversaries among Monsanto, Syngenta, Bayer and other chemical companies that invent and produce increasingly strong pesticides. Those companies do not want anyone messing around with their sales figures, or discovering what those pesticides are all about. But many high powered pesticides, particularly systemic pesticides, are lethal in more ways than one. When sprayed or injected into a seed, plant, tree, or even the soil, the entire system absorbs poison. Since ingredients in broad based "full spectrum" pesticides typically include one or more of these systemics, if you kill one thing, you likely kill something else.

A plant absorbs systemics fully: stems, leaves, flowers, and fruit — the entire system. Whatever or whoever comes in contact with these pesticides may have serious health problems. The neonicotinoid insecticides are especially lethal systemics that affect cellular systems, particularly the neurological system. The systemic herbicides, such Roundup, effectively kill weeds; however, Roundup's main ingredient, glyphosate, has been found in food. Even so, Monsanto has produced Roundup Ready seeds to produce crop plants (soybeans, corn, etc.) that can withstand field spraying for weeds. But, Roundup Ready plants have sterile seeds. This systemic herbicide has been banned in Nicaragua, El Salvador, and other places and is under study by the EPA for possible regulation in 2015.

Advertisement

Why? Because the correlation between agricultural use and workers' kidney disease and cancers is too high to deny any relationship, despite company claims to the opposite.

The neonicotinoids, first developed by Shell in the 1980s and taken over by Bayer in the 1990s, were touted as less toxic than other insecticides available at the time; yet, the neonics are as much as 7,000 times as toxic as DDT. These neonics are applied to approximately 80 percent of commercially sold seeds, in addition to sprays and plant injections; sales are in the billions of dollars annually, One of the neonics, imidacloprid, is the most widely used insecticide in the world, and has been found in flowers, fruit, and vegetables. Though it's less toxic to humans than to bees, it's still toxic and cumulative in our systems. Bayer and Syngenta don't want us to know about that. Instead, the Bayer Crop Science website proudly claims, "Bayer has proudly dedicated 25 years to ensuring the protection of bees through its Bee Care Program." (http://bayercropscience.us) The website contains a link to that Bee Care program, but it's propaganda. The bee killers are not the saviors.

For years, environmentalists, beekeepers, and gardeners have complained about these systemic pesticides and participated in movements to eliminate them, such as "March Against Monsanto" events across the country, and establishment of "Bee Havens" and "Bee Safe Neighborhoods." To counter these citizens, these big chemical companies have decided to fight with money and with even greater propaganda, claiming that these systemics are safer than other chemicals or that they are necessary to provide safe public environments.

June 16 through 22 was designated "National Pollinators' Week," sponsored by the Pollinator Partnership, a consortium of government, industry, agricultural organizations and NGOs. That sounds good, but two of these sponsors are Monsanto and Bayer, the producers of Roundup and neonicotinoid poisons. Isn't it interesting, and typical, of such producers to try to fool us again? They are masters of propaganda, and have the pesticide profits to support their false statements.

Finally, but perhaps too late, we are beginning to question these companies and their poisonous chemicals. .

We need to realize the propaganda has done its duty: ...we think we need weed free lawns and flowers without little bug bites in the leaves. We think there are plenty of bees and pollinators to last forever. We think these chemical companies are going to make our world safer, cleaner, prettier and healthier with food for all. Monsanto, Bayer, Syngenta and the lot have succeeded with their propaganda. But, we need to rethink the situation, and realize the propaganda is protecting a multi-billion dollar industry that's killing our environment, our pollinators, and us. We need to dig beneath the propaganda, learn about these pesticides, and stop using them, now.

Anne Bliss is a lifelong organic gardener who lives in Colorado's first Bee Safe Neighborhood in North Boulder.