— The St. Petersburg Museum of History will open its new exhibit, “Imagining La Florida,” to the public on Tuesday.

Citing Florida as the true birthplace of the United States, instead of Virginia or Massachusetts, the exhibit showcases the first explorations to give visitors the full colonial history of the state. It starts with Juan Ponce de León’s arrival in 1513 to the founding of the first permanent Spanish settlement in 1565, and concludes with the building of the first fort with a garrison of free Africans, slaves that had run away from the British colonies in 1738.

The exhibit details the interaction between Native Americans, Europeans and Africans that led to the creation of a society. “A generation was born, raised and died during that period,” museum Executive Director Rui Farias said.

The exhibit was curated by University of South Florida-St. Petersburg Professor J. Michael Francis, whose area of research is early Florida history. He was asked to put together a proposal for the exhibit that incorporated new research. It was approved in 2012 and, between then and spring 2013, he worked with groups Abbsolute and Acctión Cultural de España to put the traveling exhibit together.

The exhibit is designed to be interactive, incorporating computers and iPads for visitors to use. Some displays have interactive video. A fountain of youth is at the end of exhibit for visitors to walk through. It also includes figures, models, paintings depicting the time. Francis’ goal was to create a fun and entertaining exhibit that gave a new perspective.

The exhibit, officially owned by the Spanish government, was built in Miami and so far has only been shown in Tallahassee.

The St. Petersburg Museum of History, 335 Second Ave. N.E., is open 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and noon to 5 p.m. Sunday. General admission is $15, $12 for seniors, $9 for military veterans, students and children ages 6 to 17. Children younger than age 6 are admitted free. The exhibit will remain open until March 1, and then moved to St. Augustine.

mthomas@tampatrib.com

(727) 828-6766