NEWARK — A official previously involved with overseeing the state's monitor of the Essex County welfare office will now be the facility's new director.

Jeanette Page-Hawkins is stepping down as the New Jersey Department of Human Services Division of Family Development Director to take on the job of director of the county welfare office in Essex, Department Spokeswoman Nicole Brossoie confirmed yesterday. Brossoie did not respond to inquiries about when the change will take place, or what prompted it.

"We are pleased that Jeannette Page-Hawkins will be joining our team as our new welfare director," Essex County Executive Joseph DiVincenzo said in a statement about the move.

"A resident of Essex County, she has a wealth of government experience, proven management ability and has been a long-time advocate for our State's most vulnerable population. We believe her expertise will provide strong leadership at one of the busiest offices in the State and help us improve our delivery of service to our clients."

The move comes about a month after Page-Hawkins toured the Essex County facility as part of what officials called a "routine" visit to check in on its progress. The facility is one of ten county offices in New Jersey being monitored by the state for "compliance with the timely processing of SNAP (food stamp) applications," Brossoie confirmed in January.

Employees have complained of serious processing delays, long client lines, and an inadequate computer system that they say cannot handle the influx of clients the facility has seen since the approval of the Affordable Care Act, and the economic downturn of the last decade.

As part of the monitor, the DFD developed a corrective action plan for the county to follow, Brossoie said.

"Essex is following its corrective action plan and improvements are underway," she told NJ Advance Media last month.

According to her biography on the DHD website, Page-Hawkins previously worked for DYFS, the New Community Corporation of Newark, and was Executive Director of was Executive Director of the nonprofit Newark Emergency Services for Families.

According to employees, she is replacing retired director Sharon Butler.

Jessica Mazzola may be reached at jmazzola@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @JessMazzola. Find NJ.com on Facebook.