Zonta seeking vendors for new event

Zonta Zing Expo is a new, fun trade show event set for 6-9 p.m. Oct. 23 at the Abbey Event Center. The event will provide a unique, one-stop shopping experience. The event includes fashion shows, hors d'oeuvres, cash bar and musical performances. Entrance to the event is free to the public.

Zonta is looking for interested vendors and exhibitors for this event. The deadline for application and payment is Oct. 1. The vendor application can be downloaded at zontaroyalgorge.org/events. For questions and more information, email events@zontaroyalgorge.org.

Proceeds from the event are used by Zonta Club of Royal Gorge to fund the Sharon Cushman Memorial Scholarship and the Young Woman in Public Affairs Award and local and international projects to empower women through service and advocacy.

Enjoy a lunar eclipse Sept. 27

Dark Skies community will have a Star Party on the evening of Sept. 27and invites the public to watch a total lunar eclipse at the new Smokey Jack Observatory at The Bluff at the west end of Main Street in Westcliffe.

The eclipse begins at 7 p.m., becomes total at 8:11 p.m., and ends complete totality at 9:23 p.m. The eclipse will last for 3 hours and 20 minutes from beginning to end. Young and old, the public is welcome to come join Dark Skies volunteers who will explain the event and to look through telescopes at the Moon.

Advertisement

In addition, Saturn will be view at the beginning of the eclipse. A lunar eclipse occurs when the Moon passes within Earth's shadow (umbra). The Earth's outer shadow darkens the Moon slightly, then, the inter shadow begins to"cover" the Moon as the eclipse progresses. The Moon typically turns a reddish-brown color.

In recent years, the dark night skies over the towns have come to be recognized by locals as a natural resource worth preserving. The towns of Westcliffe and Silver Cliff have come together to protect a shared natural resource — their dark night skies.In the first effort of its kind, the towns worked side by side to ensure preservation of dark nights for the benefit of future residents. As a result of their efforts, the towns have earned Colorado's first International Dark Sky Community designation from the International Dark-Sky Association. This makes for great lunar eclipse viewing.

Pueblo to host hunter education courses

A special one day, 12-hour hunter education course for the permanent certificate will be given from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. Oct. 8. The minimum age is 14 years old.

Two weekend courses will given from 8 a.m. to 3 p.m. Oct. 10-11 and Oct. 24-25. Minimum age is 10 years old.

Internet completions will be given from 8 a.m. to 2 p.m. Oct. 8, Oct. 10 and Oct. 24. Pre-registration is required for all courses and will be at the Knights of Columbus Hall, 1601 Bonforte Blvd., in Pueblo. For more information, call Jose Alvarado at (719) 544-1922.

All persons born on or after Jan. 1, 1949, must successfully complete a hunter education course before being able to purchase or apply for any hunting or trapping license in Colorado.

Daily Record Staff