Yubadocs’ Dr. Roger Hicks and Dr. Andi Harris display the plaque they received as winners of the HSAG of California’s Quality Improvement Recognition Award.

Yubadocs Urgent Care has been awarded the 2014 California Quality Improvement Recognition Award by the Health Services Advisory Group of California Inc., the Medicare quality improvement organization for California. It is one of only 47 such awards conferred in the state.

“This award reflects the hard work and patient-centered accomplishments of medical professionals using health information technology to report quality measures, identify opportunities to enhance care and achieve improved patient outcomes,” said Mary Ellen Dalton, HSAG of California president.

“These physician practices are leaders in their communities and are crucial to help California meet the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act’s National Quality Strategy goals to provide better care and improve the health of communities at an affordable cost.”

HSAG of California reviewed the performance of California physician practices participating in quality improvement efforts during the past year, including Yubadocs Urgent Care.

This review encompassed four elements: quality measured excellence, effective use of health information technology, care management excellence and participation in data reporting quality initiatives. Based on specific criteria, physician practices received either a platinum or gold award.

“Award recipients should be proud of their efforts because they lead their colleagues in demonstrating effective prevention and treatment practices concerning the most serious disease indications,” said Mary Fermazin, HSAG of California chief medical officer.

“They are setting the pace to meet national benchmarks for aspirin use, blood pressure control, cholesterol management and smoking cessation.”

HSAG of California has conferred a formal plaque to Yubadocs enshrining this achievement.

“Your practice is a model for the health community, so we hope you display the award with pride,” said Debashish Mittra, HSAG of California program director. “As other providers take heed, you can take satisfaction that you have spurred a movement of excellence in quality care.”

Yubadocs Urgent Care is the premiere urgent care clinic for western Nevada County and has been part of the local medical community since opening in August 2000. Urgent care is a specialty devoted to treating minor emergencies, acute illnesses and other common medical needs.

Yubadocs is open seven days a week, never closes for lunch, and sees people as walk-ins or by appointment. They repair lacerations, take care of lumps and bumps, manage simple fractures and do x-rays, splinting, casting, basic lab work, ECGs and spirometry on-site.

Dr. Roger Hicks and RN Linda Rachmel are founders and owners of the clinic.