The removal of this “unnecessary cap,” as it was described in the title of earlier legislation, does not affect the overall cost-sharing limitation that applies to group health plans that are not grandfathered plans. Those limits are $6,350 for self-only coverage and $12,700 for family coverage in 2014, and are estimated to be $6,600 and $13,200, respectively, for coverage in 2015.

The Affordable Care Act requires annual cost-sharing limits on coverage as part of the essential health benefits package required for plan years beginning in or after 2014. As enacted, it provided for annual limits on total cost-sharing and for annual limits on deductibles for insured employer-sponsored plans offered in the small group market. Section 213 of the Protecting Access to Medicare Act of 2014 (Pub. L. No. 113-93) eliminated the $2,000/$4,000 limitation on deductibles for affected group health plans retroactive to the March 23, 2010, enactment of the Affordable Care Act.

Your HR and Payroll compliance and policy solution! Comply with federal, state, and international laws, find answers to your most challenging questions, get timely updates with email alerts, and more with our suite of products.

STANDING ORDERS

All Bloomberg BNA treatises are available on standing order, which ensures you will always receive the most current edition of the book or supplement of the title you have ordered from Bloomberg BNA’s book division. As soon as a new supplement or edition is published (usually annually) for a title you’ve previously purchased and requested to be placed on standing order, we’ll ship it to you to review for 30 days without any obligation. During this period, you can either (a) honor the invoice and receive a 5% discount (in addition to any other discounts you may qualify for) off the then-current price of the update, plus shipping and handling or (b) return the book(s), in which case, your invoice will be cancelled upon receipt of the book(s). Call us for a prepaid UPS label for your return. It’s as simple and easy as that. Most importantly, standing orders mean you will never have to worry about the timeliness of the information you’re relying on. And, you may discontinue standing orders at any time by contacting us at 1.800.960.1220 or by sending an email to books@bna.com.

Put me on standing order at a 5% discount off list price of all future updates, in addition to any other discounts I may quality for. (Returnable within 30 days.)

Notify me when updates are available (No standing order will be created).