To reach projected sales tax revenue for 2014, there would have be a 66 percent increase

Shoppers walk to stores Friday at The Promenade Shops at Centerra in Loveland. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Editor's note: This is the first in an occasional series looking at the Centerra master financing agreement in its 10 years of existence.

A decade ago, the city of Loveland entered the largest deal before or since with a private developer in hopes of creating a shining retail center that would make the city's coffers flush with sales tax revenue.

Anyone who has seen the transformation of east Loveland around Interstate 25 and U.S. 34 knows that part of that hope has come to fruition. But 10 years into a 25-year master financing agreement between the city and developer McWhinney, some revenue projections have not come to be.

The projected sales tax revenue that the city would receive from the master financing agreement appears to have been optimistic, with overall revenue also falling short of projections.

Under the 2003 forecast, the city would have received nearly $41 million in sales tax from the deal by 2013, but has actually collected just more than $27.5 million, not including the 1.25 percent that goes back to McWhinney per the MFA.

To reach the projected sales tax revenue for 2014, there would have be a 66 percent increase in annual revenue, according to figures provided by Alan Krcmarik, Loveland's chief financial officer.

Original projections had the city taking in $172 million in sales tax revenue by 2029.

Advertisement

"It means we're much better off having them out there, but it's going to take a lot of investment over the next few years to even have a chance of meeting projections," Krcmarik said. "But I hope I'm wrong."

A recession tale

The numbers tell a familiar story across the city, state and country. The MFA took effect in January 2004 and for the first few years, sales tax collection was ahead of schedule.

Stella Larsen, left, and Danya Burke shop Friday at The Promenade Shops at Centerra in Loveland. The two travel from their homes in Laramie, Wyo., often to shop at the retail center. (Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

But with the start of the recession is 2008, sales tax collections started to lag behind projections and have failed to catch up. The original projections were also built on the assumption that another large project would come into play in 2010.

Jay Hardy, general manager of the Centerra development and vice president of McWhinney, said that the absence of that project is an important piece to consider in evaluating the numbers.

"It's not really about productivity of the existing retail, it's really about one large center not being built," he said.

"If you look at the MFA in a 10-year lens, at least half of that has been in a recessionary time frame," Hardy continued. "Any agreement that you have that is 25 years in length, you're going to have ups and downs."

This city of Loveland-generated graph shows projections and actual overall revenue for the first 10 years of the Centerra master financing agreement. (Special to the Reporter-Herald)

Overall gross retail sales at Centerra — which includes sales that are not included in the MFA — continue to recover, with more than half a billion of dollars in sales last year. There are more than 7,500 jobs at Centerra, compared to fewer than 1,000 a decade ago.

"When you look back 10 years later, this is the retail hub of Northern Colorado, and without the wisdom of the City Council at the time, it certainly would not be," Hardy said.

Bringing retail back

On Tuesday, the City Council will hold a study session to review a decade of the MFA, a mammoth agreement that included the creation of an urban renewal authority project area, a business-funded service district, a tax credit and private investment.

"We need to evaluate where we are, where we will be in another 10 years and where we'll be at the end of 25 years," Loveland Mayor Cecil Gutierrez said.

The agreement was controversial from the start, when the undeveloped land in east Loveland was declared blighted to create the Loveland Urban Renewal Area (LURA), paving the way to reap millions of dollars in tax increment financing.

From a historical standpoint, Gutierrez said that the deal had so much appeal because for years, the city was aware of significant sales tax leakage due to the lack of a major shopping center.

"Having Centerra has allowed us to bring that sales tax revenue back to the city," Gutierrez said. "It's now a regional draw."

The way the MFA was set up, the city credits 1.25 percent out of Loveland's 3 percent sales tax collected from the urban renewal area. Called the "public improvement fee," or PIF, that collection is used to to help the finance the service district's authorized public improvements.

"It turned out to be a pretty good tool to fund all of these regional improvements out there," said city attorney John Duval, who led the development of the agreement a decade ago for Loveland.

As of 2013, the city has put in just more than $19.5 million from the PIF. Original projections have the city putting in $123 million over the life of the agreement.

Playing catch-up

The newest additions in the MFA are expected to come online next year and are anticipated to be significant. On "Parcel 505," or the intersection of U.S. 34 and Centerra Parkway, the 100,000-square-foot Bass Pro Shops is expected to be the centerpiece, along with a Courtyard by Marriott hotel, restaurants, inline retail and a bank.

According to Hardy, Bass Pro Shops alone is estimated to bring in $35 million in annual taxable revenue.

But it's still not expected to bring sales tax collections back to what had been projected, he said.

And the clock is now ticking. The current urban renewal authority plan will expire less than 15 years from now.

McWhinney has incentives to stay on schedule, Krcmarik said.

"In order for them to have the greatest level of financial success, they need to do as much development as they can in the 25-year window," he said.

According to a memo to city councilors from Duval, 2029 will mark the end of the LURA's collection of tax increment revenues from Centerra and end its obligation to pay those revenues to the service district.

"Consequently, future borrowings by the Service District that are dependent on the availability of LURA's tax increment revenues will see ever shorter payback periods," Duval wrote.

There is still a gap between projection and actual revenue when it comes to combining all revenue sources for the first decade of the Centerra project, but partly because property tax revenue has been ahead of schedule, it is less dramatic than sales tax revenue.

The one-year gap between forecast and actuals in 2013 is more than $7.7 million and expands over time, according to Krcmarik. Total revenue for the first 10 years of the project was $88.5 million, compared to the $96 million that had been projected.

"It's remarkably close," Krcmarik said. "This is, in my opinion, one of the biggest deals that's ever been done in Colorado."

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Jessica Maher at maherj@reporter-herald.com, or at 669-5050 ext. 516.