Syracuse, N.Y. -- I am still answering readers' questions about the New York health insurance exchange and Obamacare.

Here's another one:

I have a couple of questions. Does the federal government's Healthcare.gov website offer different insurance options that we can subscribe to from the NY health exchange website?

My parents are on Medicare and they are wondering if they can get dental insurance through the exchange even though they have Medicare. --Tonette Orlando



People in New York cannot buy health coverage through the federal health insurance exchange websites because New York has an online exchange of its own, NY State of Health.

The federal government is running exchange websites in 36 states that opted not to create their own exchanges. Even if you could, you wouldn't want to use the federal exchanges right now because they have been bogged down with technical problems. New York's exchange got off to a slow start, but is running OK now.

As to your second question, your parents cannot buy dental coverage through the exchange. People can only buy dental coverage on the exchange if they also enroll in a health plan through the exchange, according to Elisabeth Benjamin, a vice president of Community Services Society of New York, which has community "navigators" throughout the state helping enroll people.

The exchange is not for people who already get health coverage through Medicare.

Even though they can't go through the exchange, your parents may be able to get dental coverage by directly contacting the dental plans participating in the exchange to find out what dental insurance plans they offer off the exchange.

These are the dental plans offered on the New York exchange: Delta Dental Insurance Company, Dentcare, Dentegra Insurance Company, Emblem, Empire BlueCross and Empire Blue Cross BlueShield, Guardian, HealthNow New York, Inc., Healthplex, MetLife and Solstice.

Send your questions about the New York health insurance exchange and Obamacare to health writer James T. Mulder at jmulder@syracuse.com