The year 2014 was big for mergers and acquisitions (M&As) all over the world, seeing over $3.4 trillion worth of M&A-related activity — the most since the record $4.3 trillion of M&As in 2007. This was largely because of increased confidence in the overall market recovery, coupled with a strong stock market. The US alone registered a 54% year-over-year growth in M&A activity, which came out to be valued at $1.5 trillion in 2014.

High-profile mergers included Actavis plc's (NYSE:ACT) decision to buy out Allergan, Inc. (NYSE:AGN) for $66 billion, followed by AT&T Inc.’s (NYSE:T) takeover of DIRECTV (NASDAQ:DTV) for $49 billion. Big-ticket deals were largely limited to health-care, telecom, and technology, with these sectors accounting for over $1 trillion, or one-third, of the announced deals in 2014, up from one-sixth of volumetric contribution in 2007.

Michael Carr, head of Americas M&A at Goldman Sachs, when discussing future M&A activity, said in an interview with the Wall Street Journal that he expects companies in most sectors to face increased shareholder pressure to ink deals that will bolster earnings growth in the face of a strengthening economy, especially when “self-help measures” like share repurchase programs and cost-cutting initiatives have been maximized. “Shareholder expectations about growth are higher than they have been in a long time,” he added. It is likely that M&A-related activity will cause a domino effect, given that one player in the industry takes the initiative. “The psychology of deal making is that if other people are striking deals, you better strike them, too. Otherwise, you get left behind,” said Alison Ressler, an M&A lawyer at Sullivan & Cromwell LLP, in an interview with the Journal.

KPMG believes that some of the biggest drivers for M&A-related activity in the health-care sector would be the Affordable Care Act as well as the patent expiries for key drugs for many drug-makers. However, we at Bidness Etc believe that the pace of M&A-related activity in the health-care sector would likely not be able to match the level of activity seen in 2014, largely because of changes in US Treasury laws that have now severely limited the benefits associated with buying out companies located overseas.

One of the major reasons behind the increased M&A activity in the sector in 2014 was “tax inversion,” which is the practice of buying out offshore firms and then reincorporating across the Atlantic where tax rates are relatively lower than the rates levied in the US. US politicians, however, punctured the high hopes related to such deals by introducing new tax regulations that took away most of the benefits associated with a company’s decision to relocate overseas, quickly making 2014 the year of deals that never happened as three of the five inversion deals announced in the UK and Ireland in 2014 collapsed.

Dealogic estimates that over $648 billion worth of health-care deals were inversions in 2014. The figure includes those deals that were not sealed due to changes in the US tax laws. One of the deals that fell apart as a result of the new rules was medical-device maker Medtronic, Inc.’s (NYSE:MDT) $42.9 billion pending acquisition of Irish-headquartered Covidien plc (NYSE:COV). Pfizer Inc.’s (NYSE:PFE) high hopes to buy out AstraZeneca plc (ADR) (NYSE:AZN) were also crushed when AstraZeneca rejected the offer. Changes in the tax laws possibly limited any chances for Pfizer aggressively pursuing the company by offering a higher bid.

The increased focus on consolification of businesses, however, may see companies swapping resources with one another in multi-billion dollar deals, such as the $5.4 billion agreement between Novartis AG (ADR) (NYSE:NVS) and Eli Lilly & Co (NYSE:LLY), whereby Novartis will sell its animal-health division to Eli Lilly in order to focus more on its core strengths.