This is what it looks like when $15 million gets dressed alone at a locker:

After his worst game in an otherwise record-breaking NFL career, Peyton Manning sat outside a scrum of reporters listening, alone, as Brock Osweiler answered questions a few feet over about bumping aside a legend.

In that quiet gap between Osweiler, the Broncos’ fresh-faced backup and soon-to-be starting quarterback, and Manning, the veteran, Denver’s shot at a Super Bowl fell into question.

In the six weeks since that Nov. 15 loss to the Kansas City Chiefs in Denver, the Broncos were swept into a swirl of awkwardness — and Broncos Country, a fan base familiar with quarterback controversies, got pitted in a civil war, picking sides between the past and the future.

Osweiler’s quarterback takeover from Manning this season has made for the most bizarre Broncos stretch since Tim Tebow steamrolled into the playoffs in 2011.

“Peyton Manning has changed the way this game is viewed. He changed the way quarterbacks operate at the line of scrimmage,” said ESPN analyst Mark Schlereth, who won two Super Bowls as a guard with the Broncos in the 1990s. “So to see him get replaced, it’s a difficult thing to watch. But there are very few John Elways in this world who go out winning a championships and say, ‘See ya.’ “

Sunday the 39-year-old, Hall of Fame-bound Manning will be a healthy backup for the first time in his NFL career. Osweiler, 25, who never made an NFL start before this season, will be under center again.

The playoffs are rushing toward the Broncos. A victory at home Sunday over the San Diego Chargers would net Denver no worse than a No. 2 seed and a first-round bye.

But the Broncos’ quarterback questions aren’t going away. And their fans are nervous.

“Manning was great for the Broncos. I loved him. But you can only play football for so long. And he’s been fighting a losing battle,” said Denver’s Nancy Levine, a second-generation season-ticket holder. Her father first grabbed season tickets in 1964, more than 30 years before the Broncos won their first championship.

In the past 15 years, the Broncos have thrown out quarterback questions like red challenge flags. Jay Cutler replaced Jake Plummer midseason in 2006. Tebow bumped aside Kyle Orton in 2011.

“Osweiler has earned the starting spot. And I’m excited,” Levine said. “But if feeling good means, ‘Do I think we’re going to the Super Bowl?’ Then, I don’t know.”

Broncos fans are wearing their indecision. Holiday sales of Osweiler jerseys at the store at Dove Valley team headquarters kicked up. But Manning sales still dominate — the first jersey you see inside the door is a signed Manning jersey in a glass case, above an Elway jersey.

At SportsFan, an independent apparel retailer with an outpost next to the Broncos’ stadium, fan demand for jerseys is a week-to-week proposition.

“You’re always trying to balance what the customers are saying what they want right now and what they could want tomorrow,” said Derek Friedman, SportsFan’s owner. “With Osweiler, he’s not under contract for next year. So it’s definitely a delicate dance.”

Osweiler’s rookie deal with the Broncos ends after this season. He’s playing for a contract as well as the playoffs.

But zoom out of the Broncos bubble for a minute. What if, two months from now, the Broncos look back after losing in the playoffs and say they left Manning — Peyton Manning! 71,871 career passing yards! — on the bench? That’s a difficult idea to grasp.

“I get it. It sounds crazy,” Schlereth said. “But the bottom line is, as a franchise, if you’re realistic and you take the fan hat off, what are your chances really with their deficiencies to make it to the Super Bowl? Peyton Manning isn’t playing with the Broncos next year, so wouldn’t you like to see Brock play in pressure situations?”

The mania around Tebow’s takeover from Orton and his wobbly run to the playoffs in 2011 cannot be overstated. It was nuts — one of the strangest, wildest periods in Denver sports history.

Manning’s arrival with the Broncos in 2012 — Elway, as general manager, signed him to a five-year, $96 million contract — finally quieted the Tebow storm. Manning was meant to finally settle the Broncos into a solid quarterback situation, for the first time since Elway won back-to-back Super Bowls as quarterback in 1998 and 1999.

They’re now full circle back to another quarterback quandary, this time with Manning on the outs.

“I could tell something was wrong with Peyton. He just wasn’t himself,” said Highlands Ranch’s Gary Penfield, a season-ticket holder since 1993. “Given the integrity he displays for the game, it was admirable he finally stepped down to give Brock a chance.”

Penfield sat through a bitterly cold Monday night with his daughter, Christine, to watch another Osweiler nail-biter. The Broncos rallied in the second half for a 20-17 overtime victory over the Cincinnati Bengals to clinch a playoff berth.

That win bought Osweiler another week as a starter. Manning returned Wednesday from a foot injury to practice as a full participant with the team for the first time since November.

But Denver coach Gary Kubiak, a former backup quarterback for Elway, said Manning will be No. 2 at the position Sunday. It wasn’t enough for some fans to close the door on Manning.

“It was never in me to write Peyton off,” Penfield said. “He’s more than proved he’s a Hall of Fame quarterback. And I still don’t write him off. If we can win this last game, I think Peyton, if he needs to come in and play, he’ll do just fine.”

The Manning-to-Osweiler handoff left the Broncos with a conundrum. But they’re 11-4. And the other top teams in the AFC, including the Bengals and New England Patriots, have their own questions and problems to deal with. The amount of hope around Denver is bigger than the difference beween Manning and Osweiler.

“When I listen and talk to fans at the store, they’re enjoying the ride of the team more than focusing on No. 17 or 18,” Friedman said. “They really just want a W. And as long as they’re delivering W’s, fans just want to root for orange.”

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or @nickgroke

Passing judgment

With the Broncos trailing 14-3 at halftime Monday against the Bengals, a Denver Post online poll overwhelmingly favored Peyton Manning as the Broncos’ starting quarterback. He had 65 percent support compared with Trevor Siemian’s 23 percent and Brock Osweiler’s 12 percent. By the end of the game, Manning still had strong support (64 percent) but Osweiler’s stock rose to 18 percent, tied with Siemian. But by Thursday, the polling totals swung wildly back to Osweiler, a first-year starter:

WHO SHOULD BE DENVER’S STARTING QUARTERBACK AGAINST SAN DIEGO?

59.2%

Brock Osweiler

34.7%

Peyton Manning

6.1%

Trevor Siemian

Total votes: 6,984 through Saturday