After firing pro wrestler Hulk Hogan for using the N-word, will the WWE also get rid of its CEO Vince McMahon for the same reason?

McMahon used the N-word on camera during a lame “comedy” skit with John Cena and Booker T in the midst of a 2005 World Wrestling Entertainment pay-per-view show. See embedded NSFW footage below.

WWE cut all ties with Hogan this week, including scrubbing him from its website, after audio emerged of a 2012 interview with DJ Whoo Kid on the SiriusXM radio show Whoolywood Shuffle, in which Hogan dropped the N-bomb. Hulk Hogan then described how using racial epithets to refer to each other was allegedly a common practice between Hogan and Booker T, with neither side taking offense.

Perhaps more damaging to Hogan, there are also claims that a separate tape exists in which the Hulkster allegedly uses racial slurs in connection with a man his daughter may have been dating.

All this dirty laundry appears to be emerging because Hulkamania is trying to run wild, as it were, over the Gawker website in a well-publicized $100 million lawsuit about a sex tape filed by the wrestler who is Terry Bollea in real life. When the trial begins in a Florida courtroom, incidentally, Hogan will be permitted to wear a “plain bandanna” on his forehead, the presiding judge has ruled.

In the Vince McMahon 2005 footage, the wrestling impresario is shown approaching John Cena and asking him “what’s good in the hood?” When Cena, motioning to his championship belt, responds that he’s trying to take care of business, Vince shouts, “keep it up, my [N-word].”

As McMahon then struts by an outraged Booker T and Sharmell, the former exclaims “tell me he didn’t just say that.”

Reporting on the bit, the New York Daily News suggested that “McMahon’s use of the N-word appeared to be a pre-arranged part of the awkward comedy routine.”

Hulk Hogan has apologized for his racially offensive language in a statement to People: “Eight years ago I used offensive language during a conversation. It was unacceptable for me to have used that offensive language; there is no excuse for it; and I apologize for having done it.”

The iconic world champion wrestler apparently feels that the WWE exec is getting off easy. “Hulk is outraged Vince is acting so self-righteous, condemning him for spontaneously using the epithet in private when the wrestling boss used it in a premeditated way, on TV and for profit,” TMZ explained.

Responding to McMahon’s use of the N-word, a WWE rep insisted that the 2005 televised segment from the PPV broadcast “was an outlandish and satirical skit involving fictional characters, similar to that of many scripted television shows and movies.”

Do you think that Vince McMahon should fire himself for dropping the N-bomb on TV?

[Photo by Michael N. Todaro/Getty Images Entertainment]