Shepherd's Hope, one of Central Florida's leading charitable health clinics, held its annual fundraising breakfast this past week. At its five locations last year, Shepherd's Hope served more than 16,000 lower-income patients without health insurance. In an email interview, we asked CEO Marni Stahlman why business has been booming, even though Florida has led states in the number of residents signing up for coverage under the Affordable Care Act, a k a Obamacare. An excerpt of that interview follows. A full transcript is online at OrlandoSentinel.com/opinion.

Q: With the Affordable Care Act, why are clinics like Shepherd's Hope needed?

A: The role of the free health clinic, like Shepherd's Hope, is more critical than ever. Access to affordable, quality health care for the uninsured or underinsured remains a critical issue in Florida, and specifically here in Central Florida, in large part due to the Legislature and Gov. Rick Scott repeatedly declining to accept the federal Medicaid expansion program. While the national uninsured rate has dropped to 10.4 percent due to the implementation of the ACA, the rate of Floridians without health insurance, according to the U.S. Census Bureau, is at 16.6 percent. While this represents a drop of 3.4 percentage points from 2013, when the ACA first went into effect, it still places Florida with the third-highest rate of residents without health insurance in the U.S. Only Texas and Alaska have higher rates.

Despite strides made under the Affordable Care Act, the harsh reality is that as many as 450,000 Central Florida residents remain uninsured and without adequate health care. That equates to one in four living without health insurance — thus, without adequate health care. Notably, eight out of 10 uninsured people come from working families, forcing them to live in the "coverage gap". In Orange County alone, 30,000 children are impacted — making this county the 17th highest in terms of uninsured children in the country. Also consider these grim statistics: Central Florida's tri-county health-ranking data show twice the rate of uninsured as the national benchmark (24 percent vs 11 percent) and twice the number of preventable hospitalizations (82 per 1,000 vs. 49 per 1000).

A tremendous risk factor for many of the uninsured and underserved is that they are forced to wait before seeking or gaining access to health care, due to financial constraints or lack of access to limited community resources. As a result, their medical conditions generally become exacerbated and far too often progress to advanced stages before they receive medical care. Often it is area emergency departments that encounter the needs of these patients.

Shepherd's Hope CEO Marni Stahlman Shepherd’s Hope CEO Marni Stahlman says the demand for her charitable clinic persists despite Obamacare, in an interview with the Orlando Sentinel Editorial Board. Shepherd’s Hope CEO Marni Stahlman says the demand for her charitable clinic persists despite Obamacare, in an interview with the Orlando Sentinel Editorial Board.

Shepherd's Hope provides health care to thousands of eligible patients who have income at or below 200 percent of the poverty level, are uninsured, and are not eligible for Medicare or Medicaid health-care programs. The average cost of an emergency department visit in Central Florida, as reported by the Orlando Business Journal in November 2014, is $4,600. The estimated value for a patient visit to a Shepherd's Hope clinic is $77. In 2015, 47 percent of Shepherd's Hope patients (7,661) self-reported that without access to a Shepherd's Hope clinic, they would have elected to go completely without any type of health-care services. Similarly, 23 percent (3,749) reported that without Shepherd's Hope, they would have turned to an area emergency department for care. Without a Shepherd's Hope clinic available to mitigate these admissions, this more expensive alternative would have cost the Central Florida health-care system a staggering $17,245,400. By comparison, the cost for Shepherd's Hope to provide health care to these patients was $288,673 — an amazing return on investment!

Q: How many people did Shepherd's Hope serve last year? Has the number risen under the ACA?

A: In 2015 Shepherd's Hope provided 16,300 patient visits and medical services at five health centers. These services were made possible through the efforts and generosity of 2,200 clinical and general volunteers working 41,000 hours supported by $15.6 million in in-kind services from four hospital partners and over 100 medical specialty practices.

While this is a decrease from 2014, when 20,973 patient visits and medical services were reported (a 22 percent increase from 2013), this lower number is attributed to two significant factors: 1.) 1,700 patients were "turned away" from receiving medical care due to capacity shortages of available licensed clinical providers able to volunteer at a clinic; and 2.) One clinic location or another had to be completely closed 11 times in 2015 because no licensed provider was available, a requirement for operations. A clinic's nightly capacity averages 30 patients. If the clinic closes for the night, the results is 333 individuals who cannot be helped that evening.

The recruitment and retention of volunteer licensed clinical providers remains Shepherd's Hope's single most critical need. Without these dedicated volunteers we are unable operate and help to mitigate the community's health care needs.

Q: How was Shepherd's Hope able to serve those people — where did the necessary resources come from?

A: For every patient seen in one of the five Shepherd's Hope health centers, a labyrinth of resources operates efficiently and interdependently to provide free, essential primary and secondary/specialty care medical care to the underserved and uninsured. In fact, 35 percent of all primary-care patients seen return to a Shepherd's Hope clinic for a specialty service that might include Cardiology, Otolaryngology, Gastroenterology, Gynecology, Nephrology, Rheumatology, Urology, Pediatrics, Podiatry, Orthopedics and Ophthalmology, to name a few.

This innovative health-care model synchronizes and leverages a tightly woven consortium of 2,200 licensed medical and general volunteers based across the clinics nightly, operating under the Florida Department of Health's Volunteer Healthcare Provider Program; four community hospital systems — Florida Hospital, Orlando Health, Nemours Children's Hospital and Central Florida Regional — accept referrals, waiving all related fees, for diagnostic testing, surgeries and cancer treatments; 100 community-based private-practice providers accept referrals for specialty care perhaps not able to be provided at a Shepherd's Hope clinic; and 23 multi-faith partners pledge financial support for equipment and supplies, thereby creating a beautiful centrism that has Shepherd's Hope regarded nationally as an exemplary model of health care.