[Editor’s Note: This story is the second in a two-part series. Part one, in the Oct. 18 edition of The Watch, described how schools, doctors’ offices, hospitals and a network of clinics operated by the Center for Mental Health in Montrose address the need for mental health services.]

Despite the existence of mental health services in Ouray, San Miguel and Montrose counties, problems still arise when it comes to accessing them. Cost, physical constraints and access to practitioners often prevent those who could most use mental health counseling from getting the attention they need.

The cost — or the perceived cost — can be a barrier to accessing mental health services. Even for people who can afford them, not all mental health services are covered by insurance, and therapists in private practice can be expensive.

Those requiring mental health services are often the ones who can least afford them. “People who are under-insured or non-insured are the people most in need,” said Jon Gordon, the executive director of the Center for Mental Health in Montrose. “They have difficulty making appointments and then getting transportation to appointments, getting child care, getting off work. People with fewer resources have a much more difficult time.”

The CMH is funded primarily by the state’s Office of Behavioral Health to serve indigent clients, and by its Department of Health Care Policy and Financing, which facilitates Medicaid. Over the past 18 months, the number of Medicaid-eligible patients has doubled at the center.

In response, CMH is expanding its hours and improving its outreach. The goal is to help service clients in their own environments, rather than forcing them to travel to a provider’s headquarters in Montrose.

“Because of Obamacare, a lot more people who want to seek therapy are able to get it,” explained Lynton Moore, a licensed professional counselor who sees patients in Ridgway and Telluride.

“Most people in crisis can’t afford much,” Moore added. “They’re in survival mode.”

Some private practice providers in the area accept Medicaid. One is Nancy Read, a licensed psychologist who sees patients in Telluride. Her schedule is booked solid. Read accepted both Medicare and Medicaid when she practiced in Iowa and Minnesota, before moving to Colorado, because she believes people who depend on these programs are often marginalized.

“Obamacare has changed the landscape in a good way,” according to Read. “So many people have said, ‘I finally have insurance coverage,’ and that increases medical access.”

URBAN PROVIDERS, RURAL NEEDS

Although there is a rise in interest in family practice and psychiatry among medical students nationally, according to data from national medical associations, the trend has been for those new doctors to work in urban areas rather than remote rural communities that might benefit from those services the most. Turnover is also a problem.

In the past three years, for example, there have been four or five different providers working out of the Center for Mental Health’s office in Telluride alone.

“In the schools, you run into the problem of turnover,” said Lynn Borup, executive director of the Tri-County Health Network, a Telluride-based nonprofit that works to fill gaps in regional public health by improving access to care. “If you keep hiring a different therapist, the program won’t gain traction, and that’s not a sustainable model.”

Another trend in regional mental health practice is for people to visit their primary practitioners to be assessed for behavioral health problems.

“In most cases, these [primary care] doctors do a good job treating depression and anxiety,” Gordon, executive director of the Center for Mental Health, said. “But they get to a point where patients don’t respond to these treatments and need a psychiatric provider.”

Primary care doctors, according to Read, are not necessarily specialists in psychotropic medicine: “They’re out of their realm with patients who suffer from bipolar or psychosis or delusions. I don’t know that there’s a mental health crisis in terms of therapy, but I would definitely say there’s one when it comes to prescribing medications.”

While there are plenty of people listed as therapists, it’s important to pay attention to credentials. “Colorado is interesting because you can be a registered psychotherapist with the state with little or no psychological training,” Read said. “They have allowed people to work in this state who aren’t properly trained. I’m not sure the public is aware of the difference between therapists who are registered and therapists who are licensed.”

The Department of Regulatory Agencies oversees the regulation of psychologists, social workers, marriage and family therapists, licensed professional counselors and registered psychotherapists statewide. There are big differences between “registered” psychotherapists and those who are “licensed,” “certified,” “clinical” or “state-approved.”

Read urges consumers to look for a provider who is licensed by DORA in the state of Colorado. A providers’ licensure status can be found online with DORA, by checking the provider’s web site, or through a state professional association such as the Colorado Psychological Association.

Many mental health providers also cited a need for closer professional collaboration.

“People are really well-intentioned,” Borup noted. “But a lot of times we’re all working separately. Someone might being doing something innovative in mental health, the school could be doing something and so could social services — and we’re not collaborating.”

Read suggested that a meet-and-greet among local therapists would be beneficial.

“I’ll have patients who come in and say, ‘I’ve seen so and so before,’ and I’ve never heard of that therapist,” she said.

When she moved here several years ago from Minnesota and established a practice in Telluride, there were only three practicing psychologists in the area. They formed a consultation group for awhile, and met roughly once a month to talk about cases and issues in the field. That kind of discussion among professionals is a challenge in a remote place, but for these mental health professionals it was crucial.

MENTAL HEALTH CARE, PRIMARY CARE

The integration of mental health care into primary care visits is an increasingly recognized medical best practice.

A pilot program described by Tri-County Health Network’s Borup was implemented recently in Telluride in which, during regular check-ups, a physician inquires about a patient’s mental health. For those needing help, the doctor immediately arranges a consultation directly with an on-staff therapist, as opposed to referring that person to a therapist for an appointment at a later date.

Similarly, the Center for Mental Health has integrated staff at Montrose Hospital and at Pediatric Associates in Montrose. The group’s integrative footprint extends to the Norwood and Telluride school districts, where staff work with students two to three days a week. The Center for Mental Health also provides staff in regional jails to assist with tele-therapy and to organize access to additional mental health resources upon a detainees’ release.

“New staff are going into new programs, whether that’s in school-based programs or primary care clinics or the jail-based services we offer,” said Ed Hagins, deputy director at the Center for Mental Health. Hagins has worked in mental health services for 20 years and has witnessed a great deal of change, especially when it comes to integrative practices.

“Every year there’s something new. And we are learning. There are a lot of opportunities,” he said.

Tri-County Health Network has also made forays in mental health services by implementing training sessions for workers to act as First Responders for Mental Health. Borup likened the sessions to “mental health first aid, similar to CPR” which help stabilize patients “until help can get there.”

She added that an important by-product of the new training is breaking down stigmas, and raising critical awareness of and empathy for people with mental illnesses.

Stigma regarding the need for mental health services is at its worst in rural areas, and often prevent people from seeking help.

Negative judgments “are still out there, alive and well,” Hagins said. Yet “there are a lot of us living with mental illness successfully. It’s part of the human condition. There’s nothing to be afraid of.”

Indeed, one in four people in their lifetime will have a mental illness. And mental illness is one of the most easily treated disorders.

“The data shows that it’s very treatable,” Hagins emphasized. “There’s no reason for people to suffer with this.”