Prospective home owners encouraged to get personal to woo sellers who, right now, hold most cards

Related Stories In Boulder County home sales, 'cash is king'

Jesse Englund-Rohlf had been looking for a home in Boulder for about eight months when he found a place he loved: a four-bedroom town house with a finished basement in the Glenwood Grove neighborhood off Iris Ave.

Englund-Rohlf had already lost two offers. He wasn't going to get beat again. So this time, he brought out the big guns.

"I sent them a picture of my cats."

Not just any picture: A Christmas photo, with the felines sporting a Santa hat and reindeer antlers.

"I knew it had worked when we went to the closing," Englund-Rohlf said. "It's the first time I met the seller's agent, and she whips out the picture of my cats. She had printed it out and blown it up."

Englund-Rohlf, now a proud homeowner, had already offered $25,000 more than the $380,000 asking price, but like many successful area buyers he opted to put a little something extra with his offer as a way to stand out in an ultra-competitive market.

Offering life stories

"It's crazy. We had no idea what we were getting into," said Amanda Meier, who just purchased a home in old town Longmont with her fiancee.

Meier said all five offers, including her own, were 10 percent over asking price.

"We wrote a half-page letter that included a picture of ourselves and our dog, and mentioned that we were about to be married," Meier said. "And so the seller — the next day — told us that it was the reason she picked us, because she connected with some of the things we told her."

Advertisement

Meier and her partner get the keys to their new home Aug. 21.

"A home sale is a very large financial transaction, but it still has deeply personal ties," said Grant Muller, founder and owner of Boulder's Spaces Real Estate. "People want their house to go to a good home. They have memories there; sometimes they've raised kids there."

"It's an emotional transaction."

Muller said all of his agents at Spaces encourage buyers to do whatever they can to separate themselves from the pack — even when their offer isn't the best financially.

"Any way we can have a buyer create a personal connection, we'll do it," he said. "It works so well."

Here are some of Muller's top tips for crafting distinctive offers:

Get personal.

When Muller has a buyer tour a house, he makes sure they take note of their surroundings.

Is there a dog bowl or a kitty door? Lots of mid-century modern furniture? Pieces that suggest a hobby?

Though Englund-Rohlf's cats clinched the deal, he also connected with the seller on his passion for craft beer.

"I noticed (the seller) had turned the downstairs bedroom into a home brew room, and I'm an aspiring brewery owner," he said.

"Really, it's just finding common ground," Muller said, and then making sure your offer letter touches on that.

Show appreciation.

"It takes a lot of work to get a house ready for sale, so it's really important to acknowledge that," Muller said.

Find a few points you love about the house (custom paint, a well-tended garden) and mention them in your letter.

"A lot of times, you can go through a house and clearly see that there is a lot of love invested. Honor the fact that it's the center of somebody's life."

For Meier, that was certainly the case.

"(The seller) had lived in the home for 42 years, so I think it was an emotional thing to finally be selling this house," she said.

Be flexible.

Sellers want an easy process. And in this market, they hold the power. Muller said buyers need to recognize that in dealing with someone looking for an easy home-sale process.

"Ultimately, I try whatever I can to mitigate risks that the seller might have in the transaction," he said.

Use your offer letter to reassure the seller that you are easy to work with, Muller recommended. Show that you are organized and prepared to play nice — and that you won't nickel and dime the seller at the inspection.

"I try to make them feel secure that once we're in contract, we're not going to be unreasonable."

Hire good help.

The right professionals can make all the difference, Muller said.

Good lenders and buying agents will call the listing agent to introduce themselves. A buyer's team should help pull as much information and documentation ahead of time as possible, including any HOA or insurance contingencies.

"Presenting the entire offer package well is key," he said. "It helps the seller feel better that the buyer is on top of their game and willing to go the extra mile."

Just as important as managing all the moving pieces of real estate transaction, Muller said, is maintaining a good attitude throughout the process.

"Staying positive and having a can-do spirit is the beginning of making this successful."

Shay Castle: 303-473-1626, castles@dailycamera.com, @shayshinecastle