Conservative views reign at congressional forum













Image 1 of / 4 Caption Close Image 1 of 4 Francisco “Quico” Canseco said an important family matter that “trumps politics” kept him from attending. Francisco “Quico” Canseco said an important family matter that “trumps politics” kept him from attending. Image 2 of 4 Republican candidates Robert Lowry (left) and Will Hurd meet on January 16, 2014 to debate issues at the Firefighters Banquet Hallas they campaign for the District 23 U.S. representative seat. Republican candidates Robert Lowry (left) and Will Hurd meet on January 16, 2014 to debate issues at the Firefighters Banquet Hallas they campaign for the District 23 U.S. representative seat. Photo: For The San Antonio Express-News Image 3 of 4 Republican candidates Robert Lowry (left) and Will Hurd meet on January 16, 2014 to debate issues at the Firefighters Banquet Hallas they campaign for the District 23 U.S. representative seat. Republican candidates Robert Lowry (left) and Will Hurd meet on January 16, 2014 to debate issues at the Firefighters Banquet Hallas they campaign for the District 23 U.S. representative seat. Photo: For The San Antonio Express-News Image 4 of 4 Robert Lowry (left) and Will Hurd, Republican candidates for Congressional District 23, take questions at the event. Robert Lowry (left) and Will Hurd, Republican candidates for Congressional District 23, take questions at the event. Photo: Photos By Tom Reel / San Antonio Express-News Conservative views reign at congressional forum 1 / 4 Back to Gallery

SAN ANTONIO — Two of the three GOP candidates for Congressional District 23 faced off before a tea party audience on Thursday and drew cheers as they pledged to attack the nation's budget problems and reduce illegal immigration.

Physician Robert Lowry and former CIA agent Will Hurd largely agreed on goals including abolishing the IRS, revamping the tax code and eliminating the Affordable Care Act known as Obamacare.

The third contender, Francisco “Quico” Canseco, the sprawling district's former representative, wasn't part of the discussion. He canceled his appearance, citing a pressing family matter that “trumps politics,” according to a statement he sent to event organizers.

Co-hosted by the San Antonio Tea Party, Alamo City Republican Women and the Republican Men's Club of Bexar County, the event at San Antonio Firefighters Banquet Hall drew about 200 people, including numerous down-ballot candidates, GOP loyalists and tea party activists.

U.S. Rep. Pete Gallego, D-Alpine, who unseated Canseco two years ago, wasn't part of the forum and was hardly mentioned, aside from Lowry saying Gallego missed his chance to improve immigration policy and border security in the district that sweeps from San Antonio to El Paso.

With little disagreement, the two candidates fielded pointed questions from San Antonio Tea Party President Allen Tharp, who cast Obamacare as a fiasco, assailed the House GOP leadership, derided entitlement programs and suggested President Barack Obama should be impeached.

“Professional politicians and lawyers are part of the problem with Washington, D.C. If we want to change what's going on in Washington, we need to change the kind of people we're sending there,” said Hurd, a cybersecurity specialist.

“There's absolutely nothing wrong with the conservative principles of the Republican Party. The problem is, we keep sending folks to Washington, D.C., that don't know how to implement them,” Hurd said.

Lowry, with a slogan of “The Cure for Congress,” said he would advocate term limits and buck House rules that empower the speaker and committee chairs. He also favors elimination of numerous federal entities not prescribed by the Constitution.

The GOP leadership “has given up their morals. That's why they always find themselves compromised. It's time to go on the offensive, know what you're talking about and quite compromising,” Lowry said

jgonzalez@express-news.net

Twitter: johnwgonzalez