Topics: Super Bowl, super bowl 2014, super bowl ads, Entertainment News

The father in Hyundai’s Super Bowl ad uses a Jedi-like sensibility and quick reflexes to save his little boy from crashing into a brick planter. With Bruno Mars singing “You can count on me like 1, 2, 3” in the background, the father saves his kid from increasingly dangerous calamities: he steps in front of his son to take the errant pinata hit; he jumps in moments before his boy reaches a lit barbeque while trying to catch a pass.

In the highly gendered world of advertising, the ability to anticipate a child’s needs used to lie squarely in female territory. Now, it’s called “Dad’s Sixth Sense,” according to the title of Hyundai’s ad, and it’s just one example of how the image of men in ads is softening and how the once-crisp lines of masculinity have blurred.

You wouldn’t have found this kind of dad a few years ago. Now, of the 19 Super Bowl commercials released at the time of writing, three feature a father engaging with his child meaningfully and four others show men caring for another person or animal (or muppet).

Men make more household purchases than before so advertisers are trying to find ways to tap the changing market — and it turns out the stoic hero, the bumbling idiot, they don’t always work so well. As a result, advertisers are cautiously stepping away from some of those archetypes.

“Ten years ago, there were clear lines, blue and pink,” said Gary Hayward, who represents Bombay Sapphire. “The gender gap is not as clear as it used to be.”

In terms of advertising, there is no bigger venue than the Super Bowl, which is expected to beat the president’s State of the Union address viewership by at least 78 million people (a difference that is greater than the entire populations of California and Texas combined). So it’s tempting to say a softened male on this big a stage is a huge leap for this country. But critics say these ads aren’t an indication of a real shift in gender politics. After all, these guys aren’t exactly cleaning up after a sick child, washing dishes or folding laundry. And the odds that we will see a single father or a gay couple on this country’s holiest sports days any time soon? A long shot.

The ads are “pretty much saying you do need to attract a woman, you need to be a heterosexual male to be valuable,” said Imran Siddiquee, communications director for the Representation Project, a feminist group that critiques sexist ads. “I don’t know how much it really encourages young boys and girls to think differently. I don’t know how much it really allows us to be outside the box.”

Still, it makes sense that men are increasingly portrayed as caregivers. In the last few years, some statistics indicate they have assumed greater roles in families. The number of stay-at-home dads has more than doubled from roughly 90,000 in 2000 to almost 190,000 in 2012, according to census data. And dads have taken on shopping, according to a detailed study by Defy Media called the Acumen Report that will be unveiled in the upcoming months. The media group shared some of their findings from the survey of more than 2,000 men, ages 18 to 49. More than 65 percent said they shop for household items. Of the married men, more than half said they, and not their wives, select what brands to buy. Nearly 57 percent said they would stop buying from a company that did something offensive or illegal and 60 percent said they bought something because it was made locally. Only 30 percent indicated that they responded to a product that was endorsed by a celebrity or an athlete.

These results imply there’s a certain amount of thought going on when a guy shops. He seems aware of how products fit into the world and how his choice plays into that dynamic. And because the male market is clearly showing greater influence in the home and correspondingly in the stores, companies are trying to figure out how to reach these guys in a way that resonates with their conscientiousness. But advertisers don’t always get it right. In a 2012 study by the same company, men said that they couldn’t relate to the women-chasing, metrosexual or macho men in ads.