The Affordable Care Act gives states the option to expand Medicaid eligibility to people earning 138% of the federal poverty line – a group comprising the working-poor – more than 90% of which would be paid by the federal government. While thirty-one states have opted-in to the expansion, Tennessee lawmakers have repeatedly rejected the plan, estimated to cover 280,000 uninsured Tennesseans, mostly working adults.

Rather than adopting Medicaid expansion, the Haslam administration sought and received a waiver from the federal government to have greater flexibility in creating its own plan called Insure Tennessee. Though funded by the Affordable Care Act, the plan gives the federal money to eligible uninsured Tennesseans to purchase private insurance or deposit in a health savings account.

As a Haslam spokesman put it: The governor, a Republican, brought “a Tennessee-specific plan to the General Assembly that is fiscally responsible and is an alternative to Medicaid expansion.”

As per the Affordable Care Act, the federal government would cover 100% of the cost newly enrolled Tennesseans through the end of 2016. It would then phase-down to paying 90% of the costs. Hospitals, which have lobbied heavily for the proposal, have agreed to cover the state's remaining share through an assessment, basically a voluntary tax.

Insure Tennessee has, however, never made it past committee, despite support from about two-thirds of Tennesseans and a plurality of Republicans, according to a Vanderbilt poll. Among Republican lawmakers, the plan has been unable to disentangle itself from a damning association with Obamacare – and with it charges like “entitlement program” and “handout.”

“The Insure Tennessee population, broadly speaking, includes participants in the labor force who comprise a disproportionate share of the uninsured population,” writes a study from University of Tennessee's Center for Business and Economics Research. It is intended to fill the gap between those who earn too much to qualify for Tenncare but too little to afford private insurance.

Roy Herron, a Baptist minister and former Chairman of the State Democratic Party, puts it this way: “if the politicians and the prisoners, the lawmakers and the lawbreakers, have government-provided health care, what’s wrong with working women and working men having health care?” Almost all Tennessee legislators receive their health insurance from the state, including six out of the seven who most recently voted to kill Insure Tennessee in March.

Indeed, the beneficiaries include many of the state's most vulnerable populations. According to the American Mental Health Counselors Association, just under two-hundred thousand Tennesseans with mental illnesses lack health insurance who would have been covered by Insure Tennessee. The group estimates that the mentally ill constitute 44% of the population eligible for Medicaid expansion.

The group, which advocates for Medicaid expansion, argues further that expanding coverage could reduce costs by treating illness before they reach crisis levels. “Uninsured individuals with mental illness consistently forgo needed preventive and routine care, resulting in clinical deterioration to the point that they find themselves in crisis...”

Moreover, more than twenty-thousand uninsured veterans and their spouses in Tennessee would receive insurance under the plan, according to data from the Robert Woods Johnson Foundation, which would halve the total number of uninsured veterans in the state.

Interestingly, this is not a simple case of big business versus the little guy. Backing the proposal include business groups like the Tennessee Business Roundtable and the Nashville Chamber of Commerce, who don't quite see why we should reject about a billion dollars of federal money over the next ten years.

They also include the Tennessee Hospital Association, which voices the complaints of many hospitals that they are risking collapse due to the cost of uncompensated care (four rural hospitals have already closed and 50 other hospitals, out of the state's 120, are at risk). Medical groups, such as the Tennessee Medical Association and Tennessee Nurses Association, have also supported the plan.

So how on earth does a proposal hand-crafted by a Republican governor, backed by the overwhelming majority of Tennesseans, hospitals, doctors, and business groups, not even get a full vote in the legislature?

The answer is, simply, politics run amok – a legislature beholden to the most extreme conservative partisans. "People were looking for an excuse not to vote because they are scared to death of Obamacare, and they had that excuse and they took it," said Craig Becker, president of the Tennessee Hospital Association.

There is little reason to see why these electoral incentives would change. State politics is dominated by the Republican Party, who have large majorities in both Chambers of the Legislature. And the party continues to lurch rightward, galvanized by interest-groups like the Koch-funded Americans for Prosperity and the Beacon Center, which both lobbied against Insure Tennessee. In April, the House voted to make the Bible the Tennessee's state book, despite obvious constitutional problems (the bill died in the Senate).

In a special-election for a Knoxville state-house seat, Jason Zachary, an opponent of Insure Tennessee, defeated Karen Carson, a supporter of the program, in the Republican-primary. No Democrat is on the ballot. Analysts interpreted the result as a warning to any incumbent Republican: support Insure Tennessee and a primary challenge from the flank will unseat you.