Gentrification: It's a hot-button topic in rapidly growing Jersey City.

Downtown JC has seen the most changes, with new high-rises, businesses and restaurants opening almost every month. A few decades ago, people were afraid to walk alone in Newport at night. Today, it's home to shiny luxury condos and a park with its own beach.

Other neighborhoods, however, aren't directly benefiting. MLK Drive, West Side Avenue and Palisade have stretches of empty storefronts and Journal Square, JC's old heart, is a shell of its former self, only recently seeing more development. And in DTJC itself, longtime residents find themselves getting priced out of their homes. This leaves many asking--is this growth good for Jersey City?

Artist Allison Remy Hall found herself asking the same question. Hall, who studied anthropology at the University of Wisconsin, says she was intrigued by the chatter around her and decided to explore the topic through art.

At train stations and streets around the city, Hall talked to locals about gentrification. The end result? About 30 audio interviews from a diverse bunch--everyone from developers at SILVERMAN to activists from the Jersey City Peace Movement.

Hall then recruited local artists to create original pieces inspired by the interviews. While many are familiar names in the Downtown art scene, most of the participants hail from the Heights or other areas.

"Going into it, I really didn't understand how complicated an issue it actually is as far as economics, class, race, and how it all plays together," said Hall. "There were people who were all about it, who said, Downtown is so beautiful now and I love it, but also people who said, What about everyone getting displaced because of rent?

"A lot of people actually came out in the middle. They said, Yeah, we really like some of the new restaurants and bars coming up, but we also can't afford to live Downtown anymore," added Hall, who is part of this conflicted bunch herself.

In the months-long process of curating the show, Hall wondered if she was the right person to be putting gentrification under the lens, especially having only been here for two years.

"I've been struggling with the sense that I don't really have the right to be running such an art show," said Hall.

"What perspective do I really have as a person of relative privilege? That feeling originated with being a transplant, but it has evolved through my interviews with people of color in the community--There has been a lot of discussion about displacement, and as a white person living Downtown there's no way I can separate myself from that conversation.

"How can I truly curate a neutral and all-encompassing exhibit when I can't really understand all sides of the situation because of my own background?" she asked. "So I'm really just aiming to let the artists' work and the interviews speak for themselves."

While she wants viewers to take away their own thoughts from the exhibit, Hall says she's come to her own conclusions.

"I think it's important to use resources in neighborhoods that already exist instead of just new ones," said Hall. "Jersey City is already filled with great communities and it would be a shame if it all just got washed away."

"Gentrification: The Changing Landscape of Jersey City" opens Saturday, Jan. 10 with a reception from 5 p.m. to 9 p.m. at 313 Gallery, 313 Third St., Jersey City.