Of all the ways in which Portland is weird, perhaps none is more striking than its century-old form of government. Voters choose five full-time commissioners, one of them a mayor, who not only make policy but also oversee bureaus as elected executives of sorts. Of the nation’s 30 largest cities, Portland is the only one to employ this particular structure, a City Club of Portland committee noted a 2007 report. More than half a dozen attempts to replace it with something more mainstream have failed, and the most recent proposal, a priority of former Mayor Tom Potter, received a gruesome thrashing seven years ago.



Editorial Agenda 2014

More jobs for Oregon Position the Port for the future Make Portland a city that works Keep people moving Build a culture of student success Move forward on tax reform Protect and expand personal freedom

_______________________________ Read more about the editorial board's priorities for Oregon.

Whether you like the proposal or not (we haven’t made up our minds yet), it’s hard not to wonder whether City Hall would be facing this dissection if voters had made a different choice in 2007. No matter how next month’s election turns out, the City Council should consider convening another panel to review Portland’s charter.

The commission form of government does have its advantages. Giving elected officials executive duties encourages entrepreneurial and creative candidates to seek office, argued the city club panel in its 2007 report, which also noted that commissioners’ “detailed working knowledge of bureaus” tends to foster innovation.

Douglas Morgan, an emeritus professor of public administration at Portland State University’s Hatfield School of Government, says the commission system also facilitates citizen engagement. Nationally, urbanites are less engaged than they have been in the past, he says, but Portland “stands out as having engaged citizens.”

The commission system also has big drawbacks, including the widely recognized tendency of commissioners to protect their bureau turf while allowing their colleagues wide latitude to manage their bureaus as they see fit. This can lead to “innovation” gone awry, as demonstrated by former Commissioner Randy Leonard, who from his perch atop the Water Bureau directed millions of ratepayer dollars to the renovation of the Rose Festival headquarters and other projects with little connection to the bureau’s actual mission, as reported by The Oregonian’s Brad Schmidt.

A system that encourages outside-the-box thinking can, at its worst, disregard the value of boxes completely. Before you know it, water funds are being used to renovate a building in a park in Clackamas County, sewer and stormwater funds are being used to buy parkland in Portland, and ratepayers are angry. If they’re angry enough, of a chunk of city government will soon be relocated to a new box with thicker walls.

Because of its decentralized nature, meanwhile, the commission form of government isn’t designed to operate as efficiently as some alternatives, including the strong-mayor model that failed seven years ago. Even though it expressed opposition to the charter change, the city club report acknowledged that “unified bureau administration would create an environment for increasing oversight, reducing redundant services, and promoting collaboration among bureaus.”

Such coordination will be increasingly important in a future that promises a rising demand for services despite a constrained tax base, says Morgan, who chaired the Portland Utility Review Board for several years and offered testimony to the charter review commission prior to the 2007 vote.

Why did Portland residents support the status quo by a three-to-one ratio seven years ago? In part, says Morgan, “because Portland likes weird. That was part of the campaign.” Quirkiness is a core element of the city’s brand, which in many ways is a positive. But when the consequence is loyalty to an outdated form of government whose weaknesses produce the sort of ratepayer rebellion Portland may see in May, perhaps it’s time to move beyond weird.