The resistance against right-wing policies grows to Georgia with Moral Mondays and South Carolina’s Truthful Tuesdays.

Hundreds of Moral Monday demonstrators gathered on the steps of the Capitol this week to protest Governor Nathan Deal’s refusal to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act. According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, more than 400,000 people in Georgia will be denied Medicaid coverage by state leaders. Ad Policy

“Healthcare and access to healthcare—preventative services as well as treatment—is a civil right, a human right, and a moral right,” Otis Brawley, chief medical officer for the American Cancer Society and a physician at Grady Hospital, said to WABE 90.1 FM.

While Deal argues that the state can’t afford Medicaid expansion, while protesters counter that the federal government would pick up the vast majority of expansion costs. Twenty-two other states have also rejected the expansion.

A coalition of religious and progressive activists staged the first Moral Monday Georgia protest.

“Make them hear you,” North Carolina NAACP President Rev. William Barber told the crowd. “Don’t make a deal with injustice. Do what is right.”

In South Carolina, progressive groups held a “Truthful Tuesday” protest at the State House to also protest that the Legislature’s failure to enact the expansion in addition to the failure to provide high-quality education to all children, and a failure to protect voting rights.

“Whatever North Carolina has done in terms of advocating for moral and ethical laws, our state needs to do the same thing,” said The Reverend Brenda Kneece, executive minister of the South Carolina Christian Action Council, a group that represents sixteen denominations and 4,000 congregations. “This rally on Tuesday … is the opening day of the (legislative session), and we want on that day to speak truth to power.”

The “Truthful Tuesday Coalition” consists of the South Carolina Christian Action Council, the South Carolina chapter of the National Association of Social Workers, the South Carolina Education Association, the South Carolina chapter of the NAACP and the South Carolina Progressive Network. (photo courtesy of TruthfulTuesday.net)