Buy Photo Kaema Mackey, center front, holds the flag of Eritrea as she and other participants representing 55 other countries parade down 5th Street on their way to the city's WorldFest celebration on the Belvedere. 05 Sept 2015 (Photo: David R. Lutman/Special to The CJ)Buy Photo

The sights, sounds and smells of the global community are at the Belvedere in downtown Louisville this weekend at the city’s 13th annual WorldFest celebration.

More than 100,000 people are expected to enjoy the four-day event that began Friday and will run through Monday, said Corey Sims, event coordinator for the Louisville Metro Government Office of the Mayor.

“Louisville is a very diverse city and we want to celebrate that,” he said.

A nationalization ceremony took place on Friday to kick off the celebration, where 196 people took the oath of citizenship. Saturday featured a parade that represented 56 different nations and cultures.

The festival includes a “Global Village,” a tented area of the event dedicated to education including language and art demonstrations.

“Its our passport to the world," he said.

Three stages at WorldFest also features more than 100 performances of international song and dance, and there are more than 100 food, craft and information vendors at the event.

“Everyone has a unique background and story,” he said. “To understand and truly be a community we need to invest the time to learn about each other’s culture.”

One of the event’s participants, Hanna Yun, director of outreach for the Asia Institute -Crane House and principal of Louisville’s Korean Language School, demonstrated a Korean drum in the Global Village.

“I love to promote our wonderful culture to the community we are part of," she said.

IF YOU GO

What: 13th Annual WorldFest, a celebration of diverse cultures and heritage of Louisville with world music, dance and food.

Where: Belvedere in downtown Louisville

When: 11 a.m.-11 p.m. Sunday, Sept. 6; 11 a.m.-7 p.m. Monday, Sept. 7

Admission: Free

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1EIexrr