A disturbing spate of laws is being passed by states across the U.S. in the name of “religious freedom” and “protecting privacy.” The only problem? It’s coming at the expense of the LGBT community. First came North Carolina. Last month, its general assembly convened a special session (at a cost of $42,000 to taxpayers) for the sole purpose of approving a bill that essentially allows for discrimination against LGBT citizens in the state. The city of Charlotte had previously passed an ordinance allowing transgender people to use bathrooms that match their self-identified gender. The new swiftly passed state law invalidated that ordinance and went a step further by banning local governments from enacting anti-discrimination policies in the first place.

Mississippi got in on the action last week, when its Republican-led senate passed the “Protecting Freedom of Conscience From Government Discrimination Act.” Translation: Businesses and even public employees cannot be punished for denying services to LGBT customers if they have “sincerely held religious beliefs” that marriage is between a man and a woman and that gender is assigned at birth. Georgia recently passed a comparable “religious liberty” bill that would have, among other provisions, protected a business’s ability to fire an employee for being gay. Under pressure from the film industry, which has flocked to Georgia thanks to its generous tax credits, and other major corporations, Governor Nathan Deal vetoed the bill this week, saying it didn’t reflect the morals of Georgia’s “warm, friendly, and loving people.”

Unfortunately, these three examples don’t complete the trend. About 10 other states have drafted similar measures since the Supreme Court decision legalizing gay marriage. What a time: Gay marriage is legal in all 50 states, but a pizza place or a wedding hall can legally deny service to a gay couple; 60 years after the civil rights movement fought to dismantle segregated buses and water fountains, a transgender man or woman can be banned from using the restroom that matches his or her true gender. This is not a black-and-white flashback photograph; this is happening right now.

The irony is that the new wave of legislation comes under the guise of protection. The word is used liberally by conservative lawmakers. Mississippi’s law trots out protecting as the first word of its wordy title. In North Carolina, legislators argued that the state bill protects the privacy of its citizens from trans men or women who ostensibly enter the wrong restroom with the intent to prey on others. (As one trans man pointed out in a brilliant tweet, it would be more alarming and privacy disrupting for a trans man to enter a women’s restroom.) Where are the laws protecting the separation of church and state?

“This is really not about bathrooms,” said North Carolina Democratic Representative Rodney Moore. “This is about fear.”

Safeguarding religious freedom shouldn’t come at the cost of failing to protect freedom of sexual and gender identity. The new laws aren’t protecting those who need protection the most: In the absence of anti-discrimination laws, the LGBT community is left wide open to discrimination—not only by businesses or bathroom assignments, but in housing, healthcare, and education. These new laws legalize that discrimination. It doesn’t help that there’s a legal precedent: In 2014’s landmark Hobby Lobby case, the Supreme Court ruled that certain for-profit corporations cannot be required to make business decisions that run counter to their religious beliefs (in that case, it meant complying with the Affordable Care Act, which offers birth control, which the company doesn’t believe in). The Civil Rights Act outlaws discrimination based on “race, color, religion, sex, or national origin”—but there’s nothing in there yet about sexual or gender identity.

Fighting back falls to opponents of the laws, and the voters tasked with deciding who will represent them in November. “We witnessed an affront to democracy,” Democratic North Carolina State Senator Dan Blue said after his state’s law was passed. “We will not be silent.” Businesses in North Carolina and Mississippi are calling for repeals: PayPal today canceled a planned expansion that would have brought 400 new jobs to Charlotte.

In Georgia, the governor’s veto was met with praise, but it’s far from the end of the battle against LGBT discrimination there. “We’ll have to be even more vigilant and more proactive than ever,” Robbie Medwed, education director at the Southern Jewish Resource Network for Gender and Sexual Diversity, told The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. “Discrimination is already happening in Georgia. And we’re going to see this bill again next session—there’s no question about that.”