Two Palmer Ridge High School students were killed and two others injured early Labor Day morning in a one-vehicle El Paso County wreck, authorities say.

Colorado State Patrol officers took the 17-year-old driver, suspected of drunken driving, to a hospital for treatment and later arrested him, said Trooper Nate Reid, CSP spokesman. The suspect’s name has not been released. He was taken to a juvenile detention facility and is being held on suspicion of vehicular homicide, The Gazette reported, identifying the driver as a recent transfer from Palmer Ridge to a Parker high school.

Beau Begier, 17, and Ryan Pappas, 18, both from Monument, were killed in the accident, according to a news release by Trooper Eric Zachareas. Both Begier and Pappas were seniors at Palmer Ridge High School in Monument, according to their Facebook pages and online sports records

Another 17-year-old passenger in the car — who The Gazette identified as Palmer Ridge senior Mitchell Clark — was taken to Penrose-St. Francis Health Services hospital in Colorado Springs by medical helicopter for treatment of serious injuries.

The Lewis-Palmer School District sent a letter to the community outlining the crash as a “a tragedy this morning impacting many families in our community.”

“This is a tragic reminder of what can be the outcome of young people drinking and driving,” Reid said.

Begier was a member of the Palmer Ridge wrestling team while Pappas played baseball. Several people took to social media remembering the teens.

“Beau Begier was one of the funniest people I’ve ever had the pleasure of knowing,” Bailey Ferrari posted on Twitter.

“Ryan Pappas, my friend, I’ll miss you more than I can say,” Carter Thorne said on Twitter. “I know you’re in a better place now, but I can’t help wishing you were still here.”

The one-car accident happened just after 1 a.m.

The 17-year-old driver was going east on Baptist Assembly Road at high speed and failed to stop at a stop sign, the patrol said. The convertible Mini Cooper went airborne and slammed head-on into a pine tree.

Begier who was not wearing a seat belt, was ejected from the car. The others were all wearing seat belts.

The accident happened just days after the four high school students began the 2014-15 school year.

Staff Writer Jesse Paul contributed to this story.