Wisconsin Attorney General-elect Brad Schimel speaks to supporters during an election night party on Tuesday at the Country Springs Hotel in Waukesha. Credit: Associated Press / The Waukesha Freeman

By of the

Madison — Attorney General-elect Brad Schimel may seek more resources to fight heroin, saying that curbing its abuse will be his top priority as Wisconsin's new law enforcement leader.

Making the rounds at the Capitol last week after his election, the Republican prosecutor said that he would seek to aggressively expand enforcement, treatment and prevention efforts on heroin — actions that he said would probably require additional funding from taxpayers.

"We're going to hit them by land, air and sea," Schimel said of drug dealers and those who are spreading addiction through the state.

In contentious debates in both the Legislature and on the campaign trail, the fight against heroin has been a point of bipartisan agreement over the past two years. Gov. Scott Walker and legislative leaders all expressed openness to working with Schimel on battling abuse of the drug, which has led to a sharp increase in overdose deaths in recent years.

Schimel, the Waukesha County district attorney, and his opponent, Democratic Jefferson County District Attorney Susan Happ, both agreed on the need to target heroin and to do so by locking up criminals and offering treatment and outreach to those at risk.

Schimel praised efforts by lawmakers and current Attorney General J.B. Van Hollen to pass bipartisan measures last session to fight the use of heroin and said he wants to build on those efforts.

On the campaign trail, Schimel unveiled what he dubbed the STOP Heroin initiative, which stands for "Support Teaching Opiates Prevention." The plan called for increased training, better coordination with other states and more aggressive prosecution to combat heroin abuse.

Myranda Tanck, a spokeswoman for Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald (R-Juneau), said lawmakers will need time to choose leaders and establish their own priorities in the wake of Tuesday's election.

"That being said, we were proud of the recent (heroin abuse) package passed last session and are certainly open to new ideas for expanding those initiatives this time around," Tanck said.

Walker spokeswoman Laurel Patrick said that the governor and Schimel spoke by phone and were expected to meet soon.

"As they meet to discuss priorities, this will be an issue for discussion," Patrick said.

One lawmaker who has been a leader on the problem posed by heroin is Rep. John Nygren (R-Marinette), who has talked publicly about the horrors and heartache of his daughter's addiction to the drug. In a statement, Nygren said he's open to adding to the legislation he helped pass last session.

"There are various treatment options in Wisconsin; we need to consult with more stakeholders to find what will be most effective. We look forward to working with our new attorney general on combating the heroin epidemic that affects every Assembly district," Nygren said.

Schimel has said that dealers selling the highly addictive drug are "more dangerous than someone who would fire a gun into a crowded school ground."

His plan to fight back includes provisions to work with neighboring states and the federal Drug Enforcement Administration to share information and training, expand drug treatment courts, improve training for police officers and prosecute doctors who illegally profit from writing opiate prescriptions. Schimel also wants to educate students and parents about opiate abuse, and make local prescription drug recycling programs more widely available.

Schimel has said he can roll out parts of the plan quickly but would need the Legislature to act to advance some parts of the plan.

During the campaign, Happ advocated for a similar overall approach, saying she favored "aggressively prosecuting heroin dealers and talking with citizens about the addictive nature of opiates and treatment alternatives for those addicted."