Dallas Symphony Orchestra, “Symphonie Fantastique,” July 6, Bravo! Vail Music Festival

Possibly the most interesting program on all of Vail’s schedule this season. Berlioz’s elegant, emotional symphony is paired with the wow of Poulenc’s “Concerto for Two Pianos and Orchestra.” Alessio Bax and Anne-Marie McDermott are the dazzling duo.

Gerald R. Ford Amphitheater, Vail, 877-812-5700 or bravovail.org

Bartók + Björk, July 7, Colorado Music Festival

The Colorado Music Festival is plunging into its next chapter with new music director Jean-Marie Zeitouni firmly in place. There’s some traditional fare on the schedule but also some insane musical mashups, like this concert that has Steve Hackman pairing sounds from the classic composer and the present-day pop star. Could be a disaster; could change your life.

Chautauqua Auditorium, Boulder, 303-665-0599 or comusic.org

Olga Kern, July 8, Strings Music Festival

Olga Kern puts on one of the best shows in classical music, and she shines brightest in solo recitals, like this one at this versatile festival in Steamboat Springs. Fans love her on Rachmaninoff and Beethoven and she’ll dive into both on this special night. Expect good playing and plenty of personality.

Strings Music Pavilion, Steamboat Springs, 970- 879-5056 or stringsmusicfestival.com

“Mozart Under Moonlight,” Colorado Symphony Orchestra, July 10, Arvada Center

We wish the orchestra would do a whole series of outdoor concerts in the summer, but we’ll settle for this night of Mozart in Arvada. The broad program features his first ,Symphony No. 1, and his last, Symphony No. 41.

Arvada Center Outdoor Amphitheater, Arvada, 303-623-7876 or coloradosymphony.org

The Weilersteins and Tchaikovsky, July 25, Bravo! Vail Music Festival

Cellist Alisa Weilerstein does some of her best playing in Vail, and that’s saying plenty. She’ll be motivated by the presence of her sibling, Joshua, on the podium and “Variations on a Rococo Theme” on the program. Symphony No. 6 rounds out the night. The New York Philharmonic provides backup.

Gerald R. Ford Amphitheater, Vail, 877-812-5700 or bravovail.org

Sharon Isbin, Stanley Jordan and Romero Lubambo, Aug. 6, Aspen Music Festival

This is just too good to miss. Three of the world’s mightiest guitar gods — classical Isbin, jazz Jordan and Brazilian Lubambo — mesh styles on a beautiful Aspen night. Match-ups like this are what make a fest a fest.

Harris Concert Hall, Aspen, 970-925-9042 or aspenmusicfestival.com

Colorado Symphony Orchestra, “Audience Choice!,” Aug. 8.

The fact that the CSO is leaving this night’s music up to its patrons is 100 percent endearing, and just the kind of thing that makes a night with the hometown orchestra homey. Details on voting are to come, but the choices will be from the orchestra’s best efforts from past years. Watch the website for your options.

Boettcher Concert Hall, 303-623-7876 or coloradosymphony.org

Joshua Bell, Aug. 14, Aspen Music Festival

Joshua Bell is an international figure, but his Colorado connections, due largely to this festival, have long made him one of us. He’s back to play and, for the first time here, conduct. The program is impressive, with Bach’s Violin Concerto in E major and Beethoven’s Seventh Symphony.

Benedict Music Tent, Aspen, 970-925-9042 or aspenmusicfestival.com

Alan Gilbert, Aug. 23, Santa Fe Chamber Music Festival

Landmark events are rare for festivals that have been around a long time, but this performance, conducted by New York Philharmonic music director Alan Gilbert, is a big moment, indeed, for this heralded music series. The main event: Messiaen’s majestic “From the Canyons to the Stars,” inspired by the Western terrain – which is sorta perfect.

Lensic Performing Arts Center, Santa Fe, N.M., 505-982-1890 or santafechambermusic.com

Joyce Yang and Augustin Hadelich, Aug. 1, Salida Aspen Concerts

This performance series remains Colorado’s best-kept secret as stars from the Aspen Music Festival roll over the pass for up-close concerts at Salida High School auditorium. Pianist Yang and violinist Hadelich share the spotlight on Stravinsky, Debussy, Franck and a few other surprise selections. Check the entire season schedule online.

Salida High School, Salida, 719-539-6467 or salidaaspenconcerts.org.