Do research: Reverse mortgages let you borrow money using equity in your home as security. Photo: Jim Davies

We receive a combined part pension and partially draw down from our superannuation every month. Please advise on how reverse mortgages for self-funded retirees work. Would our pension be affected? R. D.

Your starting point should be a neutral source of information, such as the Australian Securities and Investment Commission's website Moneysmart at moneysmart.gov.au. Alternatively, the National Information Centre on Retirement Investments offers some information at nicri.org.au. An industry body, SEQUAL, or Seniors Equity Release, is on the web at sequal.com.au and lists Australian Seniors Finance, Bankwest, Homesafe, Macquarie and P&N Bank as active members, down from the 22 members before the global financial crisis. Reverse mortgages don't seem to have been a very popular product. The Commonwealth Bank (not a SEQUAL member) offers its Equity Unlock Loan and St George has a Seniors Access loan.

A reverse mortgage, also known as equity release, lets you borrow money using the equity in your home as security, and interest compounds rather than being paid. The loan is repaid when you sell, move into an aged-care facility or die.

The problem with these loans begins with the interest rate usually being higher than for a home mortgage, while the size of the loan is usually a relatively low percentage of the value of the home. The latter is designed to prevent the loan growing to exceed the market value since the lender cannot reclaim more than the market value.

Advertisement

As an example of how a loan can grow, where an interest rate of 7 per cent interest is capitalised, i.e is added to the loan amount, the loan will double every 10 years approximately.

The global financial crisis highlighted another problem that can arise with smaller firms closing their doors. Some retain the loans and continue to service them while focusing on other areas of finance. Others sell their loan book to a larger firm, which makes a profit by clipping the ticket on the way. Others could quietly leave you in the hands of a trustee who is not in the business of marketing mortgages and unable to make a change, say, to the interest rate you're being charged when rates generally fall.

Another approach is Bendigo Bank's Homesafe Equity Release, which doesn't lend you money but instead buys a portion of the equity in your home. See homesafesolutions.com.au.

With regard to Centrelink payments, the first $40,000 of an unspent lump sum from a reverse mortgage is exempt from the assets test for 90 days. Alternatively, if taken as periodic payments and these are spent within 14 days, they are not counted by the means tests. Alternatives to equity release that should be considered include downsizing, or moving into a self-care unit in an aged-care facility.

In 2007, we transferred a business real property from our joint partnership into our self-managed super fund, in which we are the two individual trustees. It was a sale and not a transfer in specie. We did pay stamp duty at the time and thought nothing of it until recently it was brought to our attention that we should have been exempt from paying stamp duty. I have tried to get clarification of this from our accountant and solicitor but it's still not really clear. I found one of your articles dated November 29, 2010 online. Part of it was as follows: ''In Victoria, no stamp duty is charged when business real property is transferred into a self-managed super fund, provided there is no change in beneficial ownership (that is, the owner of the property is a member of the SMSF). It must be a transfer in specie and not a sale (in legal jargon, there is ''no consideration'').'' After reading this I thought as this occurred in Victoria, and there was a sale, then we did have to pay stamp duty regardless of the fact that there was no change in beneficial ownership. I'm just wanting to make sure I'm correct in thinking this, and that this ruling still applies. I have looked on the State Revenue Office website and only became more confused. Your article was the easiest to understand. I think it may be too late to do anything about it but need to know for sure. S.I.

If you go back to the Victorian State Revenue website, and access the Duties Act (2000), or simply go to legislation.vic.gov.au, you will find Section 41 (1) that tells us: ''41 - Transfers to trustees or custodians of superannuation funds or trusts; (1) No duty is chargeable … in respect of a transfer of dutiable property made without monetary consideration to a trustee or custodian of a complying superannuation fund … where there is no change in the beneficial ownership of the property.''

So unless there has been a recent change in the law, of which I am not aware, the rule still stands.

Since you sold the property to your self-managed super fund, rather than transfer it as an in-specie contribution, you were liable for stamp duty.

Now you can stop worrying!

If you have a question for George Cochrane, send it to Sunday Money, PO Box 3001 Tamarama NSW 2026. All questions answered. Help lines: Financial Ombudsman 1300 708 808; Centrelink pensions 13 23 00.