Firework season is officially here. Local fireworks tents opened for business Saturday and will be plenty busy over the next week as the Fourth of July approaches.

Will Klausmeyer had been counting down to opening day.

"I'm kind of looking for some of the big stuff because I like doing the big stuff on the fourth but all little kids like smoke bombs and little things like that."

Klausmeyer is one of many filling up a cart at Wholesale Fireworks in Andover. While most are stocking up for next weekend, Klausmeyer says his will be lighting up the sky this weekend.

"Keeping the kids away from the fireworks is pretty dang near impossible and then buying a little bit of stuff for the fourth but most of it's going to go tonight."

The week of Fourth of July fireworks always keeps the Wichita Fire Department busy.

"The first couple days are kind of slow until people start going out and start investing in their fireworks, says fire investigator Mark Reibenspies. "Third and fourth, we pick up big time."

Last year they received over 700 firework related calls, while area hospitals treated more than 30 people for firework injuries.

"Somebody gets injured shooting off a firework, or a grass fire or evolves up to a structure fire, house, building, garage, detached garage," adds Reibenspies.

In Wichita, fireworks can't explode, project flaming objects or shoot higher than 6 feet. Tents in the city have been inspected to make sure all fireworks sold are legal.

"You can shoot off in the city limits if you buy them in the city," says Reibenspies.

But before you light them off, it's best to think about safety first.

"We always have buckets of water standing by and we also have our 4-wheeler with a pump in the back that we fill up with water," says Klausmeyer.

Kids can have fun too, but make sure they are closely supervised when using fireworks.

"They're not out there doing it by themselves they're out there with me or one of the more adult kids," Klausmeyer adds.

Wichitans are allowed to shoot off legal fireworks until July 5, but the Wichita fire and police departments will be enforcing local firework laws. Those caught with illegal fireworks could face up to a year of jail time and a $2500 fine.