ENGLEWOOD — The city school board has approved an agreement that gives teachers a 3-percent raise this year, despite calls from some board members to wait until a complete version of the contract is provided.

“You’re asking us to vote on a contract which none of you has even seen,” Trustee Glenn Garrison said Thursday night, before the board voted 6 to 2, with one abstention, in favor of a three-year contract with the Englewood Teachers’ Association.

Roughly 100 people packed into the Dr. John Grieco Elementary School cafeteria for the school board meeting, many of them wearing red shirts with “ETA” — signifying Englewood Teachers’ Association — printed on them. The audience was raucous at times, at one point shouting and clapping to drown out Trustee Stephen Brown when he spoke at length.

Several people expressed support for the contract, which calls for teachers to receive a 3 percent raise this year and 2.5 percent increases in the 2016-17 and 2017-18 school years for the about 340 teachers.

“Do the right thing. Vote it in. And … let us begin anew to educate our children — all of the children,” said Esther Babb.

Others, however, criticized the raises, calling them excessive given the district’s poor performance on standardized tests.

The city’s educators are “no doubt wonderful teachers” but there is a “disconnect” between pay scale and results, said resident Eugene Clements. “I’m disturbed, a little, by rewarding the many people that are in this room wearing red shirts who are apparently not able to come to grips with the declining scores over the years,” he said.

Board members also were divided. Brown and Garrison in particular raised several objections, including that more information was needed, that raises under the new contract are distributed unequally and that the agreement did not account for a tax that goes into effect in 2018 under the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. The tax, Garrison claimed, would cost the district between $600,000 and $700,000.

But Trustee Carol Feinstein said the regulations regarding the tax are not yet known and that it might not even go into effect. She also noted that, if the tax is imposed, the memorandum of agreement with the union calls for the contract to be reopened.

Trustee Devry Pazant said he understood his colleagues’ concerns but, if the district is going to move forward, “The last thing we need to worry about and focus on is the teachers’ contract.”

“We cannot continue to waste time,” he said.

After about half an hour of debate, six board members voted for the agreement: Pazant, Feinstein, Howard Haughton, Junius “Jeff” Carter, Betty Griffin and Molly Craig-Berry, who voted yes to the agreement but no to associated salary guides. Craig-Berry, who is chairwoman of the negotiations committee and signed off on the agreement, said before the vote that she “wholeheartedly” supported it, but the agreed-upon salary guides were not honored.

Brown and Garrison voted against the contract. Henry Pruitt III abstained, saying he would have liked more discussion on it.

For 2014-15, the minimum salary on the guide was $52,310 for a teacher with a bachelor's degree at steps 1 and 2. The maximum was $104,731 for a teacher with a doctorate at step 22. Under the new contract, the 2015-16 minimum salary is $53,105 for a teacher with a bachelor's degree at step 1. Maximum is $105,431 for a teacher with a doctorate at step 22.

Before the vote, Brown asked the board to hold off until January, after the board receives a full, typed version of the contract. The memorandum of agreement, which was posted on the district’s web site, is a two-page, handwritten document with three attachments: the proposed salary guides and the bargaining proposals put forward by the union and the board.

Brown’s motion was defeated 6 to 3. Brown, Craig-Berry and Garrison voted in favor.

Garrison objected to Feinstein and Carter participating in that vote, citing a 2013 advisory opinion by the state School Ethics Commission. The state ruled that their membership in the New Jersey Education Association posed a conflict of interest and that they should not be involved in matters such as teacher contracts.

Feinstein said that ruling was appealed and state Education Commissioner David Hespe determined that “advisory opinions are only opinions and do not amount to final agency decisions.”

Email: lueddeke@northjersey.com