Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee has made a name for himself as a conservative radio star, and has even mulled becoming the founder of a new media organization.

And at the 2014 Conservative Political Action Conference today, Huckabee made the case for a second run for the presidency in 2016.

ABC News sat down with Huckabee at CPAC and asked whether the prospect of running against the former Secretary of State and former Arkansas first lady, Hillary Clinton, would draw him into the race, and which Democrat he'd take out for a cup of coffee.

Here are ABC News' five questions with Huckabee.

Q: What's your political priority?

A: Integrity.

Q: Do you think House Speaker John Boehner and Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell are true conservatives?

A: Sure. Compared to the Democrats? Absolutely. And even within the Republican ranks, they are pragmatists and there's a role for that in the role that they play.

Q: Would you have signed the controversial Arizona bill SB 1062 into law?

A: Yeah. Most people never read the law. The law mirrored almost word for word the law Bill Clinton signed in 1993 that was voted unanimously in the House of Representatives and voted 97-3 in a Democrat-controlled Senate. So I don't know what the controversy was. It changed two basic words. There was no reason for it to ever be controversial.

(ABC News)

Q: Who is the one Democrat you would have a beer with?

A: It wouldn't be a beer 'cause … not really into it. Maybe a cup of coffee. You know, there are a lot of Democrats out there I have respect for. [West Virginia Sen.] Joe Manchin being one of them, [Virginia Sen.] Mark Warner being another. I served with them as governors, I know these guys and I think that they have a heart to govern, not heart to be ideologues.

Q: You know Hillary Clinton's record well. If Hillary Clinton would decide to run for president in 2016, would that encourage you to run?

A: It wouldn't be the sole factor but I think it might be something that voters in the republican ranks would at least recognize. But that alone is not going to be the pushing factor as to whether I end up running in 2016.