WILDWOOD — U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio made a campaign stop in The Villages on Sunday, stumping for much-needed votes two days before Florida’s presidential preference primary.

A laid-back and humorous Rubio, 45, who is an underdog in his own state, spent an hour detailing why he should be president. Rubio even smiled and casually dismissed one protester, who jumped up and told the audience that Rubio had ruined his relationship with his girlfriend.

“He stole my girlfriend. She doesn’t love me anymore,” the man said. “He will steal your girlfriend, too.”

The man was escorted from the venue by Sumter County Sheriff’s Office deputies. He said his girlfriend was in love with Rubio and no longer looks at him in the same way. The protester was not arrested, but was removed from the recreation center grounds.

“I'm still looking for the hidden camera,” said Rubio, who shook his head to the laughter of about 500 supporters who had packed a room at the Rohan Recreation Center, which is east of Wildwood and north of State Road 44 in the southern reaches of The Villages retirement community.

During the interruption, as the man was escorted from the building, Rubio said: “We don’t beat up hecklers at our events.”

Rubio then chastised GOP frontrunner Donald Trump, who has been in the news lately after violence has erupted at his events. Rubio said the Trump campaign rallies look like something that would happen in “a Third World country."

Rubio said he is appalled that Trump has been telling his supporters to punch protesters in the face and offered to pay their legal bills if arrested, Rubio noted.

The rally seemed to be Rubio’s final stand.

Trump led in two Sunday polls by a large percentage in Florida. Those polls show that Trump leads Rubio, Texas Sen. Ted Cruz and former Ohio Gov. John Kasich by more than 20 percentage points.

Rubio, who was gaining ground on Trump about a month ago, had two missteps in recent months. At one debate, Rubio repeated the same comment many times, and then in another debate, he confronted Trump with crude college humor.

That led some Rubio supporters to change candidates.

At a rally last Wednesday at a South Florida stadium, only a few hundred supporters showed up. Rubio has stated at many recent rallies that his candidacy rests on what happens in Florida.

In one Florida poll, Rubio is in third place behind Trump and Cruz. A few days ago, Rubio asked his supporters in Ohio, which also holds its presidential primary on Tuesday, to throw their support behind former Kasich. On Sunday, Kasich did not ask his supporters in Florida to do the same for Rubio.

Sunday’s rally in The Villages featured Rubio’s love of veterans. Several speakers jumped on Trump, who said last summer that Arizona Sen. John McCain, who was a prisoner of war for many years, was “not a war hero” and was a “loser” for not beating President Barack Obama.

One of the people to speak before Rubio took the stage was the grandson of famous World War II general George S. Patton. George Patton Waters carried a pair of his grandfather’s boots on stage, hoping they could help Rubio march to victory.

Rubio told the crowd that, if elected, he would repeal and replace Obamacare. He would fix Social Security so that it would remain solvent for future generations and repeal many executive orders that President Obama recently signed.

Rubio had many lighter sides during his speech. He talked about all of the struggles American citizens have had in its history, starting when citizens defeated the British. He talked about how Americans survived many wars, the Great Depression and the 1960s upheavel.

“In the 70s, we had a president who resigned in disgrace, long lines at the gas pumps and disco music,” Rubio said to a chuckle from the audience. “I don’t like it, but some of you did.”

Near the end of the event, the lights suddenly went dim. Rubio said it wasn’t the first time the lights have gone out at his rallies. He said it happens when someone leans against a light switch, or because “China hacked us again.”

After the speech, Rubio shook hands and signed autographs. He then headed to Orlando for an evening rally.

Joe Callahan can be reached at 867-4113 or at joe.callahan@starbanner.com. Follow him Twitter @JoeOcalaNews.