IT’S BEEN nearly five months since the death of Natasha McKenna, the mentally ill woman who was shot four times with a Taser by a guard at the Fairfax County jail; she was removed from life support several days later. Incredibly, the investigation into her death drags on, ostensibly while the police await data to be extracted from the Taser, a process that would seem more likely to take minutes than months.

Under pressure from public opinion, Fairfax County Sheriff Stacey A. Kincaid, whose office runs the jail, announced in April that she had temporarily suspended use of Tasers in the facility. Now Ms. Kincaid needs to go further, and ban them altogether.

The rationale for such a move is provided by a report commissioned last year by the county police and submitted this month by the Police Executive Research Forum . The report was not written with the sheriff’s office in mind; it’s targeted to cops, not jail guards. But its recommendations on the use of force generally, and the deployment of Tasers in particular, are germane — particularly in light of Ms. McKenna’s unjustified death.

The authors urge that the police rework their use-of-force policy to explicitly emphasize de-escalation in the event of confrontations. Many law enforcement officers do a good job of that, and their training often stresses it. Unfortunately, the team of sheriff’s deputies who extracted Ms. McKenna from her cell on Feb. 3 did almost exactly the opposite. That suggests there is room for improvement not only in policy but also in training for jail guards.

The police report also specifies that in the event that police do deploy Tasers, they are not to be used on subjects who are handcuffed. Ms. McKenna, who was African American, had been handcuffed before she was shot the first time by the jail guard, who then saw fit to shoot her three more times.

In addition, the report recommends that police department policy emphasize the risk involved in repeatedly shooting subjects with Tasers — a risk the Taser company’s own user’s manual also makes clear. If the six jail guards who tried to subdue Ms. McKenna were aware of that risk, they disregarded it in trying to extract her from her cell.

Finally, the report says that police should not use the Taser gun’s “drive stun” mode — in which the weapon is pressed against a person’s flesh, rather than fired from a distance — as a technique of achieving compliance through pain. As it happens, that was precisely how the guard who wielded the Taser used it on Ms. McKenna; three of the four 50,000-volt jolts she was administered were from the Taser’s drive-stun mode.

Since Ms. McKenna’s death, Ms. Kincaid has pledged herself to openness while doing quite the opposite. The identities of the six jail guards involved in the incident have not been made public; nor have their races; nor has a video of the incident that was recorded by jail personnel.

In a similar vein, it’s unclear whether the sheriff’s office has undertaken any meaningful review or reform on use of force in the jail, on policies regulating the deployment of Tasers, or on other training for guards. Even though the police report was aimed at a different agency, the Sheriff’s Office could profit by taking its recommendations to heart.