STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- As a retired information technology specialist, Dominic Saglibene is amazed.

First, at the botched rollout of Obamacare website.

Second and, personally more important to Saglibene, at the dollar hit for healthcare he's going to face next year because his company reimbursement contribution will decrease.

It's such a hit, said Saglibene, who knew surgery was in his future, that he "rushed to do the operation now, before the end of the year, so I could get the maximum deductible."

Which leaves Saglibene, of Westerleigh, where?

At home recuperating and pondering what he calls "the not-affordable healthcare act."

After 36 years on the job as an IT specialist, Saglibene retired last year.

He said under the Obama administration's Affordable Care Act, his "retirement medical premium will go up $103 a month beginning in 2014."

Also, said Saglibene, his "maximum out-of-pocket has risen from $6,000 to $9,200 for my family in network, and the Health Reimbursement Account from my company will decrease from $2,000 to only $800."

Added Saglibene: "I have a fixed pension. I would expect our medical needs would go up as we get older."

Then there is Allesandrina Pecchia of Dongan Hills, who runs a telecommunications contracting company with her husband that employs eight people.

She said they received a letter from their health insurer "informing us that because of Obamacare, they will be dropping small businesses."

Not only that, but Ms. Pecchia said the group-coverage plan they selected was deemed "sub-standard," which she said it was not.

Bottom line, said Ms. Pecchia: "Our (insurance) agent said our cost will go up 40 percent."

"We wanted to grow our business," she said. "We can't. The raises we wanted to give won't be as big because our operating costs will be higher."

Added Ms. Pecchia: "The president says you will have a lot of options for health plans, but you don't. The exchanges don't give you options to medications; they are mostly generic. The insurance companies are dictating your doctor, your medicine, your care."

Saglibene and Ms. Pecchia are among the Staten Islanders who contacted Rep. Michael Grimm about how the health care law is affecting them.

Grimm, as part of a GOP share-your-story outreach, video tapped a message calling for reaction and input from constituents.

In it, he notes that some 3.5 million Americans have been issued cancellation notices, in part for policies considered sub-par.

While Grimm told the Advance that the Affordable Care Act is "systematically broken and flawed in its premise," he added, "There is not much I can do."

He said passing additional bills in the House to knock down Obamacare that won't pass the Senate wouldn't be fruitful. He said the way to achieve a change in the law is by electing people to Congress who want to undo it.

Still, Grimm said there are "good" aspects of the plan, including coverage of pre-existing conditions and the ability to insure children under a parent's policy until they reach the age of 26.

Meanwhile, said Saglibene, recalling his long IT background: "Did they stress test it enough to meet the capacity of all the people signing up? I guess not. Did they do disaster recovery tests? This is bigger than they thought."