In Colorado and throughout the United States, education policy has moved from the back burner to the front burner. While the education debate in the past had centered almost entirely on funding, it is now centered on such issues as Common Core, the Partnership for Assessment of Readiness for College and Careers (PARCC), and requirements for federal waivers.

This change has divided the political establishment, not necessarily by party or ideology, but often by allegiances to employee organizations, and forced those who believe in local control to take positions that would appear to be anti-accountability.

The great struggle in education is between accountability as defined by the U.S. Department of Education and the concept of state and local control. Colorado has a long and rich history of local control that is now seriously threatened by the accountability agenda.

During my legislative tenure (during the 1970s and ’80s) in Colorado, I was a staunch supporter of local control. In recent years, I have been a staunch supporter of accountability. The conflict between these two objectives need not create impossible choices, if those involved in driving national education policy — including the Gates Foundation — are willing to provide enough flexibility to allow policymakers who believe in local control to avoid some of the worst outcomes.

For example, the federal requirement that 95 percent of all students take the PARCC or a similarly federally approved test has driven school districts to bully parents in unacceptable ways. One of the first constituent complaints I received when I became a member of the State Board of Education was by a parent who wished to exercise their right to opt their child out of the PARCC test. That parent was told that the child could not attend school any time during the testing window — that is, for more than a month.

This kind of assault on parental rights and the ability of parents to control their children’s education is unacceptable. I believe in a system that serves children and parents first, bureaucrats and policymakers second.

It is my intention to work as a member of the State Board of Education to reconcile the conflicts between accountability and local control and resolve those conflicts in a way that preserves parental control and protects children from abuses of what may be well-intentioned policy. The current testing regimen designed to enforce the accountability standards is overbearing; the testing windows are too long; the amount of time spent testing is too great; and the accountability regimen has become a negative factor in the education of our children.

Additionally, the tests — which are billed as more rigorous — are likely not more rigorous but simply different, and in ways that are unacceptable to many educators and parents. I recently read the Colorado 12th-grade social studies test and walked away with the uncomfortable conclusion that virtually no knowledge was required to pass the test. The test may have been a good measure of a logical approach to answering questions based on materials provided during the test, but certainly did not test any knowledge that the student may or should have gained during the education process. For example, the test contained not a single question about the American Civil War, the Revolutionary War or the Cold War, all seminal events in American history.

One must ask exactly what is being tested by this new, so-called more rigorous testing regiment. It is certainly not knowledge.

I believe the fixes to our education system are not impossible to achieve. If the parties will recognize that they must give some flexibility to those who are in the trenches and delivering education, we can resolve our education conflicts and focus on the needs of our children.

Steven J. Durham of Colorado Springs is a member of the State Board of Education.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.