I recently talked to the recruiting and retention coordinator at the Florida home health agency that provides the compassionate home health aides who care for my father. These fine caregivers allow my dad to remain in his home following his debilitating stroke rather than in a nursing facility.

The coordinator, who interacts with home care workers every day describes the aides as "really hard workers" who work up to 70 hours per week supporting their families by doing a very difficult job: going into the homes of elders and people with disabilities to assist them with everything from getting their groceries and to doctors' appointments to helping them bathe and use the bathroom.

But despite the critical nature of their work, home care workers are shamefully underpaid. Most of the home care aides working for this agency and others live at or below the federal poverty line. Consequently, the coordinator says she spends a large part of her day filling out employment verification documents so they can secure the public benefits necessary to help them live in low-income housing and feed their families.

Securing health insurance for these workers, however, is a trickier proposition. In Florida, the threshold for Medicaid eligibility for parents with dependent children is just 34 percent of the federal poverty level; for a family of four, this amounts to just $8,588 per year. Workers without dependent children are not eligible for Medicaid at any income level. A provision of the Affordable Care Act allows states to expand Medicaid eligibility to 138 percent of the federal poverty level (or $33,465 for a family of four), but Florida's legislature has consistently voted to turn down the federal funds that would allow it to do so. Medicaid expansion is currently 100 percent paid for by the federal government, and will remain 90 percent federally funded after 2020.

Meanwhile, hundreds of thousands of Floridians who would be able to secure health coverage through Medicaid remain uninsured. According to a report from the national nonprofit Paraprofessional Health Institute, this includes 25,000 direct-care workers in Florida — home care workers, certified nursing assistants and personal care attendants — who fall in the "coverage gap," ineligible for unexpanded Medicaid and yet earning less than 100 percent of the federal poverty level and therefore too poor to qualify for federal subsidies through the insurance marketplace.

The agency coordinator told me that many of the aides she works with have developed chronic back pain and other injuries as a result of the heavy lifting involved in home care work. Home care workers also expose themselves to infectious diseases on a near-daily basis, she added, but they have no good health care options. "A lot of caregivers get sick on the job, but they end up going to the emergency room rather than a doctor," she said.

Florida families and policy makers know that long term care is a critical, cost-effective aspect of the health care continuum. To discuss the state of long term care, U.S. Rep. Ted Deutch, D-Boca Raton, will join the Florida Health Alliance at a public community forum on Dec. 14 at 10 a.m. at the Weisman Community Center in Delray Beach.

Expanding Medicaid would go a long way toward securing health care for Florida's essential home care workforce — and ensuring that workers are available to continue to care for people like my father, who depend on these conscientious health aides to age at home in his community, the way most of us hope to live in our senior years. These caregivers who provide the most intimate and essential care to our frail elderly and disabled family members and neighbors deserve to have access to health care. The money's there — Florida should take it.

Dr. Laura Brennaman is the policy and research director at Florida CHAIN.