Nearly 200 children in Hall County Schools will be redistricted away from Spout Springs Elementary School beginning this fall.

The Hall County Schools Board of Education approved a redistricting plan for South Hall elementary schools at its regular meeting Monday. The plan includes grandfathering current students and rising kindergartners who are siblings of current Spout Springs students, allowing these students to finish at the school if they provide their own transportation.

“We’ve had a hearing, we’ve put out the map, which has been out for over a week now, and we’ve sent letters to all the affected families,” said Hall County Superintendent Will Schofield. “…We would like tonight to formally propose the new elementary districts for Friendship Elementary, Chestnut Mountain Elementary and Spout Springs Elementary.”

Approximately 102 students from the northwest portion of Spout Springs’ existing zone will move to Friendship Elementary School, according to the proposed map. This includes students who live off an extended length of Hog Mountain Road.

The central, eastern portion of the Spout Springs zone will move to Chestnut Mountain Elementary School, affecting approximately 88 students. This includes some direct routes to the school, such as Cash Road to Union Church Road, according to Schofield.

Spout Springs Elementary School currently holds more than 900 students, according to Principal Arlene Thomas. Friendship Elementary and Chestnut Mountain Elementary are both approximately 200 students under capacity.

The idea to allow rising kindergarten siblings of Spout Springs students to be grandfathered as well was brought forward last week by board member Brian Sloan. The board approved this change with the redistricting plan Monday.

“I know it’s tough, redistricting,” said school board chairman Nath Morris. “I’ve heard a lot of horror stories about the numbers in our neighboring counties. But that’s what happens when you’re in a growing county. You try to plan for where the growth is going to come, but you don’t have a lot of control over it.”