1. We all hire in our own image.

2. Small companies need expertise

3. Hire smart people.

4. Startups should beware of hiring the person from the large company who says, “I’ve always wanted to do a start up.”

5. Avoid hiring people with big egos — in any size company.

6. Make sure the team interviews the candidate.

7. Everyone on the team should interview.

8. NO PANIC HIRING.

9. There are lots of assessment tools, but there’s no substitute for multiple face-to-face discussions with careful formal and informal reference checking

10. Good luck!

When I graduated from college, my dad told me one of the hardest things I would ever do is to look for and land a great job. He was right. Now, after 30 years helping companies build teams, I’ve learned the other side of that is also true. It’s hard to hire the right person for the right job at the right time in a company’s journey...It doesn’t matter if you’re a startup adding a few critical hires or you’re a mid-stage company, finding the “ideal” candidate is tough. There is no ideal candidate. We’re talking about people. We joke, saying our jobs would be easy if we didn’t have to achieve goals using people! Finding the right people is as important as getting the product right — maybe more important...If you get the team wrong, you’ll lose time and product traction and maybe you start losing some of the team you already had. While lots of us can deal with product questions, it’s tough to bring products or services to market in an organization that has high turnover, lacks direction, and where there’s a high sense of frustration. There’s no magic bullet, but I want to share some things I remind folks of when we’re hiring...Recognize this. Hiring people just like you is good — smart, high energy, insightful and the “fit” with the team is great. But you also need people who aren’t just like you — successful teams need people with different strengths and weaknesses...This means you need to be self-aware and honest with yourself (ask trusted advisers about your strengths/weaknesses if you don’t have a clue). You need the confidence to hire folks who’ll challenge you and may have different ideas/perspectives. Healthy differences are good. Embrace them. It’ll make you, your product and organization stronger.... There’s no substitute for experience and the battle scars associated with it — It keeps you from making mistakes that have been made before. At some point you’re going to need to invest in bringing on expertise, even if you have to pay that person more than you’re paying yourself. Get over it — and get creative on how you’re going to afford it. One size does not fit all, and you may need to be creative to meet the hire’s needs and yours...I’m fond of saying, “I can teach a smart person anything, but I can’t teach a person to be smart” (not my original quote, but it’s a truism). Small companies need people who can “figure it out” and find answers and alternatives. Someone made for a startup loves putting up his/her hand and saying, “I don’t know anything about that, but I’ll get educated and figure it out.” It’s how individuals develop breadth and organizations move forward quickly...Ask why they haven’t done it before. People migrate to bigger companies for stability, organizational structure, pay, advancement and less risk. All good things, but will that person thrive and be comfortable when plans change a lot, the risk is high, and life/work balance can be more like work/work balance? Maybe, but maybe not. Interview carefully, posing questions that let you assess how a person would handle an ill-defined assignment when you need someone to “figure it out.”..This goes back to my first point about “self-awareness,” yours and others. Understand how the people you’re trying to hire operate and how they define themselves in the work environment. Others won’t want to work with someone who is disruptive (in a bad way), leading to a more significant HR problem...I’ve been in companies that say they will “put up” with a big ego because of the contribution an individual makes. It doesn’t work. You can’t build a company around an individual. When others see that Mr. or Ms. Ego is treated differently a sense of “unfairness,” creeps into the culture. Sooner or later you start losing the team and traction, and need to hire and train all over again...Strategize upfront relative to who is doing the deep dive on technical skills, fit with the company, relevant experience, etc. Everyone has to get a good sense of fit. I’ve seen a company so focused on convincing an applicant to join no one does a deep dive into skills. Know what success looks like in the job, and communicate that to the applicant. Many times I debrief applicants, asking how they know they will have succeeded in the job and I get a blank look. No one told them, making success elusive...This helps develop interview skills internally. Everyone will have their perceptions and thoughts. Listen carefully to dissenting voices and work through issues. It helps check the “hire in our own image” mistakes...If you’re not sure you have the right person, keep looking. You’ll be in bad shape if you don’t get it right, and you’ll be back to square one. Involve boards and advisers in hiring, but make sure you retain the “hiring manager” decision. It’s your team. Your success depends on who you hire.... Ask the candidate what each of their references will say about their strengths, weaknesses. Ask the candidates what they think will be the biggest issues they will face in the job (and if they answer with the obvious, ask ‘what else?’)...Andrea Kokolis is executive vice president of Human Resources at Newforma Inc. a high-growth venture-capital backed company in Manchester. She has been part of management teams in startup companies, as well as nine mergers and acquisitions. Andrea earned a BA and MBA at the University of New Hampshire and also serves as an adjunct faculty member...