Cpl. Dustin Maas of the Fremont County Sheriff's Office, center, and Deputy Cameron Gonzales, left, wait to see how they can help Chili's server Mikenna Huber wait on patrons Sunday during the Tip-A-Cop event to benefit the Special Olympics. ( Carie Canterbury / Daily Record )

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

» Cpl. Dustin Maas of the Fremont County Sheriff's Office listens in while Chili's server Mikenna Huber takes an order from patrons Sunday during the Tip-A-Cop event to benefit the Special Olympics. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

Their job is to serve and protect, but local law enforcement officers, deputies and officials also work to make a difference in the lives of Special Olympics Colorado athletes.

The Fremont County Sheriff's Office, the Cañon City Police Department and the Florence Police Department joined forces Sunday to raise funds for the Special Olympics Colorado by helping Chili's wait staff serve beverages and wait on customers. Tips and donations beyond those designated for the regular servers go directly to the Special Olympics Colorado that serves more than 14,000 athletes with intellectual disabilities across the state.

Sheriff Jim Beicker greeted customers at the door during part of the day.

"It's a worldwide law enforcement effort to bring awareness and raise funds for the Special Olympics," he said. "We are proud to be a part of it."

Beicker said he and his office hope to form teams with local Special Olympics athletes so they won't have to go out of town for practices.

Sunday's event was split into two shifts with at least five law enforcement representatives volunteering during each. Cpl. Richard Solano of the Fremont County Sheriff's Office got off duty at 6 a.m. Sunday and volunteered part of the day before starting his next shift later that evening.

"(Special Olympics) is a great program," he said. "They need the money and this helps out with that."

Advertisement

General manager J.J. Mews said Chili's restaurants across the state hosted the Tip-A-Cop event Sunday, and others across the county will host the same event during the month of July.

"It's a great thing for our community and a great thing for our guests to see these hard-working men and women serving and supporting a good cause," he said.

Cpl. Greg Owen of the Fremont County Sheriff's Office serves water to customers at Chili's on Sunday during the Tip-A-Cop event to raise funds for the Special Olympics. Also pictured is Shanna Neppl of Colorado Springs. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

Lori Johnson, victim assistance director for the Fremont County Sheriff's Office and Florence Police Department, said the agencies hope to participate in the Tip-A-Cop event again next year. They conducted a Law Enforcement Torch Run for Special Olympics Colorado in May, and they plan to host a motorcycle run in the fall.

For more information on Special Olympics Colorado, visit http://specialolympicsco.org/" title="specialolympicsco.org">specialolympicsco.org.