Democratic Gov. Pat Quinn and Republican challenger Bruce Rauner sharply clashed Tuesday night over who could better improve the lives of African Americans during a South Side debate focused on education, crime, jobs and taxes.

Rauner is trying to make gains among black voters who historically cast Democratic ballots in large numbers in Illinois. The idea come Nov. 4 is to get one-fifth of the Chicago vote, an essential element for Republican success statewide.

“Gov. Quinn in my opinion is taking the African American vote for granted,” said Rauner, going so far to say that the Democratic governor “could have and should have” made Stephanie Neely, the black city treasurer of Chicago, his running mate but threw her “off his ticket” in favor of former Chicago Public Schools chief Paul Vallas.

“African-American families are suffering in Illinois — brutally high unemployment, deteriorating schools, lack of proper social services and rampant cronyism and corruption that’s taking away job opportunities from African Americans,” Rauner said.

But Quinn, who is trying to keep his base of black support intact, contended Rauner had failed to hire any African Americans to top executive posts at the equity investment firm the Republican formerly chaired.

Quinn said he has a diverse cabinet in his administration and has opened up more state contracts for bidding by African-American owned businesses.

The exchange came during a one-hour forum held at the DuSable Museum of African American History sponsored by the Chicago Urban League and the Business Leadership Council, an advocacy group for African American business owners and corporate executives. Broadcast on CBS-2 Chicago and WVON-Radio (AM-1690), the event was aimed at getting the candidates to address issues involving the African-American community, though many of the issues have statewide resonance.

Gov. Quinn in my opinion is taking the African American vote for granted. — Bruce Rauner

Quinn mocked Rauner, a wealthy equity investor from Winnetka, for vowing to use his business moxie to grow the Illinois economy. “All my opponent does is grow his bank account and that hurts everyone,” Quinn said.

Rauner lashed back at Quinn’s negative advertising campaign against the Republican. “I cannot keep up with the baloney and lies that you spread,” Rauner said. “You can’t run on the truth. The truth is you’re the worst governor in America.”

The two sharply differed on the issue of gun control and its relationship to crime.

Asked if he supported a ban on so-called assault weapons, Rauner did not directly answer, instead saying “the most important thing we can do with guns is to make sure we keep guns out of the hands of criminals and (the) mentally ill.” Crime in the black community was a result of a “lack of opportunity” caused by Democratic failures to improve education and create jobs, he said.

All my opponent does is grow his bank account and that hurts everyone. — Gov. Pat Quinn

But Quinn said he supported an assault weapons ban as well as a ban on high-capacity ammunition magazines — something unlikely to win approval in the General Assembly.

The Democrat charged that Rauner’s support of lowering state income tax rates to their 2010 levels is “extreme, radical way” of budgeting that will cost the state billions in tax revenues — much of it for education. Quinn wants to make permanent the state income tax increase Democrats passed and he signed after the 2010 election — but refused to say directly if he would push for it, win or lose, in the post-election, lame-duck session. The bulk of the tax hike is scheduled to roll back on Jan. 1.

“I understand how important education is to our jobs,” said the governor, who added that “to have good jobs, you need a good education and that’s what I’m committed to.”

Rauner has said he would increase school funding, but it’s unclear how he would do so while cutting taxes. He also expressed support for giving parents “options” to public schools, including charter schools, vouchers and scholarships.

Quinn repeatedly cited his support for issues backed by hometown President Barack Obama, including the Affordable Care Act and a push for a higher minimum wage, as a way to enlist support among black voters. Obama made one fundraising visit for Quinn and is scheduled to appear at a rally on Sunday at Chicago State University, the governor said after the debate.

Rauner has said he would not have expanded subsidized health care coverage for the poor under what’s known as Obamacare.

The minimum wage issue surfaced again, with Rauner questioning why Quinn and fellow Democrats haven’t raised it since Quinn became governor in 2009.

Asked why he had not used Democratic majorities in the House and Senate to increase the state’s $8.25 an hour minimum wage to $10, Quinn cited the passage of Obamacare in noting “the president makes it very clear that we have to build from grassroots up” to gain the votes for passage.

Quinn promised he would sign a state minimum wage increase by the end of the year, anticipating a non-binding referendum on the issue on next month’s ballot will be overwhelmingly supported.

Rauner early in his campaign advocated a rollback of the state’s minimum wage rate to the lower $7.25-an-hour federal rate. Under fire from his GOP primary rivals, Rauner said he could support an increase in the federal rate or a boost in Illinois’ rate accompanied by pro-business reforms. He promised to sign a state hike if lawmakers approved changes to help business involving lawsuits, workers’ compensation and lowered taxes.

“The minimum wage is a very important issue but what we need to focus on is maximum income, maximum opportunity for every family,” Rauner said.