Less than two weeks ago, Rene McGarvy lost her sister Veronica to a horrific case of domestic violence.

“She was the best person anyone would want to meet. If you needed anything, all you had to do was call her,” said McGarvy of her little sister, 19-year-old Veronica “Roni” McGarvy.

The victim's ex-boyfriend, 25-year-old Caleb Shaffery, had called police on the evening of Dec. 6 and confessed to what he had done that day.

According to a police report, Shaffery told Phoenix police detectives he had planned Veronica’s murder. He told detectives he had taken a roof hammer from his home and concealed it on himself the day Veronica went to drop off the couple’s 3-year-old daughter.

He allegedly lured his ex-girlfriend into his bedroom, telling her he had a gift for her. That is where police say he beat her with a hammer until her skull was crushed. He also allegedly stabbed her in the chest and abdomen.

"He admitted his intent was to use the hammer to kill Veronica since it would be an efficient murder tool with less effort than using a knife," the arresting officer wrote in his probable cause statement.

[READ:Police: Man beat ex-girlfriend to death with hammer]

“Nobody deserves to die in the manner that my sister died. My mother did not deserve, no mother deserves to have to bury their child, especially at such a young age,” added Rene McGarvey.

Kathy Hartley, Veronica's godmother and aunt, told us, “She (Veronica) just didn’t think that he would do anything. None of us did. If you are threatened, take it seriously because you never know, you have no idea what is going through somebody’s head.”

Rene McGarvy said her sister was a hard worker, always making sure to provide for her 3-year-old daughter. She described Ronnie as funny and energetic, saying she “was full of life." She also said that her sister loved the Christmas season.

The family held a car wash at 67th Avenue and Bell Road on Saturday. They hope to raise $10,000 for Veronica's surviving daughter. The family has also set up a Go Fund Me account to help with memorial expenses, as well as for McGarvy's daughter.

Copyright 2015 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.