At the beginning, even to declare freelancers a group of people with common interests who could band together to buy health insurance, the Freelancers Union needed to change the rules.

This was in the early aughts, well after health care reform had failed in the early ’90s, but well before health care reform was consummated in 2010. It was clear that the system wasn’t working well for middle-income people stuck buying individual plans. The costs were high. It hurt to buy health care.

Under New York law, only certain types of groups, small and large, were allowed to purchase group plans. But Working Today—the group that would eventually create the Freelancers Union—didn’t really fit into any of those categories. It didn’t employ the freelancers it wanted to cover. It wasn’t exactly a trade association—its members were united more in how they billed for their services, than in what services they performed. It wasn’t a union, either.

But in 2001 Working Today began offering health care to people in certain industries who could prove they made money outside of traditional employer-employee relationships. The group had worked out what a United Hospital Fund report would later call “an unusual arrangement” with the state insurance department.

Sara Horowitz, Freelancers Union's MacArthur fellowship-winning president, had met Neil Levin, then the state's superintendent of insurance, at a health care forum and told him about her desire to group freelancers together to provide health insurance, she explained this week at this week at a press briefing.

Levin told her, simply, "You come to my office; I love this idea," Horowitz said.

He wanted to make Freelancers a group, and, because he wanted to, it was so. Together they looked through the regulations. "He said, 'Through regulation K, you will be an association, and we said, "Thanks,'" Horowitz said. And, after that, on a discretionary basis, freelancers counted as a “group.”

There was strength in numbers—and a huge demand for the product that the Freelancers Union (created in 2003) was now offering, as Horowitz explained in 2008 to a Manhattan Institute panel. By then, the group was selling coverage to 17,000 people in New York and had just switched insurers, from one huge company, HIP, to another, Empire. In both cases, according to Horowitz, Freelancers was one of the insurer’s biggest customers.

Since then, Freelancers has only grown, even as the group created, in 2009, its own insurance company, the Freelancers Insurance Company, which today covers nearly 25,000 people.

On Tuesday, F.I.C. announced that it will be opening 15 new primary care clinics in New York and other cities across the country and will enter a new partnership with Empire that will change, once again, how the group provides its members insurance.This expansion is part of F.I.C.'s bid to survive—and thrive—in the brave new world of federally mandated health care reform.

For the past decade or so, Freelancers Union has made one of its primary missions the delivery of affordable health care to “independent workers”—people working outside of the salary-plus-benefits system, often in creative industries like media, tech and design, where this sort of instability (and freedom) were newly normal. This is what these workers said they needed, and no one else was really doing the job.

But the Affordable Care Act changed the system.

“What the Freelancers Union had been doing was help freelancers avoid the extremely dysfunctional non-group insurance market,” says Sherry Glied, a health policy expert who worked in the Obama administration’s health department and is now dean of N.Y.U.’s Wagner School of Public Service. “The Affordable Care Act made that market more functional and reduced the need for the Freelancers Union’s special competency.”

For years, Freelancers had to push and prod and convince and cajole local, state and federal governments to change the rules so that freelancers could get affordable health care at all. Now, there’s an entire, federally mandated system that’s meant to give exactly those sorts of workers access to affordable health care. Freelancers Union has had to find its new place in this system.

What that means is changing, yet again, how it connects freelancers with health insurance. At the end of the year, the Freelancers Insurance Company will "withdraw from the market" and stop offering plans of its own. Instead, it will function more like Freelancers Union did before F.I.C. opened its doors in 2009: it will connect its members with health care offered by larger insurer, at attractive rates. Only now, its own clinics will be part of those plans and, as the Affordable Care Act mandates, anyone will be able to buy them.

What's unique about Freelancers' health care offering is no longer that it's affordable or accessible to self-employed people—the group's main advantages in the past. It's that signing up for health insurance through the Freelancers Union can tap a person into a wider network of benefits (dental care, life insurance, retirement) and of like-minded people. The group is betting on the attractiveness of its core competency: giving people who work alone the sense that they're part of a larger group.

"Individuals do better in a group than they do alone," Sara Horowitz said at the briefing this week. "Had there been health reform part 2, that's what we would have articulated."

Still, thirteen years after it first started offering health care, Freelancers Union is responsible for creating insurance that more than 100,000 New Yorkers use, even after the Affordable Care Act created a system in which freelancers don’t get—and in theory no longer need—special treatment.

It has taken a considerable amount of creativity along the way, bargaining from outside the system while participating in it.

Among all the unusual strategies that the Freelancers Union has used to get freelancers access to health care, perhaps the most radical was asking a group of people to trust their insurance company.

By 2007, even as the Freelancers Union had massed thousands of freelancers into group health plans and increased its power to negotiate with insurance companies, the rates that members were paying kept creeping upward. Horowitz had become convinced that the only way to keep rising premiums in check was for Freelancers Union to start its own insurance company. Even as the group switched from HIP to Empire, that plan was already in the works. Freelancers Insurance Company opened in 2009.

Some members revolted. Dismayed by the rapid series of switches, they protested, publicly, that the new insurance plans put them at a disadvantage. But most members—all but a few hundred, Freelancers said—transferred over. Within just a couple of years, Freelancers Insurance Company was covering 5,000 more people than the Freelancers Union’s group plan had in 2008.

The group wasn’t exactly a traditional health insurance company, though.

“We basically take on the risk of insurance and rent the Blues’ doctor network,” Horowitz told the New York State Health Foundation. “We are responsible for eligibility screening, billing, claims administration, and pharmacy benefits management. We act as the project manager.”

This, too, required a special provision from the state. In September 2009, a section of the insurance law outlining a “health insurance demonstration project for independent workers” went into effect. In October, according to a report by the state insurance department, the Freelancers Insurance Company filed an application to participate. If approved, the demonstration project would allow the group to continue, as it had through 2009, insuring people who met the definition of “independent worker”—people who worked as independent contractors or worked primarily as temps. The application went through in Dec. 2010.

This sort of legislative and regulatory success doesn’t happen without effort. Since 2007, Freelancers Union and Freelancers Insurance Company have spent hundreds of thousands of dollars lobbying state and local governments; more than $400,000 of that spending occurred during periods where lobbyists hired by one of the two groups were specifically working on health insurance provisions, according to state lobbying records.

Once it was up and running, the Freelancers Insurance Company started working on a new idea: the creation of a primary care clinic exclusive to the people it insured.

The main deal was attractive: no co-pay for primary care at the clinic, your choice of specialists for anything else. The only string attached: You had to get primary care there—otherwise, unless it was an emergency, it wouldn’t be covered. In other words the insurance company was asking its members to entrust it with the task of caring for them. This is the system that F.I.C. is expanding across the country.

The Freelancers Medical practice in Downtown Brooklyn, I can say from personal experience, is pretty rad. A little less than two years ago, when it first opened in the winter of 2012-13, I was on Freelancers Insurance Company health insurance. (Later in 2013, newly married, I switched to my spouse’s health insurance.) When Freelancers Insurance Company opened up the clinic, I joined.

At the clinic, it was blissfully easy to get on the internet while waiting. I was given a health coach—essentially, a friendly point of contact, with some health training, who could spend more time with me than expensively educated medical professionals. (We talked, one visit, about tai chi and the potential benefits of working lying down, legs propped into the air, in order to get the blood flowing a different direction.) I got an honest-to-God check-up for the first time in years. The clinic is unusually attuned to mental health (a longtime priority for the Freelancers Union), and when I happened to mention how stressed out I’d been, from dealing with a family member’s health issues, my health coach set up a meeting for me with the in-house social worker. I don’t know that I’d ever felt so thoroughly cared for.

In today’s new health care market, where there are more insurers competing to sell plans to exactly the group of people that Freelancers’ Insurance Company insures, this idea is one of Freelancers’ main selling points.

“They’ve done something that no one on the East coast has had success doing,” says Kavita Patel, a Brookings fellow who works clinical transformation and delivery. (Kaiser Permanente, in California, is a close analogue, she says.)

“That will make them a fierce competitor,” says Patel. “To me, that’s the biggest advantage they have.”

But the group also has an advantage in its powerful allies. The clinics have depended on support from politicians at the highest levels of New York’s state and local governments, including then-New York City Council Speaker Christine Quinn when the clinics were first getting started, and Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, when they were threatened by the new law.

With the health exchanges coming online in 2013, Freelancers Insurance Company had little time to get this model right, and the new law was pushing insurers to open up coverage to everyone—not, as in Freelancers’ case, a delimited group of (in this case, youngish and healthyish) people. Making this switch, the Freelancers Union said at the time, could have skyrocketed its members premium.

It wasn’t the only group being affected by the new law: groups that had long provided health insurance, like Chambers of Commerce, were having to send their members off to the exchanges. But allies in the state government were able to give the freelancer insurance entity a little bit of breathing room. By the summer of 2013, lawmakers in Albany were working on a bill that would extend the independent workers demonstration project section of the insurance law through the end of 2014—a bill that passed, despite opposition from a consortium of other groups affected by Obamacare.

Under the demonstration project extension, Freelancers Insurance Company has had to adapt and come into compliance with some parts of the Affordable Care Act. Its newer plans offer coverage comparable to Bronze, Silver, Gold and Platinum plans offered on the exchange. (These newer plans are also notably more expensive than the ones F.I.C. offered just a couple of years ago.)

And the Affordable Care Act’s medical loss ratio rule, which in New York required that no more than 20 percent of premiums could go to a company’s administrative costs, has meant, for instance that the Freelancers Insurance Company has had to rebate 2.9 percent of premiums paid in 2012. But for this year, at least, the company has been allowed to keep serving freelancers only.

W

hile defending its accomplishments in New York, however, the Freelancers Union was also paying attention to what was happening in Washington. In 2009, the Freelancers Union spent $40,000 lobbying the federal government on “providing health insurance mechanism for non-employees.” But from 2011 to 2013, as the executive branch began figuring out how to execute the Affordable Care Act, the group increased its spending dramatically—to $110,000 in 2011, $120,000 in 2012, and $330,000 in 2013.

Among the health insurance issues Freelancers was interested in was the Consumer Operated & Oriented Plan (CO-OP) system. These plans were meant to be nonprofit insurers that included the plans beneficiaries in their leadership. Before Republicans cut funding for the program early in 2013, the Obama administration had approved funding for 24 CO-OPs. Three were sponsored by the Freelancers Union—including one in New York, which, at $174 million, got a larger loan than any other CO-OP.

In 2014, that CO-OP, Health Republic Insurers of New York, captured the largest share of the market on the New York health exchange—19 percent of people enrolled.

“They were very clever to get on the CO-OP bandwagon,” says Glied, the health policy expert. “They have a marketing expertise in reaching this population. A lot of people who might be buying coverage might be people on their mailing lists. It was sensible to be able to exploit that. It’s a business opportunity and, for a variety of reasons, they wouldn’t have wanted to give it to existing insurers.”

But, there’s one important and, to some extent, unanswered question, Glied suggested: Does the Freelancers Union have any special competence in running an insurance company?

Certainly, that’s part of the idea of sponsorship. Health Republic and the Freelancers Union are separate entities: the CO-OP, at this point, is neither owned nor controlled by the Freelancers Union. But, in sponsoring and helping to set up this new organization, Freelancers Union was suggesting, at least, that its experience in creating Freelancers Insurance Company might be helpful in creating this new type of nonprofit health care company that would compete on the exchanges with more traditional, for-profit players.

All of the knowledge and experience they had gathered through establishing the insurance company could help Health Republic succeed. Freelancers Union has also served as a vendor to the new company for some services.

Already, though, Health Republic has grown huge, much larger than F.I.C. ever has been. In the first year of its existence, the CO-OP projected enrolling 30,000 people. But the premiums it advertised were some of the cheapest on the exchange, and by April 2014 Health Republic of New York’s enrollment had exceeded 112,000, it reported to a House oversight committee. Already, Health Republic is almost three times the size of Freelancers Insurance Company.

Its January launch was not entirely smooth, as new customers complained that they hadn’t received their insurance cards, were not able to use their new insurance or found that doctors who had been on Health Republic’s list had no intention of accepting this new plan, at all. And, next year, the premiums for some individual plan holders will be hiked significantly, by up to 18.8 percent.

As of September 2014, then, there are two products on New York’s health care market that the Freelancers Union, the company that did more than perhaps any other to get self-employed people health care, has created. One, Freelancers Insurance Company, offers access to a primary care clinic, with premiums that range from $471, for an individual plan where a $6,350 deductible applies to most services not offered by the Freelancers Medical clinics, to $799, which has no annual deductible and covers a wide range of services. The other, Health Republic, offers competitively priced health care and the chance to have some voice in the company’s governance.

Neither of these would have existed without ongoing support from legislators in New York City, Albany and Washington; now, more than ever before in the Freelancers Union’s history, those plans will have to compete to give customers not just health care that they couldn’t get anywhere else—but health care they might actually choose to have.

A version of this article appeared in the October issue of Capital magazine.