You could call her the Bill Buckner of politics, if she even knew who the Red Sox were.

She’s a Democrat who managed to blow a huge statewide lead to a Republican in deep-blue Massachusetts in epic fashion. And now she’s blown it again. Or at least that will be the epitaph on Massachusetts Attorney General Martha Coakley’s political career come November if Charlie Baker edges her in the governor’s race.

Story Continued Below

Most Americans know Coakley as the woman who nearly tanked Obamacare by losing Ted Kennedy’s Senate seat (and the Democratic supermajority with it) to no-name Scott Brown in a January 2010 special election. Now, she’s in a tight race against the moderate Republican Baker, with her legacy hanging in the balance, and she’s calling in the big guns. This week, Bill Clinton is stumping for her in the blue-collar city of Worcester—a sign that national Democrats are genuinely worried that she’ll choke. Come Nov. 5, she’ll either go down as the first woman elected governor of Massachusetts or a political failure, living proof that the Curse of the Bambino never left Boston, it just migrated from Fenway Park to the AG’s office on Beacon Hill. Whether or not that’s fair, it’s politics.

The high stakes in her 2010 loss and the spectacular collapse of her lead have tagged her with a stigma that may prove indelible. There were gaffes, like claiming that Red Sox hero Curt Schilling was a Yankees fan, and missteps, like refusing to work the crowd in the cold outside of a hockey game held at Fenway, along with a general sense that Coakley, who took time off over the December holidays and listed fewer public campaign events than Brown, ran a flat and apathetic race. It all left the impression that criminally negligent campaigning was to blame for the attorney general’s loss.

After Brown’s upset, Saturday Night Live opened with a skit in which Fred Armisen, playing President Obama, called Coakley “the single most incompetent candidate ever to seek public office in this nation’s history,” at a mock State of the Union address. He received standing ovations for repeatedly bashing her with lines like “You couldn’t beat Dick Cheney for mayor of Berkeley.” It’s the kind of stuff that cements a national reputation.

Closer to home, observers take a more nuanced view than the national caricature. “The question of whether or not she was a good campaigner in that race—she wasn’t,” says Mo Cunningham, a professor of political science at the University of Massachusetts Boston. “I think what happened was really national in scope, that people were hoping for some economic relief from Obama and the Democrats and they didn’t get it.”

Coakley talks to high school students at Kickstand Cafe in Arlington, Mass. | AP Photo

“Any political consultant would have told her to do what they did, which was to ignore Brown,” says Michael Goldman, who advised Rep. Mike Capuano in the Democratic primary for that seat. “Ninety-nine point nine percent of the time that’s the right advice, and this time it sucked.”

Extenuating circumstances aside, Coakley had some explaining to do coming off the loss. How could any Dem with a pulse lose a state that had gone for Obama in 2008 by 26 points? She began setting the stage for a comeback with a mea culpa tour of hundreds of the Bay State’s finer living rooms, where Democratic Party bigwigs had the chance to air their grievances in the comfort of their own homes and Coakley promised to improve. With the state party duly appeased, she rolled to a 25-point win in her AG reelection bid that November and began rebuilding.

Heading into this year’s race to succeed Gov. Deval Patrick, all signs were turning up Coakley. In one poll conducted in April, she led Baker by 29 points. Determined to shed the apathy tag, she campaigned at a brisk pace. But she faced a tougher-than-expected primary when former Democratic National Committee Chairman and current State Treasurer Steve Grossman jumped into the race and made a strong showing. Meanwhile, state Republicans quickly coalesced around Baker, their only viable candidate. By the time the general election kicked off on Sept. 10, it was a horse race, and polls since then have showed Baker and Coakley trading the lead, often within the margin of error.