Topics: Bill O'Reilly, Editor's Picks, Fox News, george will, killing reagan, Media Criticism, Ronald Reagan, Media News, News

George Will’s Thursday attack on Bill O’Reilly is not really about Ronald Reagan’s presidency. It is an opening salvo in a fight for control of the Republican Party. In a blistering op-ed—an op-ed, mind you, not a book review—Will savaged the newest book in O’Reilly’s killing series: Killing Reagan: The Violent Assault that Changed a Presidency. Will loathed O’Reilly’s contention that John Hinckley’s assassination attempt started Reagan’s descent into dementia only 70 days into his presidency. But that questioning of Reagan’s mental capacity is not what’s at the heart of Will’s attack on O’Reilly. What’s really going on is that establishment Republicans want to cut the extremists away from the party.

It may be too late.

Will’s criticism of Killing Reagan indicts O’Reilly for, well, making shit up. The book, Will notes, is “a tissue of unsubstantiated assertions.” Neither O’Reilly nor his ghostwriter actually did any research. They did not visit the Reagan Library; they did not interview any of the key players in the Reagan White House. Will calls the book “a no-facts zone,” and condemns it as “nonsensical history and execrable citizenship.” Will uses the inexcusable deficiencies of Killing Reagan to attack “today’s cultural pathology of self-validating vehemence with blustery certitudes substituting for evidence.” In other words, Will has had it with politicians who lie and then bully people into believing in their fantasy world.

The irony of Will’s outrage is that it was President Reagan who enabled such political storytelling to take over the Republican Party. After the second World War, when party leaders tried to resurrect the free-for-all economy of the 1920s that had collapsed into the Great Depression, President Dwight Eisenhower stepped in to articulate instead a new vision for the Republican Party. He led Republicans to back the New Deal consensus. Eisenhower agreed with Democrats that the government must regulate business, provide for social welfare, and develop the nation’s infrastructure, and he believed that bringing labor leaders, businessmen, and intellectuals to the same table—sometimes literally, as he invited men to dinner—to debate would enable political leaders to reach the best possible outcome for the nation. Eisenhower insisted on grappling with the complexities of reality and begged his opponents to do the same.

But businessmen who had thrived in the unregulated economy of the 1920s could not stomach the New Deal consensus. To combat it, they could not use reality-based arguments, for those arguments invariably led voters to government activism. Instead, in the 1950s, those opposed to the New Deal consensus began to create a cartoon version of reality. They laid out a storyline in which America was under siege by secular New Dealers. These “Liberals,” were ushering communism into America by insisting on an activist government that destroyed American individualism and religion.

They sold that storyline with bluster and bullying. Wisconsin’s Sen. Joseph McCarthy led the way. In his highly publicized attacks on supposed communists in Eisenhower’s administration, he presented himself as an outsider defending America from the communists who had infiltrated the government. He hectored witnesses, he bullied, he shouted, he made dramatic—and demonstrably false—statements. By the time fact checkers caught up with old lies, McCarthy was on to new ones. Movement Conservatives noted his techniques.

Still, those who opposed the New Deal consensus made little headway with voters until 1954. That year’s Brown v. Board Supreme Court decision requiring desegregation enabled Movement Conservatives to link racism and anticommunism into a storyline that would dominate American politics until the present. In this powerful narrative, an activist government redistributed wealth from hardworking white taxpayers to lazy African Americans. When President Eisenhower sent troops to integrate Central High School in Little Rock in 1957, this narrative had an illustration. According to Movement Conservatives, the integration of Central High School was not about fulfilling America’s great promise to guarantee equality of opportunity and legal equality to everyone in America. It was a story of the downfall of the nation. Grasping, lazy minorities were gaining rights through force, thanks to a bloated American government that paid for troops and bureaucrats with white tax dollars.

The image of the downfall of traditional America at the hands of grasping minorities was false, of course, but it had legs. It was that image on which Barry Goldwater’s 1964 campaign ran, with his insistence that Brown v. Board—which the Supreme Court decided unanimously under a Republican Chief Justice– was unconstitutional. It was the image on which Richard M. Nixon ran in 1968, when he adopted the Southern Strategy to appeal to white voters who believed their tax dollars were being wasted on inner-city black thugs. Then, in 1970, with his popularity slipping badly, Nixon expanded the list of American freeloaders to include women and minorities in general, as well as young people and anti-war activists.

Reagan, whom journalist Will prepped for his 1980 debate against President Jimmy Carter, brought to that image a softer, folksier tone that made its harsh division of the nation into us and them seem inviting. Reagan gave America the “Welfare Queen,” an evidently African American woman who used 80 names, 30 addresses, and 12 Social Security cards, as well as collecting social security, Medicaid, food stamps, welfare, and veteran’s benefits on four imaginary dead husbands. Reagan’s Welfare Queen rolled women and African Americans together as the enemy undermining good Americans by stealing tax dollars.