Austin Stankowski displays his bird during last spring’s hunt. Scott and Austin Stankowski will host a seminar, “Successful Turkey Hunting with a Youth in Tow.” Credit: SCOTT STANKOWSKI

By ,

Austin Stankowski has been an avid hunter for most of his life.

He has killed a bear, been out on several deer hunts and has bagged more than two dozen turkeys. Not bad for a 12-year-old.

Austin, along with his father, Scott, are bringing their stories to the Journal Sentinel Sports Show, giving a seminar titled "Successful Turkey Hunting with a Youth in Tow."

"Being able to go out into the woods in the springtime and being able to hear toms gobbling is so amazing," said Austin, who started hunting turkeys when he was 9. "If you end up harvesting that bird, it's even more amazing."

For Austin, his favorite place to go hunting is in Nebraska.

"You go over the big rolling hills and you look over the top and you see the birds," he said. "It's more open and it's hard to go after them. It's a lot more exciting."

Scott Stankowski is truly proud of his son's accomplishments.

"I'm not worried about him when he's out in the woods" Scott said. "He is doing things on his own, doing it ethically and doing the harvesting. He's not doing it to brag about it or to get a trophy. It's about putting food on the table."

Because in the Stankowski household, hunting is a means of survival.

"We don't eat any domesticated animals in our house," Scott said. "We just eat wild game. It's our way of life."

Scott, who is a teacher at Wisconsin Rapids' Lincoln High School, said it is important that hunters get youngsters involved. And the turkey hunting season is a good first step for youngsters, he said.

"There's more action, you don't have to sit still," Scott said. "You don't have to worry about scent control, and you are interactive with the animal, which means you can talk to the animal. You can give the kid something to do with the call."

As opposed to deer hunting, turkey hunting can be done over a shorter time span.

"It doesn't have to be an all-day affair," Scott said. "You can go out any time of the day and be successful. It's not a morning or evening thing."

Regulated turkey hunting is relatively new to Wisconsin. It wasn't until the mid-1970s that turkeys were repopulated in the state. The first spring turkey hunt in Wisconsin was held in 1983. Since that beginning, when 1,200 permits were issued, the annual spring hunt has grown tremendously. According to the Department of Natural Resources, 135,155 permits were issued in 2013.

The Stankowski seminar will be coming at a good time. The annual spring turkey youth hunt will be held April 12-13. The weekend is designed to expose 10- to 15-year-olds to hunting.

The move to get youngsters involved in hunting is a good idea, Scott said.

"The number of young hunters is diminishing," Scott said. "There are a lot of distractions out there. People don't realize how therapeutic the outdoors can be."

Scott and Austin Stankowski will give a seminar on "Successful Turkey Hunting with a Youth in Tow" at 1 p.m. Saturday and 1 p.m. Sunday.