Politics: Would anyone in this party be interested in stopping Hillary?

Image Credit: Screengrab via CNN

Published by: Herman Cain on Sunday May 1st, 2016

Because you wouldn't know it some days.

No one has to explain to me about the rough-and-tumble nature of presidential primary races. I know a little something about this. They’re hard-fought because everyone wants to win, and while it’s usually not personal, no one is taking any prisoners because everyone wants the prize.

Been there. Done that. I get it.

But in every nominating contest I can ever remember, the party came together when it was over and got behind the eventual nominee. Some folks did so with a few hard feelings, but for the most part they did it because they didn’t want the rival party winning the White House.

If ever there was a time when Republicans should follow this model, it’s this year. Assuming she wins the Democrat nomination as now appears likely, Hillary Clinton may be the most appalling major party nominee in modern history. She is a shameless liar. She is remarkably short on accomplishments. She is every bit the socialist Bernie Sanders is, but is less honest about it. She is mean and vindictive. She considers herself above the law. She can’t stand answering questions unless they’re friendly softballs. She would be a shoe-in for a felony indictment if not for the possibility a partisan attorney general will save her.

And even with all this, she seems to think she’s entitled to the presidency. If she becomes president, we know we will not be able to trust a word she says, but we can be pretty confident she will be hostile toward American business, she will look to raise taxes even higher than they are, she will protect ObamaCare from repeal, and she will continue the present hostility toward domestic energy producers.

And that’s just in the morning of her first day in office.

Hillary Clinton would be such a disastrous president, the Republican Party should be united like never before in its resolve to supports its nominee, no matter who it is, in order to ensure this woman never becomes president.

But the GOP has never been more divided, with everyone from party regulars to conservative intellectual types vowing not to support Donald Trump if he is the nominee, because . . . they don’t like him! And because their egos have been bruised by the fact that Trump – and not the candidates they preferred – appears at the brink of clinching the Republican nomination.

My point here is not to debate you if you don’t like Donald Trump. He is not everyone’s cup of tea and I understand that. But you know what? The country will survive if we have a president you don’t like. It may not survive if we have another president who has an agenda to further explode the scope and power of the federal government at the expense of Americans’ liberty and prosperity. That is what Hillary Clinton will do, and it would be bad enough without Barack Obama having given her an eight-year head start on the effort.

She must not be allowed to become president. That would be a disaster for this country. And while there may very well be some valid criticisms to make of Donald Trump, for any conservative to seriously argue he would be no better than Hillary Clinton is so absurd, I can only conclude your ego has gotten the best of you if you’re making that argument.

While Republicans are trying to come up with any idea possible to stop Donald Trump in his tracks – even as more and more voters give him their support – Hillary Clinton is measuring the drapes to the Oval Office. I happen to think Donald Trump is a fighter and a problem-solver who will make a good many things better in this country. Perhaps you do not. But whatever his faults, real or perceived, he does not have an agenda to attack employers, attack Christian values and cover up existing foreign policy failures while getting started on new ones.

Hillary Clinton does. So if any of my fellow Republicans have finished hyperventilating about Donald Trump, perhaps they’d like to start focusing in stopping Hillary from becoming president. We’re running out of time and we could really use your help – if that’s OK with you.

Get your copy of Herman Cain’s new book, The Right Problems, here!