Video

Video

Image Australian Story: Out of the kitchen 0:20 Play video An intriguing glimpse behind the scenes of the reality TV phenomenon that's captured the TV landscape in Australia. Monday night 8pm ABC 1. MasterChef: Chicken dramas 2:05 Play video It's a race against the clock as Colin tries to cook his chicken all the way through. Courtesy: Channel Ten

SHE was dubbed the “tough cookie” single mum during the 2013 season of MasterChef, but this contestant now claims she left the cooking show a “basket case.”

Jules Allen, a 39-year-old social worker and foster mother from Lennox Head on NSW’s north coast, spills the beans to ABC’s Australian Story tonight, revealing the bitter taste left by her reality TV experience and how exposed she feels contestants are across similar programs on all free-to-air networks.

MASTERCHEF BEAUTY: Contestant to return to modelling

FRAUD CLAIMS: Former MasterChef contestant hit outs

Allen, who made the top 12 on the Ten series, said while she was “encouraged to sort of crack open” for the cameras, “the problem is at the end there’s no one to put you back together.”

The immersive nature of the experience and the pressure-cooker challenges made contestants feel like a “basket case”, Allen argues, although she accepts it’s what they all signed up for.

“Living with the same 24 people 24 hours a day is not real. Cooking for three judges is not real. It’s not reality television. It’s orchestrated television for the purposes of entertaining a viewer.

“You’re an entertainer but you’re a powerless entertainer and a vulnerable entertainer and you don’t realise that until you’re some way down the track,” she tells ABC1.

“After four-and-a-half months on MasterChef, you’re gone. You’re kaput. There’s no transition at all. You’re spat out into a foreign world because you’re not the person you were when you left.”

She claims she felt “completely alone in that. I was a basket case really. I had nightmares for weeks ... it is really difficult for everyone.”

COMMENT BELOW: Should Jules Allen have expected the experience she got?

While her comments relate to her time on MasterChef, Allen speaks for all reality TV contestants, stating: ‘It’s not just MasterChef. It’s whether you’re on The Block, or MKR (My Kitchen Rules) or The Biggest Loser — the end result is ritual humiliation on national television. The worst thing is we signed up for it. Try reconciling that in yourself.

“In defence of MasterChef, we were told to expect the unexpected — but you can’t fathom what that means.”

MasterChef production company Shine Australia defended the Channel 10 series, arguing they take their “responsibilities and duty of care to contestants very seriously indeed. Extensive support is provided throughout production, and after when required.”

On the upside, Allen’s exposure on the show has been helpful in raising awareness for her charity work, including working with Deborra-Lee Furness as an ambassador for National Adoption Awareness Week.

“There’ve been some tough things, but at the end of the day for a charity worker to have a public profile is a dream come true.”

Australian Story airs at 8pm tonight on ABC1

PICTURES: Vienna’s Life Ball