WASHINGTON -- One of the most ambitious proposals from President Barack Obama's State of the Union address is a new government program to cover the cost of community college tuition.

But the program, while generating excitement on community college campuses in Louisiana and elsewhere, faces major obstacles, including likely opposition from the Republican-led Congress. And even if it wins congressional approval, the measure requires states to chip in 25 percent of the costs, and Louisiana, which has dramatically cut spending on higher education in recent years, has already turned down one earlier Obama initiatives -- a Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act fully funded by the federal government for the first three years.

Vanessa Robichaux, 34, a resident of St. Charles Parish, completing her two-year degree at Delgado Community College this spring with plans to move on to a four-year college to pursue a degree in social work, said the president's proposal could be a life changer for many.

"A lot of times, the financial burden keeps people from attending college," she said. "Or people have to work to cover the costs, and that means a longer time before they can get their degree. I have seen students struggle to work and pay their tuition and other costs."

Like a lot of community college students, Robichaux didn't go straight to college from high school. For a while, she was a stay-at-home mom, and then went into the workforce, before entering Delgado to pursue her dream of a college degree.

For community college administrators, it was a positive just to have the president of the United States talk about the importance of community colleges in his annual nationally telvised speech to Congress.

"When the president of the United States is singling out the good work of community and technical colleges around the country, that's always a good thing," said Monty Sullivan, president of the Louisiana Community and Technical College System, which consists of 13 schools, including Delgado and Baton Rouge Community College.

The question, for Congress and policy providers, Sullivan said, is "can we really make community and technical college affordable for all Americans."

"The flip side," he said, "is can the nation afford it." The Obama administration pegs the cost of the free tuition program at $6 billion a year.

Gov. Bobby Jindal doesn't seem to like the college initiative any more than the Affordable Care Act's Medicaid expansion, which he turned down.

Jindal, who has supported cuts in Louisiana higher education, over increases in taxes and fees, with more cuts projected, said the national debt has increased by $7.5 billion on the president's watch, and entitlement programs "are going bankrupt."

"So of course, now he is planning to offer two years of taxpayer paid college," Jindal said. "Why stop there? Why not have the government buy a car and a house for everyone?"

Jindal said "states are better positioned than the federal government to handle initiatives like these."

Obama's proposal comes with a few conditions.

Students would have to attend community college at least half time, maintain a 2.5 Grade Point Average, and make steady progress toward completing their degree program.

And colleges would be required to offer programs that provide fully transferable credits to local four-year colleges and universities, and offer occupational training programs with high graduation rates.

On Capitol Hill Tuesday night, some House members suggested students who get the full cost of college tuition covered by the government might not be as motivated as students paying a part of their college costs.

Robichaux, the Delgado student leader, rejects that argument, saying the main motivation for her and fellow students is getting a degree and a pathway to a better job. Free tuition, she suggested, would take away from the financial challenges that make attending a college so challenging, she said.

Kristine Strickland, executive dean of Delgado's West Bank Campus, said it is hard to say whether free tuition would take away student motivation, saying there are lots of factors that could impact negatively on student performance, including issues like child care and caring for an elderly parent or grandparents, along with financial pressures that presumably would be eased with free tuition.

Tuition at Delgado is $1,461 per semester for full-time students.

President Obama is adamant that community college plan will pay for itself.

"By the end of this decade, two in three job openings will require some higher education -- two in three," Obama said in his State of the Union address. "And yet, we still live in a country where too many bright, striving Americans are priced out of the education they need. It's not fair to them, and it's sure not smart for our future."

Stuart Butler, a fellow in economic studies at the Brookings Institution, said the president's plan is flawed because it isn't targeted just to low income students, but would provide subsidies to people who don't need them. And he said it might push some students into community colleges, when they might do better in highly competitive four-year colleges. Too many community colleges, he said, are dead ends, with just 20 percent of students who begin a two-year public community college program actually graduating within three years.

Obama insists it makes sense to target limited federal resources on community colleges, while continuing to provide assistance to students at all colleges, including four year colleges, through programs like income-based Pell grants.

"Keep in mind 40 percent of our college students choose community college," Obama said. "Some are young and starting out. Some are older and looking for a better job. Some are veterans and single parents trying to transition back into the job market. Whoever you are, this plan is your chance to graduate ready for the new economy without a load of debt."