As President Obama approaches the end of his fifth year in office, his approval ratings are reaching new lows. According to the latest Washington Post-ABC News poll, just 43 percent of Americans approve of the job he’s doing—down 9 percentage points from the same time last year. In polls comparing confidence in Obama to confidence in congressional Republicans, the president has lost ground with the public on every measure since last year—from his handling of the economy to protecting the middle class.

The dismal numbers are a reflection of a rocky year. From still-sluggish job growth to Edward Snowden’s revelations about the National Security Agency’s spying on Americans to the partial government shutdown to the botched rollout of HealthCare.gov, little seems to have gone right for the White House in 2013.

Story Continued Below

At least, that’s one way to look at Obama’s second-term woes. Another possibility is that there’s just something about Year Five itself—some immutable law of the American political calendar that condemns our presidents to a miserable time after their second inaugural. Maybe it’s about presidents and their re-election hangovers, or their opponents’ renewed determination to thwart the White House agenda, or perhaps it’s simply the problem of the public’s inevitable fatigue. What’s clear is that, while the causes may differ, Obama is by no means alone in his fifth-year flop.

We asked a panel of distinguished historians to tell us which American presidents also had rough starts to their second terms, and their responses are a reminder that West Wing misery has plenty of company: Many presidents, even some of our most fondly remembered, have suffered from disastrous fifth years.

***

H.W. Brands: F.D. Roosevelt

In 1937, the greatest president of the twentieth century suffered the worst fifth year in presidential history. Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s effort to reform the Supreme Court was denounced as “court-packing” and cost him nearly all the momentum he had gained in his huge reelection victory. And then the economy tanked, undoing most of the progress that had been made against the Great Depression. The Roosevelt magic was gone; even Democrats began turning against him. If World War II hadn’t given him another chance, he would be remembered today as a mediocre president at best.

Jean Edward Smith: F.D. Roosevelt

With the exception of Lincoln, FDR had the worst fifth year of any American president. And it was all self-inflicted. He began by attempting to pack the Supreme Court. Roosevelt wanted to appoint a new justice for every justice who was 70 and had not retired. That would have given him six additional appointments. It was overreach.

Then Sen. Taylor Robinson, the majority leader, died in the middle of the fight, and Roosevelt did not attend his funeral in Arkansas. That further alienated the Senate. Finally, FDR thought the Depression was over and cut the federal budget drastically. That precipitated the economic downturn in 1938 and 1939. If war had not come, FDR would have been a two-term president. And he would have been ranked good, not great.

Peter Hahn: Richard Nixon

Arguably, Richard Nixon experienced the bumpiest “year five” in recent history. Nixon triumphed in the 1972 presidential election by huge margins, collecting 60.7 percent of the popular vote and gathering 520 electoral votes to his opponent’s 17. And in January-February 1973, he officially ended the Vietnam War and welcomed home American POWs. By the end of 1973, by contrast, the Arab-Israeli October War escalated international tensions, provoking a military alert and undermining the détente policy that Nixon had championed. At home, the Watergate scandal—which resulted in resignations, criminal convictions, congressional and press inquiries, and the “Saturday Night Massacre”—together with the forced resignation of Vice President Spiro Agnew placed Nixon on a fast track to a disgraceful, premature exit from the White House.

James Goldgeier: Richard Nixon and others

The gold standard for a rough first year of a modern second presidential term belongs to Richard Nixon in 1973, as Watergate burst into the nation’s consciousness. The Affordable Care Act enrollment rollout does not come close. Other modern presidents have gotten into deep trouble in their second terms—Ronald Reagan with the Iran-Contra affair and Bill Clinton with the Monica Lewinsky scandal. At the conclusion of Year One of his second term, while his aides grapple with his dismal approval ratings, Barack Obama no longer faces the threat of another imminent government shutdown, thanks to the budget agreement in Congress, and his administration has opened the possibility for a nuclear deal with Iran—participating in the highest-level talks between the two countries in nearly four decades. All in all, it could be a lot worse.

Jack Rakove: James Madison

Few presidents have had a worse fifth year than James Madison, when the United States went from one reverse to another in the War of 1812. Most critics treat his conduct of the war as a low mark in the history of the presidency. The New England states sat the war out, and even mused about secession. Yet Madison left the presidency in 1817 a popular leader, buoyed not only by the patriotism that flourished after the war, but by the widely held belief that he had acted as a republican president should, holding to the constitutional principles he did so much to establish. Perhaps there is a deeper lesson in his presidency we should all contemplate.