This is the second part of a chat held last week at UT Southwestern’s William P. Clements Jr. University Hospital. County Judge Clay Jenkins, DFW Hospital Council President Steve Love, and Parkland Health & Hospital System CFO John Moore talked about who pays for the uninsured. Head here to catch up on the first part.

Love: I’m going to give kudos to Dallas County and special kudos to Parkland. You just heard the judge say the taxes are paid in Dallas County, but Parkland treats patients from Collin County, Kaufman County, Denton County. They don’t shut their doors. They’re really doing some good will for all these counties, and those counties should help fund their way with that.

Jenkins: And that is unlikely to happen because of the EMTALA Law (The Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act), which Ron Anderson, by the way, who died last year, he was a saint of healthcare and CEO of Parkland for about 35 years, he helped pass those laws that banned patient dumping. It punishes, which is a good thing, emergency rooms for sending people away because they don’t have any way to pay in an emergency situation.

So if a Collin County person drives with a broken leg to Parkland, or the gash in his hand, or chest pains, or whatever; there’s really no option, he is seen there at Parkland. There is some effort in part of Collin County in a deal that their judge and I did, where they do reimburse us minimal amounts of money because they reimburse for 100 percent of poverty, but we treat up to 200 percent of poverty. There are very few people who qualify for reimbursements; there’s a whole lot of people who qualify for treatment.

Do you know the breakdown of patients that Parkland sees who live outside of Dallas?

Jenkins: I don’t have that right off the top of my head.

Love: The last I heard, and this was two years ago, it was like, 20 to 25 percent.

Jenkins: That doesn’t surprise me.

Steve, would you like to explain the Texas Way?

Love: The Texas Way is something we are all trying to get through this legislative session and I’ll boil it down to you. One of the things that people who don’t support Medicaid expansion, but they do acknowledge we have an issue— we’ve got 6 million people with no insurance—is how do we craft something where we deal with the private sector and the public sector to come up with a solution?

The Texas Way is really private insurance that would be maybe a Silver Plan on the health insurance marketplace that meets the criteria that the state funding can also be matched and receive federal funding. It’s similar to what Arkansas did, but not exactly. It’s a little like Arkansas and a little like Utah. But essentially, the Texas Way is: We’re not truly expanding the Medicaid program, but we are expanding coverage using the private sector in a plan known as the Texas Way.

Some of the people that oppose expansion say, we need skin in the game. OK, we’ll put some sliding scale of deductible there. They can’t pay $1,000, but they can pay $20. Let’s have something along those lines. Let’s make sure that the coverage is affordable through the health insurance marketplace. The one thing that I will say that worries me, if King prevails in King v. Burwell, that’s going to hurt us all the way across the board because it’s going to really hurt the subsidies. Those are part and parcel to what we’re trying to do for the Texas Way.

AUDIENCE QUESTIONS BELOW

Is the opposition to expanding Medicaid in Texas really just ideological, or is there something I just don’t understand? To me, it seems like a no-brainer.

Love: I’ll be candid with you, I’ve talked to 100 or more legislators. I’ve talked to Democrats and Republicans, and by the way we’re not political, we treat Democrats and Republicans at our hospitals. But some of the people are opposed to it, frankly, because it’s part of the Affordable Care Act and they don’t support ‘Obamacare.’ I’m sorry, but that’s true. There are some people who truly think even though we show them the information, that it’s going to hurt us economically. Frankly, we think just the opposite. There are studies that show that it’s going to help us economically, and it’s going to produce more jobs.

There are things that we could craft; i’ve heard more than once, well, suppose the federal government reneges. Well, Arizona did it and Jan Brewer, a Republican, put in there: If they renege on their part, we abandon this program. There are safety measures we can put in, but by and large, and I hate to say it, but I think it comes down to political.

Jenkins: I agree with that.

Does the public know about EMTALA laws? It’s almost cultural, if you want to get medical care, you go to Parkland whether you’re in Dallas County or Collin County.

Love: A lot of people don’t. I speak at a lot of chambers of commerce and such, and I’ve had a lot of people raise their hand and say, ‘just don’t treat the undocumented.’ I said, undocumented residents are not as big an issue as you think. And physicians take an oath. This is one of the best teaching institutions in the nation right here, and these physicians take an oath like the judge said. When someone comes into the emergency room and they’re dying, we’re not going to say prove to us you’re a U.S. citizen. We’re going to treat them.



Should there be some communication to the general public that if you are in need of dire care, go to the nearest ER. Don’t go to Parkland.

Love: Well, they do. Just so you know, Baylor, Methodist, and THR are safety net too. Not to the extent Parkland is. But trust me. They have a lot of uncompensated care that they give back to the community.



Jenkins: A Texas Way would help them tremendously, too. John do you know how much money you lost last year on charity and uncompensated care and treating the uninsured?

Moore: It’s hundreds of millions of dollars.

Jenkins: And, really, uncompensated care is a misnomer. It is compensated. It’s compensated by you. It’s compensated in your tax dollars. I don’t know if anyone saw the story two weeks ago, but I think it was hip replacements—Dallas was third in the country in expense of hip replacement surgery. If you’re in Akron, Ohio it was like $8,000, and in Dallas it was like $45,000. In Dallas, think of those as a restaurant. What if you had a restaurant where one in four of the people who ate at your restaurant, the restaurant gave them their food. And it didn’t pay. The only way to make money in that restaurant is what? So you see that here in Dallas. It’s a dirty secret that you see that.

Love: It translates to $1,800 a year in your healthcare premiums. It’s called the hidden tax.

The Texas Way sounds like an almost band-aid solution based on the current dynamic and I’m curious, what’s your opinion on it? Do you think it’s a sustainable solution and what are the weaknesses there? And if, in a perfect world, you can create a system as you wish, what would that look like?

Love: Well, on the Texas Way, it’s not really a band-aid. But it’s only a partial solution. There are 6 million people uninsured. This will address roughly 1.5 million of them. It is sustainable because it’s through the private sector and as long as we have an active and viable health insurance market place, in my opinion it’s sustainable. I don’t really know what the answer is. People compare our system to other countries, but we do things here in this country that they don’t do in other countries. And in my opinion, we do have the best medical care. It is the best care per capita.

I think we really need to sit down and look at prevention, wellness and something we haven’t talked about is end of life. Fifty percent of the healthcare dollar is spent in the last six months of life. And I’m not talking about death panels. I’ll tell all of you, if you haven’t done your advance directives, get those done. You could be in a car accident. Make sure that you plan for end of life.

Where do you see healthcare going in the next five years?

Moore: To be honest, I don’t know. So much of it can be political. How the elections go will have an impact. Both how they go in Washington and in Austin really has an impact on what is going to occur. The presidential election coming up here in the next couple years could have an impact. Republicans have control of both houses of Congress. And the president is a Democrat. So in my opinion, there probably won’t be any major changes. But if the presidency were to change, it very well could be.

Love: The one thing that’s got to happen, this fee-for-service is got to go away. When providers get paid, hospitals included, we get paid if we do something. Now, if we go to a bundle payment, call it what you like, a flat fee where the prevention, the medical clinics, the hospital, the post-acute; all of that’s included in that one payment, and the payment is predicated upon the outcome of the patient—that’s where we need to go, and hospitals support that. It’s called value-based versus volume-based. CMS is already moving Medicaid that way. Burwell came out with what I consider some pretty good standards. So in the next five years, I think we’ll be on bundle payment which will make all the providers work together.

Do you still the growth in the entire healthcare sector?

Love: Yeah, it’s going to grow. Thirty percent of the kids in Dallas County live in poverty. We’re sorry that’s the case. Education, poverty, and healthcare intersect. Thirty five percent of the kids in Dallas County are obese. Eighty-five percent of them, in the course of their lifetime, will develop Type 2 diabetes. We’re unhealthy. Out of 17 industrialized nations, we ranked 16th. Until we do something about our health, medical expenses are going to continue.

Jenkins: My opinion is, if you work 40 hours a week, you should be able to afford the basic necessities of life for your family. And that includes healthcare. My hope is that as we move away from fee for service and move into fee for efficacy, I think we’ll begin seeing healthcare more like other industrialized countries that see it as a right. We accept education of children as a right. You have the right if you want to choose to send your child to Catholic school. But if you send your child to public school, we expect that they will get a decent education. You should be able to send your child to get decent healthcare. If we move in that direction, we’ll be a much more productive and competitive country.