We always hope our favorite team goes undefeated. However, there’s a little more pep in our cheer for the Denver Broncos because, when they win, complete specific plays, or just show up, fans score some great food and drink deals. Promos are valid for all games during the regular season at participating locations. There are several offers to tackle, so get your game plan ready.

On game day

Papa Murphy’s serves up a game day feast with an oven-ready large pizza (up to five toppings) or signature pizza for $10, no strings attached.

After a win

The day after a win, save 50 percent on a Papa John’s online order of regular-price menu items. Use the promo code BRONCOS. To celebrate a sweet victory, King Soopers gives customers a free raised or cake donut the following day (you need a loyalty card). If you’re not still buzzing from a big win, you can sip on a free small coffee at participating Suncor Energy/Shell gas stations from 5 a.m. to 10 a.m.

Get your kicks

When the Broncos kick a field goal of 35 yards or more, get up to six single tacos for 35 cents each at Jack in the Box from 3 p.m. to 7 p.m. the following day. If you kick it with the maximum, that’s only $2.10, plus tax.

Touchdown treats

Thirsty fans can get quenched with a touchdown freebie from King Soopers. When Eric Decker scores a touchdown, get a free 2-liter bottle of Orange Crush. If Demaryius Thomas makes a TD, get a free 2-liter Pepsi. If both players score, choose between Pepsi or Orange Crush. The offer is good the next day and requires your store loyalty card.

Sack dance

When the Broncos get two or more sacks, buy two beverages and a burger, entrée or entrée salad and get a free Red’s Tavern Double Burger the Tuesday after game day. This freebie comes with bottomless steak fries.

Big score

Should the Broncos score 28 or more points, one dozen Original Glazed Krispy Kreme doughnuts are yours for $2.80 the Tuesday after game day. The sweet offer is only available until 11 a.m.

Each Monday, Laura & Bryan at MileHighOnTheCheap.com compile “Cheap Checklist” to help cheapskates find deals, discounts and freebies. Know of a deal? E-mail info@milehighonthecheap.com 10 to 14 days in advance.