SOCHI, Russia — A $1 million lodging snafu by Olympic organizers has caused 100 sports fans, including relatives of U.S. athletes, to scramble for a place to live during the Games, according to an angry tour operator.

“It has been a nightmare,” Ludus Tours managing director Adam Dailey said Sunday, during a telephone interview. “I feel like it’s amateur hour in Russia.”

Add a severely overbooked cruise ship in the Black Sea to a Winter Olympics that has gone to the dogs, with frequent complaints of substandard accommodations lacking basic items that are expected in any two-star hotel, such as clean water in the tap.

At least 100 Olympic spectators who believed they had guaranteed reservation on the Grand Holiday, a 729-foot-long cruise ship docked not far from the Olympic village, were turned away without reasonable explanation when they arrived in the Russian port town of Adler.

“We were moved off the cruise ship and forced to relocate our clients. This was done as if were Russian mafia,” said Dailey, who describes his company as the official tour operator of USA federations for curling, luge, bobsled and skeleton. He estimated 30 people in the Ludus traveling party are relatives of American athletes.

“We’ve spent two years planning for this event and they’ve thrown this at us in the 11th hour,” said Dailey, who blamed the Sochi Organizing Committee for the Olympic Games for not notifying visitors of the problem until after they landed in Russia.

Clients who paid approximately $400 per day for room and board on a ship were relocated five miles west of the Olympic park, in apartment hotels that rent for $175 per night. In some cases, Dailey claimed, fans arriving early last week were forced to wait 24 hours before replacement lodging was located.

“Just because they overbooked a cruise ship doesn’t mean it’s a natural disaster,” said Dailey, irked at a threat that lodging would be withheld from his clients if he complained too vigorously.

Communism is dead in Russia. But a large, sticky pile of bureaucratic red tape remains for Olympic tourists, whether the goal is to obtain something as essential as a visa or as simple as a spare key to a hotel room. Dailey feels their pain.

“We’ve spent more than $1 million for all our accommodations in Sochi during the Games, and nothing is what we were promised,” he said.

Mark Kiszla: mkiszla@denverpost.com or twitter.com/markkiszla