The Keyhole on Longs Peak became the most popular route up the mountain although the first ascent by white men was made from the south side. ( Courtesy of Rocky Mountain National Park )

This story takes place when Rocky Mountain National Park was in the distance future.

Elkanah J. Lamb was among the area's first professional mountain guides. In 1875, he chopped his way through trees and brush from Estes Park to the base of Longs Peak. He settled in a small valley and constructed a lodge he called the Longs Peak House. His occupation was that of a traveling minister, and Lamb is credited with founding the United Brethren Church in Loveland.

Lamb and his second wife operated the Longs Peak House for a quarter of a century. In 1902, they sold it to Enos A. Mills, who is credited with being "The Father of Rocky Mountain National Park."

After making a solo climb of Longs Peak in 1885, Mills joined Lamb to become a professional guide.

Climbing Longs Peak grew in popularity. With their inn positioned near the start of the trail, Lamb and Mills enjoyed a steady seasonal business.

Donald Brown made the first recorded ascent via the Keyhole route. Although the first ascent by white men was made from the south side, the Keyhole route became the most popular.

In 1871, Elkanah Lamb put together a small party and used this route. Lamb's climbing partners gave up before reaching the Keyhole itself, and Lamb trudged on alone. He traversed across the "Narrows" and up the "Trough" to the summit.

Once on top, Lamb's bad judgment led him to try to return via the east face. He began what was the first descent of the Notch Couloir and passed spots so steep and dangerous that he could not retreat.

Advertisement

At the base of the couloir, he was forced to traverse a very narrow ledge hundreds of feet above Chasm Lake. Someone with a sick sense of humor later named this ledge "Broadway."

The ledge took him to a steep ice slope, which he was unprepared to climb down. He slipped and accelerated rapidly toward what should have been certain death. In desperation, he managed to throw himself around a projecting rock stopping his slide. He broke his pocketknife trying to chisel out a foothold.

Bible in hand, preacher Elkanah J. Lamb was among the first professional guides on Longs Peak. He built the Longs Peak House specifically for overnight accommodations for those wishing to climb the peak. (Estes Park Museum collection)

Somehow, Lamb survived, and it wasn't until 32 years later that Enos Mills repeated this route presumably with better equipment. The ice slope was later named "The Lamb's Slide."

Elkanah's wife died in 1867 when his son Carlyle was only 5 years old. Carlyle Lamb made his first climb of Longs Peak in 1879 and spent more than four decades ascending and descending the mountain 146 times.

In September 1884, Carlyle Lamb had the unfortunate luck to guide Carry J. Welton up the peak. It was late in the season and during the climb, Lamb advised the young lady to turn around. She was stubborn and made it to the top.

On the return trip, she reached the Keyhole and collapsed. Lamb made the decision to return to the Longs Peak House and get his father. When they returned at dawn, they found that she had died of exposure. This was the first death on the mountain.

Carlyle Lamb had a hard time clearing his name, but eventually it was concluded that Welton's headstrong nature made her responsible for her own death.

Carlyle Lamb took over the operation of the Longs Peak House from his father and carried on the tradition of catering to mountaineers.

Enos Mills purchased the facility in 1901 made it into the Longs Peak Inn.

Carlyle Lamb's last ascent of Longs Peak was in 1935 at the age of 73.

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years. This year his columns will focus mainly on the history of Rocky Mountain National Park.