The 2010 election was a watershed moment for the Tea Party, reshaping the landscape of state legislatures across the country and setting up a redistricting process meant to keep them in power in Congress for years to come. But the Republicans did win every contest they tried for, and one major loss was in Arizona, where Tea Party favorite Sharron Angle failed to unseat Democratic Senator Harry Reid.

Even in an election where anger against the passage of the Affordable Care Act and rumblings against “Washington insiders” allowed a wave of business people with little to no elective experience to win high level congressional races, Angle was just a step too far for even most GOP voters.

From calling for “second amendment remedies” to election results if they didn’t swing conservative, telling rape victims to “make lemonade” out of their pregnancies and some of the most racist, anti-immigration language of the election cycle, Angle proved that there is such a thing as too extreme for the extreme right.

Despite this lesson, and despite the GOP worrying about an election cycle where they are not only on the brink of catastrophe when it comes to endorsing a presidential candidate, but that they could possibly lose the Senate again, too, Angle is pushing her way back into the conversation in Nevada.

With Sen. Harry Reid’s decision to step down at the end of 2016, Nevada Republicans know this is their best chance in decades to flip it into their party control. GOP Rep. Joe Heck had been the anointed party choice, but now Angle is prepped to primary the establishment’s choice and see if she can snag the endorsement away from him.

“Sharron Angle’s entry into the Nevada Senate race creates a headache for Republicans hoping to sail through a primary and focus on a tough general election,” reports The Hill. “The 2010 Republican Senate nominee’s decision to run upends the party establishment’s plan to rally behind Rep. Joe Heck (R-Nev.) in an uncontested primary as the GOP looks to flip the seat being vacated when Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) retires.”

Angle returning to the stage to challenge an “establishment” candidate to the party nomination makes perfect sense when considering the wider landscape of GOP politics. With businessman Donald Trump solidly on the way to winning the party nomination for president – or at the very least blocking any Republican “establishment” politician from winning enough delegates to secure the nomination himself – the frontrunner is serving up a model for any big name, anti-establishment politician to follow in order to win a lower level primary race similarly. It is a blueprint that could work especially well for Angle, who has similar extreme views on immigration and a love of xenophobic campaign rhetoric that has helped Trump soar to popularity among the far right.

The problem for Angle, however, is that this go around, she may be extremely unlikely to get the support of the anti-establishment political groups she needs to make a run at the nomination – either because they don’t want to expend the resources, or they see her as already too damaged a candidate to win a general election.

“Back in 2010, Tea Party Express spent about half a million dollars helping Angle in the primaries—playing a decisive role in supporting her then. Their less-than-enthusiastic statement about her entry in the 2016 primary isn’t a positive sign for Angle,” reports Breitbart News.

“FreedomWorks, another organization that spent about $300,000 on Angle in 2010, told Breitbart News it doesn’t expect to endorse in the Nevada GOP senatorial primary. ‘We do not anticipate endorsing in the Nevada Senate race,’ FreedomWorks said in a statement. ‘We’re concentrating our resources on defending the House Freedom Caucus and a few Senate races, including Mike Lee in Utah.’ Western Representation PAC, which was started in 2010 specifically to help defeat Reid and which spent more than a hundred thousand dollars in that effort, also said it won’t be backing Angle again.”

While money groups may not be interested in backing Angle this go around, her decision to primary Heck shows that Tea Party candidates from the past are still not happy with the current GOP slate – even when some of their own are the ones in office. And with Trump’s run successfully exposing the growing schism within the right, more Tea Party followers are increasingly vocal about demanding more anti-establishment representation on every level – even in calling out and primarying some of the biggest leaders of the party, like Speaker of the House Paul Ryan.

What should be especially worrisome to the GOP currently is that those who were considered insurgent in 2010 and 2012 – Sen. Marco Rubio, Rep. Paul Ryan, Sen. Ted Cruz – just a few years later are now already too centrist and “insider” for a Tea Party that believes any involvement in governing actually taints a politician and makes him or her unsuitable to be in government itself.

With a mindset like that, is it any wonder that the GOP is falling to pieces, or that candidates like Sharron Angle are on their way back to the ticket?

Photo credit: Wikimedia commons