Tree pruned to clear power lines on Freya Street, Kareela. Photo: Supplied

​The state's electricity distributor has been accused of wilful vandalism by one of several Sydney councils frustrated by what they say is excessive pruning of street trees.

Sutherland Shire's mayor Kent Johns said Ausgrid's work trimming vegetation away from power lines in the city's leafy southern suburbs was so poor, in some instances trees had been left unsafe.

"They have knowingly continued vandalising our streets, butchering our trees and creating an unsafe environment," Cr Johns said.

Kareena Road, Miranda. Sutherland Shire's mayor Kent Johns has criticised Ausgrid's trimming work. Photo: Sam Venn

The concerns are not limited to Sydney's Sutherland Shire.

Advertisement

In the inner west, Marrickville Council unanimously expressed its concerns about Ausgrid's "excessive and unreasonable" tree pruning in a council motion that last year called on the operator to better bundle its wires to avoid unnecessary damage to trees.

Marrickville mayor Mark Gardiner said Ausgrid responded by saying that it was acting within the guidelines and essentially "bad luck".

Tree on Menai Road, Bangor. Photo: supplied

"Generally speaking – please pardon the pun – we find ourselves fairly powerless, Cr Gardiner said.

"They do say they take into account species and location, but council's generally of the view that they don't do that well if they do it at all."

Woollahra's mayor Toni Zeltzer​ said "what we see sometimes is that much of the heart of the tree is removed," but she was "very confident" collaboration with a new Ausgrid contractor would lead to better outcomes.

Cr Zeltzer said forced council amalgamations posed a greater threat to Woollahra's vegetation than Ausgrid as the street canopy was not greatly valued in neighbouring areas.

"When you cross the municipal boundaries, you get a real sense of Nullabor," Cr Zeltzer said.

Sutherland's mayor said it was preparing a proposal to put to Ausgrid that would see some trees removed and replaced with more appropriate species, rather than badly trimmed.

The mayor highlighted one instance in Como, where he said the trees had been cut back to such deformed "stumps" that council was now investigating whether to replace them.

"I'm not sure what's driving the savagery that they're using," Cr Johns said.

"I can only suspect that it's to lower costs, that if you completely hatchet a tree then you don't have to come back for two years instead of annually."

However, an Ausgrid spokeswoman said it had written to Sutherland last year about a possible tree replacement program and was yet to receive a response.

All but isolated cases of recent trimming work in the Sutherland Shire had been completed to a high standard, she said, adding that any tree identified as potentially unsafe was reported for further assessment.

"Many of the council-owned trees planted throughout the Sutherland Shire are single-leader Eucalyptus, which can grow to between 10 and 40 metres, depending on the specific species," the spokeswoman said.

"When these types of trees are planted directly under powerlines, which are generally about six metres high, it is difficult to achieve both a safe electricity network and an aesthetically pleasing cut."

Contractors were trained to prune to Australian standards to protect the health of the tree and to allow for annual regrowth, as part of a vegetation management that cost Ausgrid about $40 million a year, the spokeswoman said.

"Trimming trees more frequently would be inefficient and would add significantly to customers' bills," she said.

Energy Minister Anthony Roberts said trimming trees must be done for the safety of the community and to prevent blackouts.

"Ausgrid has worked with councils to remove and replace trees in some situations," Mr Roberts said.