By Tim Nesbitt

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) has spent more time in courtrooms over the last five years than in clinics, pharmacies and hospital rooms, or so it has seemed during its initial struggle for political survival. But now that the Supreme Court has freed the program to get on with the business of reforming our health care system, its biggest challenges are yet to come.

Critics of the ACA claim that higher costs, unaffordable premium increases and unsustainable subsidies will send the program into a death spiral before the end of this decade. Supporters counter that its early success in expanding coverage and moderating cost increases point to a healthy maturation over time. There is plausibility in both prognoses. The ACA's demise has been greatly exaggerated, but it will have to follow a strict regimen of cost controls and continuous innovation to remain viable. And this is where Oregon's experience with the program highlights the challenges ahead.

First, let's remember that there is more to the ACA than insurance exchanges. Its greatest success has come from the expansion of coverage for low-income Americans through state Medicaid programs, in spite of the fact that 21 states opted out of this part of the ACA. Oregon, in particular, has excelled in implementing this expansion.

Last year, Oregon's Medicaid program boosted its enrollment from 614,000 to just under a million Oregonians. One of every three Oregon residents under the age of 65 is now covered by Medicaid, which we know as the Oregon Health Plan (OHP). Even more telling, these Oregonians are served by a system of coordinated care organizations (CCOs) that are controlling costs within tight bounds prescribed by state government. OHP's costs per person for inpatient and outpatient care have actually declined since the establishment of the CCOs in 2012.

But Oregon's implementation of the ACA's private market expansion has been troubled from the start. The failure of the state's insurance exchange depressed enrollments. Cost pressures are growing. And, state regulators aren't making life easy for insurers in the individual market, where the ACA is supposed to be controlling costs in return for mandating coverage. In rate setting decisions issued this week, the Oregon Insurance Division raised premiums by 8 percent to 38 percent for individual coverage in 2016.

The ACA hedged its bets on health care reform, putting resources behind the expansion of public plans via Medicaid and enacting a combination of mandates and incentives to drive reform in the commercial marketplace. In Oregon, those bets have paid off on the public side, but they look increasingly shaky on the private side. And matters could get worse if doctors, hospitals and drug companies respond to cost containment pressures in the OHP population by raising their rates in the private insurance market.

This is why the premium increases announced by state regulators this week are so troubling. Not only are they a setback for the "affordable" part of the ACA, but they suggest that the state's Insurance Division may be overly cautious when it comes to price competition in the commercial market. That will retard the ability of innovative insurers and efficient provider networks to gain subscribers based on their success in controlling costs and improving care in the next phase of ACA implementation.

Former Gov. John Kitzhaber anticipated this challenge two years ago when he asked the Oregon Health Policy Board to recommend ways to move the commercial marketplace toward "models of coordinated care and growth rates of total health care expenditures that are reasonable and predictable." This is what some insurers are trying to do by organizing their own provider networks. One example is a new entrant in the Oregon market called Zoom Health Plan, which has created a delivery system of neighborhood health centers in the Portland area. Another, more established, participant is Kaiser, whose managed care model seems to fit best with the ACA's vision of effective and affordable care. But both of these insurers were directed by state regulators to set their premiums above their original asking prices for 2016.

Reforming the private health care market has always been the larger challenge for the ACA. But if the cost trends we're seeing in private insurance markets in Oregon and other states continue in 2016 and beyond, the struggle over the ACA will only intensify in the court of public opinion.

Tim Nesbitt writes on public affairs, has served as an adviser to Governors Ted Kulongoski and John Kitzhaber, and is past president of the Oregon AFL-CIO. He writes every other week for oregonlive.com and The Oregonian. He can be reached at nesbitt.columns@gmail.com.