Timber Lake, SD

Rural communities dot the landscape in South Dakota. They’ve bound by common pleasantries and share similar challenges, too.

You'd have to drive miles through multiple counties before arriving at the small town of Timber Lake from either of the interstate highways in South Dakota. Developers haven't exactly been lining up to risk money and add new housing to the small Dewey County community.

When teachers interview for jobs at the school, superintendent Jarod Larson always expects a similar question.

"They always ask, ‘where would I live,’" Larson said.

There were never a lot of options, Larson says, but the community had some thanks to investments by the development corporation and others. Then a couple rental houses went off the market.

That's when the school entered the housing sector, bought a couple small homes and moved them to town so it could rent to teachers. This is the first school year the houses have been in Timber Lake.

"It's our responsibility to supply top-notch, high quality education to our kids and housing isn't our responsibility,” Larson said. “However, when housing impedes on our ability to recruit and/or retain highly qualified educators, then it does become our issue."

On the eastern side of the state, it's not the school but an employer in town investing in new housing.

"We're planning to develop a 35-unit town home development. We just saw a real need here in Milbank," Valley Queen Cheese CEO Mark Leddy said.

Leddy wants to grow the cheese plant in Milbank and that requires more workers. Without more housing options in town, he says, recruitment would be difficult.

South Dakota Housing Development Authority has helped small communities study housing needs. Results show Milbank and Timber Lake aren't alone.

Faulkton has completed a housing study. Roger Deiter is part of the community’s housing task force and says it’s learned Faulkton has a high percentage of old homes in need of repair or beyond repair. It also needs more lots for people to build and more rental options for people moving to town.

"Through this process we've networked with several other communities in our area and the problems virtually are the same, Deiter said. “It's a critical issue that needs to be addressed otherwise these rural communities will just shrivel up like a lot of them already have."

The city guaranteed a portion of a loan to build a new eight-unit apartment complex that will help with some of the needs in Faulkton. Still, a lot of work needs to be done, Deiter says, to help the community move forward.

In Milbank, ground is already cleared for the new town homes planned by a company that would just as soon stick to making cheese.

"We expect them to fill and once they do, we've got a phase two planned as well. We think it's a need," Leddy said.

And back in Timber Lake, after brining two rental homes to the community, the school board is considering a third.

"It's not an ideal situation. It's certainly not something that we set out to do. It becomes a matter of necessity," Larson said.