Democratic presidential candidates Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton made several campaign stops Monday across New Hampshire on the eve of the first-in-the-nation primary.

Hillary Clinton, fighting to win or at least avoid embarrassment in the first-in-the-nation presidential primary, sent a message Monday that Democratic foe Bernie Sanders is hypocritical for calling her out on her acceptance of donations from Wall Street corporate interests.

Final WMUR Democratic poll: Sanders continues to hold... On the eve of the New Hampshire primary, a new poll shows Vermont U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders maintaining a big lead over former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, while nearly two-thirds of likely Democratic primary voters believe he will be the winner on Tuesday. More

She also said Sanders’ proposal for a single-payer health plan “looks good on paper,” but she said it is wrong to try to “start over” on health care.

Trailing in polling a day before voters in New Hampshire cast their ballots, Clinton, at a rally at Manchester Community College, said she has not been swayed by taking Wall Street money. She said Sanders did the same, although, she said, in his case, the money was funneled through the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee.

Sanders’ campaign responded by accusing the Clinton campaign of spreading “falsehoods” and charged that the Clinton campaign has become “increasingly negative and dishonest.”

Campaign manager Jeff Weaver said Sanders will not dismantle health care programs and called her charge that he took Wall Street donations “false and absurd,” his campaign manager said.

Clinton, introduced at the packed event by former President Bill Clinton and their daughter, Chelsea Clinton, fought back against Sanders’ continued criticism of her for taking donations and speakers’ fees from Wall Street firms.

She said she has been “speaking out against, and working to rein in, powerful forces for many years. I have scars to prove that.”

“And they have spent a lot of money against me,” Hillary Clinton said. “Imagine. If Wall Street were interested in supporting Democrats like (President Barack Obama) and me for their own reasons, why are they spending $6 million trying to defeat me?”

“I haven’t just talked. I haven’t just given speeches. I’ve introduced legislation. I’ve called them out. I’ve gone to Wall Street. I said they were going to wreck the economy over the mortgage market.”

“They know where I stand because I’ve always stood there,” Clinton insisted.

“And like President Obama, I’ve taken donations, there’s no doubt about that,” she said.

She said donations taken by Obama did not stop him from signing the Dodd-Frank bill into law.

“And you know,” Clinton continued, “Sen. Sanders took about $200,000 from Wall Street firms. Not directly, but through the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee,” the party group that pours money into campaigns to help Democratic U.S. Senate candidates.

“You know, there’s nothing wrong with that. It hasn’t changed his view."

“Well, it didn’t change my view or my vote, either,” she said.

Clinton also hit Sanders on his call for a single-payer health plan.

She said the Affordable Care Act was a major accomplishment and she wants to build on it.

“But what we cannot do is start over,” Clinton said. “We cannot take what looks good on paper, an idea, and say, ‘You know what? We’re going to thrust our nation into a contentious debate and start all over.’”

“It’s a lot easier to get from 90 percent coverage to 100 than it is to get from zero to 100.”

Sanders’ campaign manager Weaver responded with a statement blasting the Clinton campaign on Wall Street, health care and other issues.

“It is very disturbing that, as the Clinton campaign struggles through Iowa and New Hampshire, they have become increasingly negative and dishonest. Bernie Sanders will not dismantle health care programs in America. He believes in health care for all. Bernie Sanders is not ‘attacking’ Planned Parenthood. He believes Planned Parenthood is an outstanding organization and wants to increase its funding. No, Bernie Sanders is not ‘protecting’ the gun lobby. He has a D- record from the NRA."

“Today’s attack from Secretary Clinton, whose super PAC received $15 million from Wall Street, is even more absurd, “Weaver said. “Bernie Sanders, who has never accepted corporate PAC money in his life, is now accused by Secretary Clinton of taking ‘about $200,000 from Wall Street firms.’”

“How do they reach that false and absurd conclusion? They assume that every nickel Bernie Sanders received from the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee for his Senate campaign came from Wall Street. That is obviously preposterous,” Weaver said.

“Bernie appreciates the help he has gotten from the DSCC, whose funds come from millions of Americans’ individual contributions, labor organizations, environmental groups, women’s organizations and others.”

Earlier, former President Clinton told the rally, “It bothers me to be in an election where debate is impossible because if you disagree, you are just part of the establishment.”

In Manchester, there was no outward sign at the rally that the Clinton campaign was reeling. The private consensus among several supporters was that if she does not win the primary, she will make the contest close enough to say that she staged a comeback in the final days – not unlike her husband’s late surge to second place in a crowded 1992 primary field.

Manchester attorney Terry Shumaker, who has been ever-present at Clinton campaign events dating back 25 years, was not about to concede anything to Sanders.

“I never buy the polls in the New Hampshire primary,” Shumaker said. “It’s just too fluid, too unpredictable.”

Shumaker said the Clinton campaign has a massive, highly effective ground operation that does not show up in polling.

Sanders has said he is not taking for granted that he will win the primary.

The result is that if Hillary Clinton finishes within single-digits of Sanders, she can declare that she exceeded what are currently low expectations.

Executive Councilor Chris Pappas, a Clinton supporter, said: “The people of Manchester are going to decide this election.”

Manchester is viewed as a “must” stronghold for Clinton if she hopes to make inroads and come close to, or defeat, Sanders.