St. Barnabas Medical Center has received the largest donation in its history -- $25 million -- courtesy of a plumber’s son and his wife.

That someone from such a humble background could be in a position to make so large a donation is proof of the American dream, said Leon and Toby Cooperman in the announcement about their donation.

“In life, everyone has the choice to be a consumer or a giver, and my wife and I choose to be along the latter,” said Leon Cooperman. He spent 25 years at Goldman Sachs, then launched his own investment firm, Omega Advisors.

The donation will fund construction of the Livingston medical center’s new west wing. There, the Cooperman Family Pavilion will include a new neonatal intensive care unit, three floors of private rooms, with the ground floor offering easy access to outpatient cardiac vascular, pulmonary and other diagnostic services.

The Coopermans are among the group of 120 or so people who have taken the Warren Buffett Giving Pledge. That pledge, devised by the Omaha billionaire, encourages the wealthy to decide how much of their fortune they truly need, then to give away the rest.



In a September, 2011 letter to Buffett, Cooperman wrote that he and his wife were “enthusiastically” taking the pledge to donate the majority of their personal wealth to charity.

They quoted Winston Churchill, who said, "We make a living by what we get, but we make a life by what we give."



The former Short Hills residents have long been active in other charitable work as well. Toby Cooperman was a special education specialist at the Early Childhood Learning Center in Chatham, and on the board of the JCC Metrowest, Jewish Services for the Developmentally Disabled, and Jespy House, along with other organizations.

Leon Cooperman has been affiliated with Barnabas for more than three decades, first as a trustee and later as chairman of the medical center’s foundation.

“We are exceptionally grateful,” said Barry Ostrowsky, president of Barnabas Health, of the record donation.