As a former teacher at William Allen High School, Yamil Sanchez Rivera said he was bothered by the number of high school students in the Allentown Promise Neighborhood who had no idea what they planned on doing after graduation.

"Personally and professionally, that was disappointing to me," said Sanchez Rivera, executive director of Allentown Promise Neighborhood and Promise Neighborhoods of the Lehigh Valley. "We want to get better results there."

The agency seeks to learn about community needs and connect residents with services. It works with other area nonprofits to provide services to residents within the designated Promise Neighborhood.

Promise Neighborhoods of the Lehigh Valley held its first "State of the APN" address Thursday at the Allentown Public Library, where the public was invited to hear results from the ambitious survey conducted last summer in the Allentown Promise Neighborhood.

The assessment comes as the organization's board of directors expects to decide next week on the boundaries of a new Easton Promise Neighborhood, and the group plans to soon start town hall meetings in Bethlehem in preparation for a Promise Neighborhood there.

In Allentown, the nine-square-block area is bounded by Hall, 10th, Turner and Liberty streets and is home to roughly 5,200 people.

Not enough data

When he joined the program a year ago, Sanchez Rivera said he realized they had no data necessary to direct resources. So a team of nine canvased the neighborhood for about two months and managed to survey 608 of the 827 households, for a 74 percent participation rate.

One key number the organization sought was how many children under the age of 5 lived in the neighborhood. Estimates varied from 400 to 500, prompting nonprofits to concentrate resources there for pre-school learning, but programming was lightly attended, Sanchez Rivera said.

Survey results showed only 235 children under the age of 5 live in the neighborhood. He was also surprised at the number of households, 43 percent, that reported no children living in the home.

An overwhelming majority of of those surveyed, 84 percent, reported having health insurance, but 38 percent also reported using the emergency room as a primary health care provider. And Sanchez Rivera said it was interesting to see how close the numbers for emergency room use were between the insured and uninsured.

Allentown Promise Neighborhood has expanded its reach in 2015 to include another 75 square blocks. The group adopted a neighborhood zone bordered by Martin Luther King Boulevard to the south; Tilghman Street to the north; Jordan Creek to the east and 12th Street to the west.

"Our expanded boundaries will allow us to expand our reach to more Allentown residents," Sanchez Rivera told about 100 residents and community leaders who attended the presentation.

The organization has applied to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development to officially designate the expanded footprint as a neighborhood zone, said APN Manager Amanda Raudenbush. The designation does not provide immediate funding, but will give the group bonus points when applying for future federal grants, she said.

Connecting resources

Cathy Cortijo is a outreach and enrollment specialist with Neighborhood Health Centers of the Lehigh Valley, which works with Promise Neighborhoods.

Cortijo said she regularly receives referrals from the Allentown and Bethlehem health bureaus and relies on groups like APN to connect her with city residents in need of healthcare. Her work with APN has connected her with people she may not have otherwise found and allowed her to enroll them for medical insurance under the federal Affordable Care Act.

Raudenbush points to the The Literacy Center, in the 800 block of Hamilton Street, as an example the work APN can do.

The center started a Spanish story time this summer, and weekly attendance expanded rapidly, exceeding the it's budget for healthy snacks promised for each child, Raudenbush said. The center approached her and she connected officials with a St. Luke's University Health Network healthy living initiative that was able to provide snacks.

The organization's statistic-laden inaugural report focused on four areas: family health, safe and stable communities, student learning and student preparedness for college or careers.

The survey showed that more than 66 percent of the heads of household earned a high school diploma or GED, while just about 15 percent did not graduate high school. Another 14 percent earned either an associate's or bachelor's degree.

More than 57 percent of residents surveyed said they don't feel it's safe for their children to walk to school by themselves. There are three elementary schools in the APN.

When asked which of six issues -- violence, crime, drug use, alcohol use, drug sales or gang activity -- was the largest public safety issue facing the neighborhood, more than half the residents selected all six. But drug sales, 67.4 percent, topped the list as the greatest concern.

LEARN MORE

Promise Neighborhoods of the Lehigh Valley and Allentown Promise Neighborhood are located in Suite 345 of the Hamilton Business Center at 1101 Hamilton St.

Survey results will be posted on the website, promiseneighborhoodslv.org, in the coming weeks.