MADISON (WKOW) -- Patients both young and old will learn next year that some of their prescription medications are no longer covered under their health insurance plans, but the reasons for that are unclear.

"That'd be very concerning to me," said Jim Lake, as he shopped at Mallatt's Pharmacy on Monroe Street Tuesday.

Lake and his wife both take daily prescription drugs and he's hoping none are on the steadily growing list of exclusions insurance companies put out each year.



As an example, the number of excluded drugs for CVS/Caremark customers has grown from 34 in 2012 to 124 for 2016.



CVS/Caremark is one of the largest pharmacy benefits management companies in the nation. Express Scripts is another major provider, which will have 90 excluded drugs for 2016.



"I don't think any good explanation has been given, except that they need it for research. Well, they've been saying that for a long time," said Lake.

John Kelly, chief operating officer for Security Health Plan, said research is a legitimate reason for some cost increases, but not all.

"There have also been stories and you know, you covered this in the news, where there are generics that have seen dramatic price increases that - maybe are not as easily understood why those price increases are going up." said Kelly.



The Wisconsin Health Network hosted a panel discussion on the Affordable Care Act Tuesday afternoon in Madison, where a number of different people weighed in on the issue.

Rep. Joe Sanfelippo put the blame squarely on the Affordable Care Act.



"I think you see them (insurance companies) trying to find savings in other areas to make up for the losses that they're experiencing through the Affordable Care Act, the marketplace plans that they're providing," said Rep. Sanfelippo.

But the exclusions and higher prices aren't just going up for marketplace plans. Even government employees, who face fewer drug exclusions, will soon be paying more out-of-pocket costs for those drugs.



Former Dane County Executive Kathleen Falk is the Region V director for U.S. Health and Human Services, which administers the Affordable Care Act.



She said the law is not to blame.

"Like at any time, the insurance plans contain coverage for certain items and no coverage for others," said Falk.