Evidence of the shooting was still on the front of the building and canal walkway Saturday. Detectives obtained security camera footage from right outside the club where the man was killed.

Local business owners say it was a frightening scene following the shooting at Social nightclub, but the area is secure and were not going to close Saturday.

It is business as usual in Bricktown despite Friday night's shooting.

Local business owners say it was a frightening scene following the shooting at Social nightclub, but the area is secure and were not going to close Saturday.

"We have our loyal regulars, and the club has its loyal regulars. A lot of people thought we were going to be closed tonight, and we said ‘No, we've been going all day and should be going into the night,'" said Coyote Ugly Saloon general manager Amber Almond-Fawcett

"So I mean it was just crazy, something you don't really expect to see walking outside of your bar or your business."

Just a day after gunfire broke out next door at Social nightclub, Almond-Fawcett says she saw the gunshot victim on the ground, as the shooter took off.

3/1/2014 Related Story: Police Search For Gunman After Deadly Shooting In Bricktown

"Yeah the guy got mad. He was arguing with his girlfriend or something. So they kicked him out, and he just had, I don't know if he had too much to drink, and lost his mind, but he threatened to come back and shoot them. Then came back this way and that's when we heard the gunshots," she said.

Friends of the victim say it was Zack Bowie of Spencer who died and leaves behind a young son. Almond-Fawcett says Coyote Ugly is stacked with security just as many Bricktown businesses.

"For me and the restaurant community down here, I'm pretty sure we're going to see the same amount of sales we did last Saturday, the same amount of foot traffic," said Charles Stout of Bricktown Brewery.

Multiple Bricktown businesses have given surveillance footage to the police. Oklahoma City Police have not released a suspect description, and ask anyone with information about last night's shooting to call them.

"I talked to some of their security guys, and they seem to think that everything will be fine," said Almond-Fawcett. "I mean they are all in shock because they had just got threatened, and then that happens, so I think it will probably be business as usual over there."