This question from a Polk County taxpayer: What effort is Broadlawns Medical Center, the county-owned hospital, making to collect on bad debt — that is, hospital bills that patients are expected to pay but don’t?

The taxpayer said he had heard little effort is made to collect on bad debt, and the hospital does not use collection agencies, as do other hospitals in the Des Moines-metro area. He’d also heard that executives at the hospital benefit through their compensation plans when that debt is written off.

The request led to an open records request for five years’ worth of financial information — which disproved some of the rumors, but contained some interesting news.

For one thing, gross patient revenues at the taxpayer-backed hospital have soared 56 percent to $216.7 million from the 2010 through 2014 fiscal year — mostly the product of more patients being covered under the Affordable Care Act.

But the amount of debt collected by Broadlawns and two private collection agencies it hired was the lowest in 2014, about $1 million, a 21 percent reduction from 2010. Last year, the hospital wrote off $18.4 million in bad debt — about 20 percent more than the $15.2 million it wrote off in 2010.

And this was somewhat perplexing: Charity care — bills covered for low-income patients actually deemed unable to pay — increased by about 43 percent, from $11.3 million to $16.2 million.

The figure grew during the hospital’s last fiscal year, even as other Iowa hospitals saw their charity care expenses decrease because of the Affordable Care Act and the new Iowa Health and Wellness Plan, which, like ObamaCare, expanded Medicaid use for low-income Iowans.

A study last year of 101 hospitals by the Iowa Hospital Association found that charity costs fell about 18 percent, or more than $32 million, in the first six months of 2014.

Karl Vilums, chief financial officer of the hospital, told me the charity care number jumped substantially after July 2013 because patients were no longer being allowed to enroll in IowaCare, the state’s program for low-income patients. Many of those patients had no coverage at all until they could sign up for the insurance exchange in January 2014 or the Iowa Health and Wellness Plan, he said.

“In second half of (fiscal year) 2014, the numbers went down,” he said. “We’re projecting charity care to drop significantly this year and bad debt to drop, but not as much.”

Vilums said the hospital’s financial counselors have done a good job getting more people into Medicaid, the Iowa Health and Wellness Program or the insurance exchange.

But one byproduct of the Affordable Care Act has been that more people who used to have private insurance now rely on Medicaid, which reimburses hospitals at a lower rate than it costs to treat patients. Another is that people with private job-based insurance can’t as easily afford bills because of higher deductibles and co-pays. And that can drive up bad debt.

In Kentucky, for example, hospitals have undergone billions in cuts, layoffs, service reductions and, in some cases, closings, according to the Kentucky Hospital Association.

Vilums said Broadlawns is encountering more patients with high-deductible plans, but it still sees a much higher Medicaid-eligible population than other hospitals. About 60 percent of the hospital’s patients are in some type of Medicaid program. Most hospitals are 8 or 9 percent.

But the shift created by the Affordable Care Act, and the revenue it generated, allowed hospital leaders to broaden services. In the past couple of years, Broadlawns has expanded orthopedic services and added an oncology unit, a geriatric clinic, an interventional pain clinic and an eye clinic.

Vilums said he’s relatively satisfied with collections, given the largely low-income patients the hospital serves. “Of course, we always want it to be better.”

Collections begin after patients fail to send payments or agree on a payment plan after they are sent three monthly billing statements. The hospital sends new debt for collection to those agencies electronically every Friday.

“At that point it is written off of accounts receivable as bad debt but a record of that account is kept in the event collection is made,” spokesperson Mikki Stier told me.

CBE Group of Cedar Falls, hired in 2002, receives a 32 percent contingency fee on regular recovery accounts and 36 percent on legal recovery accounts. General Service Bureau as a collection agency of Omaha, hired in 2006, receives 32 percent on regular recovery accounts and 45 percent on legal recovery accounts.

Both collection agencies attempt to contact the patient/client through the mail and through phone calls and may take legal action when necessary. If there is no successful collection after two years of collection activity, the collection efforts are ceased.

Stier said one of the reasons for that is that many of Broadlawns’ patients move often and can be hard to find.

Broadlawns provided me with details of how bonuses are awarded and amounts of actual bonuses received by hospital staff members. Most of those bonuses stemmed from staff members achieving “Vital Signs Scorecord” goals in safety, clinical excellence, employee relations, customer services and finances.

“But nobody gets any type of incentive bonus for writing off bad debt,” Vilums said. “As CFO, I would stop that practice immediately if that were occurring. There would be no incentive for the organization to do that.”

Lee Rood’s Reader’s Watchdog column helps Iowans get answers and accountability from public officials, the justice system, businesses and nonprofits. Contact her at lrood@dmreg.com, 515-284-8549 on Twitter @leerood or at Facebook.com /readerswatchdog.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1Hmdj5K