As Congress blusters its way toward a possible shutdown at the end of the month, one of the groups that has the most to lose are Iraqi and Afghan contractors who worked for U.S. troops in their home countries.

In recognition of the risks they took and the threats of revenge killings that many still face, Congress drafted and passed a special immigrant visa program intended to help them relocate to the United States.

But the program for Iraqi contractors expires at the end of this month, its intended goals unmet. A parallel program for Afghan contractors has another year to run.

Interpreters who spoke English and Dari and Pashto were "mission critical" at Forward Operating Base Gamberi, said Oregon National Guard Sergeant Philip Steiner, who returned this spring from a nine-month deployment in Afghanistan.

The locally hired linguists helped the Americans talk to their counterparts in the Afghan National Army. They offered social cues. They noted warnings that might not have been noticed by English-speaking Americans.

"There's definitely no way we could have communicated without them," said Steiner. "They were there whenever we needed them."

The linguists worked at some personal risk. They wore body armor and Kevlar helmets when visiting the Afghan side of the base, conscious that they could be targeted in any of the green-on-blue attacks that punctuated the war in Afghanistan.

Steiner said some received "death letters" from the Taliban and others opposed to the U.S. role in the country. They took precautions to disassociate themselves from the Americans when they went home at the end of a shift.

The dangers are real. An Iraqi interpreter for Oregon Guard troops in Iraq in 2004 had a family member kidnapped as punishment for his service to U.S. troops. Another quit because of the threats made against his family.

And some, like "Omar," the pseudonym for an interpreter whose pursuit of a special immigrant visa was portrayed this summer by National Public Radio's "This American Life," were killed while they waited.

The special immigrant visa program, which enjoys broad support on both sides of the aisle, is hostage to the larger clash between House Republicans and Senate Democrats and the Obama administration. If the argument about the Affordable Care Act and the debt ceiling can't be resolved with a continuing resolution by the end of the month, the effect will be to slam the door on Iraqis and Afghans who hope to immigrate.

Iraqis who have waited for years for an answer have already been told if they don't receive a visa by the end of Sept. 30, they won't get one, said Katie Reisner, national policy director of the Iraqi Refugee Assistance Project.

The argument about the federal budget is "very amorphous," said Patrick Malone, communications director for Rep. Earl Blumenauer, D-Ore., who has been an advocate for the special immigrant visa program. "This is an example of something that would be affected by it. These are real people."

Both the House and Senate versions of a continuing resolution contain language that extends and improves the special immigrant visa program, which requires no additional money.

U.S. troops who have come home while Iraqi and Afghan contractors have been left in danger feel guilt about this, said Reisner.

"They feel very strongly, and rightly I believe, they have left a brother behind."

Now many -- some 2,000 or more Iraqis, by Reisner's estimate -- are in limbo, hoping to be admitted with a special immigrant visa. The program allows for 25,000 Iraqi to be admitted, but after five years, only about 22 percent of that number have been issued. The ratio is even worse for the Afghan immigrant visa program, which allows for 8,750 visas but has granted only about 12 percent of that number.

Reisner attributes the long waits for a special immigrant visa -- three to four years is "typical," she said -- to "bureaucratic inertia." Each application moves through multiple stages of verification, but nobody is responsible for seeing them through, she said.

This week, Medal of Honor recipient Dakota Meyer and former Assistant Secretary of Defense Bing West wrote an op-ed for the Washington Post that called the delays and the imminent expiration of the special immigrant visa program "a failure to keep faith with those who fought beside us."

"Our soldiers never leave a comrade behind," they wrote, "but State is leaving the interpreters behind."

The special immigrant visa program "needs to continue," said Tom Towslee, state communications director for Sen. Ron Wyden, D-Ore. "This helps a lot of people who have helped Americans."