A desperate Mitch McConnell announced to the media back home that he will only talk about Obamacare. The problem is that the ACA is popular and working well in Kentucky.

According to WFPL,

In a candid moment, McCOnnell told reporters that was all that he wanted to discuss at Tuesday’s press conference even in the face of polling numbers that show his popularity waning and that the Kentucky race is tightening. “I’m probably not going to be answering questions about anything else, but I’m happy to respond to questions about Obamacare,” McConnell said. “As some of you have complained from time to time that I don’t do a stake out after every event and I’m not going to do a stake out after every event because as you can imagine I prefer the news of that day to be what I’d like for it to be rather than what you all may be interested in pursuing.”

Talk about putting all of your eggs in one basket. McConnell isn’t going to lay out his vision of what he will do for Kentucky if he wins another term. Instead, McConnell is going to spend the next year doing nothing but criticizing the ACA. Sen. McConnell hasn’t seemed to notice that the ACA is working beautifully in his home state. McConnell refused to talk about his horrible job approval numbers, or the fact that he is tied with Democratic challenger Alison Grimes in the latest poll. McConnell wanted to talk about the ACA, so that is all he was going to discuss.

Mitch McConnell wants to make the Kentucky Senate race all about Obamacare, but this might be a terrible idea since Kentucky is one of the states that has set up their own exchange which is doing really well. The political strategy here is a desperate one. Sen. McConnell is hoping that the ACA is less popular in Kentucky than he is.

Sen. McConnell is in big trouble, and his plan to make his reelection campaign all about the ACA demonstrates how out of touch he is with his own state. McConnell is living in some sort of fantasyland where he is proclaiming the ACA a failure in Kentucky despite the fact that the numbers suggest the exact opposite. Each day, 1,000 more people are being given access to healthcare because of the ACA.

Sen. McConnell’s decision to run against the ACA in a place where it is working may backfire and cost him his Senate seat. He is so out of touch with reality that his own campaign strategy may get Alison Grimes elected to the Senate in 2014.