Sioux Falls, SD

Police say a six-year-old girl's report led to the arrest of a Sioux Falls day care worker, who is accused of inappropriately touching her. Officers arrested 26-year-old Edward Moss earlier this week. He was an employee at the Citibank Day Care, which is run by Bright Horizon Family Solutions. He faces charges for sexual contact with a child under 16.

Paperwork filed at the Minnehaha County Courthouse outlines the accusations Moss faces. The victim told a Child's Voice advocate that Moss had touched her chest, stomach, back and sides underneath her shirt at this day care. She said that he "tickled her" and that the "touches did not feel good." Authorities said the little girl told an elementary school counselor that her day care teacher touched her "private parts." Sam Clemens with Sioux Falls Police said the girl had just learned about good touch and bad touch at school.

"Once the school counselor received that information she called the school resource officer, who was able to get detectives involved right away," Clemens said.

After an interview with Child's Voice, authorities obtained an arrest warrant. According to court papers, Moss told an interviewer that he was rubbing her back and only touched the girl's bare skin because her shirt was not tucked in. He said he stopped, but claims the victim asked him to keep rubbing her back.

Bright Horizon released this statement: "We were deeply troubled to learn about this allegation and we have been working closely with the local authorities as they have investigated. We have also communicated to all of the families we serve at the center. Our most important responsibility is to ensure the health and safety of the children in our care, and the child's well-being is our primary concern. We will support the child and the family in any way we can during this time and will continue to do everything we can to help the investigation."

A spokesperson said Moss, who has since been fired, passed his background check before he was hired.

"There are certainly times when a background check isn't going to show anything. You're not going to be able to find, I guess, bad guys or potential suspects just from doing a background check," Clemens said.

CitiBank released this statement: "We are deeply concerned by this news. Bright Horizons continues to cooperate with the authorities involved. The safety and wellbeing of the children at the center is the top priority for all concerned."

Moss is out on bond.