Single-issue syndrome. It happens in the media whenever we try to address what we feel is the most prominent concern of any given demographic. As a member of the Latino and LGBT communities, I see it all the time.

The Latino community, for example, is associated with the issue of immigration.

[moko_youtube src=”Bgc59qx_HDU”]

But immigration is just one of the many political issues we Latinos prioritize. Here are five more that many people may not associate with the Latino community.

The Economy

The Great Recession hit the Latino community hard, and according to polls conducted in 2012, they believe they suffered the most. Between 2006 and 2010, the poverty rate among Latinos went up six percentage points, more than any other group. What’s more, the majority of Latinos are aware of their economic condition.

The Environment

Latinos see themselves as committed to the protection of the environment. I recently wrote about a Latino community rallying to fight fracking after the dangerous practice forced them from their homes. A 2013 poll found that 76 percent of Latinos agree that the planet is warming up, 14 percent higher than whites.

Education

Beyond what DACA can do for undocumented students in the United States, Latinos see education as a way to improve the quality of their lives. The results are positive – a majority of Latino parents say they expect their children to get educated beyond high school and groups like Exelencia in Education are working hard to build a network of policymakers to address Latinos’ concerns on education.

Health Care

In 2010, nearly one in three people uninsured in the United States was Hispanic or Latino. Employer-based insurance is the most common form of insurance for Latinos to have, but compared to their non-Latino peers, they are far less likely to have it. The federal government lays out all the possible benefits Obamacare offers Latinos here, including guaranteed access to HPV testing and mammograms for Latinas.

Representation in Media

It seems like the only time people bring Latinos out on the news, it’s to discuss immigration.

[moko_youtube src=”MY-_XWdk4LI”]

Latinos have excelled in American media, including film. Still, despite being the second largest racial group in the United States, Latinos are extremely underrepresented in mainstream media. In fact, they are disappearing. Representation matters, as I’ve said time and again, and Latinos deserve to see themselves reflected in the media they consume.

H/T: Pew Research Center, National Council of La Raza, Department of Health and Human Services, Columbia University