Fiona Swanson and Jana Hermoso, students at St. Agnes Academy and Francesca Mattioli, a senior at Carnegie Vanguard High School earned the Girl Scout Gold Award, the highest award in Girl Scouting.

Swanson, a senior at St. Agnes designed and constructed a portable transportation trolley for electric keyboards used by The River Performing and Visual Arts Center, a program of TUTS Education that provides accessible, affordable fine arts education for individuals who have disabilities. Swanson wanted to make it easier for instructors to teach their students valuable music skills. To assist in her project, Swanson recruited eight volunteers.

“I noticed that the keyboards used in music classes at The River were extremely difficult to use and they were getting damaged as they were being transported, so I wanted to develop a more streamlined transportation system,” said Swanson.

Swanson has volunteered at The River for two years and participated in theatre at Strake Jesuit and has received the All-Star Cast Award during UIL competition.

“I’ve always loved musical theater and playing the piano, so this project really served both of those passions,” said Swanson.

Hermoso, a junior at St. Agnes, introduced the concept of healthy living to children at La Escuela Rice by creating a homegrown garden. With assistance from 15 volunteers, Hermoso turned a small plot of land into what she calls a “thriving prolific garden.”

“The children not only learned how to maintain the garden, but they also gained responsibility, learned about the importance of nutrition and diet and had tons of fun while doing it all,” said Hermoso.

Besides raising and harvesting plants such as carrots, onions, tomatoes and radishes, Hermoso enlisted help from the school’s librarian to help her engage students in fun and healthy activities. These activities ranged from making homemade peanut butter and freshly squeezed carrot juice to having a Christmas pizza party using produce from the garden.

“My project will impact more than I can imagine,” said Hermoro. “Since I influenced the children at la Escuela Rice to live a healthy lifestyle, I suspect that they will influence many others to do the same.”

Mattioli recruited nine volunteers to help her improve and expand the storage space in each of the sleeping quarters located at Casa Juan Diego, a temporary shelter for homeless immigrants in Houston. Mattioli designed, constructed and installed shelving, helped renovate and repair common areas and helped update residences.

“I was glad to help solve the limited space issue for recent immigrants adjusting to a new country,” said Mattioli. “This project taught me that leadership requires patience, perseverance and hard work.”

Mattioli’s said that her Gold Award project integrated many things important to her – her faith and family history. Casa is an organization founded by Catholics committed to serving those in need and it focuses on immigrants. Many of Mattioli’s ancestors immigrated to the U.S.

Since 1916, girls have successfully answered the call to Go Gold, an act that indelibly marks them as accomplished members of their communities and the world. Swanson and Mattioli are both members of the Girl Scouts of San Jacinto Council.