Topics: Atheism, chapel hill murders, Editor's Picks, Islam, Islamophobia, Muslims, New Atheism, News, Politics News

By now, certain facts appear well-established: in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, on Feb. 10, Craig Stephen Hicks, a 46-year-old avowed anti-theist and “gun-toting atheist” without a criminal record, had a conflict over a parking space at his residential complex with three young Muslim Americans (Deah Shaddy Barakat, his wife, Yusor Mohammad, and her sister Razan Mohammad Abu-Salha, all between the ages of 19 and 23), and shot them dead inside their apartment with a weapon selected from his abundantly stocked private arsenal. He departed the scene and later that day surrendered himself to the authorities.

The beautiful, radiant faces of the victims, subsequently broadcast to the world, brimmed with all the promise of youth – a promise broken by an abrupt, insensate act of violence. A grand jury in Durham has indicted Hicks on three counts of first-degree murder, which carries the death penalty. Members of the victims’ family told the press that they believe Hicks targeted them for being Muslim. The chief of the Chapel Hill Police, Chris Blue, announced, however, that their “preliminary investigation indicates that the crime was motivated by an ongoing neighbor dispute over parking,” but added that, “We understand the concerns about the possibility that this was hate-motivated, and we will exhaust every lead to determine if that is the case.”

The killings might have passed almost unnoticed in the United States, where, in 2013 alone, there occurred more than 11,000 firearm homicides. But the combination of Hicks’ anti-theism and the Muslim faith of those he slaughtered led to (comprehensible) suspicions that his murder could be classified as a “hate crime,” and sparked a social media campaign that prejudged Hicks’ foul misdeed to be an anti-theistically or atheistically motivated execution.

Local press coverage of the Chapel Hill shooting quickly turned national and then international, with the result that ISIS-abetter Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s crypto-Islamist president, chided President Obama for his silence on it, which apparently prompted the president to wade into the affair with a written declaration that “No one in the United States of America should ever be targeted because of who they are, what they look like, or how they worship,” when there is still no evidence that that is what happened in Chapel Hill. Egypt’s Islamic Al-Azhar University decried a “terrorist cowardly act” rooted in “racism and Islamophobia.” The Organization of Islamic Cooperation – the same entity pushing in the United Nations for a global law criminalizing “insults” to religions – declared that “This gruesome crime has left Muslims worldwide in a state of shock and has raised concerns of the growing feelings of hatred towards Muslims and the increase of acts linked to Islamophobia in the United States.”

Without checking the books, some journalists rushed into print and backed calls for an investigation into whether Hicks’ murder was a hate crime, and Attorney General Eric Holder has ordered civil rights lawyers at the Department of Justice to do just that. But North Carolina law has no statute that would even allow prosecution of murder as a hate crime. Glenn Greenwald went beyond hate crime, tweeting: “Horrifying: Radical atheist terrorist murders 3 Muslims in Chapel Hill,” which presumes Hicks’ killing qualifies as terrorism. Check out the FBI’s definition of terrorism: Whether Hicks’ atrocity meets the criteria hinges on his motive.

And his motive, I repeat, is not yet clear. The Chapel Hill police have not revised their position that Hicks’ motive was a disagreement over a parking space. We have not heard from Hicks about what impelled him to pull the trigger, but his ex-wife Karen Hicks backed up the police account and issued a statement saying that “This incident had nothing to do with religion or the victims’ faith, but in fact was related to the longstanding parking disputes that my husband had with the neighbors.”

Postings from Craig Hicks’ Facebook page would seem to corroborate her words: “I hate Islam just as much as christianity, but they” – Muslims – “have the right to worship in this country just as much as any others do.” Hicks wrote this in support of American Muslims who wanted to build the once notorious (but never-built and now forgotten) “Ground Zero Mosque” in Manhattan – not exactly something one would expect from an Islamophobe. On the same page he also opined that “It’s OK if we have a Muslim president.” Fifty-four percent of Americans, and certainly all Islamophobes, would beg to differ.

Neither these Facebook postings of his nor others reveal murderous sentiments toward Muslims as Muslims. Hicks’ profile picture shows not his face, but the logo “Atheists for Equality.” Neighbors spoke to the media of his aggressive temperament and their fear of him (he was often openly armed and confrontational over minor matters), but none have suggested that animus toward Muslims, much less anti-theist convictions, had anything to do with his crime. That could, of course, change.

The sad fact is that no surprise should attach to the possibility – still the only officially bruited one — that Hicks killed for a banal, trifling motive (a parking space) unrelated to Islamophobia or anti-theism or atheism, “New” or old.

Nevertheless, New Atheists Richard Dawkins and Sam Harris have suffered indictment by at least two well-known opponents of honest discourse about Islam for purportedly inciting Hicks with their “strident” atheism. Hicks’ Facebook page shows him to have been an admirer of Dawkins’ “The God Delusion,” which may have prompted the renowned scientist to tweet: “How could any decent person NOT condemn the vile murder of three young US Muslims in Chapel Hill?” Reza Aslan responded with infelicitous petulance to this and other sympathetic tweets Dawkins emitted: “Sorry @RichardDawkins no matter how many times you condemn #ChapelHillShooting we are just going to keep assuming you haven’t and don’t.” Aslan continued in this taunting vein with tweets about Sam Harris, who strongly rebutted him on his blog.

Here you can read a summary of the wider (and unfounded, given the dearth of evidence) New Atheist indictment frenzy, but one article in particular blaming New Atheists for what happened in Chapel Hill does deserve special attention. I’ll get to it in a moment. First, a necessary digression. Neither atheism, “New” or old, nor anti-theism possesses a canon calling for violence against believers or in any way suborning it. Atheism denotes one thing and no more: the absence of belief in God or gods; and anti-theism, the rejection as undesirable of the existence of God or gods. The closest thing to any modern-day statement of what anti-theism is belongs to the late Christopher Hitchens, who declared, in his 2001 book “Letters to a Young Contrarian,” “I’m not even an atheist so much as I am an antitheist; I not only maintain that all religions are versions of the same untruth, but I hold that the influence of churches, and the effect of religious belief, is positively harmful.” Nothing here could be construed as provocative of violence. And it goes without saying that there exists no equivalent of an atheist “church” that could sanction what Hicks did.

Though I’ve never introduced myself as an anti-theist or much bothered with the term, I concur with Hitchens’ definition. Obeisance to imaginary celestial despots and faith in ancient Middle Eastern “holy books” of whatever kind have never owned a place in my life. If believers should try to convert me, I would respond with one or another version of Lucifer’s fabled retort to God’s command to submit to Him or be cast out of heaven: Non serviam! I shall not serve!

But back to the matter at hand. Lack of demonstrative evidence linking atheism, “New” or old, to the Chapel Hill shootings did not stop Elizabeth Stoker Bruenig, a journalist and Ph.D. candidate in religion and critical thought at Brown University, from drawing up her own bill of indictment against Dawkins, Harris, et al., for the New Republic. In a wrongheaded essay titled “The Chapel Hill Murders Should Be a Wake-Up Call for Atheists,” she begins by citing a Pew survey showing that atheists and Muslims both enjoy almost equal unpopularity in the United States – a fact of singular irrelevance to the Hicks slayings.