Topics: Affordable Care Act, Congressional Budget Office, congressional republicans, David Vitter, Editor's Picks, Health Care, Health care reform, House Republicans, Obamacare, Republicans, U.S. Politics, Politics News

There are two things you should know about Sen. David Vitter, and one of them is that he really hates Obamacare. The Louisiana Republican spent months in 2013 gumming up non-Obamacare-related legislation in an effort to end federal subsidies for Capitol Hill staffers to buy health insurance. His obsessive quest irked lawmakers on both sides of the aisle who weren’t keen to force their staffs to pay more out-of-pocket for their health coverage. Democrats finally got fed up and told Vitter that if he didn’t quit it, they’d start bringing up the other thing you should know about David Vitter.

Anyway, with Vitter on record as a die-hard opponent of federally subsidized health insurance, it was a bit of a shocker this week when he showed up at the Press Club of Baton Rouge and said maybe he’d be open to accepting federal dollars to expand Medicaid in the state. “We need to improve and reform Medicaid, and I want to look at everything that could be brought to bear to do that. Now, could more federal resources help to do that? They could, if it’s done right and if it’s done in a constructive way.”

From a crass political standpoint, it makes sense for Vitter to ease into bed with Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion. He’s running for governor, and expanding Medicaid would mean lots of Louisiana residents receiving health coverage at relatively little cost to the state. Republican governors nationwide have been slowly coming to the same realization. But the fact that David Vitter, of all people, is adulterating his rigid opposition to the Affordable Care Act is just the latest indication that the much-maligned law is working, and working well.

I wrote a couple of weeks ago about how June was shaping up to be a bad month for Affordable Care Act opponents, and it’s only gotten worse for them since then. A new report from Health and Human Services found that people who were eligible for subsidies and shopped for health insurance on Healthcare.gov paid an average of $82 monthly for their insurance premiums. The report also found that “82 percent of people eligible to purchase a qualified health plan could choose from 3 or more health insurance issuers, and 96 percent could choose from 2 or more health insurers in the Marketplace.”

The whole idea behind Obamacare was to provide incentives for insurance companies to participate in the marketplaces, and foster competition among them to keep prices down. The exchanges have been successful enough that insurers who opted out of the first enrollment period are reversing course and will offer plans through the federal exchange next year.

Those who’ve been enjoying Obamacare’s benefits for years now – the young people who were allowed to remain on their parents’ insurance until age 26 – are reporting better health outcomes and reduced expenses. And the Obamacare “sticker shock” that so many conservatives were sure was coming has not yet materialized. A study conducted by a conservative economist found that people who’d been purchasing their own health insurance and then switched to Obamacare saw their premiums rise between 14 and 28 percent – not exactly a tremendous jump. Also, the study didn’t take into account Obamacare’s subsidies for lower-income families.