Buy Photo A 1903 photo shows an addition to the Miller’s Restaurant building, also known as the Howard Hardy House, at 429 S. Second St. in Louisville. In the car were the grandparents and father of Martha Miller . (Photo: C-J file photo)Buy Photo Story Highlights The Howard Hardy House was restored after Miller’s Cafeteria closed in the building in 1998.

The attorneys who bought the building at auction expect to add more lawyers to their firm.

The site is across from a city block where a $261 million redevelopment project is planned.

The historic Howard Hardy House on Second Street between Liberty Street and Muhammad Ali Boulevard — the former Miller’s Cafeteria — is about to have a new owner, provided the sale is finalized by July 27.

Once a boarding house for University of Louisville Medical School students, the renovated 1830s building was auctioned June 27 for $358,600 to the law partnership of Johnston and Wilson, Robert Johnston and Alexander Wilson.

They firm currently has its practice at 727 E. Jefferson St. and wanted a larger site with historical significance.

ITS HISTORY

The recent auction was the second within a little more than year for the building. Investor Clifford Todd bought it at auction in May of last year for $385,000 when it was owned by an entity affiliated with Christ Church Episcopal Cathedral next door at 421 S. Second.

It had been renovated as part of a church redevelopment project beginning in about 2005 that also included building a new apartment building next door for low-income tenants called Cathedral Commons.

Extensions to the building, including one in front with “Miller’s Restaurant” painted on the side that’s shown in a 1903 photo, were removed during the redevelopment project. The building was leased as offices for about five years by John Milner & Assoc., which had designed the renovation when Milner architect Charles Raith was a member of the church.

Miller’s Cafeteria closed in 1998, after operating as a restaurant since the early 1900s. When Rudolph W. Miller Sr. and his wife, Margaret, bought the property in the late 1800s or early 1900s, they rented sleeping rooms to medical students when the medical school was a block away at First and Chestnut streets. The family-style meals Margaret Miller served were the precursors to the restaurant and cafeteria fare.

The house is named for John Howard, who built it, and Charlotte and Nathaniel Hardy, Howard’s daughter and son-in-law, who later owned it. John Howard’s wife, Annie Christian Bullitt Howard, was the daughter of Alexander Scott and Priscilla Bullitt, who built Oxmoor House, behind today’s Oxmoor Center, according to Steve Wiser’s book “Historic Houses of Louisville.”

ITS FUTURE

Wilson and Johnston, both in their late 30s, hope to add more attorneys at their new site. They each had practiced law for more than 10 years and formalized their partnership after moving to the East Jefferson building from other locations a few months ago, Wilson said.

They wanted a bigger place. “We had been looking, keeping our eyes open,” he said. The Howard Building “just fits all the criteria.” It has a long staircase leading to upstairs areas and individual rooms off long hallways.

Representatives with H. Barry Smith Realtors & Auctioneers in Shelbyville said at the auction that more than $1 million had been spent renovating the building.

Todd, who dropped plans for apartments there because of ill health, said improvements included new plumbing and electrical systems.

FUTURE NEIGHBOR

The site is across the street from a city block where a $261 million public and private redevelopment project is planned.

Expected to take three years, it would include a 600-room luxury hotel, a major grocery store, retail stores and 200 apartments. The project would be a collaborative effort among the city, the state, Omni Hotels & Resorts and the Cordish Co., which runs 4th Street Live.

The site, which contains the old Louisville Water Co. building, is owned by the city and bounded by Second, Third and Liberty streets and Muhammad Ali Boulevard.

Omni would build the hotel adjacent to 200 apartments that Cordish would develop. Construction is expected to begin next year.

Reporter Martha Elson can be reached at (502) 582-7061, melson@courier-journal.com and on Facebook. Follow her on Twitter at @MarthaElson_cj.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1lI6QSf