Long before comic books and graphic novels, there were fairy-tales and wood-cut engravings.

Oh, they may not have trucked in superheroes but they had more than their share of flawed protagonists, villains, and, better still, complicated life lessons to impart.

The oral folk tales collected and put to paper by the Brothers Grimm weren’t merely enthralling (if chiding), they were road maps for navigating existentially dark forests.

Of course, you already know all this. Yet, it’s wonderfully satisfying that in a year that saw X-Men and Avengers and even Guardians, 2014 ends with an ensemble of old-school misadventurers and a few troublesome baddies in “Into the Woods.”

Cinderella, the Baker and his wife, Little Red Riding Hood, Jack of Beanstalk fame and Rapunzel make director Rob Marshall’s adaptation of the Stephen Sondheim-James Lapine Broadway musical “Into the Woods” a dark, exquisitely enchanting pleasure.

The 1987 musical assembled quite the collection of fairy-tale all-stars. Then it sent them on their merry — or not — ways singing of wishes for princes, infants and a respite from a hardscrabble life.

Marshall’s ensemble is nearly as impressive. So much so that Tracey Ullman as Jack’s harried mum and Christine Baranski as Cinderella’s harrowing stepmum seem like cameos. Almost. Because this is an ensemble wonder.

Meryl Streep is vividly vexing as Witch. If we take her at her word in “Stay With Me,” she is misunderstood. To a degree. She sings the song to Rapunzel (MacKenzie Mauzy), her adopted — ahem, kidnapped — and sequestered daughter. Billy Magnussen plays the prince who discovers the lovely woman and climbs her ropey braid, to Witch’s dismay.

Chris Pine is the smitten, smugly charming Prince. The one Anna Kendrick’s Cinderella gobsmacks at the famous ball.

The weight of the tale falls on the shoulders of the Baker. And James Corden is touchingly fit for the gig. He and his lovely Wife , (a winsome and sympathetic Emily Blunt) have been rendered childless by a curse courtesy of Witch. It can be broken if, she tells them, they gather some rather unlikely items.

Then she gives them a helluva shopping list.

There is a very funny bit in the Denver Center’s current edition of the musical “Forbidden Broadway” spoofing Sondheim’s gift for gab at the expense of melody. “Into the Words” is hilarious.

But truth be told, there are a number of nearly hummable beauts here.

The 16-minute “Prologue” that weaves together the characters with the shared declaration “I Wish” and then the hopeful refrain “Into the Woods” even has its moments. Pine and Magnussen’s princely duet “Agony” is winning. As is Cinderella and the Baker’s Wife’s “A Very Nice Prince.”

The orchestration is lush. Tony Award lifetime achievement winner Paul Gemignani conducts a collection of London Symphony members. So is cinematographer Dion Bebbe’s palette.

As remarkable as Marshall’s cinematic choices are, his wildest decision might be the casting a youngster in the role of Little Red Riding Hood.

Thirteen-year-old Lilla Crawford plays the slightly bratty miss with the red cape and a rather insatiable appetite. Johnny Depp howls and struts as the Wolf she encounters.

A grown actress is typically cast as one of the canon’s more famous girls. For good reason. The lyrics to the Wolf’s come-hither song, “Hello, Little Girl” goes from sly inuendo to outright disquieting when applied to a child. Where’s SVU’s Olivia Benson when you need her?

But then, Sondheim and Lapine headed into these woods to recover lessons beyond the bromide “happily ever after.”

That Marshall and his cast maneuver their uncomfortable news with a film that should bewitch kids of a certain maturity and please adults hankering for the lessons once delivered at bedtime is a delight. Not a sugary plum, but a delight nonetheless.

Lisa Kennedy: 303-954-1567, lkennedy@denverpost.com or twitter.com/bylisakennedy