Office Furniture Warehouse recently announced the addition of a division that will serve the health care community.

The new division of Office Furniture Warehouse, which buys and sells used office furniture, will be called OFW+Med and will specialize in repurposing preowned health care clinical furniture.

OFW+Med started out of a demand from clients who were looking for the same kinds of deals on refurbished clinical furniture as they were getting on office furniture, John Jerman, one of the founders of Office Furniture Warehouse, said.

OFW+Med buys the furniture from physicians, practice managers and hospital administrators who need to dispose of their clinical furniture, he said.

He also said:

A lot of times, these people are clients getting new products, and we are getting their existing furniture or equipment on consignment or giving them a trade-in value on new items we have sold them. Also, there is a steady increase of doctors retiring due to age, health care reform [or] reduction in reimbursable expenses, or just getting out of the business. If they can't sell their practice, then they just shut down and liquidate everything.

Leaders saw an opportunity with the new division to provide furniture and equipment to health care organizations that may not have the financial means to purchase new items.

Changes resulting from the Affordable Care Act are also prompting health care providers to look for ways to make their organizations lean and streamline costs, he said.

"Customer demand has driven our product and service expansion," Jerman said. "When customers tell us their needs, we evaluate our expertise and if there is a viable business model. Our medical clients who were buying new and used office furniture started asking for refurbished medical furniture and equipment."

Customers can find clinical furniture items such as refurbished hospital beds and stretchers. Some specialized beds that sell for as much as $50,000 are available refurbished for $15,000.

OFW+Med also has access to other items, including wheelchairs and surgical lighting systems for operating and procedure rooms.

Supporting services include installation, space planning, furniture reconfiguration, touch-up, cleaning, reupholstery and hospital bed circuit board repair.

OFW+Med currently has a large inventory of preowned Ritter exam tables in as-is condition for $750, or $900–$1,000 with a reupholstered tabletop. Jerman said a new Ritter exam table retails for $3,000–$4,000.

"Our program to reupholster existing exam tables and waiting room furniture is allowing and reducing the need to buy more expensive new furniture," he also said.

And the new division has helped Office Furniture Warehouse create an additional stream of revenue. Jerman said the company has seen growth in revenue from this division.

OFW+Med also kept the environment in mind with this new business model.

"Medical furniture and equipment that was disposed by health care organizations is now deferred from the landfill and put into our refurbishing program to extend its useful life," he said. "A hospital bed alone can weigh 300 pounds up to 600 pounds. Those items take a toll on our landfill."

In 2014, Office Furniture Warehouse redeployed more than 600,000 pounds of used furniture and recycled approximately 20,766 pounds of metal.

Jerman said they are also working on an export program to ship these reconditioned beds to foreign countries.

Meg Ferguson graduated from the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga with two bachelor’s degrees in English: creative writing and communication. She served for three years on The University Echo, the student newspaper of UTC, as a staff writer, assistant news editor and managing editor. She currently works full time at Unum in their Leave Management Center as an FMLA specialist, where she is responsible for processing complex FMLA policies and practices. In her spare time, Meg loves to enjoy Chattanooga’s outdoors and local restaurants and participate in Chattanooga's running events.