Real cowboys ride bulls wearing pink — well, at least Jordan Kane is tough enough to do so.

The 5-year-old from Iowa strutted around the rodeo staging area of the Denver Coliseum at the National Western Stock Show on opening day, sporting a bubble-gum-pink shirt, pink-fringed chaps and his initials “JLK” emblazoned in the same color down his leg.

His outfit — including a breast-cancer awareness ribbon stitched on his chest — honors his grandma’s victorious fight against the disease.

Jordan is a member of the Tuff-N-Nuff Miniature Rodeo Association, a group making history by bringing miniature bull riding to the National Western Stock Show for the first time in the event’s 108-year stretch.

“This is a scaled-down version of our group,” said Johnny Hopkins, who runs the association with his wife, Peggy. “We are hoping this goes well and that we can bring 40-plus bull riders here next year and do two full-fledged days of our show.”

First-day attendance Saturday was strong — with an increase of 2,000 advanced tickets sold, compared with the previous year, and with bustling walk-up sales throughout the day.

Miniature bull riding is exactly what its name implies: bull riding on a smaller scale, both in terms of beast and man. All of the riders are under 18.

The Hopkinses’ son Levi is the world’s largest bull contractor — with 75 bulls — and he’s only 17.

The kids showcased their riding skills as part of a special program during the third annual Team Colorado Rodeo, which includes contestants from major rodeos throughout the state.

Team Colorado Rodeo “gives us at the National Western a chance to talk about these other rodeos that happen throughout the year,” said Susan Kanode, rodeo media coordinator. “Colorado has some really good rodeos and some very important ones within the industry.”

All of the headliner competitions during National Western’s two-week schedule are considered the new year’s set-up contests for these professional riders.

With large prize purses and the stock show kicking off the year’s competition circuit for many, National Western’s rodeos can help catapult riders into a good position for the year.

“It can give them confidence and set them up as they travel to other rodeos,” Kanode said. “Every National Western champion last year, except the bull rider — because he got injured — qualified for the Wrangler National Finals Rodeo, which is like our Super Bowl.”

As for the miniature bull riders, Jordan made the whole ride and scored a solid 85.

“We drove 14 hours to make an eight-second ride,” said Brian Kane, his father. “So you have got to be proud.”

Kristen Leigh Painter: 303-954-1638, kpainter@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kristenpainter