The Eye

'The Mindy Project' Season 2 SPOILERS: Jenna Dewan-Tatum Guest Starring as Danny's Ex? Mindy Using Peter to Make Danny Jealous? [PIC]

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Facebook/The Mindy Project) "The Mindy Project" season two spoilers!

The countdown is on for the return of "The Mindy Project!"



The show will return with season two in just a matter of days and creator, Mindy Kaling, has been getting fans ready with her latest Instagram countdown.



Viewers were at the crossroads of stunned and filled with joy from the midseason finale as they watched the should-be couple Mindy Lahiry and Danny Castellano engage in a full throttle makeout session during their flight from LA back to New York, just moments after Danny encouraged Mindy to send her ex-boyfriend Cliff a heartfelt email in an effort to win him back.



Now that Mindy and Danny's love connection has officially been realized, we can't help but to be a little confused by the last TMP promo picture Kaling released.



The actress/writer threw fans for a loop when she posted a steamy promotional picture for TMP of Mindy being fed grapes by her co-worker, Peter.







Mindy has never seemed to have any romantic interest in Peter before, so what's the joke? Maybe the picture is from a scene during season two where Mindy is trying to make Danny jealous?



That could very well be a possibility, being that Danny will get a blast from his past when actress Jenna Dewan-Tatum makes her guest appearance on the show!



As we previously reported, Dewan-Tatum has been booked for the spring installment of the series and her character may be throwing a big curve ball in any plans of Mindy and Danny seriously hooking up.



Dewan-Tatum will be playing the role of Brooke, a medical receptionist and newcomer to the Schulman and Associates office who has an interesting past with Danny.



If Danny is seen schmoozing with his ex-lover, it's easy to predict that Mindy might try and make him jealous and use Peter as her prop.



A Mindy/Danny hookup has been a long time coming as viewers have been anticipating the character to act on their bubbling sexual tension since the beginning of the show. Lucky for them, Kaling, the show's creator, was ready to give viewers exactly what they've been asking for.



"It used to be an open debate about "if" these characters should ever kiss. As season two progressed and Danny and Mindy grew even closer, it became more of a discussion about "when." There are only so many times two characters can almost-kiss before your audience begins to feel jerked around," Kaling recently said in an interview. "We could have kept up the loaded tension between Danny and Mindy for a while longer, but I think at a certain point, the option that seemed the most fun to write was to have them kiss and deal with the comedic fallout for these characters. Also, my writing staff think Chris Messina's lips are like soft little pillow-magnets."



Do you think Dewan-Tatum's new character will drive a wedge between Mindy and Danny?



Find out when "The Mindy Project" returns to Fox on April 1!



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.