CLIFTON — City and federal officials hope that in the next three months, hundreds of North Jersey residents will stop by a retail plaza on Route 46 to shop not just for bargains but for health insurance through a federal marketplace.

KEVIN R. WEXLER/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER Congressman Bill Pascrell Jr. speaks in Clifton at the official grand opening of the SRA Passaic Enrollment Assistance Center for health insurance on Tuesday, Nov. 10, 2015.

The ribbon was cut on Tuesday morning on a center where 22 people in light blue polo shirts stood ready to help people in 14 languages to navigate options in the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

“You've got to have health coverage; you've got to have it,” said Rep. Bill Pascrell Jr., who was joined by Clifton Mayor James Anzaldi and Jackie Cornell-Bechelli, regional director of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Cornell-Bechelli urged people to sign up for healthcare, “and then work to educate your friends and family,” she said.

The enrollment center in the shopping plaza on 1006 Route 46 West opened on Nov. 1, for the start of the health-insurance enrollment period that ends Jan. 31. The Clifton storefront is the third in New Jersey designed to help residents enroll in person in federal health insurance programs, Cornell-Bechelli said.

At the centers, people shopping for coverage, either by appointment or walk-in, meet with enrollment specialists who help them go over coverage options and sign up for a plan. The Clifton center is open Monday through Saturday from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., with an 8 p.m. closing time on Tuesdays.

Jessica Fernandez of North Arlington, one of the staff members, spoke emotionally about her own experience signing up for insurance last year. She said she had gone years without coverage, racking up debt. The need for insurance hit home when her father had open-heart surgery. She has Crohn’s disease, a chronic inflammatory bowel disease.

“We take care of our cars, we take care of our homes. Those things need to be insured,” Fernandez said. “So do our bodies.”

For 2015, 208,000 New Jersey residents signed up for Affordable Health Care coverage, and more than 400,000 state residents got coverage through Medicaid.

Enrollments centers are also open at 1199 Amboy Ave., Edison, and 2565 Route 22 West, Union.

Email: parkm@northjersey.com