An opponent of health care reform demonstrates in front of the Supreme Court. (Photo: 2012 AP photo)

Obamacare's failure to fail has sidelined the law as a key issue in the weeks leading up to the midterm elections, a USA TODAY editorial argued. Letters to the editor:

It is beyond belief that USA TODAY's editorial would make judgments about Obamacare this soon ("Obamacare upsets GOP election plan: Our View").

Many people do not have any idea how it is going to affect them because the president allowed many provisions to be delayed until after this election.

I just got my premium increase, and it is the highest one I have had.

My doctor is closing his practice because he cannot make enough money to pay his staff and make a living to support his family. More people will have basically free health care while the rest of us have to pay. And the debt in this country will increase.

Dick Meyer; Charlotte

Walmart's decision to eliminate health benefits for part-time employees putting in less than 30 hours a week was easily predictable.

Obamacare drives up costs for businesses, which have few options for dealing with the attack on their bottom line. Walmart has very narrow profit margins, which fund not just dividends for shareholders but also investments in new stores and equipment.

Many of Walmart's customers have modest incomes, so price hikes would be counterproductive as well.

That leaves employee compensation, such as the health benefits of part-time workers.

The ideologues who put Obamacare together had little understanding of business, and now tens of thousands of low-wage workers will pay the price for this ignorance.

Sean Parnell, managing editor, Health Care News, The Heartland Institute; Alexandria, Va.

Comments from Facebook are edited for clarity and grammar:

The Affordable Care Act is just getting started, and it's too early to call it a success. The fact that the Obama administration delayed open enrollment six weeks (last year it started in October) so that it occurs after the election tells me that Democrats are concerned about this issue.

— Fred Johnson

The opposing view of Ed Gillespie, the GOP candidate for senator in Virginia, sounds interesting on the surface, but it doesn't address the fundamental concern addressed by the Affordable Care Act: how to cover the millions of Americans who are uninsured ("Replace this flawed, law").

Many of these uninsured people make up the working poor who are not offered insurance in their current jobs. Instead of replacing the law, let's keep working toward improving aspects of it, which could take a generation to solve as Americans start to change lifelong bad health habits.

— Nancy Knadler

Gillespie suggests, "Expensive pre-existing conditions could get affordable insurance from federally funded, state-run 'high risk' pools." You can't have a risk pool of very sick people alone. The costs are extremely high and could be covered only by huge taxpayer subsidies.

— Steve Hirsch

The GOP isn't attacking Obamacare because the Democrats have delayed enrollment until after the elections. There isn't a lot to talk about right now, but there will be once enrollments start up again. Then the people will see what a financial burden this will be on the middle class.

— Robert Johnson Parrott

Whether Obamacare will reduce costs is still up in the air. But the doctors I've talked to who are dealing with its mandates told me wait times will increase because of the unnecessary red tape.

— George Austin Terlep

Obamacare will be positive overall. The people will see that, like any medicine, it may not taste as good as we'd like, but it will cure many ills later on.

— Marvin Myszka

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1w9TFRU