Charles Nilon, CU's first black professor and founder of HELP Inc., shown in 1973. (Carnegie Branch Library for Local History / Daily Camera Collection)

Boulder's lack of affordable housing is foremost in the minds of many of its citizens these days, but it's not the first time.

In the late 1960s, professor Charles Nilon made a commitment to help with Boulder's housing problem. He believed everyone working in Boulder was entitled to the dignity of a decent place to live, and based on his experiences, he formed a group to support that notion.

When Nilon became the University of Colorado-Boulder's first black professor in 1956, the university celebrated the milestone.

But Nilon and his wife would have rather been celebrating finding a place to live in town.

The couple were subtly and not so subtly steered away from good neighborhoods toward less-desirable places in town.

Carol Taylor Boulder County History

In an oral history interview from 1990 held at the Carnegie Branch Library for local history, Nilon remembered being one of a few black people on campus. He said there weren't even any black people on the janitorial staff. He said he later looked at census figures that reported only 90 nonwhite people in Boulder in the 1950s. (The population of Boulder was nearly 20,000 in 1950 and grew to nearly 40,000 by 1960.)

In describing his search for a place to live, Nilon recalled that he found a home for sale on 11th Street on University Hill that met his family's needs. He arranged to make a down payment. The owner of the property agreed to the sale. A neighbor discovered Nilon was black and alerted the property owner, who lived in California. The man warned the owner that the value of the property would decrease dramatically if he sold to a black family.

Nilon knew CU sociology professor Howard Higman, who lived on University Hill. Nilon recalled that he visited every 11th Street residence with Higman to introduce himself. Still, after receiving numerous calls from worried neighbors, the owner of the house changed his mind and pulled out of the agreement.

Nilon looked at another house nearby, and a local realtor attempted to get all the neighbors to purchase the home before Nilon could secure a deal. After several similar incidents, the Nilons were successful in purchasing a home on Spruce Street.

Nilon wasn't a bitter man, but he remained sensitive to the fact that, for some people, securing housing in Boulder was difficult.

Then, in 1968, in the wake of the assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Nilon founded HELP Inc. (Housing for Everyone Through Local Programs). According to the HELP brochure:

"Boulder has always been a city that housed its own. One hundred years ago, the miners, schoolteachers, ministers and merchants who worked in Boulder, lived in Boulder. Boulder should continue to be a city where people from all backgrounds and levels of income can work and live. HELP was created as a nonprofit corporation dedicated to a city where all people can find decent, dignified housing through reasonable rental or outright purchase."

HELP bought a few single-family homes and managed some apartments and trailers and also created a fund to assist moderate-income folks with down payments. The organization secured housing for dozens of families and people of color and also lent a hand to elderly residents on fixed incomes. Many Boulder residents volunteered to repair and maintain homes, and many more contributed funds to the organization.

Boulder architects Roger Easton and Jerry Van Sickle and realtor Vann Hilty served on the HELP board.

HELP dissolved in 1977. In closing, the group set up an award at CU to continue its mission. The Martin Luther King Jr. Housing Prize, an undergraduate scholarship, was established. The annual award was for a student or a student team who showed innovation in housing for low- or moderate-income people. The CU Regents passed the motion for the award unanimously and accepted the proposal "with gratitude,:' according to a 1977 letter. The $5,000 scholarship continues at CU today.

Nilon taught in the English department from 1956 until his retirement in 1985. He died in 1991 at 74 and is buried at Green Mountain Cemetery.