Correction: An earlier version of this story incorrectly said that a provision of the GOP plan would extend food stamps to the children of low-income state employees. Rather, it would extend health care, under the Family Access Medical Insurance Security program, to such children. This version has been corrected.

While Va. House Republicans rejected Gov. Terry McAuliffe’s push to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, their budget plan includes $124 million for mental-health care and health services for the poor. (Steve Helber/AP)

House Republicans announced Thursday that their state budget plan will include $124 million for mental-health care and health services for the poor — slightly more than the money proposed last fall by Gov. Terry McAuliffe (D).

The move reflects a bid by the GOP to build on mental-health reforms begun after a tragedy involving a senator’s son and to shake off the “party of no” label Democrats have lobbed at them for rejecting McAuliffe’s big push to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.

The GOP played up distinctions between their plan and McAuliffe’s fallback “Healthy Virginia” program on Thursday, while the governor took credit for spurring Republicans into action.

“Let’s be clear: We are not expanding Medicaid, not funding the specifics the governor put out,” said Del. John M. O’Bannon III (R-Henrico). “Our budget will strengthen the existing safety net for the truly needy.. . . We’re using real dollars, not promises of federal funding for the most pressing needs of our most vulnerable Virginians.”

After a meeting between McAuliffe and House leaders later in the day, McAuliffe spokesman Brian Coy said the governor had concluded that their plan was not too different from his own.

“The Governor is happy to see House Republicans recognize the need to expand care for thousands of Virginians with serious mental illness, even if it took the announcement of his own plan to motivate them to act,” McAuliffe’s office said in a written statement.

O’Bannon unveiled the plan on the House floor ahead of formal approval that will come from the House Appropriations Committee in a meeting Sunday. It would use $124 million in state funds to provide treatment for people with serious mental illness and nearly double funding for free clinics.

A news release from House leaders said the budget would “reject Governor McAuliffe’s effort to implement Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion and will not fund Governor McAuliffe’s ‘Healthy Virginia’ entitlement program.”

The Republican plan includes some components of the Healthy Virginia plan, however. The GOP, like the governor, would cover dental care for 45,000 pregnant Virginians and extend health care, under the Family Access Medical Insurance Security, to the children of low-income state employees.

But the GOP plan diverges from the governor’s when it comes to mental health. McAuliffe has created the Governor’s Access Plan, or GAP, as a way to provide medical and mental-health care for 20,000 of the state’s most severely mentally ill individuals.

The Republican plan would cover 30,000 mentally ill people, but provide them with only psychiatric care, including psychiatric prescription coverage. It would not provide them with broader health care. Republicans propose addressing unmet medical needs with an extra $3 million for free health clinics.

The mental-health services in the House plan would be provided through the same managed-care system that handles psychiatric care for the state’s Medicaid patients. But the new patients would not be considered Medi­caid enrollees nor be eligible for other Medicaid services, said Matthew Moran, spokesman for House Speaker William J. Howell (R-Stafford). The federal government would match what Virginia spends on those mental-health services.

That 50-50 match is considerably less favorable than the match Washington offers under Medicaid expansion. But Republicans opposed to expansion have questioned the federal government’s ability to keep its promise to pay at least 90 percent of the cost, with lawmakers saying they fear that Virginia will ultimately be stuck with the bill.

The House’s plan would cover severely mentally ill people making less than 80 percent of the federal poverty rate. McAuliffe’s would cover the severely mentally ill making up to 100 percent, which is about $24,000 a year for a family of four.

McAuliffe recently received federal approval to spend $13 million to pay for a GAP pilot program through June 30, the end of the fiscal year. But the GOP-controlled legislature would have to approve continuing the program in the next fiscal year.

Republicans have questioned McAuliffe’s authority to create a new program without legislative consent as well as the wisdom of enrolling patients with no guarantee that the General Assembly will continue funding their care.

The House plan suggests that even in an election year, Republicans feel comfortable calling for more spending for mental health — as long as it is on their terms. The issue was among the most prominent in last year’s legislative session after the November 2013 suicide of Austin “Gus” Deeds, the mentally ill son of Sen. Creigh Deeds (D-Bath).

But GOP lawmakers remain wary of anything that could be construed as expansion of Medi­caid under the federal health-care law.

“Expanding Medicaid is the wrong approach,” said Appropriations Committee Vice Chairman Steve Landes (R-Augusta). “It relies on the false promise of free federal money and creates a new welfare entitlement system for able-bodied working adults. Our approach increases access to existing services for the neediest Virginians.”