The Affordable Care Act is causing headaches for East Baton Rouge Parish schools as they try to find substitute teachers, school board members said Thursday.

The federal health care reform initiative, known as "Obamacare," requires larger employers, such as the school district, to provide health insurance for all of its full-time employees -- so the school district began asking principals in August to limit the number of its substitute teachers who are working more than 29 hours a week, are therefore considered full-time, and are therefore required to be insured.

"This is going to hurt education across America, because we know having those subs change every 29 hours is detrimental to that person in the classroom, that can build a rapport with those kids," said school board member Jill Dyason.

She brought the subject up during a discussion about school performance scores at a meeting Thursday, because she said the restrictions can have a direct impact on student learning

Other board members also said they had received complaints about the new policy.

Mary Lynch said subs work Monday through Wednesday and part of Thursday, and then by Friday there's not enough people to fill the slots in the classrooms.

"The inconsistency in the classroom, you can see that just anywhere you go," Lynch said.

District officials cautioned that in circumstances where it's known a teacher is going to be gone a long time, such as a maternity leave or a medical leave, they will still hire long-term subs and pay for the insurance. But in some circumstances where a sub is needed for an in-between amount of time, it might not be worth the cost of the insurance.

"The thinking was let's work with the principals to come up with some sort of schedule that would limit, yes limit, the number of persons that would qualify and would require us to offer the insurance, which means some people are going to be told you're at your limit, you can't come back," said district General Counsel Domoine Rutledge.

Superintendent Bernard Taylor said the substitute issue is a small part of a much larger problem, as the district struggles to find teachers to fill slots in the lowest-performing schools. For example, Merrydale Elementary, which dropped to an F rating in the latest rankings, had eight substitutes for all of last school year because teachers couldn't be found.

"Our issue is not substitutes," Taylor said. "Our issue is getting quality instruction to the kids who need it the most."

The district needs to look for creative ways it can help get the best instruction to kids, Taylor added, alluding to the possibility of using technology to have effective teachers teach multiple classes of students at once. Last year he offered bonuses to teachers willing to transfer to lower-performing schools, but that apparently wasn't enough to fill all the slots.

"How do we mitigate that, because we are reluctant to assign teachers if they don't want to go there (to the lower-performing schools)," Taylor said. "At what point do we say 'We need the best 5th grade math teacher in the district working with those children.'"