NEW YORK — The last day of the Electric Zoo festival has been canceled following two drug-related deaths, city officials said.

City officials announced this morning that the annual festival would be shut down today after the two deaths and the hospitalization of four others during the first two days of performances.

The city says the deaths appear to have been linked to drugs, specifically MDMA, known as ecstasy or molly. Definitive causes of death have not yet been determined.

According to a report in the Daily News, Jeffrey Russ, 23, of Rochester, was rushed to Harlem Hospital at 3:10 a.m. Saturday but could not be saved.

Russ posted a photo from the festival on Twitter at 8:43 p.m. Friday, hours before he died. He had also posted a photo of last year's Electric Zoo festival several weeks ago with the message "TWO WEEKS TO #EZOO5! Retweet if you're going!"

The Daily News also reported that Olivia Rotondo, 20, of Providence, R.I., was taken to Metropolitan Hospital at 8:45 p.m. Saturday and died about 50 minutes later, police said. Six hours before she was rushed to the hospital, the University of New Hampshire student posted a final message on Twitter.

“The amount of traveling I've done today is unreal,” Rotondo wrote. “Just get me to the damn zoo.”

City officials said Electric Zoo organizers have worked with city officials to reduce health risks at the annual event, held this year on Randall's Island in the East River.

"But in view of these occurrences, the safest course is to cancel the remaining day of the event," the announcement said.

Today's schedule included performances by Avicii, David Guetta and Diplo.

The event's founders expressed condolences on its website to the families of those who died.

The festival, which has been held since 2009, typically draws 100,000 participants.

Staff writer Jessica Calefati and The Associated Press contributed to this report.

RELATED COVERAGE

• Electronic music mega-festival getting slapped with Meadowlands' first concert age restriction

• N.J. basks in the glow of the brave new rave: Electronic dance festivals go mainstream