LONGMONT — Dad is 66. He just lost his wife of 38 years to a short illness and can’t seem to cope without her.

To make matters worse, he retired two months before she died.

His 34-year-old daughter invites him to meals and outings, but he doesn’t seem to see or know his grandchildren. He just sits and stares into space for much of the day, locked into his grief.

Dad, in this case, is a character in a scenario, a subject for suggestions from about 20 employees of Longmont United Hospital. He’s part of a mental health first-aid course that aims to make treating the mind as normal as treating the body.

He’s also part of something the Centura Health system does to maintain its nonprofit status and exemption from federal taxes.

Across the United States, every nonprofit hospital must provide community benefits to qualify for tax exemption. The Affordable Care Act added requirements, such as periodically assessing community health needs, but also allows a broad range of community benefit choices.

Unpaid care counts. As do allowed differences between hospital fees and federal reimbursements for hospital care.

In Colorado, community benefit spending totaled more than $2.1 billion in fiscal 2014, according to a Colorado Hospital Association survey of 56 hospitals in the state.

Health screenings, education, free clinics, discounted services and charitable contributions all count toward the exempt status. But about 85 percent of community benefit spending fell into what the hospital association calls “unpaid costs of patient care.”

Besides patients who don’t pay, that includes “both Medicaid payment shortfall and Medicare allowable payment shortfall,” said association spokeswoman Cara Welch.

The association does not release hospital-specific data. But a few large hospital systems account for much of the money.

The University of Colorado Health system, which includes five Front Range hospitals, spent $500 million in fiscal 2015 on financial assistance, subsidized care and other programs that benefit patients and the communities it serves, spokesman Dan Weaver said.

Those included education programs for expectant mothers, cooking classes for cancer patients, a free nurse call center, financial aid to support faculty members’ clinical work and Christmas toys for kids at a local school. About $185 million came from uncompensated costs of patient care, including Medicaid.

Children’s Hospital Colorado offers, among other things, a “first 1,000 days initiative” to support children from birth through age 2, a behavioral health program in Aurora and an asthma program in schools, “the only long-running organized school-based initiative of its kind in Colorado,” spokeswoman Elizabeth Whitehead said.

All told, the hospital reported $174 million in community benefit activities in 2014. Of that, $118 million came from unreimbursed costs for providing care to patients, including those enrolled in Medicaid.

The 17-hospital Centura network in Colorado and Kansas reported spending $255 million for unreimbursed care and community benefits in fiscal 2015.

James Corbett, its senior vice president of community health improvement, said Centura does not disclose the unreimbursed care portion because hospitals account for community benefits in such different ways that comparisons would be meaningless.

Corbett sees the Affordable Care Act driving some changes in the ways hospitals operate, including their approaches to community benefits.

He describes Centura’s devotion to mental health first aid as an example.

Hospitals have counted “random acts of kindness” by “people who are well-intentioned and good-hearted,” he said, without “a strategic, planned approach to improving the ills” of patients.

Centura held focus groups in schools and churches, he said, and mental health problems “came up in every one of our communities.”

On this issue, “I think we are definitely at the forefront” with a systemwide commitment, he said.

At Longmont Hospital, the day-long mental health first-aid course is taught by Angela MacDonald, a behavioral health manager with master’s degrees in social work and divinity.

Her course materials emphasize how common mental health problems are. One-fifth of all people are affected each year, more than half in their lifetimes.

MacDonald divides the class into four groups to discuss four different scenarios. Each must decide whether their character is a candidate for a mental health action plan calling them to assess risk, listen nonjudgmentally, give reassurance, encourage appropriate professional help and encourage self-help.

It doesn’t take long to decide that 66-year-old dad needs help.

Her class also went down a list of helpful — and not so helpful — things to say to someone showing signs of anxiety or depression.

Some, they agreed, get overused and may turn the conversation back to yourself: “I understand and know exactly what you are going through. That happened to me two years ago.”

Better: “Let’s go and have a cup of tea” or “Something seems to be bothering you. Do you want to talk about it?”

David Olinger: 303-954-1498, dolinger@denverpost.com or @dolingerdp