Gov. Andrew Cuomo and New York’s pliable Legislature kowtowed to the gambling industry last year and, using loaded language on the ballot referendum, tricked the electorate into changing the State Constitution to allow casino gambling on the dubious premise that it would bolster the state economy.

Taking this dangerously flawed concept another step forward, the Cuomo administration on Wednesday awarded permits for three huge casino operations in upstate New York.

Fortunately, it rejected the worst of the 16 proposals the gambling industry put forward — a thoroughly misguided plan for a massive casino complex adjacent to Sterling Forest, an important watershed and recreational area only 40 miles from New York City. It instead chose one site near Albany, in Schenectady; one near Monticello, next to the former home of a fabled Catskills resort; and one in the Finger Lakes area of Tyre.

Meanwhile, as a result of a wholly separate deal between Mr. Cuomo and a powerful Senate Republican, Dean Skelos, two huge slot parlors, each holding 1,000 slot machines, will soon appear in Nassau and Suffolk Counties. Neither will offer the Vegas-style glitz of the upstate resorts, but both will be no less efficient in vacuuming the pockets of the poor.

Slot parlors are a wretched deal for most communities, and it is even more appalling to see them used as life support for Long Island’s Off-Track Betting Corporations, which are patronage schemes tied to an ailing horse-racing industry. Nassau County, having been run into a financial ditch under Republican leadership, is under a financial control board and is desperate for cash. Suffolk’s Off-Track Betting Corporation, which is emerging from bankruptcy, is similarly itching for a cash infusion.

Taken together, the three upstate casinos and the two Long Island slot parlors mean that the glut of gambling facilities in the Northeast is about to get much, much worse. The regional gambling market is already brutally competitive. Four of Atlantic City’s 12 casinos have closed, and a fifth filed for bankruptcy last month. The big tribal casinos in Connecticut are faltering. There are already five tribal casinos in upstate New York and nine slot parlors at state racetracks. The idea that five new facilities can bring in sustainable revenue seems the stuff of fantasy.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

What Long Island and upstate New York need is a government that nurtures responsible growth while also tending to the interests of the working class, the elderly and the poor. Instead, its elected officials are addicted to quick fixes and seemingly painless revenue streams. Legalized gambling is one of those illusions, pushed as a source of economic development by politicians who can’t come up with anything better.