Just as Google and Microsoft were attempting to block access to child porn sites last week, a reprehensible step in the wrong direction involving a rich guy and his admitted download of horrifying child sexual images was taking place in a Manhattan courtroom.

On Wednesday, the repulsive, internationally known hedge fund guru and child porn fetishist Ezra Zask was allowed to plead guilty to one count of possessing kiddie porn even though his computer held at least 10 photos and videos.

Think that’s bad? Wait. It gets worse. The filthy-rich and just plain filthy 63-year-old Zask, who could have gotten locked up for years, will not be in thrown in jail or even forced to wear an ankle bracelet. He gets probation and is now free to walk among actual human beings.

Jefferson Siegel/Pool; Raymond Hall/FilmMagic

Wait a damned minute! Alec Baldwin’s stalker, Genevieve Sabourin, got seven months in the can for annoying the crap out of a grown man, and a week later a child perv goes free to keep living large?

Is justice always on the side of rich and powerful men — no matter what side of the law they’re on? Most of the time, yes. I give you convicted-then-overturned murder suspect and Kennedy cousin, Michael Skakel.

Says a person very familiar with the Zask case, but wanting to avoid the wrath of the judges, “In the 1970s and ’80s, no one took domestic violence cases seriously. This is similar. We have to change how people understand ‘child porn.’ This is children being sexually assaulted and there is absolutely nothing remotely non-criminal about it.”

Shame on Judge Larry Stephen, who presided at yet another black day in justice. But given the parameters of the case, he was within the guidelines. Guidelines? Guidewrongs. The laws should be changed and judges who passively refuse to hand out max sentences should all be kicked to the curb with the trash.

Richard Harbus for New York Daily News

Recently there have been cases where cops and prosecutors nailed men with hundreds, even thousands of images of child porn on their computers (one had 2,000 videos and pics) and the pervs got “punished” with probation, and had to file as sex offenders. Period.

We’re not talking about photos of naked teens. We’re talking thousands of images of toddlers being sexually assaulted, raped and forced to give oral sex. Our laws deal with this child slavery like we’re in some third world country that engages in the traffic of children.

So, let’s forget our justice system for a moment. It’s broken. Here’s some homemade justice instead for the latest crime of the week: For the record, child perv Ezra Zask, lives on E. 39th St., which is just a stone’s throw away from the brand-new kindergarten public school on E. 35th St.

Shopkeepers and teachers: Cut out this photo of Zask along the dotted lines and post in your windows.

RELATED: STASI: STALKER FACING JAIL BECAUSE ALEC BALDWIN’S A CELEB

Mike Pont/FilmMagic

JAY ZZZZ’S BIG BARNEYS BUST

Jay Z finally released his crazy-expensive line at Barneys. It’s not that he forgets where he came from, he just forgot where he’s going. So what can he do to save his precious merch that’s not flying off shelves? Z must prove to his regular Joe fans that each have-to-have item is really a double-duty bargain.

Cashmere Ski Mask: Works well for cold days and warm nights when knocking over convenience stores after you go broke from buying a $695 ski mask.

Hoodie: Stylish enough for the runway, but light enough for running away from Barneys employees who think you stole it.

Marcus Santos

T-Shirt With Epaulettes: When your SEALs dress uniform is too much of a statement, this lightweight para-military style T delivers the goods, while allowing you to deliver the goods — like pizza or Chinese takeout. You’ll need a second job if you were idiotic enough to blow that dough on one stinking T-shirt.

Python “Brooklyn” Baseball Cap: The most stylish way for a stylish guy to pass the hat to pay for the hat.

EXPRESS LINES

Zimmerman Zapped: Crazy George Zimmerman lost his right to play with guns last week after threatening his girlfriend with them. Now can somebody take away his right to drive, since he’s as terrible a menace behind the wheel?… Like A Rolling Stoned: Speaking of all things Zimmerman, as in Robert, have you seen these takes on the Bob Dylan classic? ... The Race is On: Oprah complained last week on Brit TV that Americans have a racist attitude towards the President. Too often true, but wasn’t it in Europe where she was stopped from shopping in high-end boutiques because of her race?

RELATED: STASI: ZIMMERMAN, GOETZ ONLY TOUGH GUYS WITH GUNS

GUNNING FOR GROUPON

The site that used to just offer cheap meals, man-brow waxing and discounts to New Jersey spas is now offering cheap gun-safety classes in the greater metropolitan area. So far, however, no cheap offers for assault weapons to accompany the classes.

BAND (AID) WAGON

Dems are running away so fast from President Obama and his failed Affordable Care Act and towards Hillary that they’re going to end up with stress fractures. Maybe their health insurance doesn’t cover memory drugs. Hello? Hillary headed the disastrous first attempt at universal health care when she was co-President, and it was a keystone of her first failed presidential bid.

RELATED: STASI: OBAMACARE FIASCO SHOWS THE PRESIDENT IS NO SPIN DOCTOR

Steve Daubs for New York Daily News

IT'S MATCH.SCAM

A supersexy Florida mom and model, Yuliana Avalos, and a bunch of others who aren’t as hot and therefore not as interesting, have filed a $1.5 billion class-action suit against Match.com because their photos were used without permission in phony profiles.

The pix are posted by grifters and goons who pluck them off Facebook and other sites, and use them as come-ons for fools and freaks whom they hope will send the profiled lovely-but-lonely losers big bucks.

For Avalos and the others, the whole scam is terrifying, of course. But they should think of it this way — it’s not nearly as terrifying as, say, being trapped in one of those eHarmony ads where the founder, blow-dried, white-haired Neil Clark Warren suddenly pops up like the ghost of creepy teachers past. Can you imagine being that sexed-up bikini-clad couple enjoying a nice beverage on beach chairs and suddenly, out of nowhere, he’s there? Yikes!

Howard Simmons/New York Daily News

SEPARATED AT MIRTH

Either smiling former Public Advocate Betsy Gotbaum has found a way around the term-limits law by pretending to be smiling Council Member Melissa Mark-Viverito (now up for the Speaker’s job), or there’s a batch of loose DNA floating around the city duplicating Dems.

Pearl Gabel/New York Daily News