A car emerges from heavy windblown sand ahead of two other cars made nearly invisible on Gene Autry Trail, north of Vista Chino, in Palm Springs. (Photo: Desert Sun file)

Build bridges instead

Why are we even thinking of constructing CV Link?

What is truly needed is bridges over the Whitewater Wash at Indian Canyon Drive, Gene Autry Trail, and Vista Chino.

Robert Fox, Palm Springs

An open letter

Mr. David Ready, Palm Springs city manager:

KMIR6 reported on the ongoing issue of sand on Gene Autry Trail. A city spokesman stated one lane had only been closed since May 24! If he had to drive it every day, I am sure it would be cleared daily!

He also stated it would cost multimillions to erect a bridge over the wash there. We don’t need a bridge, we need a few strategically placed barriers along the route. It is fairly evident where they are needed from the piles of sand. Use some Measure J funds!

In the meantime, it would certainly help to have the city restripe the lanes in yellow so they are visible when the sand is blowing. It is really hazardous to drive Gene Autry when you can’t see the lane markers. That won’t cost millions and should be done regularly anyway.

Randy E. Rice, Desert Hot Springs

CV Link as Rorshach test

We may not know what the actual CV Link is going to look like, who’s going to fund it and how and when it will be built, but we are definitely learning a lot about our fellow citizens from the way they write to the paper about it.

Basically, as evidenced by the letters to the editor, there are two camps:

The first is a sunny, optimistic — and maybe naive — bunch of fit folks on the go — bike riders, all-terrain vehicle racers, joggers, hikers, active adventurers, people curious about the many different areas of the valley, explorers living life out and about. This is the group that’s in favor of the Link.

Then there are those who are a’gin it. Wary of possible ballooning costs (that they won’t live long enough to pay) and terrified that the homeless, the robbers and the lower classes might end up sharing their space on the planet, this group fears that the Link’s thoroughfare will provide an express route to their back doors.

Both sides have valid arguments.

The Link may become a Rorschach test for the Coachella Valley, revealing how we view our future and our fellow residents.

Stewart Weiner, Palm Desert

My take on CV Link

I know most people know the drawbacks of the CV Link:

•$1.6 million a year in maintenance and safety costs(spread between the cities)

And I know most people know the advantages:

•$152 million savings in health care through 2035

•Over $1 billion in economic benefit through 2035

•The cities only pay for maintenance, the construction is gifted to them

•Safer roads for cyclists to ride, decreasing potential accidents, (14 of the last cyclists deaths occurred within 2 miles of the path’s planned route)

•Another amenity that decreases traffic and increases business, our roads are getting too clogged during season, making leaving to go shopping a chore

That leaves us with a 39-to-1 return on investment compared to overall cities contribution.

On a side note, it will give us as employees of the bike shops a safe place to send riders without throwing them into the high speed streets throughout our valley. We have up to 30 or more calls a day to just our one shop asking where to ride that is safe. Between all the shops, there must be hundreds of visitors a day trying to avoid unsafe roads while enjoying their time in the valley on their bikes. Plus, I know from personal experience, there is no go way to get though certain parts of the valley by bike.

Scott McKelvey, Palm Desert Cyclery

Answer the questions

CVAG, aren’t you folks reading any of the letters to the “Your Voice” page of The Desert Sun? Our residents are posing all sorts of questions regarding the many wrinkles of the CV Link.

We have no place for discussions on these matters. I personally attended one of your supposed input meetings last fall at your main office and several of us were told that if we had any objections to the CV Link we were at the wrong place because CVAG was going to continue planning and construction of the link.

I asked specifically how the path would negotiate the many private golf clubs with no reply. I asked whether you were contemplating the use of eminent domain. Still no answer. Finally, one nice lady politely asked how we private citizens could have some of our questions answered and was told rather sharply to take it up with our individual city councils. Doesn’t anyone have oversight of CVAG?

I believe that it is time to apply the brakes before more millions of dollars are spent.

James Shaver, Palm Desert

Scouts help our young

Regarding the letter from Rick Schwemler concerning the apparent lack of support for boys these days; I beg to differ. My son, who is now 50, is an Eagle Scout. This training contributed greatly to his education in his formative years and to his success as an adult. Scouting continues today doing this very thing.

The Ophelia Project does fabulous work for young women, however, so does the Girl Scouts. My granddaughter recently completed her Gold Award (equivalent to the Boy Scout Eagle Scout honor) that builds leadership skills and community sustainable projects.

These organizations provide great leadership and educational opportunities for the young growing minds and hearts of our community.

Bonnie Cloer, Palm Springs

Beware of soda

San Francisco lawmakers are once again pursuing some sort of legislative ban or limit on soda consumption because of its high sugar content and the health risks that large amounts of sugar can cause. These are the same folks who embrace the legalization of marijuana, ignoring the documented negative health consequences associated with ingesting the plant in its various forms.

Apparently, getting behind the wheel after drinking a six-pack of Mountain Dew must pose a greater risk to society than driving under the influence of marijuana.

David Suss, Rancho Mirage

Saving water is key

My wife and I come to Palm Springs several times a year. We always enjoy ourselves with the many great restaurants and lounges.

I noticed with great distress the amount of wasting of water. I saw many displays of gutter flooding. I noticed in most restaurants and in public restrooms throughout the city that there are no restrictors on water faucets.

I know it is hot in Palm Springs and it is the time of year where landscaping will be watered 2 or 3 times daily. Something needs to change. The supply of water is not unending. We are in the fourth year of a severe drought.

Joseph Schmit, Stockton

Pay for the extras

In a May 26 letter, Duane and Stella Dier voiced concern that their Medicare Advantage plan’s co-pays and costs have gone up because of “$200 billion in cuts under the Affordable Care Act.” It’s true that there are cuts dictated under the ACA, but they are essentially an end to the subsidies provided private insurers who wished to “experiment” with offering enhanced plans, aka Advantage plans. In other words, these insurers lobbied for these private plans to piggy-back on standard Medicare coverage, which is embedded in each plan.

As part of a set of reforms under the ACA, to gain control of Medicare costs, federal subsidies of Advantage plans are reducing over time to bring them into line with the costs of original Medicare, which are 14% less. So while Advantage Plan enhanced benefits are enjoyed by their members, it’s only equitable to expect them, not the public, to pay for the added cost of those benefits. The alternative is to join the rest of us seniors in the original “no frills” Medicare program.

Rodney Smith, Palm Desert

Go after corporations

Re: “We earned what we have,” letter to the editor by George Batavick, June 1

I am happy that he and others like him are enjoying a comfortable life in retirement. I don’t think anyone who has worked all their lives and paid the appropriate taxes should be taken to task and I don’t believe the president would disagree.

The issue that needs to be seriously addressed in the “redistribution of wealth” should and is not necessarily focused on individuals like Mr. Batavick. It should be on the hundreds of corporations in the U.S. that have made millions and billions in profits but pay no taxes. And these usually are usually some of the corporations that pay their top executives obscene compensation.

Appropriately taxing just a few of these guys would probably take care of our crumbling infrastructure, make Social Security solvent and cure a host of other ills.

Ray Nocera, Palm Springs

Laugh lines?

From the people who brought us these unforgettable lines: “I did not have sex with that woman... .” “It all depends on what you think the meaning of the word is, is.” (Scholars will no doubt debate the word ‘is’ for centuries) “I smoked marijuana, but I didn’t inhale.”

And, then came this: “My husband is innocent; it’s a vast right wing conspiracy.” “What difference, at this point, does it make?” “We were dead broke when we left the White House.”

There’s more, but I had to stop; I was laughing so hard the tears blurred my vision.

Do we really want these people back in the White House? Maybe we do, just for the entertainment value.

Charles Gabriele, Bermuda Dunes

‘St. Sanders’ defended

According to letter writer Paul Forrest, Bernie Sanders is “a man who would change the country into something it isn’t, and was never intended to be.”

So here is what “the most economically powerful (interesting choice of words) nation in history” is: 27th in math, 20th in science, and the most expensive and worst (country) in health care in the developed world. And “the greatest country in the world” is 16th in quality of infrastructure and 34th in life expectancy. However, we are “the best military in the world”; we spend more than the next 7 countries (combined) and our military budget is 20 percent of federal spending.

Mr. Forrest, “a great writer of fiction” ignores factual information and presents a “very naughty” perspective of America; a great writer of non fiction has a more honest appreciation of the world (as it exists) and “is an amazing writer.”

“Our new Santa Claus” is not promising gifts that “intends to rob from those who have and give to those who don’t”; “St. Nick” is simply describing an America that “was never intended to be”.

Paul Barzman, Palm Desert

Guns as kitchen utensils?

I have to comment on a recent letter considering pressure cookers as weapons, as they were used in the Boston Marathon Massacre.

Don’t forget that guns played a big part in the bloody aftermath. The Tsarnaevs shot and killed MIT Officer Sean Collier, and a gunfight between the brothers and police left 16 officers injured. Pressure cookers have actually worked for years for cooking and canning, but I’m not convinced about the domestic uses of guns.

Mary Pons, Palm Springs

Lots of green

I must agree with Councilman Chris Mills: Does Palm Springs, a city of 47,000, need six pot shops?

Do we have to supply pot customers from all over Riverside and San Bernardino counties?

We will now have almost as many pot shops as we do grocery stores and more than we have drug stores. Interesting demographics.

Will we be advertising this in all our tourism brochures?

Milt Levinson, Palm Springs

Thanks for the good wishes

I wish to thank my many friends and The Desert Sun for publishing a full page of congratualtory comments on my 80th birthday on May 29.

This was such a treat for me to read all of the messages my partner, Michael Myers, gathered and I personally wish to thank him also.

Don Genhart, Palm Desert

Read or Share this story: http://desert.sn/1Itjohp