A slew of open seats in the Legislature means there will be at least 18 freshman lawmakers in the Capitol come January. Two thirds of the open seats are currently held by a Republican.

While dozens of members of the Texas Legislature are fighting for re-election across the state, a slew of open seats means there will be at least 18 freshman lawmakers come January – two in the Senate and 16 in the House.

With prominent legislators from both sides of the aisle opting not to return to their posts, some voters are having to choose between relatively unfamiliar candidates on the March 1 primary ballot.

Most of the more than 70 candidates in these races have their work cut out for them. In presidential election years in particular, voters showing up to the polls are less likely to know about the races lower on the ballot, said Rice University political science professor Mark Jones.

“They’re turning out to vote for either Ted Cruz or Donald Trump or Marco Rubio,” Jones said, referring to the leading Republican candidates for president. “Maybe some ads have reached them on a U.S. House race or a state Senate race, but by the time they get to the statehouse races, you have a significant proportion of voters who simply never heard of these candidates running for an open seat.”

Two-thirds of the open seats are currently held by a Republican. A race without an incumbent may seem like a prime chance for the seat to flip from Republican to Democrat or vice versa, but such swing seat opportunities have become increasingly rare in Texas.

“There are very few purple districts,” Jones said. “So even though the Republican candidate or the Democratic candidate, depending on the district, won’t get the advantage of incumbency, they still enjoy the advantage of the district being solid red or solid blue.”

Rather than creating an opportunity for a party swap, races without incumbents open the door for smaller ideological shifts, according to Henry Flores, St. Mary’s University political science professor. Often, candidates in the races are focusing on turning out certain segments of their party’s base.

“In Texas, if it’s an open House seat in North Texas or West Texas, one of the areas that’s traditionally Republican, it will mean something to the factions within that particular party,” said Flores. “What it will do is give one faction or the other within the Republican party the opportunity to win the seat.”

In most of the open seats, the races are so crowded that no one is likely to draw the needed majority support to avoid a runoff. This year’s primary runoff elections are scheduled for May 24.

The sparring among the candidates to land a slot in an expected runoff is particularly intense in the two open Senate seats.

The crowded race in Senate District 24 replace state Sen. Troy Fraser, R-Horseshoe Bay, who decided not to seek re-election, has drawn six candidates from across a sprawling district that stretches from rom Abilene to the northwest suburbs of Austin: state Rep. Susan King, eye surgeon Dawn Buckingham, retired radiologist Brent Mayes, construction business owner Jon Cobb, Little River Health Care owner Ryan Downton and businessman Reed Williams.

“In SD 24, it’s a little bit more complex because it’s such a spread out district and there are so many candidates that it’s difficult to pin down whose in the best position,” Jones said. “Baring something very unexpected, we’re looking at a runoff in that race.”

The Senate District 1 race in Northeast Texas to replace outgoing Republican state Sen. Kevin Eltife‘s seat drew in state Reps. Bryan Hughes and David Simpson in addition to Army General James “Red” Brown and Mike Lee, a retired Navy hovercraft pilot.

The entrance of King, Hughes and Simpson into the two Senate races left three seats open in the House – Districts 5 and 7 in Northeast Texas and District 71, which includes Abilene and Sweetwater.

Districts 5 and 7 only drew Republican candidates — five in HD 5 and two in HD 7. Randy Davis, a Texas State Guard officer; businessman Jay Misenheimer; Philip Hayes, a former Senate staffer; real estate agent Holly Coggins Hayes; and Cole Hefner, an insurance salesman and former Upshur county commissioner, are competing for Hughes’ seat, while Longview Mayor Jay Dean and businessman David Watts are running for Simpson’s in HD 7.

King’s HD 71 seat drew five Republicans and one Democrat. Attorney Chris Carnohan, former Hamilton Mayor Isaac Castro, Abilene ISD School Board trustee Stan Lambert, retired paramedic Stacey Scaief and retired firefighter Brian Scalf are all vying to win the Republican nomination and face Democrat Pierce LoPachin in November.

Both San Antonio and Houston stand to see a significant shakeup in their representation in the state Capitol due to a wave of retirements.

In San Antonio, three South Texas incumbents are not seeking re-election:

The Greater Houston area will also receive new representation in the House, as incumbents in Houston, Spring and Cypress are not running again.

Newly elected Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner , a Democrat, left his seat in House District 139 to run for his current position, opening the door for four Democrats to run to replace him: Randy Bates, Jerry Ford Jr., Jarvis Johnson and Kimberly Willis.

State Rep. Allen Fletcher, R-Cypress, decided not to seek re-election to House District 130, and announced his intentions to run for Harris County sheriff. Fletcher later decided not to enter the local race. Republicans Tom Oliverson, an anesthesiologist, and Kay Smith, the former president of the Texas Tea Party Republican Women, are running to replace him.

In the city of Spring, Republican state Rep. Patricia Harless announced she would not run again for her District 126 seat. Two Democrats will face off in the primary – Cris Hernandez and Joy Dawson-Thomas. One Republican, businessman Kevin Roberts, is running for the seat.

The remaining open seats are scattered across the state:

Early voting ends Friday. The primary election is on March 1. A full list of candidates in the Texas primaries is available here.

Disclosure: St. Mary’s University is a corporate sponsor of The Texas Tribune. Rice University was a corporate sponsor of the Tribune in 2013. A complete list of Tribune donors and sponsors can be viewed here.

This article originally appeared in The Texas Tribune at http://www.texastribune.org/2016/02/26/open-seats-texas-legislature/.