Charles Michael Yim, a contestant on ABC’s TV show Shark Tank, made history when he convinced all five celebrity Sharks to invest one-million dollars into his smartphone breathalyzer product “Breeze.” The 31-year-old entrepreneur's company Breathometer is now launching a second product with the same technology. But instead of analyzing a person’s blood-alcohol content to prevent drunk driving, “Mint” will measure your mouth’s bacteria and hydration levels to prevent unnecessary trips to the dentist.

"A lot of people think halitosis is just bad breath, but it's really a byproduct of poor oral health," Yim told Inc. "We measure what are called sulfuric compounds, which have a direct connection to the amount of bacteria in your mouth."

The American Dental Association (ADA) recommends that the average person brush their teeth twice a day with fluoride-containing toothpaste and floss once a day. But in case you forget, you can check yourself with Yim’s newest smartphone-compatible breath monitor by simply blowing into the device. The beta version of Mint is scheduled to ship this week to those who contributed to Breathometer's Idiegogo campaign, which raised more than $94,000 to get it off the ground in March. The final version will be available to public consumers in September, and is projected to earn nearly $20 million in sales by the end of 2015.

"There are all these ultrasonic toothbrushes, but there is nothing in the market in terms of a portable consumer product that can validate whether or not your tooth brushing, flossing, or hydration methods are adequate," Yim said. "Mint can play a substantial role in that."

When food particles collect on the surface of the tongue, between the teeth, or along the gums surrounding the teeth, naturally occurring bacteria work to break down the food particles. As the bacteria work on the food particles, they release chemicals with strong odors, which produce bad breath — also known as halitosis, according to the ADA. Poor oral hygiene is what allows those food particles to accumulate in the mouth, ultimately increasing levels of bacteria and subsequent odors.

Because saliva helps wash food particles from your mouth, people with chronic dry mouth are at an increased risk of bad breath. Medications, certain types of breathing through the mouth, and smoking can all cause dry mouth — the key reasons Yim designed Mint to measure the mouth’s hydration levels.

In the next few weeks, Breathometer will announce a partnership with a major oral health care company. And that’s in addition to the five Sharks, a new group of venture capital firms, and other early-stage investors. The financial groundwork Yim has laid for the company has added up to the “tens of millions,” he said.

"We're looking at connecting the application to an e-brush," Yim said. "The idea is to encourage better behavior than what you're already doing, because 100 percent of people can improve their oral health care regimen."