At his year-ending press conference, President Obama praised the success of ObamaCare, saying that 17 million gained coverage, that the uninsured rate was in the single digits for the first time ever and that health care inflation is at historic lows.

Was any of that true?

It depends on your source. That 17 million figure comes from a study by the RAND Corporation, which said that by February of this year, 17 million more had coverage than in late 2013.

But Obama’s own number crunchers at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services put the figure far lower than that.

According to the CMS, 8.7 million — or less than half of the RAND number — gained coverage by the end of 2014. The Census Bureau puts the number at 8.8 million.

The difference is entirely due to a huge gap in estimates of private sector coverage. RAND says that Medicaid coverage increased by 6.5 million, while CMS says that it was up 7.7 million. However, RAND claims that employer coverage climbed by more than 9 million, while CMS says that it dropped by 1.7 million in 2014.

It’s not surprising that Obama chose the higher number, but the wide gulf between the two numbers suggests that the 17 million number is highly debatable.

What about the uninsured rate being in the “single digits”? That comes from the Centers for Disease Control’s “early release” of estimates from its health interview survey. From January through June, 9% said that they were uninsured at the time of the interview.

But that’s just one measure of the uninsured.

The CDC also asked if they’ve been uninsured at any time during the past year, which presumably is a more accurate gauge than a snapshot in time. By that measure, the uninsured rate is 13.5%.

The Census Bureau, meanwhile, measures the uninsured as those who lacked coverage the entire year. Its latest data shows that last year, 10.4% were uninsured.

But Census changed the way that it conducts its survey. The change reduced the number who would be counted as uninsured, making it impossible to compare to previous years. Back in 1987, Census pegged the uninsured rate at 12.9%.

Again, it’s not surprising that Obama picked the more flattering number out of the multiple ones available. (It’s worth pointing out that before ObamaCare, Democrats would normally use whatever uninsured number was highest.)

What about health inflation? Here Obama is on very tenuous grounds.

CMS data show that the annual growth rate for national health spending had been trending down for years before Obama took office and well before ObamaCare took effect.

It also shows that last year — the first year the ObamaCare exchanges were in operation and the Medicaid expansion took effect — that downward trend suddenly reversed. Health spending climbed 5.3% in 2014, compared with 2.9% in 2013.

“The faster growth experienced in 2014 was primarily due to the major coverage expansions under the Affordable Care Act,” the CMS report shows.

Obama also bragged that 6 million people had signed up for ObamaCare through the federal healthcare.gov exchange.

Whether that’s good or bad news remains to be seen. We will have to wait until next week before the Health and Human Services Dept. releases its official weekly update. That will let us compare enrollment this year with the enrollment numbers from the same time a year ago.

Follow John Merline on Twitter: @IBD_JMerline.