Topics: american boychoir school, boychoir, Editor's Picks, Movies, Sex abuse, Media News

Soon, “Boychoir” will light up movie theater marquees worldwide.

Right now Dustin Hoffman, Kathy Bates, Debra Winger and Eddie Izzard are working the festival circuit to promote this film.

Last night, I thought my husband killed himself because of it.

Trav’s wallet, phone and wedding ring were lined up on the table. Our driveway was empty, and I smelled cigar smoke. “This is the day,” I reconciled. This is the day when the pain is finally too much. After years of therapy, diagnoses and medications that mitigate — but can’t eliminate — the memories in his head, today is the day my husband will smoke a cigar (one of his remaining vices), drive to a remote location and then walk alone into the Maine woods.

“They made a movie?” he asked when he learned about “Boychoir.” His voice got angrier. “What’s next? ‘Penn State, the musical’?”

I had no answer.

“Boychoir” screenwriter Ben Ripley did not include a rape scene.

Search online for “Boychoir” and red carpet images pop right up. New Jersey’s American Boychoir School, where Trav was a choirboy from ages 11 to 13, is the inspiration for the eponymous film. The American Boychoir School provided its students as actors, as well as musical direction and accompaniment for the movie.

As late as the 1990s, the school also provided a well-documented spot where little boys were regularly and repeatedly sexually violated by teachers, administrators and other students. I’d wager the school is still addressing these allegations.

Now, it is a movie.

But it’s not a movie about overcoming a culture of institutionalized sex abuse. In fact, sex abuse has no part in the story line. Variety film critic Peter Debruge writes, “In a country where musical talent is so often confused with sex appeal, ‘Boychoir’ offers a welcome alternative, celebrating discipline, talent and the sound of untainted innocence.”

Untainted innocence? I’ll write it again for emphasis. Little boys, according to many sources, were systemically raped at the American Boychoir School.

“That” is all in the past — ancient history, the current American Boychoir School officials say, never using the word “rape.”

However, for Trav (and for so many sex abuse survivors), the American Boychoir School’s history dictates his present-tense reality.

There are safety measures now, the school’s website assures.

Trav’s parents were given safety assurances, too, and their son still spent 30 months as a choirboy from 1988 to ’90 unable to sleep because of the sex abuse he saw, heard, feared and experienced.

More than 25 years later, he deals with the long-term effects of this experience. A few of the clinical diagnoses: post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, anxiety, bipolar disorder (1, not 2), and alcoholism.

Want to know how many prescription medications he takes? Six. Two of those are anti-psychotics. For my husband, getting through the day is a win. Sleep is a gold medal.

On one especially brutal night, Trav said, “I cannot get away from this. I keep trying to put it behind me, and it keeps presenting itself. Every time I try to get past this, it jumps in front of me.”