By Riley Manning

Daily Journal

TUPELO – It’s a good day for The Salvation Army.

Upon going public with the organization’s capital campaign to fund an expansion for its homeless lodge, Army Major Jeff Daniel also announced more than half its goal of $2.5 million has already been raised.

“If the campaign continues in this kind of success, and I think it will, we could break ground on the new lodge by March,” Daniel said.

The campaign committee is largely to thank. The committee includes BancorpSouth CEO Dan Rollins, Renasant CEO Robin McGraw and Dr. Dick White of the North Mississippi Medical Center, each of whom helped contribute $100,000 from their respective organizations. Former mayor Jack Reed Jr. also announced the city of Tupelo had pledged $500,000, taking the Army’s total to more than $1,754,000.

“This is why we’re a community,” White said. “We’re here to give hope for the future to one person at a time. That’s what we’re called to do.”

The expansion to the lodge will afford five family rooms, of which there currently are none, and raise the capacity for women up to 17 from seven, and the men to 23 from 10. Daniel said the need for lodge space only increased over the summer, and he expects it to intensify as the days get colder.

“We’ve been housing an additional 10 to 15 in the gym, and with our current space, we turn away three to four families a week and about 10 to 15 individuals,” Daniel said.

The effort will also go toward the revitalization of the Army’s current space, including a playground for children.

“This will be the booster shot the community needs to take it where it needs to be,” Reed said. “It’s time to put something other than a Band-Aid on this facility from 1982. We’re lucky to be able to give to the Salvation Army and increase their capacity to do their work.”

Daniel said the lodge expansion is one of several steps to solidify a bridge to independence for the area’s needy. When Daniel and his wife came to the major post last summer, one of their first projects was initiating a budgeting class for lodge members. Earlier this month, the CREATE Foundation awarded the Army with a $50,000 grant to go toward transitional housing. A cluster of apartments on Green Tee Road will serve as a sort of halfway house as lodge residents work, save money and learn basic budgeting and life skills.

“The image people have of homelessness most of the time isn’t usually how it looks here. Lots of our clients sleep in their car, or bounce around between friends and relatives, staying a day or two here, a day or two there,” Daniel said. “Some of them have problems, like illiteracy, but usually they just don’t have the ordinary skills to be successful. This is a big step to eliminating some of those road blocks to that success.”

riley.manning@journalinc.com