The Co-operative Group has told its members that it cannot make an enhanced commitment to stock Fairtrade products because of tough competition among supermarkets and its shift towards convenience stores.

The UK’s largest mutual made the remarks in response to a motion tabled ahead of the upcoming annual general meeting asking for the commitment to Fairtrade – for which the group has prided its link in the past – to be reiterated and also retain the long-term strategic objective that that if a “Co-operative product can be Fairtrade, it will be Fairtrade”.

Saying it could not back all elements of the motion, the board blamed the current financial position of the group and “the austere market climate we continue to face and the strategic direction of the business into convenience shops which naturally increases pressure on space and range”. The board – chaired since February by serial boardroom director, Allan Leighton – provides a supportive statement from Fairtrade.

The motion is one of a number contained in ballot papers sent this weekend to the more than 2.5 million people eligible to vote at the annual meeting under a new one-member-one-vote system being introduced as part of the overhaul of the business following the scandal in its banking arm in 2013.

A leading Co-op activist is making a call for a protest vote against Leighton and other directors at the meeting – the first being held since last year’s governance reforms were voted through to replace a system where 100 or so delegates went to the AGM. Instead a national members’ council has been created to meet regularly while members can attend the AGM. About 2.7 million are thought to be meet the criteria – which includes a threshold of expenditure – out of an estimated 6 million members.

The members’ council has withdrawn one motion it had drawn up for the meeting on 16 May asking the Co-op to reconsider its description of the group’s purpose in society as “championing a better way of doing business, for you and your communities”.



But other divisions remain between the board and the members council including the future of up to £1m of donations to the Co-op party – a motion brought by the board is being contested by the members council. In explanatory notes published alongside, the council asks for the motion on political donations to be withdrawn.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Co-operative Group chief executive Richard Pennycook (left) and chair Allan Leighton. Photograph: Andy Tyler Photography/The Co-op/PA

The other main issue is over the way three member nominated directors have been selected for election to the board. Leighton – who chaired Royal Mail and is credited with turning around Asda – and two other directors could face a protest vote unless all six names shortlisted by the national members council were put forward.

The call not to support the election of Leighton, the chief executive, Richard Pennycook, and the senior independent director, Sir Christopher Kelly, was made by a leading Co-op activist.

Related: Co-op chairman Allan Leighton urged to reverse boardroom plan

Peter Hunt, managing partner of Mutuo, has already accused the board of adopting totalitarian practices over the selection process. Hunt is now planning not to back Leighton, Pennycook and Kelly’s election to the board and urging other members, to do the same. “I urge the members not to support their appointment to the board unless they withdraw the three member nominated directors,” said Hunt, who is standing for election to the members’ council and a former general secretary of the Co-operative party, which is allied with the Labour party.

The Co-op said Leighton, Pennycook and Kelly were backed by the board and the members’ council. “We are in the process of building a board made up of directors who are individually and collectively qualified to oversee an organisation of the scale and complexity of the Co-operative. This will ensure we maintain our focus and momentum, whilst ensuring the catastrophic events of the recent past cannot happen again,” the Co-op said.