Terry Bowman and Debbie Dingell are competing in the Nov. 4 election for a chance to take over Michigan's 12th Congressional District seat.

Bowman, 49, is a Republican from Ypsilanti Township and an auto factory worker at Ford Motor Co.'s Rawsonville plant.

Dingell, 60, is a Democrat from Dearborn, president of D2 Strategies and chairwoman of the Wayne State University Board of Governors.

She's also the wife of U.S. Rep. John Dingell, who is vacating the seat.

The 12th Congressional District stretches from Wayne County and Downriver west to Ypsilanti, Ann Arbor and other parts of Washtenaw County.

In questionnaire responses submitted through MLive's Vote Guide, the two candidates explained why they're running for office, what they consider their top priorities and more.

Here's a snapshot of what they had to say:

Why are you running for office?

Bowman: After 81 years of one family rule of the 12th district, it is time to return the seat to the people of the district instead of a family dynasty. As a true representative of the people, I can relate to and understand the needs and concerns of the people much more than my opponent who has been in Washington DC for decades. The district deserves a Representative who does not need to hold a "Town Hall" meeting to understand the needs of the people of the district; but someone who lives it everyday as a blue-collar, hard-working taxpayer.

I believe the role of the Representative is to carry those needs and concerns of the people of the district to the Nation's Capitol, and to act as your watchdog to ensure that the Federal Government - and all of its duly elected officials - are spending wisely, remembering our succeeding generations by living within its means, and obeying the restrictions placed upon it by the US Constitution.

Dingell: I'm running for Congress because I'm committed to making education affordable and accessible for Michigan families, to protecting our environment for generations to come, and to making certain the voice of Michigan's workers is heard in Washington. I believe in getting things done. While I know that one person can't do everything, I also know that one person can make a difference. I want to keep fighting for the issues that have always been my passion, especially women and children.

When I was in high school, I helped organize the movement that gave 18-year-olds the right to vote in Michigan. When I learned that women weren't included in studies being funded by the federal government, I founded the Women's Health Resource Center. I've built coalitions around jobs, around health, and around trade because that's how you get results and find solutions. That's the approach I've taken all my adult life. I believe you can find ways to get things done to make a difference in people's lives.

Why do you identify with your political affiliation? Are there any issues in which you believe differently than your political affiliation's traditional (or more typical) view?

Bowman: I align completely with the Republican Party belief that a limited, Constitutional government that respects Free-market economics is the best model for economic prosperity and pulling people out of poverty. The United States can still be called the "Shining City on the Hill", but with the current overreach by the Federal Government into healthcare, energy, and our pocketbooks, that City is starting to dim.

I also align with the Republican party and will respect and protect innocent human life.

If I would have been a part of the Michigan legislature, I would have voted NO on dropping the pension tax exemption. I believe it was a total violation of the Republican Party platform. Raising taxes, unless in times of war, is never an answer to economic prosperity.

Dingell: I am proud to be a Democrat and have spent decades working for equal rights, expanded economic opportunity, and expanded educational opportunity for Michigan residents. But I have a long record of working with people in both political parties and feel strongly that elected officials must work together regardless of political or geographic affiliation. Elected officials should examine each issue individually and avoid voting in lock-step based on an ideology. If elected to Congress, I will carefully examine each issue that comes before me and will cast each vote based on the facts and the best interests of the people of the 12th Congressional District.

What are your top two areas to look to cut the federal budget? What are your top two priorities to preserve or increase funding?

Bowman: The PPACA (also known as Obamacare), has severely damaged the economy by placing expensive and unsustainable mandates on US citizens and businesses, and has not reduced costs as promised. Remember: the US Supreme Court ruled that the PPACA IS a tax - the biggest in our nation's history. Instead of the controlling PPACA, Washington could have paid for and given every single uninsured American citizen a private health care plan, and saved hundreds of billions of dollars of taxpayer money. Instead, the PPACA is the first step to 100% complete government control of your healthcare. Just like in the private market, we can reduce costs by cutting 10% from every federal agency over a 4-year span.

We must be willing to make tough decisions in order to preserve and protect the last, greatest hope on earth - the United States of America. Our spending is incredibly out of control, and we cannot outsource our tough decisions onto the backs of our children and grandchildren.

Dingell: We must increase federal funding for education to reflect a genuine federal commitment to education. If elected to Congress, I will work to reverse devastating cuts to education made by the Congress and will fight for low-interest student loans, new resources to make early childhood education more affordable, and increased funding for our K-12 public schools. We must also protect Social Security and Medicare. Hundreds of thousands of Michiganders rely on Social Security and Medicare, worked hard for decades, and paid their fair share to support these programs.

We must also increase funding for the National Institutes of Health (NIH), which is vital to supporting life-saving medical research and promotes job creation in the research and technology sectors. I support ending corporate tax breaks for those who ship jobs overseas. We must also cut bureaucracy and eliminate overlapping and duplicative programs.

Do you support so-called "Obamacare"? Why or why not? Please indicate reforms you support, if any.

Bowman: The PPACA is not affordable; and those who passed the bill lied to the American people. We are losing our doctors, our plans, and our religious liberty - even when Representatives like John Dingell promised otherwise. It has destroyed stability in the economy - something that job creators rely on when deciding to hire new employees.

It has created 2 types of businesses: the 49'rs are businesses who - because of PPACA mandates - are unwilling to hire a 50th employee. And the 29'rs, businesses who are unwilling to work employees over 30 hours a week because the PPACA defines "full-time" employment as 30 hours a week. This is a law that actually ENCOURAGES unemployment and under-employment.

You don't destroy the healthcare of 85-90% of Americans who like their insurance in order to fix the other 10-15%. You fix that 10-15% and leave the healthcare decisions of Americans between themselves and their doctors. Healthcare should be about people - not politcs; care - not control.

Dingell: Every American should have access to quality affordable healthcare. Before the Affordable Care Act (ACA), an individual diagnosed with leukemia could have had their insurance cancelled or been denied insurance because of a pre-existing condition. The ACA was passed to help fix these and other problems. It gives Americans access to health care, puts individuals in charge of their own medical decisions, was designed to help control escalating costs, prevents denial or cancellation of insurance, removes lifetime limits on coverage, encourages preventative care, protects individuals' choice of doctors, and keeps young people covered. It also gives patients a Bill of Rights.

The ACA is not perfect; it needs improving and nobody could defend its early implementation. But instead of voting to repeal it, Republicans should work with Democrats to improve it. I will fight to ensure that if you are ill you shouldn't have to worry about seeing a doctor or about access to important preventive care.

Do you believe current immigration laws should be reformed?

Bowman: This country was founded on legal immigration, and I am a strong supporter of legal immigration. Before we can discuss any changes, we must first be willing to enforce the laws we already have in place. The non-action by the current president and the Democrat party actually encourages illegal behavior by enticing non-citizens to cross the border illegally. If we would only enforce the current laws and secure the border, much of our problem would be corrected.

I would launch an investigation into the INS and the process it takes to come to the U.S. legally. Once we identify any obstacles to legal immigration and have corrected them, we must be willing to speak truthfully and admit that anyone crossing the border of the United States has purposefully chosen to ignore our laws and are engaging in criminal behavior. I would approve of using our National Guard troops to patrol our borders. We must encourage legal immigration, and discourage criminal, illegal immigration.

Dingell: The United States is a land of opportunity. Our history has been written by generations of immigrants who have come to our borders looking for the promise of a better life. They have shaped our culture, our economy, and our national story, helping to make us the greatest of nations. Unfortunately, our nation's immigration system has many flaws that hinder economic growth and tear families apart. I support comprehensive immigration reform that secures our nation's borders but is also fair and humane.

What do you consider the nation's current top foreign policy issue or issues?

Bowman: Trade issues: The United States and our economic policies lead the world's markets. I believe that we must engage in Free Trade - as long as it is also Fair-Trade for our American businesses and workers. The devaluation of the American dollar can be devastating for our economic viability in the world's markets.

We also must be willing to aggressively pursue the destruction of any group like ISIS (ISIL). The number one job of the Federal government is to keep Americans safe from aggressors that want nothing less than our complete and utter extermination.

Dingell: Threats persist from around the globe and our first priority must be to protect the homeland. We cannot, however, become an isolationist country. The United States must engage diplomatically with our allies around the world to reduce the threat of terrorism and expand human rights. Although extraordinary circumstances - such an act of terrorism or an attack against a NATO ally - may require an immediate response by our military, I feel strongly that U.S. military intervention should occur only with prior consultation and authorization by Congress. As a nation, we have a moral obligation to protect human rights but we must work with international organizations and our allies to develop appropriate international action.

What issues do you consider a top priority?

Bowman: 1. Healthcare: returning healthcare decisions back to patients and their doctors, and removing government control over our personal healthcare decisions.

2. An affordable energy policy that focuses on people as our primary focus. Wind and solar should be used along with ALL our methods of producing affordable energy for people of all income levels. Energy should be about you and your kitchen table budget, not a political agenda that causes energy prices to skyrocket. It is important in your personal lives - but also for your employers so that they can afford to create new jobs and increase wages and benefits.

3. A common-sense government that works for the people, lives within its means, and remembers that we must protect our country for the benefit of our children and grandchildren. $17 Trillion in debt is immoral, unethical, and quite frankly, very embarrassing. No more outsourcing our tough decisions onto the backs of our kids - so they have to clean up our mess.

Dingell: If elected to Congress, my top priorities will be to make certain that the voice of Michigan's workers is heard in Washington as we work to grow the economy and expand manufacturing, to work to ensure that all Americans have access to quality and affordable education and health care, and to safeguard Social Security and Medicare for future generations.

Do you support legalized abortion?

Bowman: No

Dingell: Yes

Do you support legally recognized gay marriage?

Bowman: No

Dingell: Yes

Would you sign or have you during this campaign signed a pledge to not raise taxes?

Bowman: Yes

Dingell: No

Ryan Stanton covers the city beat for The Ann Arbor News. Reach him at ryanstanton@mlive.com or 734-623-2529 or follow him on Twitter.