Facebook has recently faced criticism from marketers because their “organic reach” is decreasing. In other words, the content they post on the social network without paying is reaching fewer people, leading some marketers to suggest the changes are designed to drive them to purchase advertising.

On Thursday Facebook took to its blog to rebuff those allegations. The company’s ad product marketing lead, Brian Boland, denied that it’s cutting brands’ organic reach in order to make more money from advertising, and argued instead that the decline is simply a result of the growing amount of content published across its network.

“Competition in News Feed — the place on Facebook where people view content from their family and friends, as well as businesses — is increasing, and it’s becoming harder for any story to gain exposure in News Feed,” Mr. Boland wrote.

In addition, the company has made recent tweaks to the way the News Feed surfaces content in order to keep its users happy. “Rather than showing people all possible content, News Feed is designed to show each person on Facebook the content that’s most relevant to them,” Mr Boland added.

But many marketers questioned, though, whether Facebook was thinking of its users or of its ad sales efforts. In March, online food ordering service Eat24 deleted its entire Facebook presence, claiming the social network was deliberately limiting the exposure of its posts in order to force it to pay for ads.

“When we first met, you made us feel special. We’d tell you a super funny joke about Sriracha and you’d tell all our friends and then everyone would laugh together. But now? Now you want us to give you money if we want to talk to our friends,” the company wrote in a humorous blog post announcing its decision.

Eat24 isn’t the only brand that feels this way. Many marketers paid significant sums to accumulate audiences or “fans” on the social network, only to find it’s getting harder to actually put content in front of them without paying.

Interestingly, Facebook’s response seems to be that fans help boost the effectiveness of its ad products. In other words, marketers must pay for ads to extract value from the fans they may already have paid to acquire. The changes aren’t designed to help Facebook sell more ads, but they might.

“Fans make your ads more effective. When an ad has social context — in other words, when a person sees their friend likes your business — your ads drive, on average, 50% more recall and 35% higher online sales lift,” Mr. Boland’s post read, adding, “Fans also make the ads you run on Facebook more efficient in our ads auction. Ads with social context are a signal of positive quality of the ad, and lead to better auction prices.”

Some marketers don’t seem impressed by Facebook’s explanation. Shauna Hogg, owner of ecommerce site All Things Racing Apparel left a comment on the company’s post stating, “This doesn’t make me feel any better, still as frustrated as ever. Our fans like our pages because they want to see our content. On my personal Facebook page, I’d rather see content from pages I like than the paid sponsored ads! People are complaining about the volume of sponsored ads, however we’re forced to do that so our own fans can see our content. There is something fundamentally wrong with that theory!”

Meanwhile, Eat24 says it doesn’t regret its decision to ditch Facebook at all.

“We closed our Facebook page, and absolutely nothing happened. The sky didn’t cave in. Hell didn’t freeze over. Tuesdays are still exclusively for Tacos. Everything is pretty much exactly the same as it was when we had a page. The only difference is now we don’t have to think about things like optimal headline length, preview image resolution, and the proper ratio of cats to cheeseburgers to maximize virality,” it said.