Alex Wong via Getty Images

Mitch McConnell failed on his pledge to make Obama a one-term president, but he did succeed in obstructing the passage of many bills that would have grown the economy and helped the American people. Since 2007, McConnell has used the filibuster 413 times as minority leader. Despite the Republican Party's roadblocks, our economy has been growing: there has been declining unemployment, lower gas prices, a soaring stock market, and a decreasing deficit. McConnell, however, credits these accomplishments to the newly elected Republicans even though they have only been in office for a few weeks. Really, Mitch!

Due to poor voter turnout the Republicans took control of both houses and McConnell finally got the power he so desperately craved. He savors his new title: majority leader of the Senate. Now he has the chance to use his power to show Americans that he can lead, govern, and accomplish things as Harry Reid did. Now he has the chance to work together with Obama and live up to his campaign promises of compromise and moving America forward. Unfortunately, his actions are proving otherwise.

Mitch immediately started to chip away at women's reproductive rights, to take health care away from the needy, to oppose raising the minimum wage, to continue to gut voters' rights, to dismiss immigration reform, to repeal bank regulations, and to contest jobs bills and infrastructure repairs.

He, like many Republicans, still wants to keep their own constituents from getting health care, while Congress enjoys a "Cadillac" policy. Even though Kentucky Governor Beshear has confirmed that more than 500,000 residents have taken advantage of Kynect, the health care program funded by the ACA (or Obamacare), McConnell blatantly lied to voters saying they could keep Kynect even if he repealed the ACA. His hatred for Obama far exceeds his love of his fellow Kentuckians.

Mitch also wants to take away Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, food stamps, a livable wage, and veteran benefits. Why doesn't he want to help the poor and close the growing income gap amongst the American people? Unlike most employees, Congress sets their own salary, raises, vacations, and job description, rather than their bosses -- the voters.

If he and other Republicans think a family can live on the current minimum wage of $7.25 an hour, which amounts to approximately $15,000 a year for a full-time worker, then I suggest we cut their pay to that amount. Think of all the money the country would have if Congress and their staff all made just $7.25 an hour?

In addition, McConnell continues to block infrastructure policies that even include fixing disastrous roads and dangerous bridges in his own state. He is preventing millions from working. Instead he supports the construction of the Keystone Pipeline with full knowledge that it is environmentally dangerous, doesn't create but a handful of jobs, and the U.S. doesn't even get the oil. The country takes on all of the risks with the pipeline, but none of the rewards. The rewards go to individual oil and gas lobbyists, oil barons like the Koch Brothers, and senators like McConnell.

Furthermore, Mitch doesn't support theories on climate change because in his words, "he is not a scientist." He chooses not to read briefs on the climate, listen to reports from meteorologists, or watch the extreme weather patterns that are currently emerging. In a recent study, more than 10,800 scientists said that the global warming we are experiencing is manmade. Two disagreed. The Republican Congress, Mitch, and the potential Republican presidential candidates' actions (or rather inaction), all support big oil as opposed to our planet, ocean life, and drinking water.

Mitch McConnell told the voters he would compromise on the campaign trail but has not budged since he has been elected. Instead of embracing and building on Obama's policies, where the U.S. has experienced 58 months of continued economic growth, Mitch wants to revert back to the policies under George W. Bush. Has he forgotten that those policies collapsed our economy?

Like many Republicans, Mitch disregards the wishes of those who put him in office. They gerrymander districts, suppress voting rights, and continue to support Citizen United rather than repeal it. These steps insure their continued reelection and the flow of unlimited campaign funds from a few billionaires.



Due to poor voter turnout in 2014, the Republicans took control of both houses. In 2016, if Democrats stay home and do not come out to vote, they might lose the Presidency too.

Follow Gerry Myers on Twitter: www.twitter.com/glmyers