Some small changes can get big results

A presentation at the School Nutrition Association conference in Boston last Monday. (Photo: Charles Krupa, AP)

There's one truth emerging from the debate over the National School Lunch Program on the floor of Congress and in the lunchrooms of public schools: You can lead a child to vegetables, but you can't make them eat.

The 2010 school lunch standards have made giant strides in improving the quality of food offered to our children. But such improvements come at a substantial cost.

As is common in Washington, the debate has been reduced to two seemingly unacceptable options. Either we enforce high nutrition standards with waste and cost, or we allow schools to provide the lowest common-denominator lunches and perpetuate the growing public health crisis. But the problem is neither the funding nor the regulations, it's the motivation of the child to eat.

One guideline requires children to take a fruit or vegetable regardless of whether they want one, which has led to excessive waste, according to many schools. Schools also have reported shorter lines because some students have decided to skip the school lunch and bag it instead.

As a result, some changes have been recommended. The School Nutrition Association believes children should be allowed to choose or refuse fruits or vegetables. But many Republican lawmakers believe schools that have lost money on the new guidelines should be able to abandon the new standards entirely.

There is a third alternative. Some schools have used ideas from behavioral science and marketing to make the food more attractive or convenient.

Instead of "burrito" or "spaghetti," they gave them descriptive names such as the "Big Bad Bean Burrito" or "Homemade Spicy Spaghetti." Instead of using the standard stainless steel bins, they made fruits more appealing by placing them in a basket by the cash register. Instead of putting milk in its separate cooler, they added cartoons to the cooler with the soda and iced tea. Most schools made such changes for less than $50 for an entire school.

These approaches might seem small, but one little change can have a wide impact. For example, chocolate milk, while no longer part of the guidelines, is still banned by many large school districts. But research shows that when chocolate milk is banned, kids drink 10% less milk and waste 29% more food, and as much as 6.8% of them stop eating the school lunch.

When schools made healthy foods more convenient and attractive, our research shows not only does fruit and vegetable waste return to pre-guideline levels, but also more kids buy lunch.

This means better nutrition for the students and school lunch programs that are financially solvent. This is just a smarter way to operate a school lunchroom no matter which policy is in place.

There are close to 100,000 public school lunchrooms across America. Instead of trying to imagine how to control them or set them up to sacrifice nutrition for dollars, a better option is to help them become smarter and more efficient.

David Just is director of the Cornell University's Center for Behavioral Economics in Child Nutrition Programs. Brian Wansink is director of Cornell Food and Brand Lab.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the opinion front page or follow us on twitter @USATopinion or Facebook.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1jPC0MX