WASHINGTON -- At 3:29 a.m. Friday (March 27), it was finally over.

After an all day and all night session, the Republican-led Senate, by a vote of 52-46, passed a budget that would repeal the Affordable Care Act, cut Medicaid and Medicare and eliminate the federal deficit over the next 10 years.

All Democrats voted no, along with two Republicans, Rand Paul of Kentucky and Ted Cruz of Texas. Cruz has already announced he's a candidate for president and Paul is expected to join him in what is likely to be a crowded Republican field. The GOP-led House passed a similar budget on Wednesday.

"By passing a balanced budget that emphasizes growth, common sense and the needs of the middle class, Republicans have shown that the Senate is under new management and delivering on the change and responsible government the American people expect," said Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky. "The Democrat-led Senate for years refused not only to pass a balanced budget, but any budget at all. Those days are over."

Democrats said the budget would make painful cuts in health care and education, , take away health insurance from millions of Americans who signed up for coverage under the Affordable Care Act and slash programs that benefit middle class and low income Americans.

"Fortunately for the country, the Republican budget will not become law," said Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., who announced Friday that he won't seek

The session started at 9 a.m. Thursday, and didn't end until 3:29 a.m. on Friday morning. Freshman Sen. Bill Cassidy, R-Baton Rouge, had a good view of some of the proceedings. As is the case for freshmen members of the majority party, he was called to preside -- and his shift ran from roughly midafternoon until shortly after 6 p.m.

Cassidy, a physician, had success with one budget amendment he co-sponsored with Sen. Chris Murphy, D-Ct., to overhaul the nation's mental health services. Their amendment was voice vote support.

"More than 11 million people struggle with mental illness yet many don't have access to proper treatment. This problem is worsened by a shortage of mental health professionals," Cassidy said. "This amendment will improve access to care and will help protect the health and safety of the individual, their families and society as a whole."

"Mental health care in America is in desperate need of an overhaul," Murphy said. "Children and adults struggling with mental illness may bounce from professional to professional without an accurate diagnosis for years, ultimately suffering in isolation, or be cast aside as a result of their mental health condition and abandoned by the system. Too often, individuals with mental illness who are capable of living healthy, productive lives instead end up homeless or in prison due to lack of adequate care. Thankfully, a growing chorus of both Democrats and Republicans is saying enough is enough."

After the 2012 killing of 26 first graders and educators at an elementary school in Connecticut, Murphy worked hard for mental health legislation and a gun control measure to tighten what some call a gun show loophole that allows people to purchase guns without background checks from unlicensed dealers.

Murphy, who served in the House with Cassidy before being sworn into the Senate in 2013 and Cassidy, who won his Senate seat in 2014, agree on the need for mental health upgrades, but not on gun control. Cassidy opposed the bill, backed by Murphy, to require background checks for all guns purchased at gun shows.

Cassidy called it too restrictive to America's right to bear arms.

Cassidy didn't get votes on three other amendments.

One would open up more of the Outer Continental Shelf to more oil and gas development.

A second amendment would provide what Cassidy says would be stable and predictable Medicaid funding to states along with provisions to encourage states to develop innovations that actually result in better care for the low income residents the program serves.

The third was aimed at preventing EPA ambient air quality regulations from blocking manufacturing and slowing what he calls "America's energy renaissance.

On his Medicaid proposal, Cassidy said:

"I am a doctor. I have been working in the public hospital system of Louisiana for the last 25 years caring for the uninsured. I am so aware of the importance of safety-net programs such as Medicaid. I point out, though, that Medicaid is a broken program--so broken that it is bankrupting State governments and contributing to our runaway national debt. The question is how do we preserve this important program but, at the same time, also preserve the financial integrity of our State government, of our Federal Government, and, if you will, ultimately the pocketbook of the taxpayer."