Gov. Andrew Cuomo is known as an extremely savvy political operator. But last week, at least, the governor more than met his equal in Southern District U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara.

After Mr. Cuomo announced that he would disband the Moreland Commission—an investigative body he formed in 2013 to probe corruption in the Legislature—Mr. Bharara, who has built a reputation for pursuing Albany wrongdoing, said his office would take over outstanding cases.

The federal prosecutor did not even rule out looking into the actions of Mr. Cuomo, whose administration is said to have interfered with Moreland probes that came too close to the governor's political allies (contentions the governor's office denied last week). "People should take very, very seriously any suggestion that there was either influence or interference," Mr. Bharara said in a radio interview.

Mr. Bharara has proved deft at snaring corrupt New York lawmakers, though many of those cases were built through informants and wiretaps sprung on unsuspecting politicians.



Mr. Cuomo, who promised to clean up Albany during his 2010 run for governor, can't be happy about an unexpected attack by a high-profile prosecutor during an election year.

JUDGE ACCEPTS SAC'S GUILT. A federal judge approved SAC Capital Advisors' guilty plea. Steven Cohen's hedge fund will pay $1.8 billion to resolve criminal and civil probes into insider trading—the largest such settlement in history. SAC will be placed on probation for five years and will employ a compliance consultant.

DIMON'S BIG PAYDAY. JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon was awarded $20 million in compensation last year, nearly double his 2012 pay and the most of any banking chief in New York City. Most of his pay was in restricted shares, many of which have not yet vested. Meanwhile, the bank said first-quarter profits fell 19% on lower fixed-income trading and mortgage revenue. JPMorgan was the first bank to report first-quarter earnings.

COMCAST, TWC BAND TOGETHER. Comcast and Time Warner Cable defended their $45 billion merger last week before the Senate Judiciary Committee, which questioned whether the deal would benefit customers. Critics said the combined company would have nearly 40% of the nation's broadband market. A Comcast executive argued that there is plenty of competition, and the merger would not increase customer bills.

HEALTH CHIEFS DEPART. New York state Health Commissioner Dr. Nirav Shah is stepping down May 4 to join the Kaiser Foundation Health Plan in Southern California. He had been in his post since 2011. Separately, Kathleen Sebelius, the U.S. secretary of Health and Human Services, resigned. The former Kansas governor oversaw the troubled rollout of Obamacare. President Barack Obama's budget chief, Sylvia Mathews Burwell, replaces her.

CITY COUNCIL BOOSTS SPENDING. The City Council plans to increase its fiscal 2015 budget by 10%, to $56.9 million, six times the rate of inflation. The additional funds will be used to draft more legislation, increase the body's oversight and investigative functions, and expand individual district offices.

RESTAURANT INSPECTOR GADGETS. City restaurant inspectors may be required to wear a camera—potentially the pricey Google Glass—during inspections, according to a bill introduced last week by Councilman Vincent Ignizio. The bill aims to level the playing field for restaurateurs looking to dispute their inspection reports.

ID IDEA. The City Council introduced a bill that would allow undocumented immigrants to obtain municipal ID cards they could use to access city services. It would be the largest such program in the country.

J&R RECHARGES. Consumer electronics retailer J&R Music and Computer World will find itself without a brick-and-mortar store for the first time in its 43-year history. It closed its block-long string of shops on Park Row on April 10. J&R's owners plan to redevelop the site and open some sort of electronics business in 2015.

Get Crain's Morning Insider Sign up for the Morning Insider email and receive political news and musings every morning at 6 a.m. More Newsletters ›

Comments