This week KSBY has been profiling the candidates vying to be the next representative of the Central Coast's 24th district.

Santa Barbara County Supervisor Salud Carbajal was able to secure the endorsement of incumbent Lois Capps, who announced after 18 years in office she's retiring. She said Carbajal knows what it means to serve the people he represents.

Carbajal said he's ready to take his 12 years experience as County Supervisor to Washington, D.C., starting with immigration reform.

Those who work in the fields have a special place in his campaign. Carbajal's dad was an immigrant farm worker. He says he'll vote for amnesty for the millions here illegally.

"Really coming up with legislation that acknowledges the valuable contributions that these individuals make to our economy," said Carbajal, adding he believes Congress can come to a bipartisan agreement on immigration reform and gun control.

He supports more restrictions on those who buy and sell guns, bans of certain rifles and funding for more mental health services, something republicans are calling for.

"We need a comprehensive approach to addressing this issue. There's common ground to be achieved," he said.

He supported President Obama's executive action on new gun laws and supports the president's Affordable Care Act, but says more work needs to be done to bring down health care costs.

"We need to address the Cadillac tax that is providing a fiscal impact on businesses and government and individuals," said Carbajal.

He said funding can be improved in a number of areas, such as making education more affordable, by closing what he calls loopholes in taxes for the wealthy. "We need to make sure multi-national corporations who pay less taxes than -in some cases than a middle class family- that they are paying their fair share."

He also said he'll fight to bring down medicare and prescription drug costs and, as a former marine, he'll fight for veteran benefits.

Carbajal also has the endorsement of House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi.