Topics: Barack Obama, Bowe Bergdahl, Detainees, Editor's Picks, gitmo, Glenn Greenwald, Guantanamo Bay, mos def, Taliban, White House, Politics News

Last week’s highly publicized prisoner exchange conducted by the Obama administration suggests that, despite years of inaction, it is entirely possible to close the Guantanamo Bay Detention Center. On Friday, the White House announced that it was going to transfer five “high ranking” Taliban officials in exchange for Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl, a U.S. Army soldier who was captured in Afghanistan by the Taliban almost five years ago. The five Guantanamo detainees, who were released into the custody of the government of Qatar, are prohibited from traveling outside the country for one year, after which point they will be free to return to Afghanistan.

Though Rep. Mike Rogers, R-Mich., is drumbeating about how their release poses threats to American soldiers for years to come, he needn’t worry. Simply put, those detainees can and will always be tracked — by drones, Internet, telecommunications companies, or simple house arrest monitors. As the Obama administration has demonstrated, it is as capable as it is enthusiastic, about droning any real or perceived potential threats to the U.S. (I do not endorse droning anyone, whether Taliban officials or U.S. citizens; I am merely reminding Rogers that, over the last decade, the U.S. has demonstrated through rather drastic examples and self-legitimizing bills such as the NDAA 2012 and 2013, its capacity to engage in global “peace-keeping” through whichever means it autocratically deems.)

This weekend’s news makes it clear that the Obama administration is able to release Guantanamo detainees without either soul-searching national conversations or congressional permission. As Jason Leopold and Glenn Greenwald point out, the White House does not view congressional authority as necessary in deciding whether and when to release Guantanamo detainees. If that is true, then it is unclear why the remaining detainees, especially those who have been cleared for release, are still imprisoned in Guantanamo.

It is difficult to understand why, for example, Shaker Aamer, a Saudi national brought to Guantanamo when it first opened but cleared for release in 2007, is still in prison. By several accounts, he was caught up in the dragnet accidentally. Journalist Victoria Brittain details the capture of Aamer in her book “Shadow Lives.” Aamer, an interpreter for some lawyers in England, had moved his family to Afghanistan five months prior to Sept. 11. The school where Aamer was teaching English was destroyed in November 2001. His pregnant wife and children fled to Pakistan to escape the chaos. Aamer, who had stayed behind to look after their house, was grabbed and traded to an armed group by bounty hunters, and eventually sold to U.S. forces for $5,000. Aamer, who was initially overjoyed to have been rescued by American forces, was moved to Bagram, and then on to Guantanamo, where he remains to this day, after a decade of torture and abuse.

Despite a vigorous campaign by Aamer’s family, his lawyer Clive Stafford Smith, and Aamer himself, there was seemingly no exit, at which point Aamer and and his fellow prisoners have gone on a deathly hunger strike. Rather than releasing him, the U.S. government responded with brutal force feedings (exemplified vividly in a clip recorded by rapper Mos Def). The status of the prisoners on hunger strikes are no longer communicated by the U.S. military as of December 2013, as the latter has determined that it was no longer in their own interest to do so.

So, why are five high-level Taliban detainees being released while Aamer and others — who present no security threat, according to the U.S. government — are left rotting in prison? It could be due to several reasons.