The brutal killing of the photojournalist James Foley at the hands of militants calling themselves the Islamic State (formerly known as ISIS), reports of a U.S. attempt to rescue him and other hostages earlier this summer, and U.S. airstrikes in support of Iraqi and Kurdish forces has continued to keep the water boiling about what role the U.S. should play in Iraq's current conflict. As President Barack Obama stated in his press conference yesterday about the Islamic State:

They have rampaged across cities and villages – killing innocent, unarmed civilians in cowardly acts of violence. They abduct women and children, and subject them to torture and rape and slavery. They have murdered Muslims – both Sunni and Shia – by the thousands. They target Christians and religious minorities, driving them from their homes, murdering them when they can for no other reason than they practice a different religion. They declared their ambition to commit genocide against an ancient people.



[READ: A Picture Worth Nothing at All]

Even before the gruesome footage of the all-too-familiar practice of beheading captives – a practice meant to instill fear and anger through propaganda of the deed – watching the Vice News documentary about the Islamic State certainly does nothing to take away from concerns about the group and its desired ends. The Islamic State has been particularly effective so far because it seems to have a strategy, and is combining combat operations with terror and governance. (See also this piece from Der Spiegel in 2005 about al-Qaida in Iraq's strategic goals, which reads chillingly in 2014, as that group was the Islamic State's predecessor.) As counterinsurgency expert David Kilcullen said, the Islamic State "is the most dangerous terrorist group in the world because they combine the fighting capabilities of al-Qaida with the administrative capabilities of Hezbollah. … It's clear that they have a state-building agenda and an understanding of the importance of effective governance."

U.S. response to the Islamic State is complicated for numerous reasons, such as the U.S. not wanting to get pulled back into Iraq in a big way. Perhaps the bigger complication is that the Islamic State straddles the borders of Iraq and Syria, and while we can support the Iraqi and Kurdish regional governments, we cannot and should not support President Bashar Assad’s government in Damascus. This is problematic because the Islamic State’s leadership is located deep inside Syria in Raqqa, and the militants can move freely back and forth from non-Kurdish controlled areas in Iraq and their safe havens in Syria. Furthermore, Assad’s regime wants to pull us in to support it, and will no doubt continue to use brutal tactics and bomb indiscriminately. Both he and the Islamic State have reason to blame the U.S. when airstrikes occur, particularly when there are large numbers of civilian casualties.

[NEWS: U.S. Steps Up Strikes Following Foley Killing]

The U.S. response thus far has focused on providing an assessment of Iraqi and Kurdish capabilities, military assistance, humanitarian assistance to members of the Yazidi religious minority, and conducting limited airstrikes. Since August 8, the U.S. has conducted 90 airstrikes, with roughly half of them being in support of Kurdish and Iraqi efforts to retake the Mosul Dam. Retaking the dam was imperative, because the longer the Islamic State controlled the dam the more it would be able to use the destruction of it as a credible deterrent to both Baghdad and the Kurds.

While a slight majority of Americans support airstrikes and a plurality seem to feel the need to do something about Iraq, publicly the direction of U.S. policy is not entirely clear. Obama’s remarks yesterday did not seek to expand U.S. commitments in any specific way. The inferred policy in Iraq seems to be to back the local actors with limited, calibrated support. With the removal of Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki from power, the hope seems to be to leverage support to the Kurdish regional government and Baghdad to work together to fight the Islamic State and to keep Iraq together for now.

[VOTE: Should the U.S. Have Paid a Ransom for Foley?]

But for some this is not enough. For instance, retired Marine Corps General John Allen, the former commander of Central Command, has called for expanding support for the Iraqi Security Forces, the Kurds and the Free Syrian Army with more robust U.S. air support to destroy the Islamic State now. But others, such as terrorism analyst Brian Fishman, have warned that backing into a large-scale involvement against the Islamic State is unwise. In his words:

Advocating the defeat of [the Islamic State] over the short-term without acknowledging what will be necessary to achieve that end is a recipe for mission creep. Mission creep is a recipe for policy failure because the American people will not allow sustained investment in a policy they did not commit to originally. This is the most important strategic lesson from Iraq: Don’t bullshit the American people into a war with shifting objectives (even if those goals are important) because they will not put up with that commitment long enough for those goals to be achieved. This is not a call for pacifism; it is a call for fighting to win, which requires sustained commitment, which requires forthrightness in our discourse about whether to choose war. We should only fight if we are fighting to win, and we will only win when we commit as a country—not 51 percent, or the viewers of one cable news station or another, or because one party or faction has managed to back a president into a political corner. The country must be ready to accept the sacrifices necessary to achieve grand political ends. Until then, any call to “defeat ISIL” that is not forthright about what that will require is actually an argument for expensive failure.