My plunge into the world of ambulances, emergency rooms and minor surgery came without warning, like a trapdoor opening beneath my feet.

One second, I was skiing along happily in upstate New York’s Adirondack Mountains with my son and a group of friends. The next, I was writhing on the slope in pain — having wrenched my right leg in an awkward, slow-speed fall. In the blink of an eye, I went from a healthy and independent 52-year-old to a trauma victim in need of a lot of expert help from a lot of people.

What happened next gave me an upclose and personal view of a health care system that I’m more accustomed to writing about — and sometimes criticizing — from afar. I was pleasantly surprised.

The experience showed me U.S. medicine at its capable, caring best — and left me more convinced than ever that pushing hard for universal health coverage was the right thing for President Obama and Congress to do.

The crackerjack response began when Gore Mountain’s ski patrol showed up within a minute or two of my fall. A dozen or more people — a mix of paid pros, volunteers and trainees — checked my vital signs before lifting me onto a sled and sliding me carefully down the mountain to a first-aid station.

There, a second team moved me to a gurney, removed my ski boots, prodded my damaged leg, took down my insurance information — and brought in my skiing chums for a visit.

Next came an ambulance ride, courtesy of the local Johnsburg emergency squad, during which a friendly nurse kept me company in back and nagged the driver to take it easy on the bumps.

Forty-five minutes later, they rolled me into the emergency room at Glens Falls Hospital, where an X-ray confirmed that I had fractured my hip. Soon, a surgeon was offering to bolt it back together with three stainless steel screws — and breaking the news that I would be on crutches for the next six to eight weeks. He did the procedure the next day, and it seems to have worked as promised.

Meanwhile, a small army of nurses, aides, orderlies, patient representatives, care coordinators, physical therapists and occupational therapists gently peppered me with kind attention.

Now I know that a single fractured hip isn’t a perfect window into our endlessly complex, very expensive and deeply flawed, health care system. But every now and then, it’s worth tuning out the sky-is-falling crowd and appreciating what we’re doing right in the age of Obamacare.

Signs of reform in action were everywhere. Virtually everyone who approached me asked for my name and birth date and scanned a bar code on my ID bracelet — precautionary measures to avoid dangerous medication errors and other treatment mixups. The surgeon marked my injured hip with a felt-tip pen, to make doubly sure that he operated on the correct limb. Meanwhile, the staff was constantly using rubber gloves and hand sanitizer to guard against infections that have become a major cause of preventable illness and death.

Even before I went under the knife, a care coordinator was quizzing me about the home I would be returning to in temporarily disabled condition. How many steps to the backdoor? On what floor are the bedrooms and bathrooms?

This is exactly the kind of discharge planning hospitals should be doing — to avoid seeing their patients bounce back a few days after checking out.

They helped me order equipment for navigating the bathrooms and putting on my socks. They outfitted me with crutches and a walker and trained me in their safe use. They set me up with appointments for visiting nurses and physical therapists.

Virtually every caregiver was impeccably kind and considerate — never failing to ask how I was feeling, and always urging me to let them know when I needed anything.

Also crucial to my long-term well-being was my employer-sponsored health coverage, which should pay the bulk of the considerable tab.

Millions of uninsured Americans do not have that luxury. In an emergency, they would be entitled to the same topnotch care I got — but then face bills that would drain their savings or push them to bankruptcy.

Worse, they might delay seeking care for slower-moving medical crises, such as diabetes, multiple sclerosis or cancer — and drastically shorten their lives as a result.

For all its flaws, the Affordable Care Act is slowly working to end this national shame by giving all Americans access to affordable health coverage — which is the right thing to do.

No one should have to live outside the safety net that was there for me when I needed it. whammond@nydailynews.com