Gov. Scott Walker rejected federal funding, saying savings now could lead to great costs later. Mary Burke says that was a lost opportunity for the state.

By of the

Madison — Gov. Scott Walker and challenger Mary Burke offer voters distinct plans for the biggest health program in Wisconsin and the fastest-growing major cost for state taxpayers: go smaller and more on our own, or go bigger with money from federal taxpayers.

Last year, the Republican governor rejected taking federal incentives to expand the state's Medicaid programs, saying the deal risked entangling the state in exponentially growing future costs.

Burke, his leading Democratic opponent, has embraced the expansion. Walker's approach, she said, has meant that state taxpayers today are paying more to cover fewer people in the BadgerCare Plus health plan and the state's Medicaid fund now has a projected shortfall that could lead to more short-term cuts.

At the heart of the issue lies the question of how Wisconsin should handle the federal Affordable Care Act, often called Obamacare, which sought to persuade states to add health coverage by promising to pay all of their short-term and most of their long-term costs to do it.

Walker declined that offer, part of his strategy to limit the state's involvement in the ACA.

"Unlike other states, we did not accept the false choice of the federal government and — instead — created a Wisconsin solution," Walker said in a statement.

That decision by Walker was the first major policy that Burke promised to undo after announcing her run for governor.

"Scott Walker's decision was fiscally irresponsible and political. He cost the state millions of dollars and made health care less affordable. ... Accepting the Medicaid expansion should have been the most fiscally responsible decision that Governor Walker ever faced," Burke said in her own statement.

When it comes to BadgerCare, the stakes for Wisconsin are huge. It currently covers 781,657 people, the majority of them children, who depend on the program to pay for immunizations, medication to control chronic conditions like diabetes and even surgery.

But that comes with a cost. The state's overall Medicaid programs, which also serve nursing home patients and the disabled, will cost state taxpayers $4.78 billion over the current two-year budget, with federal taxpayers kicking in an even larger amount. Combining those long-term care programs with BadgerCare gives Medicaid more enrollees than any other health plan in Wisconsin.

Polling over the past year has shown Wisconsinites with a negative view of the Affordable Care Act. But that consistent disapproval doesn't necessarily extend to the Medicaid expansion.

An October 2013 Marquette University Law School poll found that 56% of registered voters backed using the federal money to expand Medicaid, while 36% opposed it. The law school hasn't polled on the issue since then.

Walker's approach expanded coverage through BadgerCare for the poorest adults in Wisconsin without coverage — those making less than $23,850 a year for a family of four — while dropping it for others making just above that amount.

So far, BadgerCare has added about 97,500 adults without children who were below this cutoff of 100% of the federal poverty level, with state taxpayers covering a little more than 40% of the cost and federal money paying the rest. Meanwhile, the state has dropped about 57,000 adults from BadgerCare with incomes between 100% and 133% of the poverty level.

The governor said last year that the great majority of those adults losing their BadgerCare would receive subsidized coverage by buying it on the private market or through an online federal marketplace created under the ACA. So far, only about one in three has done that.

Under Obamacare, federal taxpayers would have paid 100% of the cost for the adults that the state is bringing onto BadgerCare if Wisconsin hadn't dropped its coverage of the adults with somewhat higher incomes. The federal government's share eventually would drop to 90% of the cost.

The decision to reject that federal money is estimated to have a net cost to the state of more than $100 million in the current two-year budget. That doesn't include $59 million in unexpected costs in BadgerCare Plus the Walker administration will have to cut by June to help balance the Medicaid budget.

The extra federal money would have allowed the state to cover an estimated 84,700 more people through BadgerCare.

State Health Services spokeswoman Stephanie Smiley said the Walker administration isn't yet ready to say how much and what kind of cuts are needed.

Jon Peacock, research director of the Wisconsin Council on Children and Families and an opponent of Walker's approach, isn't satisfied with that.

"I feel very strongly that the Department (of Health Services) should tell us what they're going to cut and weigh that against taking the federal funding," Peacock said.

Walker and other Republicans dispute the idea that taking the federal money will save Wisconsin taxpayers money, arguing the nation's growing debt may prevent the federal government from paying in the future and the state could end up paying for the additional patients.

"We provide health care access to everyone living in poverty, help transition those above poverty into the marketplace, reduce the number of uninsured and limit the future risk to Wisconsin taxpayers," Walker said.

Democrats respond that Wisconsin could likely pull out of the Medicaid expansion if the federal government doesn't hold up its end of the deal, pointing to a memo prepared last month by the nonpartisan Wisconsin Legislative Council. These Walker critics note that some GOP governors in states such as Ohio, New Jersey, Michigan and Arizona accepted the Medicaid expansion.

At the moment, there also are questions about the funding for the subsidized insurance available through the health exchanges run by the federal government after a U.S. appeals court in Washington, D.C., issued a ruling blocking those specific subsidies.

That ruling may not prevail in the U.S. Supreme Court, but if it does it would include the exchange in Wisconsin, where Walker and GOP lawmakers chose to let the federal government build the marketplace.

"After looking at all options, a majority of governors, both Democrat and Republican, chose not to do so," Walker said of building an exchange. "A state exchange would have been state-run in name only with dictates coming from the federal government. Wisconsin taxpayers would have been on the hook."

Burke has criticized that decision, but unlike with the Medicaid plan, she hasn't committed to undoing it.

"I'm confident that the courts will uphold the cost-saving measures and if they don't, I am open to establishing a Wisconsin exchange if that is the most fiscally responsible way to expand access to quality, affordable health insurance," Burke said.