His speech was billed as a farewell address, but when Texas Gov. Rick Perry took the stage before thousands of Texans at the state Republican convention last week, it sounded a whole lot more like someone rehearsing a presidential stump speech than a politician ready to kiss the spotlight goodbye.

“The national Democrats think Texas is the next battleground. Well let’s be really clear: Texas will be their political burial ground,” he said, bringing the crowd to its feet.

[READ: Rick Perry Compares Homosexuality To Alcoholism]

But everything’s big in Texas – including presidential ambitions – and Perry’s not the only man in the state eyeing a White House bid in 2016. At the same convention, freshman Texas Sen. Ted Cruz was everywhere, speaking to women’s groups, an anti-gay group and reporters. He delivered his own fiery speech with his signature opening line, “I spent all week in Washington, D.C., and it is great to be back in America.”

Cruz then spent hours shaking hands and signing autographs beside his exhibition booth, which may have aided his eventual victory in the convention's presidential straw poll. He topped the 14-person field with 43 percent of the vote. Even with a home state advantage, Perry came in fourth after Dr. Ben Carson of Maryland and Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul.

“In Texas, Ted Cruz has effectively eclipsed Rick Perry,” says Mark Jones, a political science professor at Rice University.

In the 2016 race for the White House, many wonder if the Lone Star State is big enough for the rising star and his more establishment rival?

Ideologically, it’s hard to draw many distinctions between Perry and Cruz: both are unabashedly conservative and rail against Obamacare, hitting the high notes in forums with social conservatives.

But Cruz and Perry represent a fault line within the GOP that reaches beyond the simple tea party versus establishment narrative. The difference between them comes down to governing. Cruz may run for president as the man willing to fight no matter the political costs, as exhibited by the 17-day federal government shutdown he inspired. Perry, on the other hand, is in a position to parachute into the race as the governor who isn’t scared to put up a fight as long as he knows he can actually win the battle at hand.

“Perry has been a pitch perfect campaigner in Texas, but has also had to govern, and really to govern as a statewide elected official,” says Cal Jillson, a political scientist based at Southern Methodist University in Dallas. “Cruz has never given a thought to governance.”

On Perry’s watch, Texas has soared to the top of the list as the country’s fastest job creator. He’s ticked off fellow governors by personally luring businesses to Texas by keeping corporate taxes low.

[ALSO: U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz Renounces Canadian Citizenship]

Meanwhile Cruz leans on his rhetoric and stirs up his base with big applause lines. After two years in Washington, he’s managed to maintain his reputation as a lawmaker on the outside. There is no doubting that Cruz is the future of Texas, a state where anti-establishment candidates have found their stride.

“Cruz has changed the game in Texas,” says Matt Mackowiak, a Texas-based Republican strategist. “He wrote the playbook for a whole new generation of conservative candidates.”

Cruz’s victory in 2012 set the foundation this year. Tea party candidates have taken over nearly every statewide office in the state.

“It seems the more experience you have, the longer you have been in the legislature, the longer you have been in Washington, the more suspect your views,” says Jim McGrath, a Republican communications consultant in the state. "Some of the shake-up is also ambition. We have had a pent-up demand for statewide office."

Cruz is the reason state Sen. Dan Patrick was able to clinch the nomination for lieutenant governor against incumbent David Dewhurst. He’s the reason tea party-backed state Sen. Ken Paxton ran away with the Republican nomination for attorney general. And why Sid Miller won the nomination for agriculture commissioner against moderate Tommy Merritt. On the state level, even the Texas Senate has lost its moderate members laying the stage for an explosive 2015 legislative session that promises to be even more conservative than the state’s seen in the past. If Texas was red in 2012, it’s on its way to burgundy by 2016.

Nationally, though, the Republican Party is itching to go in a different direction. The establishment has been fighting back this primary season, something it may need to do again in 2016. Scarred from a bitter GOP 2012 presidential primary campaign that left their eventual nominee battered and bruised, national Republicans are likely to treasure experience above insurgency in 2016.

“At a certain point even the voters who discount experience today will want to see leadership translated into policy,” says Ray Sullivan, who served as Perry’s spokesman in the 2012 presidential campaign. “I am confident that the next presidential campaign that will be a central piece of the debate in the Republican Party.”

At this point, Perry’s got the resume, but he has yet to prove he can handle the challenges of a race. In a presidential contest that could to be crowded with sharp and seasoned governors, Perry has an uphill climb to distinguish himself. A series of flubs on the 2012 campaign trail made Perry a laughing stock. He forgot where he was at times on the stump and forgot what federal agencies he wanted to shed from the budget on the debate stage.

"I'm sure glad I had my boots on because I sure stepped in it out there," he told reporters after he failed to articulate that he would cut the Department of Energy, as well as Commerce and Education.

Perry supporters argue the best candidates often after run more than once before they seal the nomination. It was true of Mitt Romney and Ronald Reagan. Last time, they say Perry got into the game too late and gave his staff inadequate time to prepare. As a result of a back surgery, they say he physically was struggling to keep up with the grueling pace of a campaign.

Now Perry must rebuild his reputation nationwide. That’s why he’s been on the road. He’s been to Iowa three times in six months. In South Carolina, the state where he both joined the presidential fray and dropped out in 2011, he’s returned to shore up ties. He’s not been to New Hampshire yet, but in May, he invited state leaders from the Granite State to join him in Texas on his turf. He has proved he’s more articulate than he was before. This year alone, his black horn-rimmed glasses have made the rounds on Fox News, “Crossfire” and “Jimmy Kimmel Live.”

“His strong performance in office in Texas and in the national media spotlight has led many Republicans to give him a strong second look,” says Sullivan, his former flack. “He is more in command, confident and forceful than he has ever been. That is particularly important and impressive given where he was when the race ended in 2012.”

But yet again, Cruz is clipping at his heels. The freshman senator has dropped by Iowa four times in eight months, addressed home schooling groups and pheasant hunted with some of the influential Republicans in the state. He’s been to South Carolina and New Hampshire three times each, and been jet-setting to California and New York to attract high-rolling donors.