NEW YORK, N.Y., Feb. 9, 2016 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- via PRWEB - As New World Medical Network and Endeavor Plus Services, Inc begin working together to offer members quality healthcare options, New World's President and CEO, Cathy Nenninger stated "We are excited to share our platform with such a visionary team of professionals. Endeavor Plus has entered the market at a pivotal time in healthcare and clearly understands the additional value we can offer their members who elect to travel for treatment to quality destinations."

"To truly offer a best-in-class consumer centric healthcare solution, providing our members choice is critical. By partnering with New World, our members now have distinct options when shopping on where to obtain their care" shared Endeavor Plus' Executive Vice President Business Development, Daniel Wells.

Endeavor Plus is a fully-integrated healthcare solution that provides small / medium sized employers with Third Party Administrative services for the implementation of a consumer-driven health plan. The plan offers comprehensive major medical health insurance/stop-loss reinsurance with funded Health Savings Accounts and is complemented with a number of comprehensive voluntary employee benefits and a national network of medical providers which employees can access as they choose.

Endeavor has created a sustainable ERISA & HIPAA compliant major medical health insurance solution for the small / medium sized employers that, over time, is significantly less costly than the fully insured legacy carrier health insurance plans offered by the Affordable Care Act today.

New World Medical Tourism LLC (New World), is run by experienced healthcare and insurance professionals and caters to the self-insured marketplace - TPAs, companies, municipalities, and unions - with its one-cost, all-inclusive approach to non-emergent medical procedures and surgeries called "One Price HealthcareTM." The New World Network consists of high quality, accredited medical facilities within the United States often saving organizations 50% off average historical costs. The program overlays existing health plans, achieved with a simple amendment to the plan document; there is no need for open enrollment and the program can be implemented at any time. New World can be reached at 800-475-PATIENT (7284) or by visiting NewPatient.Net

This article was originally distributed on PRWeb. For the original version including any supplementary images or video, visit http://www.prweb.com/releases/2016/02/prweb13205408.htm

New World Medical Network Cathy Nenninger +1 (631) 909-8538