'I don’t think we should throw the baby out with the bath,' Clinton says. Clinton defends Obamacare

Hillary Clinton offered a defense of Obamacare — but struck a note of concern for small-business owners who’ve complained about mandates required by the law — in a twin set of speeches in Florida on Wednesday.

“I think we are on the right track in many respects but I would be the first to say if things aren’t working then we need people of good faith to come together and make evidence-based changes,” Clinton said at the first event, the Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society conference in Orlando, Fla., according to CNN.

Story Continued Below

The event was closed to the press, but people could buy tickets and attend.

( PHOTOS: Hillary Clinton’s 50 influentials)

Clinton highlighted the problems voiced by people owning a “small business of 50 or more” as well as those “moving people from full-time work to part-time work to try to avoid contributing to their health care,” CNN reported.

Those are the very voters who Democrats are concerned about appealing to in the midterm elections and to whom the most targeted messaging on the Affordable Care Act is taking place.

“Part of the challenge is to clear away all the smoke and try to figure out what is working and what isn’t,” Clinton said. “What do we need to do to try to fix this? Because it would be a great tragedy, in my opinion, to take away what has now been provided.”

“This is going to be challenging and I don’t think we should throw the baby out with the bath,” she added, according to CNN, saying the debate has been rife with “misinformation.”

She struck a far folksier tone on Wednesday evening in talking about health care to a group of students at the University of Miami, where she engaged in a question-and-answer session with former Clinton-era Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala. Hillary Clinton and Shalala, the university’s president, worked together on health care reform in the early 1990s, a fact Shalala referenced by mentioning the “bruises” the two still have from that battle.

( PHOTOS: Hillary Clinton’s life, career)

She asked Clinton to explain to the students why they needed health care, and in a personal style reminiscent of her husband’s, she described the vastly better system the “so-called millennial generation” is entering into.

“On a very personal, self-interested basis, you should have health insurance to protect yourself and your families from unpredictable costs that none of us know will be striking whenever,” she said. “You can’t sit here today and tell me for sure you won’t have a car accident, you won’t have a slip or a fall, you won’t have some kind of disease that you never thought you’d ever be stricken by.”

She added that the “vast majority of young people will get through their 20s” without such a fate. But “a significant minority percentage of you will not. You don’t know what category you’re in.”

Clinton said the costs to everyone goes down with an expanded pool of insured people, and she reflected on her own life lessons.

“You don’t have to take a job, as so many people in my generation did, just to have health insurance,” said Clinton, who has never been able to connect with crowds the way her husband does, but who talked in personal details to try to capture the students’ attention. “I know so many friends from literally high school, college, who stayed in jobs for decades because they had a spouse with a preexisting condition and they couldn’t afford to lose the job they had. You will be liberated from that.”

( Also on POLITICO: Full health care policy coverage)

“Many of you are now covered because under it, up to the age of 26, your parents get to keep you on their policies. That wasn’t the case a few years ago,” Clinton added to applause.

Earlier, Clinton gave a 20-minute speech that laid out potential themes of a future stump talk, focusing on inclusion and participation in society — regardless of race, religion or sexual orientation — as a means for improving the country. That’s almost certain to be part of a message for a likely candidate who is many decades older than the younger voters who eluded her in her 2008 campaign.

Clinton did not attempt to connect to the students on false notes, and her repeated references to “your generation” and “young people” underscored the age gap. But it also contrasted with the scripted, often stilted version of Clinton who appeared at events in 2008.

She invoked gay rights, acknowledging that Arizona Gov. Jan Brewer had moments earlier vetoed a controversial anti-gay bill in her state, “recognizing that inclusive leadership is really what the 21st century is all about.”

Clinton went on to talk about the early days of the United States, adding that “a good number of us would not have been qualified as citizens. I certainly wouldn’t have. Nor would President [Barack] Obama.”

She recalled meeting Martin Luther King Jr. and working on civil rights, saying there needed to be equality “no matter your religion, your ethnicity, or whom you love.”

“No one can or should sit on the sidelines,” she said, adding later, “You are living and breathing the ethic of participation. I hope that your generation will be a true participation generation. I hope that you will find ways to make sure that the barriers that divide us too often are … torn down.”

She called for an end to partisan rancor, a theme she’s struck frequently since she left the State Department early last year.

On other topics, Clinton:

• Expressed disappointment at the situation in Venezuela.

“We were very involved in supporting a free press in Venezuela,” she said, adding, “The protests that are going on … are demanding … a more inclusive government, a government that makes policy based on evidence not ideology.”

“The United States certainly is concerned with and invested in better relationships” in the Americas, she said. But “Venezuela is a difficult situation because it’s a country that’s not being well-governed. … It’s a situation we’ve given a lot of thought to but are not yet seeing changes being made at the top that will help Venezuela get back on the right track.”

• Said she was surprised, when she was first named secretary of State, by how interested people in other countries were “about my relationship with President Obama.”

When she appeared on an Indonesian version of MTV, she said, she was told by the interviewer, “We watched the campaign, it was so hard.”

“I said yeah, yeah, tell me about it, I lived it,” she said, adding that she served because she loves her country.

• Remains concerned about the situation in Syria.

“The agreement that the Assad regime entered into to disable and remove the chemical weapons stocks was a positive step, but it has not been fulfilled,” she said. “There has not been the level of cooperation … of the chemical procurers and weapon stocks that we had expected at this time.”

She added, “The fact is indisputable we have not done yet what Assad promised would be done, and so we have to stay focused on getting the chemical weapons stocks out of Syria.”

But “the broader question about Syria is one of the most difficult to answer because it is a multisided conflict,” she said. Things were done differently in Libya in part because it “had a very weak air defense system. … Syria has one of the most extensive air defense systems, and elements of it are embedded in populated areas, so trying to do that would be extremely difficult and likely to cause civilian casualties.”

• Declined to elaborate on the “TBD” in her Twitter biography.

“I’d really like to, but I have no characters left,” she said. “I will certainly ponder that.”