Wealthy trial lawyers could very well end up being the unsung heroes of Illinois residents who earn only the minimum wage.

Why? It's all about leverage.

Ever since GOP candidate Bruce Rauner was caught saying he would cut the state's minimum wage, or even abolish it altogether, he has claimed that he really wants to increase the minimum wage to $10 an hour, but only if it's tied to things like tort reform and an overhaul of the state's workers' compensation program.

Trial lawyers make their money by suing people and corporations, whether it's a doctor who allegedly committed malpractice, a corporation that allegedly polluted a local water supply or a company that employed a worker injured on the job.

The state's legal system has been kind to them. They don't want change. Tort reform and changes to workers' comp would hit them right where it counts—in the wallet.

By a 2-to-1 ratio, voters supported a nonbinding referendum on Election Day that asked: “Shall the minimum wage in Illinois for adults over the age of 18 be raised to $10 per hour by January 1, 2015?”

The day after the election, Gov. Pat Quinn announced that he wanted to make the “will of the people the law of the land” by pushing for a hike in the current minimum wage of $8.25 an hour during the upcoming legislative session.

Gov.-elect Rauner then demanded that the General Assembly avoid all major issues until he's sworn in Jan. 12, particularly the minimum wage proposal. He repeated his plan to use the minimum wage hike as leverage to obtain much-needed business reforms.

And that's why I expect the Illinois Trial Lawyers Association to lobby heavily for a minimum wage increase. Take away Mr. Rauner's leverage and he'll have to bargain using some other super-popular issue. If the trial lawyers succeed, they won't kill his effort to pass business reforms, but they will at least temporarily hobble it and send a powerful message: “Don't trifle with us.”

Democratic Senate President John Cullerton has said he will consult with his members before committing to raising the minimum wage. If passed before Jan. 1, the increase won't take effect until June 1 according to the Illinois Constitution.

His membership is quite liberal, so it's likely they'll want to go forward.

House Speaker Michael Madigan is a different story. He always has been politically allied with the Illinois Retail Merchants Association. The group, whose members include Wal-Mart Stores Inc. and the corner grocer, definitely is opposed to raising the minimum wage.

But Mr. Madigan got big-time help from labor unions this year, including some unions (such as the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees) that haven't contributed to him in many a year. He told the Chicago Tribune Nov. 13 that he's “encouraging” his members to vote for the minimum wage hike.

Organized labor and the trial lawyers often are on the same side, and unions do not want any cuts of any kind to workers' comp. They also don't want to end up negotiating against themselves if it comes time to choose which cuts in workers' comp payments they'll take in order to hike the minimum wage.

The House and Senate Republican leaders will push hard against any effort to increase the minimum wage before Mr. Rauner takes off. They won't want to undercut their new party leader. The same goes for the business lobby.

So, the main focus will be on Democrats, some of whom may have been spooked by how unexpectedly close some legislative races were on Nov. 4.

But in the end, if the minimum wage is increased, thousands of low-wage workers may end up thanking some trial lawyer living in a lakefront mansion.

A contributing columnist to Crain's, Rich Miller publishes Capitol Fax, a daily political newsletter, and CapitolFax.com.