Week in Review

Administration Action on Opioid, Heroin Treatment

President Obama traveled to Georgia on Tuesday to announce new steps the administration would take to fight opioid and heroin abuse, all using funding that has already been appropriated by Congress.

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services finalized a rule requiring insurers to cover mental health and substance abuse disorders at parity with other medical services. The Department of Health and Human Services also issued a proposed rule to raise the patient limit for physicians prescribing buprenorphine, a medication-assisted treatment for opioid abuse.

Dozens of medical schools also announced they would participate by requiring students to take prescriber education starting next fall.

Several of these proposals have been floated by lawmakers over the past several months, but by using already-appropriated funds, the administration will avoid a funding battle with congressional Republicans.

HHS Presses Holdout States on Medicaid Expansion

The Department of Health and Human Services unveiled a study this week showing states that chose to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act were better prepared to treat behavioral health issues, and encouraged holdout states to expand.

But just one new state announced it would expand the program this year. Other states, such as Arkansas, are seeking waivers that become available in January to nontraditionally expand Medicaid there.

Supreme Court Asks for Solutions in Contraception Case

The Supreme Court asked both parties in Zubik v. Burwell, the challenge to the Affordable Care Act’s contraception mandate that the court heard last month, to file a brief this month suggesting a solution to the main question of the case.

The court floated one possible solution in the order, whether the petitioner would contract to provide private insurance to their employees, and tell the insurer at that time that the company does not wish to cover contraception.

CMS Turns Focus to Risk Adjustment, Uniting Industry Groups

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services held a meeting on risk adjustment this week, a topic that has actually united the pharmaceutical and insurance industries.

Both groups are in support of prescription drug costs being included in the risk adjustment formula, which CMS floated in a recent white paper. While the Obama administration has not yet taken a firm stance on the issue, the white paper discusses pros and cons of the idea, and CMS’s initial statements seem encouraging.