Mayor: Private rentals 'not a practical expectation' for most council members

Bob Yates

Boulder City Councilman Bob Yates has rented his own council office downtown and is holding open office hours there Mondays and Tuesdays.

"I've been hired by the community to be their representative and to serve them, and I believe I can't serve them well unless I'm listening to them," said Yates, who took office Nov. 17. "And one way to do that is to be there physically."

Boulder's nine City Council members have access to an office in the Boulder Municipal Building, 1777 Broadway. It has a table and six chairs and a desk with a computer and a phone.

City spokeswoman Sarah Huntley said the office gets reserved about four times a month, and council members will stop in to use the computer and do some work in between meetings more often than that, though the office use isn't tracked closely.

Council members also meet constituents in their homes, at community meetings and at coffee shops.

"We all meet with constituents," said Councilwoman Mary Young. "I try to meet people where it's convenient to them. Parking can be hard downtown. I try to meet people where they are at rather than make them come to me."

Young said she lauds Yates' effort to be available to constituents, but many members of the council have full- or part-time jobs around which they have to fit their meetings.

"Speaking for myself, it does put others in an awkward position," she said.

Advertisement

Yates, who is retired from Level 3 Communications, said it's not the first time he's kept a private office. He had a different space in the same building, the Broadway Suites at 1200 Pearl St., for his work with nonprofit organizations before moving on to the Museum of Boulder, where, as a member of the museum's board, he served as a caretaker during its renovation.

Yates said he prefers to have a place to work outside the house. He also wanted a space where he could put up pictures, have his own computer and hold meetings before 8 a.m. or after 5 p.m.

"Council for me is my full-time job," he said. "I get up in the morning and put on my socks and shoes and go to work. Almost 100 percent of my time will be dedicated to council business."

Yates said the office costs $800 a month, roughly equal to his council pay of $206 per meeting for four meetings a month.

"Everything I get paid gets reinvested in the community, and I think that's appropriate," he said.

Yates said he plans to be in the office most of the day on Mondays and Tuesdays, but he encourages constituents to call ahead at 720-310-5829 or email yatesb@bouldercolorado.gov.

Yates is not the only new council member who has looked for additional work space.

Councilman Aaron Brockett, who owns a small software company with his wife in north Boulder, has a desk at the co-working space Impact Hub Boulder, 1877 Broadway, Suite 100, near Broadway and Walnut.

Brockett has held open office hours there once and said he expects to announce additional office hours from time to time on Twitter, where his handle is @AaronBrockett12.

Brockett said having space to work downtown helps him keep in touch with an important constituency in a more central location.

"It gave me an option for something that I could use at any time," he said. "Sometimes I have 45 minutes between two meetings, and I want a place to set up. I also felt it had a synergy with some of the tech and entrepreneurial people, and I wanted to keep in contact with them."

Access to the co-working space costs $75 a month. Brockett said he is paying that personally.

Mayor Suzanne Jones said she has always found the available office space in the city building to be adequate, and meeting with constituents in coffee shops and neighborhoods allows her to visit different parts of the city.

Jones said Yates clearly has good intentions, but his rental of a private office downtown raises questions about the nature of serving on council.

"I appreciate the sentiment, but it gets at the larger question of who can afford to serve on council and whether it's a volunteer position or not," she said. "It would not be a practical expectation for almost all council members."

Yates said his decision to keep a private office allows him to work the way he prefers but it shouldn't be taken as an indictment of how his colleagues operate.

"They meet with people in different ways," he said. " For me, this just made the most sense."

Erica Meltzer: 303-473-1355, meltzere@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/meltzere