Governor Chris Christie discusses heroin addiction and Narcan with, clockwise from Governor, overdose survivors Daniel Watkins, Justin Jones, Wayne Frascella; Toms River Patrolman Frank Moschella, Mercer County Executive Director Brian Hughes and Rescue Mission of Trenton Executive Director Mary Gay Abbott-Young before a press conference to announce the statewide expansion of the Narcan pilot program to help reduce the number of heroin-related deaths by training and equipping police officers and first responders to administer the antidote Narcan to overdose victims while at the Rescue Mission in Trenton, N.J. on Tuesday, June 17, 2014. (Governor's Office/Tim Larsen) (Photo: Tim Larsen, Tim Larsen) Story Highlights Since the program was rolled out in Monmouth and Ocean and expanded to Camden County a few months ago, it’s credited with helping save more than 40 lives

Marlboro Police Chief Bruce Hall said his officers helped save a life within a week after completing training counter heroin addiction

Since the program was rolled out in Monmouth and Ocean and expanded to Camden County a few months ago, it’s credited with helping save more than 40 lives with “reversals’’ performed by certified EMTs and EMT-trained police officers

The opportunity to prevent a drug overdose death a month ago is having a lasting impact on Frank Moschella, a young Toms River police officer.

And Moschella concedes that timing was everything: He wouldn’t have been able to intervene effectively prior to the recent launch of a program at the Jersey Shore that has equipped police officers and first responders to administer the antidote Narcan to overdose victims.

“I had a gentleman who had overdosed, a gentleman who had been known to use narcotics, especially heroin,” Moschella said. “I was able to save his life and give him another opportunity at life.

“Hopefully he’ll make better choices and better decisions.”

Moschella and others from law enforcement and addiction specialists attended a press conference Tuesday at the Rescue Mission of Trenton, where Gov. Chris Christie announced that the effort to help reduce the number of heroin-related deaths begun in Ocean and Monmouth counties is getting a statewide expansion.

Police officers and first responders in all 21 counties now will be trained in how to administer the nasally injected Narcan antidote to overdose victims.

Further, the New Jersey State Police has ordered 900 of the recovery kits, with Superintendent Col. Rick Fuentes promising that the kits “will be part of the equipment that every trooper will take when they go out on a patrol shift.”

It’s part of a developing trend as more police departments across the nation are turning to Naloxone, commonly known for its trademark Narcan. In Quincy, Mass., police officers have carried Naloxone since October 2010.

Narcan dose packs typically cost $25 each and other equipment, such as medical gloves and syringe-atomizer, brings the total cost of a Narcan kit to $50.

Officials say there have been 41 “saves” in Ocean County since the program was rolled out in April. Monmouth’s launch this month has resulted in two more recoveries and Camden County, another early participant, has 16.

Marlboro Police Chief Bruce Hall said it won’t take long to see the impact when the program starts elsewhere in the state. Hall said his officers helped save a life within a week after department training was completed.

“We deployed June 2, and five days and two hours later, we had our first save,” Hall said. “It’s something we weren’t able to do last year and we lost three of our residents. It’s difficult to sit there and face the families, especially when two of these people were 21 and 22 years old. It’s heartbreaking to tell the parents their child isn’t coming home.”

Christie in his remarks called the national war on drugs an “abject failure.” He said breaking the cycle of addiction remains a priority, as is acting “to prevent a loss, to prevent an unthinkable tragedy.”

“Back in March, we empowered 28,000 EMTs throughout the state by allowing them to administer Narcan. As a result, police officers and EMTs are now trained to be equipped to administer the antidote to overdose victims,” he said.

“We have the ability to prevent this type of tragedy and save lives,” said Christie, who also met with recovering addicts being treated at the Rescue Mission, including former Edison resident Daniel Watkins, 33.

Watkins said he’s never been administered Narcan, “but I have been in situations where friends and family have had the drug administered to them,” he said.

Those who are saved from overdose episodes “need the proper outlet to get to a different place in life,” Watkins said. “They need to be able to walk through that door to treatment for addiction or mental help. If you don’t have that opportunity, you’re going to have the same result.”

Watkins earlier shared his thoughts with Christie.

“If you were asking me about him five years ago, given my drug use, I would have said, ‘Governor who?’ But I’m glad to say with the help of counselors and family and friends, I’ve been clean and am actually doing something to change my life,” he said.

The state Department of Human Services is also working on creating a so-called bystander program to train relatives and friends of users how to use Narcan, based roughly on an established program in Massachusetts that has in some areas reduced overdose death rates by nearly 50 percent.

In Monmouth County, the Prosecutor’s Office purchased an initial 300 units of Narcan, which have been distributed to the police departments. The doses were paid for with money confiscated from drug dealers in a series of investigations conducted by the prosecutor’s office with local law enforcement agencies. Ocean County has also tapped forfeiture money.

Contributing: Staff writer Dustin Racioppi Bob Jordan 609-984-4343, bjordan@app.com

Ocean County documented a record 112 drug overdose deaths in 2013, and 21 drug overdose deaths were linked to heroin for the first two months of this year. In Monmouth County, there were 61 heroin-related deaths in 2013, and 13 through February of this year.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1qa51CH