School-based clinics play expanding role





Photo: Autumn Driscoll / Hearst Connecticut Media Image 1 of / 2 Caption Close Image 1 of 2 Buy photo Registered Dental Hygienist Marissa DeCarli, of Trumbull, helps Megan Casey, of Southbury, give a student a cleaning Thursday at the Tisdale School dental hygiene clinic run by the Fones School of Dental Hygiene at the University of Bridgeport. The clinic provides free dental checkups and low-cost oral health services for children at Tisdale Elementary School in Bridgeport. less Registered Dental Hygienist Marissa DeCarli, of Trumbull, helps Megan Casey, of Southbury, give a student a cleaning Thursday at the Tisdale School dental hygiene clinic run by the Fones School of Dental ... more Photo: Autumn Driscoll / Hearst Connecticut Media Buy this photo Image 2 of 2 Buy photo Melissa Krebbs, of Stratford, left, consults with Marissa DeCarli, of Trumbull, Thursday, Sept. 24, 2015, on a patient's x-rays at the Tisdale School dental hygiene clinic run by the Fones School of Dental Hygiene at the University of Bridgeport. The clinic provides free dental checkups and low cost oral health services for children at Tisdale Elementary School in Bridgeport. less Melissa Krebbs, of Stratford, left, consults with Marissa DeCarli, of Trumbull, Thursday, Sept. 24, 2015, on a patient's x-rays at the Tisdale School dental hygiene clinic run by the Fones School of Dental ... more Photo: Autumn Driscoll / Hearst Connecticut Media Buy this photo School-based clinics play expanding role 1 / 2 Back to Gallery

Tisdale is poised to become the 15th Bridgeport school at which students can get an education and a throat culture under the same roof.

With the new Tisdale School-based health center, nearly half the students in the district will have access to virtually free health care at their schools, and in many cases free dental care and mental health services as well.

“There is a need,” said Ludwig Spinelli, CEO of Optimus Health Care, one of two agencies that took over operation of the school-based clinics from the city health department in 2009.

The growth comes because even with Obamacare, a good chunk of city students remain uninsured, many because they are undocumented. At city schools where Southwest Community Health Center runs health clinics, as many as 26 percent of the students seen are uninsured, said Katherine S. Yacovone, president of Southwest.

Spinelli and Yacovone both say the only things keeping them from setting up shop in all city schools are space and resources.

Statewide, there are now 96 school-based health clinics licensed by the state Department of Public Health in 27 communities. In southwestern Connecticut, in addition to Bridgeport, there are school-based health clinics in Stamford, Norwalk, Stratford, Danbury, Ansonia, Milford and Newtown.

More Information By the numbers There are 13 school-based health clinics in city schools, soon to be 15. They include: Bassick High School, Central High School, Harding High School, Fairchild Wheeler High School, Blackham, Read, Roosevelt, Batalla, Columbus, Barnum/Waltersville, Dunbar, JFK Campus. In addition, a school-based health center is located in Bullard-Havens Technical High School in Bridgeport.

Spinelli received approval from the city school board to open the Tisdale clinic earlier this month. He now must await federal approval, which can take up to three months, then apply for a state license, which requires a site visit. He is optimistic that the clinic can start signing up children by the end of December. A dental clinic to be operated across town at Curiale School, which won board approval last winter, is still working on its approvals.

The cost to run the clinics is, for the most part, split between the state and the providers, who also tap federal grants and carriers of children who do have insurance. Combined, the clinics run by Optimus and Southwest get about $1.1 million from the state to operate.

Charmaine Worthy, principal at Tisdale School, can’t wait. Although dental services have been offered by the University of Bridgeport’s School of Dental Hygiene at Tisdale since 2008, the addition of Optimus means the services will be expanded. Worthy expects the clinic to help boost attendance, since students won’t have to skip school to go to checkups.

Marcia Lorentzen, dean of the Fones School of Dental Hygiene at UB, called the partnership a “win-win” for the 326 Tisdale students treated in the dental clinic last year.

“We have a very good working relationship with the nursing staff, teachers and Tisdale administrators,” Lorentzen said.

Liz Petrocelli, school nurse supervisor for the school district, is pleased, too. Even though starting this fall all city schools have a full-time nurse, an on-site health clinic can provide all or most of the services of a doctor’s office, including shots and prescriptions.

The health center at Tisdale will open part-time to start, with a nurse practitioner, social worker and medical assistant. The hope is that it will become full-time in short order, Spinelli said.

“We work well together,” Petrocelli said, adding that if she could pick the site for the next school-based health clinic, it would be Johnson School.

Worthy said she is excited because Tisdale has a large special-needs population and can use another health care provider to assist the school nurse.

“I am also excited that I will receive an additional social worker to assist with meeting the needs of my students,” Worthy said.

Mental health services are on the rise at many of the clinics. At three of the centers run by Southwest, a new program is starting, in consultation with the Department of Children and Families, to identify and treat children who have witnessed trauma.

“It depends on what the principal asks for,” said Spinelli of the services offered.

At the district’s JFK campus, which houses High Horizons and Multicultural Magnet Schools, for instance, there were 113 medical visits in the 2014-15 school year and 646 mental health visits, which generally means seeing a social worker. At Luis Munoz Marin School, there were 1,600 medical visits, 803 mental health visits and 134 dental visits.

To participate, students need only get parent permission. If the family has medical coverage, it is tapped, but if not, there is no charge to the family.

For many students, clinics serve as primary care providers, Yacovone said.