Improvements in the way cancer is identified and treated has resulted in more Americans surviving with the disease, shows a new study from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Now, 2 out of 3 people who have cancer survive five years or more.

Though cancer continues to be the second-leading cause of death in the U.S. (heart disease is the first) it increasingly is becoming a chronic illness that can be treated and lived with, rather than a death sentence.

The report confirms what members of the cancer community have known for some time, but gives clearer insight into geographic incidences of the disease, allowing researchers to pinpoint the greatest need and to provide adequate response.

"For the first time we have data on cancer survival for extended population coverage," says Rebecca Siegel, director of surveillance information in the Surveillance and Health Services Research Program for the American Cancer Society. Previous data collected on cancer covered 28 percent of the population, she says, while the latest report covers 71 percent.

[DATA: Americans Don't Know What Causes Cancer]

CDC analyzed data from 2011, the most recent available. Among the most common types of cancer, five-year relative survival was 97 percent for prostate cancer, 88 percent for breast cancer, 63 percent for colon cancer and 18 percent for lung cancer.

The geographic data allow the agency to see whether it is meeting its health targets, outlined in its Healthy People 2020 report. Data by state show incidence rates for all cancer sites ranged from 374 cases per 100,000 persons in New Mexico to 509 cases per 100,000 persons in the District of Columbia.

Still, the results also mean that the country will be managing a larger aging population, with more cases of cancer and more people living longer. This will create more demand on treatment facilities.

CDC has set several goals in combating cancer, and the data show it is achieving its goals of reducing colon cancer in 37 states and reducing cervical cancer rates in 28 states.

"We're making progress," Siegel says. "Cancer death rates are consistently declining so we are absolutely making progress against cancer. People are living with their cancer much longer than they did 20 or 30 years ago."

Dr. Lisa Richardson, division director of CDC's cancer prevention and control, says the country also is nearing its goals on lung cancer, particularly in decreasing smoking rates. The geographic outline, she says, is very telling. "Smoking prevalence overlies almost completely with cancer incidence," she says. The CDC data show that lung cancer incidences cluster in Southern and Midwestern states.

[MORE: Living With Breast Cancer – as a Man]

Though 16,000 to 24,000 Americans who have lung cancer have never smoked, tobacco use is a major risk factor for the disease. For other cancers, lack of exercise, poor diet and obesity are risk factors. For survivors of cancer, avoiding these lifestyle factors is important, Siegel says.

Cervical cancer rates also are outlined in the report, though Siegel says it is too early to determine whether the HPV vaccines, which protects against major strains of the virus that causes cervical cancer, have had an effect. The HPV test and PAP smears, however, have helped with early detection.

Data from the CDC report show that survival rates depend on the type of cancer and age at which someone is diagnosed. One finding Siegel says is concerning is that survival rates were 10 percentage points lower for breast cancer among black women than for white women. For all types of cancer, five-year relative survival after diagnosis was lower for blacks, at 60 percent, than for whites, at 65 percent.

Differences in survival after cancer diagnosis might be attributable to differences in type of cancer, stage at diagnosis, timeliness of follow-up after diagnosis, appropriate treatment after diagnosis or having a chronic condition, according to the report.

While some of the differences are due to more-aggressive breast cancer types among black women, Siegel says, much of it is due to lack of coverage and later diagnosis because of lack of access to health insurance and regular screening. The data collected do not take into account increased coverage through the Affordable Care Act, which went into effect in 2014, requiring Americans to get coverage and requiring health insurance companies to offer screenings at no cost to patients.