Health Republic Insurance of New York, the nation's largest co-op, is being ordered to wind down its business, becoming the fourth co-op created by the Affordable Care Act to fold.

The company, which has policies for more than 200,000 New Yorkers and owes the federal government more than a quarter billion dollars, will cover its members until the end of the year, but it won't write any new policies for 2016 and will be removed from the state's health insurance marketplace.

Federal and state regulators decided it was best for policyholders and the state's insurance marketplace for the co-op to wind down, given its likelihood of becoming insolvent, said Kevin Counihan, director and marketplace CEO for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, in a statement.

The announcement comes amid broad speculation that the co-ops — created by the Affordable Care Act to inject competition into state marketplaces — weren't given the capital they needed to succeed, and that the federal government could lose billions of dollars trying to create new insurers.

Health Republic had borrowed $265 million to begin operations. It is not yet clear how, or if, that money will be repaid.

The insurer reported $130 million in losses during its first 18 months of operations, according to financial filings, even as it enrolled more customers than any other insurer.

For consumers, the loss is more than an inconvenience. Health Republic offered one of the lowest premiums of any insurer on the exchange, and still provided a relatively broad network of providers.

Its success may have been its undoing.

The insurer's low premiums attracted roughly 20 percent of the New York market, but the company never had the reserves to cover all those members. From the beginning, many industry insiders wondered whether its offerings were too generous.

In 2014, insiders in Albany whispered that the novice insurer was pressuring the state's Department of Financial Services to approve much higher second-year rates, after rumors the low premiums in its first year had left its balance sheets in the red.

DFS did allow for a 13 percent increase in the second year and a 14 percent increase heading into 2016. Both were lower than what Health Republic requested, though, and were not enough to save the struggling insurer.

The Affordable Care Act had set up a $6 billion pot of money for co-ops to use for startup costs and as a solvency fund that would, in theory, buffer them against bad times. But Congress cut off the funding after the first $2.4 billion went to 23 co-ops, which meant Health Republic never had enough in its rainy-day fund to stay solvent.

"Starting a new insurance company is a daunting task in any environment, but the challenges placed on us by the structure of the Co-op program as enacted by a bitterly partisan Congress were simply too difficult to overcome," Health Republic said in a statement.

Further, Health Republic, like other co-ops, had to build an infrastructure from scratch, which meant nothing it did was in-house. It and other co-ops rented or leased vendors to manage almost all of their operations, which led to costly inefficiencies.

That also made it hard for Health Republic to prove to the federal government that its members were as sick as they actually were, because they didn't have the claims data to back up their case. And that meant they owed a far larger risk adjustment payment — set up by the Affordable Care Act so insurers that treated sicker people would be reimbursed by those who treated healthier people — than they expected.

"The risk adjustment and risk corridor programs, intended to help offset the unpredictability of risk and adverse selection for all insurers entering the marketplace, have hit many co-ops and other new insurers particularly hard, while simultaneously bolstering many large, established insurers," Kelly Crowe, CEO of the National Alliance of State Health co-ops, said in a statement.

The company also failed to estimate just how much it would cost to cover members in upstate New York, where residents are historically less healthy than those nearer to New York City. Board members' desire for statewide coverage proved too ambitious and costly, and earlier this year, Health Republic announced it was pulling out of upstate New York, unable to provide coverage there without substantially raising premiums.

Co-ops generally have also been hampered by the inability to draw on private capital — the result of a lack of guidance from the Obama administration on what was and was not allowed.

Co-ops in Iowa, Louisiana and Nevada have also gone out of business or announced plans to, and all but four of the co-opsreported losses at the end of the second quarter this year.

“From practically their inception, health insurance co-ops have been hamstrung by both the structure of the program and the way in which the Affordable Care Act was implemented," Crowe said. "Though it has become clear that initial capitalization levels for most co-ops were insufficient for the short term, regulatory obstacles have continued to make it virtually impossible for these co-ops to raise additional third party capital to support growth."

Health Republic was dealt its death blow when it became clear that the Affordable Care Act's risk corridor program would not be fully funded, said one source familiar with the company's finances. A report from Standard & Poor's in May said the program had only 10 percent of the funds needed to make payments.

The risk corridor program is supposed to act as insurance for insurers, letting those companies that lost money reclaim some capital from those companies that were profitable. Health Republic was owed approximately $147 million but was told by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to expect less than half that, the source said.

But CMS spokesman Aaron Albright said the state and federal government had determined that insolvency was likely no matter what Health Republic received from the risk corridor program.

"Our joint conclusion took into account all financial factors, including potential risk corridor receivables and other proposals from the company. Combining all financial and operational factors, including current losses and 2016 final rates, financial insolvency was still a high likelihood," he said. "This would have caused significant disruption to current policyholders."

--additional reporting by Laura Nahmias, Josefa Velasquez and Katie Jennings