Trevor Story slipped into a baseball life as a kid in Texas, skipping from one dusty diamond to another, and wherever he stood, whether he hit a home run or struck out, there was always a cheese dip waiting at the end of the day.

So 10 days before he launched himself into the talk of baseball with two lofty home runs against Arizona’a Zack Greinke on opening day, Story was lunching at a Chili’s.

“Yeah, I love it. I grew up going there,” Story said. “It’s familiar and comfortable. I’d go there a lot with my family. I’d go there with my grandpa a lot before he died. He was a big part of my life. And I think they have good food. The queso is my favorite.”

Baseball falls into an easy routine. Every game follows the same convention. Everyone bats in order. Players rely on normal. And occasionally, the ordinary swivels into extraordinary. Justin Morneau ate the same Jimmy John’s turkey sandwich before every home game in his 2007 MVP season in Minnesota.

Story, the Rockies’ 23-year-old rookie shortstop, set home run records through his first two weeks in the big leagues before he even unpacked the boxes of his new life in Denver. He’s still living in a hotel. But a queso dip is never too far away.

“It’s a crazy life to live, on the road all the time,” Story said. “Everything is routine with baseball, even outside life. It’s good to stick with it.”

Legendary way for Trevor Story to start

Story’s seven home runs through his first six major-league games broke the record of six held by Willie Mays, Mike Schmidt and Larry Walker. “That’s something that legends do,” Rockies right fielder Carlos Gonzalez said.

The previous 24 players who hit five or more home runs in the first six games of a season averaged 35 homers by season’s end, according to ESPN, led by Luis Gonzalez’s 57 in 2001. Story, a 2011 first-round draft pick, is now the talk of the town in Denver. Storefront signs dot downtown with his projected home run totals.

“The attention that Trevor Story is getting not only has gone national, it probably crosses solar systems,” Rockies manager Walt Weiss said last week. “If (there’s life) out there, they’re talking about Trevor Story.”

But in horn-rimmed glasses and a hat, Story still goes unnoticed eating breakfast around town. “I feel in control,” he said. “Getting used to the big leagues is different. It’ll take a little bit. But it hasn’t sped up on me. I feel good about how I’m handling it.”

The ballpark always brings him back to normal. An echo from the batting cage before Rockies home games sounds eerily familiar.

“You hear the difference,” Colorado hitting coach Blake Doyle said.

The pop of the ball off his bat sounds a whole lot like that of the man he replaced at shortstop, Troy Tulowitzki. Fans can see it, too, during games. The white, velcro batting gloves and that deep breath while he stares at his bat before he steps to the plate mimic Tulo. That’s Story now.

It’s not the end of the comparison. Story worked out two winters ago with the Rockies’ former shortstop at “Camp Tulo” near Las Vegas.

“He really gets into his legs well,” Doyle said of Story’s swing. Tulowitzki was the same way. Their plate approach starts out tall and upright. But they both crouch down as the ball nears the plate and swing up through the ball.

That’s led Story to a 64 percent flyball rate, right around Bryce Harper’s 62.5 percent. Story, strong through the shoulders and powerful in the legs, has so far turned those flyballs into home runs.

“I use the ground,” he said.

He’s shown he can rebound from a tough game too. San Francisco’s Jeff Samardzija struck him out three times with a 96 mph cutting fastball outside the zone last week. But Story rebounded the next night with two triples to the opposite field in right-center that would have been home runs a year ago if not for the new fence installed at Coors Field.

“I’m not too overanalyzing. He had a good night. I have to tip my cap to him,” Story said of Samardzija. “I just try to hit the ball hard, and if it gets in the air and it goes out, that’s awesome. But I hope they don’t think I’ll hit one out every time. That’s not very realistic.”

Too many strikeouts

Story’s rocket-like rise has had its hitches. In 48 at-bats through 11 games, he has 20 strikeouts and just two walks. But even after a five-game homerless skid, Story still has a .292 average and leads the major leagues with seven home runs, which entering Saturday was two better than Seattle’s Robinson Cano, Toronto’s Josh Donaldson and Baltimore’s Mark Trumbo. And through Friday, he trailed only teammate Nolan Arenado in RBIs, 14-13.

That’s how far Story jumped in a whiplash start. But he’s not the first Rockies player to sprint from the gate. Charlie Blackmon went 6-for-6 in the Rockies’ home-opener in 2014 and was hitting .402 on April 27. Blackmon said it would be better to yield on expectations.

“The game is way more fun when you’re doing really, really well,” Blackmon said. “But in terms of all the media attention, it’s really frustrating, and it’s tough on players, especially young players, to deal with that. Just let the kid play baseball. You don’t have to project him to hit 50 home runs in a season.”

Blackmon parlayed his fast start into an All-Star Game appearance in 2014. But he was a better player in 2015. He increased his hit total by only five over 157 games, but he got on base more, stole more bases, hit more doubles, hit more triples and walked more. His key was finding a more normal routine.

“I know for a fact that at some point you’re going to be bad,” Blackmon said. “Just because you’re good out of the gate doesn’t mean you’re going to be good all year. Just know that. You start thinking ahead of yourself. You start thinking about tomorrow before today gets here. You have to stay in the moment. And realizing that you can only do your best at one pitch. And if you can do that, then your next step is to do that every time.”

Recognizing the regular, Blackmon said, only comes with experience. He can’t tell a rookie to do it. But Story long ago locked into a routine as a teenage prospect at Irving High School in Texas — with every trip to Chili’s.

And he has a lot of everydays left to play.

“There’s nothing else I’d rather be doing than this,” Story said. “You can be in all kinds of different cities, and the year will be crazy, but you get used to it.”

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or @nickgroke

Shortstop’s shortlist

Five more things to know about Rockies rookie shortstop Trevor Story: