YOU'D have to be heartless not to feel sympathy for Kevin Rudd, tearstained and forlorn, announcing his resignation from politics.

It's also only human to feel exasperation at his self-indulgence and emotional flaccidity.

Overseas visitors who watched Wednesday night's performance could scarcely believe the behaviour of a grown man, a former prime minister, in parliament with streaming tears, sniffily nose and the demeanour of a child who has just spent an hour in his bedroom bawling his eyes out.

Get a grip, Kevin. People in the Philippines have something to cry about.

The contrast could not have been more stark between a blubbering Rudd capping off his spectacular career with another spectacle and Tony Abbott just 10 minutes earlier giving the interview of his life on ABC's 7.30, as he tried to fix his predecessor's biggest mess.

There was the Prime Minister bluntly stating that it was not in the national interest to engage in the sort of soap opera politics Rudd had perfected.

The 24-7 West Wing pantomime was the hallmark of Rudd's time in office, always providing diversions and entertainment for a voracious media. It became a drug for journalists, not just those in the "love media" of the ABC and Fairfax. Laurie Oakes has been carrying on like an addict deprived of his fix since Rudd lost the election.

But Abbott is one cold turkey. "I'm not interested in providing sport for journalists," he told 7.30. "I'm not interested in starting a fight or provoking an argument; I'm interested in stopping the boats.

"And why I'm interested in stopping the boats is because this is a humanitarian disaster as well as an affront to Australian sovereignty."

The spurned luvvies of the media, along with Labor, the Greens and compassionistas, are demanding "transparency" in the government's boat-stopping operations, as if they are high-minded idealists preserving democracy.

But it was just such cartoon morality that got us into the mess in the first place, persuading Rudd he could dismantle the Howard government's border protections and be hailed as a hero.

And it worked for those years after Rudd created the people-smuggling boom, as the love media and so-called human rights lawyers and refugee activists studiously ignored the boats they are now so excited about.

But finally reality overwhelmed spin. It's hard to ignore dead bodies floating in the sea.

"I want to stop the boats for Australia's sake and for the sake of common humanity," Abbott said.

"Surely all Australians, including the media, should want to stop the boats, not to provoke an argument."

Abbott's construction is correct. Those calling for blow-by-blow details of "on-water" operations are only providing marketing material for people-smugglers and causing trouble with Indonesia. Why should the government help them?

This was the rabbit Rudd pulled out of the hat and could never fit back in. For him it was always about the optics of government, not the actions that so often were botched.

Rudd played at prime minister as though it was a role in a movie. It was about showing off to visitors at Kirribilli House that he had the US President on the phone, being photographed visiting a movie star in hospital, and putting his name to impenetrable essays on economics.

It was about hobnobbing with world leaders at global summits and being made a fuss of in Seat 1A by Qantas. It was more about the trappings than the business of government.

Rudd's ended his political career the way he lived it, bitter, vengeful, wallowing in self pity, dragging out the limelight, complaining about petty slights, boasting with grandiosity and railing at colleagues who wouldn't be there if he hadn't "saved the furniture".

He hijacked the first business day of the 44th Parliament and ambushed new Labor leader Bill Shorten, who was given just 10 minutes' notice of Rudd's bombshell.

In the end, Rudd was a broken man, hunched and angry, flinching from Shorten's hand on his shoulder, neither man able to look at the other.

Again, how different it was to John Howard's behaviour when he lost office in humiliating circumstances in the Ruddslide of 2007, losing his own seat of Bennelong to Maxine McKew by 2434 votes.

But Howard was gracious in defeat, even turning up at the official declaration of the poll when he didn't have to, smiling and shaking hands with the victor, and having a cup of tea with the voters who had rejected him.

"This is a wonderful exercise in democracy and it is a privilege to be part of that process," he said at the time.

John Howard was indeed a class act. History will treat Rudd less kindly.

SOLUTION TO ALL THE HOT AIR ON CLIMATE

IT was a world first on Thursday night when the Rational Optimist and the Skeptical Environmentalist shared stage in Melbourne.

British science writer Matt Ridley and Danish statistician Bjorn Lomborg also shared a scathing disdain for the scare tactics of the green movement over the latest typhoon to hit the Philippines.

"Do you really think cutting off carbon emissions is going to help the victims of Typhoon Haiyan," asked Lomborg, who shot to fame with his 2001 book The Skeptical Environmentalist, which holds that no environmental problem is so bad it can't be fixed by human progress.

Viscount Ridley's 2010 bestseller The Rational Optimist also dismisses the case for catastrophic climate change.

"Humanity is the solution, not the problem. Centralised government is the problem not the solution," he told the Institute of Public Affairs.

"Our species will always find innovative ways to surmount obstacles."

Lomborg, a vegetarian environmentalist, blasted those who are trying to capitalise on the Philippines tragedy.

"Yes, there are ferocious cyclones in the world, as there always have been. But … claiming that CO2 cuts is the way to tackle cyclone damages is simply immoral."

Even if the world was to drastically cut carbon dioxide emissions any impact would only occur in 50-100 years.

The real way to help typhoon victims is to build them better houses.

A BRIDGET TOO FAR

IT'S a complete foot-stamping outrage that the latest instalment of Bridget Jones' Diary has killed off Darcy and turned Bridget into a 51-year old cougar.

What a let-down for all the women around the world who believed in the happy ending.

We willed silly Bridget to come to her senses and snap up the treasure in front of her eyes: Darcy. Swoon!

And what an insult to Jane Austen, whose Pride and Prejudice formed the basis for Helen Fielding's 1996 chick-lit classic.

Bad enough that Austen's spirited Elizabeth Bennet was transformed into a 20th century dumpling who wears granny undies, drinks too much and obsesses about her looks. But at least Mr Darcy was worthy of his literary predecessor. He was the patient prize at the end of Bridget's tizz.

Bumping him off is just wrong.