Topics: Andy Harris, appropriations, Barack Obama, DC, District of Columbia, drug war, Drugs, House, marijuana, veto threats, Politics News

This spring, the government of the District of Columbia decided to decriminalize marijuana possession. It did that because it, like various other local and state governments, thought it would be the proper public policy for the District of Columbia. And it thought it would be the proper public policy for the District of Columbia because applying criminal penalties to the possession of marijuana is rapidly being recognized as an obviously insane thing to do.

But there are still some insane people out there, specifically in … oh what’s it called … the “United States House of Representatives.” And because Congress, technically, has to appropriate the District’s budget — a budget based on money that the local government itself raises — all it takes is one of these insane people looking for a good ol’ culture-war headline to clip for the old folks back home during election season to make a fuss and block the District from enforcing its laws.

Late last month during an appropriations subcommittee markup, Republican Rep. Andy Harris, representing Maryland’s Eastern Shore, introduced and successfully passed an amendment depriving the District of funds to enforce the new marijuana decriminalization law. Harris, appealing to his credentials as a physician, cited the detrimental effects of marijuana on teenagers’ brains. (He did not take into question the effect of teenagers or parents of teenagers being locked up for possessing marijuana on teenagers’ brains.) Most District politicians rolled their eyes and heckled Harris.

The appropriations bill covering the District’s budget, and a whole host of other things, is being considered by the full House this week. The White House issued a veto threat against it yesterday, outlining its complaints in a seven-page statement. Among the White House’s concerns are cuts to the IRS, SEC and other agencies; it also objects to language that would subject the new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau’s budget to the appropriations process (i.e., allow financial services lobbyists to obliterate the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau).

But tucked away on Page 5 is a whole section on the District of Columbia. First, the White House supports so-called budget autonomy, allowing the District to manage its budget without congressional approval, and to eliminate the congressional review period for new laws. The administration also opposes the usual Republican attempts to block the District “from using its local funds for abortion services” or from funding its needle exchange program.