Painter feels art is 'is the air I breathe'

Childers' painting "Kissed By the Sun" has stylized flowers and sky, but the perspective is from ground level looking up. (Jafe Parsons)

Tanielle Childers was born in Loveland but went to elementary school in Milliken.

The school had old-fashioned hot water radiators, the kind that knocked when air was trapped in the pipes. When she was in the first grade, her teacher asked the students to draw something that they thought made that sound. Childers drew a monster and won first place with a prize of one penny.

In second grade, Childers was in a Castle Rock school. The students were given the challenge to do a contour drawing, and her teacher was very impressed with Childers' work. At her teacher's insistence, Childers was sent to the teacher's lounge where she showed off her drawing.

Childers is now an accomplished artist selling her work at a variety of outlets including the Lincoln Gallery, Canyon Acoustics west of Loveland, Da Bean in Berthoud and Indigo Sky Trading in Berthoud.

Her first sale was at a show at the Lincoln Gallery, and it sold the minute it went up. The painting was called "Realistic Imagination" and was a whimsical dragonfly with white mountain peaks.

"My art comes from a magical place that words fail to describe," Childers says. She continues, "My painting usually begin with flashes of a vision, and then I paint intuitively and with emotion bringing my art to life." As she paints, she listens to music, but the selection depends on her mood at the time. In her words, "While I paint, I find that happy place.

Advertisement

Childers depends on spontaneity without any preliminary sketches.

After working for 13 years at the Quick Print Shop in Loveland and also taking graphic design classes at Aims Community College, she has honed her skill as an artist.

She likes intense colors and uses diluted acrylic paint in multiple layers.

As for her future plans, she simply states, "More art -- it is the air I breathe and part of my right arm. I never see giving it up -- it is my therapy."

Her work can be seen at Facebook.com/TanielleART, Tanielle-Childers.artistwebsites.com and Redbubble

.com/people/Tanielle.