The Loveland Fire & Ice Festival presents ice sculpting, fire performances and all things hot and cold at three-day street festival

Sarah Houlton, left, from Fort Collins, and Bailey Kleppe, right, from Loveland, perform Saturday afternoon with the Harrington Arts Alliance during the Loveland Fire & Ice Festival. ( Michael Bettis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

If you go What: Loveland Fire & Ice Festival. When: Through Sunday, Feb. 14. Where: Fourth Street from Garfield to Lincoln avenues. Cost: Free, but some activities require fees. Lineup sampling: • 10 a.m. to 10 p.m. Motor Vehicle Showcase, along Fourth Street. • 11 a.m., 1 p.m. Harrington Arts Alliance, Hearts & Horses / Family Fair Stage. • Noon. Paradox, Townsquare Media/Main Stage. • 12:45 p.m. Ice Sculpting Competition, Townsquare Media/Main Stage. • 1 p.m. Mary Sue Thompson, Veterans Plaza/Food Truck Food Court Stage. • 1:30 p.m. Ryan Millard, There With Care/Rialto Block Stage. • 2 p.m. The Jurrassicasters featuring Dave Beegle, Townsquare Media/Main Stage. • 2:15 p.m. Ice Sculpting Competition, There With Care/Rialto Block Stage. • 4:30 p.m. MountainCity, Townsquare Media/Main Stage. • 5:15 p.m. Alexandra Nikolova, fire artist, Hearts & Horses / Family Fair Stage. • 5:45 p.m. Corinne Watson, fire performer, Veterans Plaza/Food Truck Food Court Stage. • 6 p.m. Taylor Scott Band, Townsquare Media/Main Stage. • 6:15 p.m. Corinne Watson, fire performer, Hearts & Horses / Family Fair Stage. • 6:30 p.m. Alexandra Nikolova, fire artist, There With Care/Rialto Block Stage. • 7 p.m. Ice Sculpting Awards, Townsquare Media/Main Stage. • 7:30 p.m. Caitlin Morris Fire Dance Troupe, Hearts & Horses / Family Fair Stage. • 8 p.m. Steve Manshel Band, Townsquare Media/Main Stage. • 9 p.m. Musical Light & Fireworks Show, all stages.

Fire performer Corinne Watson uses her wrist to spin a hula hoop bursting with five fire flames Friday night as she does the splits. She straightens, twice whirls the hoop up and down her body and does a backbend.

"It's all about the hip. I like to do a front-and-back motion; some people do side to side. ... It's all about concentrating where your hoop is with your body," Watson said. "Especially at night, it's better to have the fire. ... It's a crowd pleaser."

Watson, who goes by the stage name of Coco Hula Hoop Extraordinaire, performed all three days with the Fort Collins-based Ember Ensemble during the Fire & Ice Festival Valentine's Day weekend. She and her troupe presented fire hula hooping, fire eating, fire juggling and fire spitting to give the hot, bright side to the street festival with the theme of "The Yin and Yang of Light and Dark."

The festival of music, booths and entertainment from fire to flash mobs closed off Fourth Street from Garfield to Lincoln avenues Friday to Sunday nights.

For the Ice Part of Fire & Ice

For the cold part of the festival, ice sculpting teams carved 20 blocks of ice into sculptures portraying the festival's theme in an invitation-only contest with awards presented Sunday. The teams participated in three ice sculpting competitions on Saturday and two early on Sunday.

Shayla Dube of Fort Collins stood next to one of the sculptures, an ice heart with little hearts around the edges popping with red centers.

"It's really neat to have all the artists come to town and show what they can do with ice even when it's warm," Dube said. "It's unique to Loveland, all the sculptures to promote Loveland, all Valentine's Day-themed. They're awesome."

Eight-year-old Nate Temple of Fort Collins sat on a heart-decorated ice bench.

"I was just wondering if it was cold. No, it was not," he said after a few seconds of sitting. "That one has an arrow through the heart ... And it has hearts on the bench. I think that's really, really cool."

The Fire & Ice Festival, kicking off Friday night and lasting all day past 9 p.m. Saturday and Sunday, brings together ice, fire and light in events and entertainment on stages, in booths and out on the street. There are dozens of stage performances of music and acting, a light parade on Saturday, fireworks shows each night with fireballs and light-emitting diode lights, and LED lights flashing up and down Fourth Street, provided by Blazen Illuminations, organizer of the event.

Adding Entertainment to the Mix

The entertainment lineup presents local performance groups, singer-songwriters and blues, folk and rock artists on four stages. There also is a Food Truck Food Court and Marketplace, an artisan market and carnival games and a carousel. Another attraction is a model of a Weasley family-style car from the Harry Potter films with Aragog the tarantula slinking down onto the roof in the Forbidden Forest.

"Several hundred people have taken their picture in front of the car. We expect the number to increase tenfold," said Aronn Williamson, owner of Long's Peak Media, working with Jordan Lanham, a Fort Collins-based freelance photographer. "They're just diehard Harry Potter fans."

Lanham said the fans consider the car to be nostalgic.

"You see something like that, a bit from the movie, it's kind of a nostalgic factor for you," he said.

Jolee Rivera, 15, of Longmont, had her picture taken with the car on Saturday.

"I just love Harry Potter. I just like Harry and how everybody knows him because of his scar," Rivera said. "I've seen every movie, too."

And Now ... The Fire

Chelsea Stubbs and Derek Beasley, artists with Gammaspace in Denver, stood by Hin-Han: Guardian of the Milky Way on Saturday as the giant owl burned along its 25-foot wingspan and in its heart, thanks to propane lines lighting up its 1,800 pounds of steel flesh.

"There is a certain amount of comfort from standing in the wingspan. His heart is on fire, and he's there for you," Stubbs said.

The artists also have on hand an angler fish and two worker ants lifting up a heart forming an archway, both pieces emitting fire.

"It's a flaming heart. That definitely has a Valentine's Day vibe to it," Beasley said about Arcus Hymenoptera, the steel ant sculpture.

Hali McDonald and her boyfriend, Mark Horton, stood by Arcus, catching that vibe in a long hug.

"It's cold everywhere. You want to snuggle up with somebody," McDonald said. "Plus, it's Loveland, Valentine's Day weekend. Where else should you be in Colorado? It's perfect."

Horton said, "It's just a fun weekend. It warms you up. It's just inspiring."

And with all the heart stuff going on along Fourth Street, Tom Helm, owner of Brewsworthy Coffee, set up a booth displaying the 2016 Valentine Blend of chocolate-covered cherry-flavored coffee.

"It's hot. Brew it to make the fire part, or you can have it over ice, so therefore it fits well with the event," Helm said. "It's Valentine's Day. That's why you have to make it with love ... in the city of love."

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm