Between the antics of Donald Trump, the stumbles of Ben Carson and the failure of a House committee to discredit Hillary Clinton, Republicans have had plenty of reasons for gloom lately. They got a powerful antidote, though, on one of the days that matters most for any political party: Election Day.

Last Tuesday, Republicans won more than their share of votes, as did conservative causes. The left-leaning Slate headlined Wednesday, "Liberals got smoked across the country last night." Most conspicuous among the winners was Matt Bevin, a tea party stalwart who captured the Kentucky governorship for the GOP for only the second time since 1971.

Democrats were turned back in Virginia, where they had hoped to gain control of the state Senate. Republicans added to their lopsided majority in the Mississippi House. San Franciscans voted out the sheriff who defended its sanctuary policy for unauthorized immigrants after one of them was arrested in the fatal shooting of a young woman.

Voters in Houston repealed an equal rights ordinance that opponents attacked for allowing transgender people to use restrooms corresponding to their gender identification. Ohioans voted down a measure to allow recreational use of marijuana. All this, wrote Matt Yglesias on the website Vox, is "a clear warning that the Democratic Party is in a much weaker political position than most of its supporters realize."

The trend was clear even before. Democrats have been reduced to just 17 governorships. Republicans have complete control of 30 legislatures and partial control of another eight. They also dominate both houses of Congress. And history suggests it's hard for any party to win a third consecutive presidential election.

So what's going on? Rationalizing the defeat in Kentucky, Elisabeth Pearson, executive director of the Democratic Governors Association, said the Democratic candidate "ran into the unexpected head winds of Trump-mania, losing to an outsider candidate in the Year of the Outsider." The low turnout common to elections in odd-numbered years was also used to explain the conservative success.

But the Trump surge is not an accidental fad; it draws on discontent with President Barack Obama's policies. And there's no law of nature that says low turnout must favor Republicans. Their relative eagerness to vote is a sign that they are more motivated and better organized than their rivals. When Obama is on the ballot, he drives Democrats to the polls. But when he's not, they tend to stay home.

The ongoing culture wars also helped conservatives Tuesday. With same-sex marriage now the law of the land, its supporters may have grown complacent, while those who resent it are feeling the need to act — as in Houston. Transgender rights, in any case, are unfamiliar to most people, threatening to some and not as easy to defend as marriage equality.

Legalizing cannabis has more appeal in socially liberal states like Colorado and Oregon than in the more old-fashioned Midwest. The infamous Planned Parenthood videos have energized anti-abortion voters, who lean heavily toward the GOP.

At the moment, Democrats have no comparable causes firing up the party faithful. After seven years with a liberal Democrat in the White House, it's clear, liberals and Democrats have lost some steam.

But that could easily change. "Overall, there's nothing wrong with the Democrats that losing the presidency probably won't fix," Hamilton College professor Philip Klinkler wrote on Vox.

Fixing it while keeping the White House? Now, there's a herculean task. If Democrats hope to achieve it, they had better up their game.