The top seven polling Republican presidential candidates went head-to-head Thursday night.

During debates, sometimes what the candidates say do not match up with the facts. We took a look at five critical fact checks from Thursday's debate below:

1. Chris Christie claimed that "Common Core has been eliminated in New Jersey" and ''I never wrote a check to Planned Parenthood."

First, The Associated Press pointed out one of his panels only recommended changes to 232 out of 1,427 standards in math and English. And another Christie panel recommended the state continue using a Common Core-aligned test — and require it for graduation by 2021.

Second, in a 1994 Newark Star-Ledger story, Christie is quoted saying, "I support Planned Parenthood privately with my personal contribution, and that should be the goal of any such agency, to find private donations." The Associated Press points out this quote also appears in his book, but he claims to have been misquoted.

2. Mark Rubio said that Obamacare is "a certified job killer."

This is not true. CNN reported that one report showed that only 4 percent of employers shifted staffers to part-time and not qualify for health care. Also, another 4 percent said they were reducing the number of full-time employees. There is a second study that says 10 percent of employers reported that they were changing workers from part-time to full-time status to enable them to obtain coverage.

3. Donald Trump claimed the Syrian refugees "...look like very few women. Very few children. Strong, powerful men."

Politifact counters this claim. The majority of refugees entering Europe are actually women and children 17 and younger. They also mention Trump has said this before.

4. Ted Cruz said "we have the lowest percentage of Americans working today of any year since 1977."

This is mostly true. He is referring to the civilian labor force participation rate. But Politifact notes if looking at the employment-population ratio, it's not true. This ratio takes the number of people who are employed and divides it by the civilian population age 16 and above.

5. Mike Huckabee said of religious hate crimes "...58 percent were directed toward Jews. Only 16 were toward Muslims."

This is true, but there's more to the story. The Washington Post points out many of these crimes go unreported and anti-Muslim hate crimes could actually be 25 to 40 percent higher.