The Democratic Party of Wisconsin issued a statement today blasting Gov. Scott Walker for endorsing U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, for president. The endorsement comes a week before voters in the state head to the polls to vote in the presidential primaries as well as for a Supreme Court justice and local leaders and judges.

Cruz came to national attention when he caused a shutdown of the federal government in 2013 over the Affordable Care Act, which he has compared to Naziism. WisDems denounced Cruz’s “extreme right-wing policies” on issues such as abortion, marriage equality and climate change.

“Cruz’s extreme record mirrors not only that of Walker, but also of current GOP frontrunner Donald Trump,” said a statement issued by WisDems. “ Most recently, Cruz said we should “patrol and secure Muslim neighborhoods," but this only scratches the surface of his divisive rhetoric. Cruz has accused people who support marriage equality as waging “jihad” against people of faith, said the laws in this country that give women a right to choose are extreme, and has said the Obama economy is disastrous even though we have had 68 positive months of job growth.

“It’s shameful that Scott Walker would support a candidate with an extreme record of divisive policies and hateful partisan rhetoric,” Democratic Party of Wisconsin Executive Director Kory Kozloski said today in a prepared statement. “Ted Cruz has spent his career working to divide people across this nation, rather than working to bring us together. That is not the sort of candidate the governor of our state should be standing behind.” Kozloski said.

WisDems’ press release provided an overview of Cruz’s divisive rhetoric (below):

Climate change

ACA

Ted Cruz compared the fight to defund Obamacare to that of taking on the Nazi’sin World War II.

If elected, Cruz stated he would repeal every word of Obamacare, which means nearly million people would lose coverage, insurance companies could punish people for pre-existing conditions, and companies would be able to discriminate against women with higher healthcare costs.

Cruz went so far as to say he lost his own healthcare coveragebecause of the ACA, and this has been dismissed as pandering for votes.

Gay Marriage and homophobia

He accused theLGBT community of waging jihad against people of faith

When Ted Cruz announced his presidency he said a top priority was defending traditional marriage, i.e. gay people would not have the right to marry

He scorned the Supreme Courts decision to make marriage equality the law of the land and said states should ignore the decision.

See Ted Cruz’s history on Gay Marriage and Homophobia here.

More