Buy Photo Volunteers serve dinners to the hundreds sho showed up at St Mary's for the free meal and clothing, and other goodies provided including toys for the children, clothing for all, and sweets for those witha sweet tooth. Christmas Day dinner and party at St. Mary's Church in Stafford with a visit by Santa with presents for the children. (Photo: Peter Ackerman/Staff Photographe)Buy Photo

STAFFORD - It started small, with little more than a dozen people at a park in Manahawkin.

Six years later, the extended Rua family has grown to more than 200 people.

Friday afternoon marked the sixth annual Christmas Dinner at St. Mary of the Pines, where anyone in the area is welcome to come find a free hot meal and new friends lined up along cafeteria tables.

An hour after dinner was served, the parking lot was still filled and the long cafeteria tables at capacity. In one corner of the room, Santa Claus posed for pictures with children while others frolicked with each other.

Buy Photo Clothing for men, women and children were available at the Christmas dinner and the clothing was as popular as the free meal provided. Christmas Day dinner and party at St. Mary's Church in Stafford with a visit by Santa with presents for the children. (Photo: Peter Ackerman/Staff Photographe)

"Some stay for an hour. Some stay all day," said Joe Rua, an organizer of the event. "We've had some people coming for three or four years. They love the fellowship, the warm atmosphere."

The project was the brainchild of Gail and Michael Rua, Sr., inspired by their granddaughter: One Christmas, she simply asked what she could do to help others.

That year, they posted signs in areas with large homeless populations but only got 14 people to Manahawkin Lake Park. The next year -- the first hosted by St. Mary's -- there were more volunteers than guests, Rua said.

"After that, it just kind of blew up," Rua said. "It's really beyond what we ever expected."

The Ruas' guests came from all different faiths and backgrounds. Some came out of economic hardship -- the toys and clothes they receive at St. Mary's are the only ones they'll receive all year. Others simply came because they didn't want to spend the holiday alone.

Buy Photo Kylee Campbell, 2 of Barnegat peers out from behind her plate as she waits in line for her dinner. Christmas Day dinner and party at St. Mary's Church in Stafford with a visit by Santa with presents for the children. (Photo: Peter Ackerman/Staff Photographe)

"Maybe they're elderly or don't have any family, so we'll have volunteers come and just sit or talk with them," Rua said. "We get calls saying, 'I don't have anywhere with Christmas. Can I spend it with you?'"

For Rua, the annual dinner -- a yearlong source of stress with a three-hour payoff -- is a welcome reminder of the "meaning of Christmas," a way to find hope amid the gloom and doom.

"Sometimes, you have this dim kind of perception of what the world is," Rua said. "Sometimes, the meaning of Christmas is commercialized. But then you see something like this generosity. It really moves you."

Buy Photo Heather Tatur, Brianna Otto, 11, and Mikayla Rua, 11, all of Stafford, pick out toys from age and gender specific tables as children visit with Santa. Christmas Day dinner and party at St. Mary's Church in Stafford with a visit by Santa with presents for the children. (Photo: Peter Ackerman/Staff Photographe)

Mike Davis: 732-643-4223; mdavis@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1Orge1e