Edward L. Smith Jr. (Photo: Provided)

Edward L. Smith Jr. is a member of the NKY Mental Health/Substance Abuse Regional Planning Council.

Newspapers have been full of articles about the heroin epidemic in Northern Kentucky and the substantial effort being made to deal with it. Progress is being made.

However, not so thoroughly covered is the understanding that heroin usage is entwined with the broader, underlying issues of addiction and mental illness. The term "behavioral health care" includes both mental health and substance abuse services. Historically, both services have been seriously underfunded in Kentucky.

From the beginning, there has been stigma attached to both services. According to Dr. Owen Nichols, president and CEO of NorthKey Community Care, for nearly 50 years, the Northern Kentucky Mental Health/Mental Retardation Regional Board, doing business as NorthKey, and The Friends of NorthKey have worked to reduce the stigma attached to mental illness and remind people that stigma is just another word for discrimination.

People recognize that heart disease and kidney disease are medical conditions that need treatment. Yet, many have difficulty understanding that mental illnesses such as bipolar disorder and addictions to alcohol or other drugs are illnesses, too. That has led to inequities in funding.

Under the Affordable Care Act, by the end of 2014 Kentucky's Medicaid expansion covered an additional 375,000 Kentuckians, equivalent to 8.5 percent of Kentucky's total population. With Medicaid's expansion, Kentucky's uninsured rate dropped from the peak of 20.4 percent to a low of 11.9 percent, the second lowest state uninsured rate in the country.

Kentucky's Medicaid expansion opened the behavioral health care provider network beyond Kentucky's Community Mental Health Centers to "any willing provider." That added over 300 new behavioral health care providers in Kentucky. Before the expansion, substance abuse treatment was not a routinely covered Medicaid service in Kentucky. There were only a few small "waiver" programs.

While Kentucky's involvement with the Affordable Care Act has been commendable, more needs to be done. Only 1 percent of the expanded Medicaid dollars go to behavioral health care while 42 percent go to hospitals and 21 percent to pharmacy coverage. Behavioral health care funding must be increased.

In 2008, Congress passed the Mental Health Parity Act to ensure that all insurance coverage included equal treatment of both behavioral health care and physical health care.

In 2010, further steps were taken to prevent discrimination in coverage.

However, in spite of that, coverage for mental health and substance abuse issues continues to fall far short of the benefits and coverage available for physical health care. The denial rate for behavioral health care reimbursement is substantially higher than for any other forms of health care services.

Just this April, the National Alliance on Mental Illness found that insurance companies deny mental health care services at twice the rate of physical health care services. This is discrimination against a population dealing with mental health, substance abuse and developmental disabilities.

The high level of denial is clearly evident in Kentucky, too. The Medicaid Managed Care Organizations in Kentucky continually resist fair reimbursements, limit the medications on their formulary lists and restrict the number of inpatient days for the mentally ill.

The lack of adequate funding has had consequences. Kentucky ranks 45th in per-capita funding for mental health care, 49th (second worst) in the number of people suffering from depression and 49th (second lowest) in mental health well-being. Suicide in Kentucky kills more people every year than automobile accidents.

Our congressional delegation, the governor and members of our legislature should be encouraged to provide adequate funding for behavioral health care services and the flexibility to direct the funds to the greatest needs. The best place to start is increasing the behavioral health care funding for Medicaid.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1GSXUXD