Please enable Javascript to watch this video

MOORE, Okla - An outpouring of support has helped a beloved family attraction rebuild after devastation.

Orr Family Farm suffered major damage after being in the path of the May 20 twister.

Just four months later, it is almost ready to open to the public.

However, there was a time just after the storm the family didn't think they would be able to rebuild.

The sounds of reconstruction at Orr Family Farm are slowly fading, replaced by barnyard animals and in a few weeks, a crowd.

It’s been a long four months for the family behind the farm.

Glenn Orr remembers May 20 as if it were yesterday.

The monster twister destroyed just about everything here.

Immediately after the disaster, Orr had doubts of rebuilding.

"I'm 81-years-old,” says Orr. “Ordinarily, if it were just me, no."

An overwhelming amount of volunteers stood by his side, as many as a thousand people at a time.

"I had no choice,” says Orr. “We had to rebuild."

Instead of simply repairing what stood before, Orr went for bigger and better. They've doubled the sizes of some of barns.

He looks at before and after pictures, amazed by how far they've come to be able to reopen just four months later.

Orr says, "This quick. I didn't think so at all."

He gives all the credit to friends, family and strangers for keeping his spirits up enough to be able to tell a story of strength.

"That gives you a wonderful feeling,” says Orr. “Like wow! Maybe we're going to be able to do this!"

Once again, Orr can enjoy his livelihood and ride around his property proudly.

"Thank you. Thank you. Thank you from the bottom of my heart,” says Orr. "It's Oklahoma Strong you know!"

The grand reopening is set for Sept. 28 and will stay open for the fall through November.

Visitors can enjoy train rides, those barnyard animals, pumpkin patch, hayrides and a tornado themed, giant corn maze.

The attraction will be open from Oct. 1 through Nov. 2.

Hours are 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. Monday through Thursday, 10 a.m. to 9 p.m. on Friday and Saturday and 1 to 6 p.m. on Sunday.