There were so many ways the Affordable Care Act could have been derailed since lawmakers and the administration started crafting it in 2009. Any one of the five congressional committees that wrote the bill could have inserted language dooming the package in either chamber. Senate Democrats, with just enough votes to overcome a GOP filibuster, could have failed to finish their work before Republican Scott Brown unexpectedly captured the Massachusetts Senate seat held by the late Ted Kennedy, who had spent much of his 47 years in the Senate fighting for health care reform. The U.S. Supreme Court could have invalidated the individual mandate in 2012, destroying a key pillar of the law. And one of the 50-plus efforts by House Republicans to repeal the law might have succeeded.

Instead, the law is facing the possibility of being unraveled for what can only be called a technicality: inartful language in the bill which, if read very strictly, would seem to invalidate the federal subsidies offered to 6.4 million people in 34 states which have federal, instead of state, insurance exchanges. And this time, the stakes are more complicated for the GOP lawmakers who have fought to relentlessly to undo the law. While previous efforts have been largely hypothetical, and would take everyone back to the health insurance laws before the overhaul was passed, getting rid of federal subsidies could imperil actual voters who can't buy mandatory insurance without them.

[READ: How King v. Burwell Could End the Obamacare Wars Once and For All]

The result, advocates fear, is that America could be left with the worst of all possible worlds: a still-settling-in health care law that never got a chance to show what it could do, chaos in the insurance markets, and – worst of all – more uninsured people. And as difficult as it was for Congress to pull together the votes to approve a sweeping but excruciatingly detailed and complicated plan, lawmakers and advocates see no way Congress can pass something new if the existing law is upended by the court.

The Senate would not even agree to a House proposal to have an entirely federal exchange, something that would have averted the pending problem, notes John McDonough, professor of public health practice at Harvard University's School of Public Health and a former Senate staffer who helped craft and shepherd the legislation on the Hill. The idea of a European-style national health care program was never even a credible daydream for liberals, forcing them to agree to a hybrid sort of system.

More than five years after "Obamacare" was signed into law, the public remains divided about it, largely along partisan lines. The U.S. still has the most expensive and least effective (in terms of health outcomes) health care system in the world, according to the Commonwealth Fund. And even as federal and state governments grapple with the law – making sure people adhere to the mandate, providing subsidies to the poor, deciding whether to expand Medicaid and running an insurance exchange – Congress, activists and the courts are still fighting.

Even if the administration prevails in King v. Burwell, the Supreme Court case challenging the delivery of subsidies to people who signed up on the federal exchange, "the legal and political battles will go on," says Ralph Tyler, former chief counsel at the Food and Drug Administration and now a partner in the Baltimore office of law firm Venable LLP.

At issue is a seemingly innocuous phrase in the 1,000-plus page act. The law provides financial help to qualifying individuals who buy their insurance through one of the health insurance exchanges. Congressional supporters of the law had hoped states would set up their own exchanges (just 16 states and the District of Columbia did), but created a backdrop of a federal exchange for those whose states did not provide the service.

The law says that people may be eligible for subsidies if they are "enrolled in through an Exchange established by the State." The IRS has interpreted the language generally, meaning anyone on a government health insurance exchange could apply for financial help.

Opponents, eager to find a way to chip away at the law, sued, saying "state" means that – and only that. It's a small thing, but could instigate what Edwin Park, vice president for health policy at the left-leaning Center for Budget and Policy Priorities, calls the "death spiral" that weakens the act like a three-legged stool losing one of its supports.

Without the subsidies not all Americans will be able to afford health insurance – and some would be spared the burden, since the law provides exemptions from the health insurance mandate for people if it ends up costing more than 8 percent of their income. If the mandate falls apart, the insurance pool will be older and sicker – forcing companies to raise premiums. And more Americans would lose insurance or find it impossible to pay for it, Park says. "It's not just people who now have subsidies who will lose it in the long run," Park adds.

That's a potential political headache for incumbents, especially those who have pledged to repeal the law. Of 22 senators running for re-election next year, all but four are from states that use the federal exchange and could lose subsidies if the case goes against the federal government, McDonough says. "That is going to be a very powerful dynamic for them. This is all about politics. It is not about the law," adds McDonough, who also played a key role in passing Massachusetts' health care law when he was in the Bay State's legislature.

[MORE: Obama, GOP on Offense Leading Up to Health Care Ruling]

GOP lawmakers are coming up with "fixes" – the leading proposal by Sen. Ron Johnson, a Wisconsin Republican in a competitive race for re-election, would extend subsidies for existing beneficiaries until September 2017. But it would not provide for new enrollees and would weaken the law in other ways, such as eliminating the individual mandate. "We have to make sure that these 6 million people who have subsidies do not lose it," says Sen. Charles Grassley, Republican of Iowa. But the rest of the package would almost certainly provoke a Democratic filibuster. Congress could just fix that one word (adding "federal"), but "whether that would be politically doable is certainly questionable," Tyler says.

Ed Haislmaier, senior research fellow at the conservative Heritage Foundation, said the fallout from the loss of subsidies could be ameliorated by getting rid of some cost-drivers, such as mandatory, no co-pay coverage for certain services. But he agreed that Congress, which passed the law along party lines, is in no mood now to cooperate. "This is the downside of not doing incremental compromise, bipartisan legislation," Haislmaier says. "When you run into trouble, you haven't given any reason for the other side to hand you a life preserver."