MONTREAL — CGI Group Inc. is on its way to returning to organic growth after beginning the year with revenues that exceeded analyst expectations. But, as the company responsible for the error-riddled Obamacare website knows well, a good start can be interrupted, and there is uncertainty ahead that could keep the global information technology company from achieving its goal.

The Montreal-based company reported earnings Wednesday of 63 cents per share in the first quarter of 2016, topping the average 59 cent per share estimate of analysts surveyed by Zacks Investment Research.

Their organic revenue growth for the quarter was -1.8 per cent, up from -3 per cent in the Q4 of 2015.

“One of my sales pitches when I shake hands with a customer is that we’ll still be around in 10 years to deliver on the promises we’re making today,” said CEO Michael Roach of the $16.7-billion company that boasts 68,000 employees across 40 countries.

“Not a lot of competitors can say that with the same conviction that we do.”

CGI has operations in Canada, the U.S., Europe and Asia, working on both private and government projects. In Q1 2016, 58 per cent of bookings were new business, with the remaining 42 per cent came from extensions and renewals.

The company reported Q1 revenues of $2.7 billion, representing growth of 5.6 per cent. Because of the company’s strong U.S. exposure, foreign exchange fluctuations had a positive impact of $187.1 million.

Related

Moving forward, Roach said a major company target is to work with financial institutions that are moving to increase digitization.

“A lot of our clients are feeling the pressure of the cost of operating and running their existing infrastructure, so they need to find funds to invest in the digital world,” he said.

“No one ever won a war by giving up their home fort, so we protect our base.”

Maher Yaghi, an analyst at Desjardins Capital Markets, says Scotiabank’s announcement last October that it would enhance digitizing its customer service operations makes him confident that CGI can grow its order book in the near future.

“We believe other Canadian financial institutions will have to follow this strategy as clients’ expectations of digital services will continue to rise,” he said in note, rating the company as a “buy” with an above-average level of risk.

But some analysts do see factors that could derail the company’s outlook for organic growth in the coming year.

Barclays warns that weakness in the Canadian energy sector spreading to other sectors could put CGI’s investment in other businesses — banks in particular — at risk. There could also be tougher times ahead in the U.S. market as the country’s economic outlook weakens in spite of a strong present environment.

“While ongoing macro volatility has reduced visibility and made returning to organic revenue growth a ‘show me’ story, we are encouraged by the stronger outlook for IT services spending in 2016 and 2017,” said a report by Barclays Equity Research, recommending CGI in its “Best Buys Amid a Shaky Market.”

CGI Group has being buying back shares over the past two quarters, which Roach says the company believes are undervalued. Shares were up 6.09 per cent to $58.89 in Toronto at 10:45 a.m. EST Wednesday.

CGI owes much of its growth to transformational acquisitions, such as CGI Federal’s 2010 acquisition of Stanley Inc. for US$1.07 billion, which almost doubled the company’s presence in the U.S.

In October 2013, CGI Federal was blamed for millions of users not being able to access the website for the U.S. Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. In 2014 the federal government replaced CGI with a competitor, Accenture, though that company also ran into problems implementing the website.

At the moment, Roach says the company has 85 new acquisition targets and has identified an additional other 5,000 companies as possible targets.