In a recent editorial ("Boulder's housing problem," Daily Camera, May 7), Dave Krieger stated: "Boulder is the crown jewel of one of America's most attractive metropolitan areas. Although there are those in town who would like to take credit for this status, it is actually owed to a fabulous natural setting that is the work of God or nature, depending on your view. The building height limit is a characteristic of Boulder, but it does not define its beauty. CU has high-rises on campus that do nothing to detract from its appeal."

Most of us agree that we live in a fabulous natural setting. We do not presume to have created it. However, we have spent time and treasure in protecting and preserving it.

In the late 1950s, a consulting engineer hired by the city of Boulder was already formulating plans to pump water uphill onto the mountain backdrop, so that it could be developed. The response was unique. Professors Robert McKelvey and Al Bartlett walked the mountain backdrop and chose an elevation above which the city would be forbidden to serve water, the now-famous "Blue Line." Passing petitions to put the item on the ballot, the citizens prevailed, and the Blue Line is now firmly imbedded in our city charter.

Advertisement

In 1967, after the local environmental group PLAN-Boulder held a conference entitled "Greenbelts for Boulder County" with hundreds in attendance, the brand new city manager Ted Tedesco proposed a politically-astute one percent sales tax, 60 percent for major thoroughfares and 40 percent for purchase of land (eventually called "open space"). The citizens overwhelmingly passed the tax by 62 percent, becoming the first city in the nation to earmark tax dollars for purchase of open space. The first purchases were on the mountain backdrop, and then over the years other natural areas and farmland in the valley were bought, either in fee or by easement, creating a buffer.

About the same time, the Boulder Tomorrow program was initiated, with a goal to revive a deteriorating downtown. Popular Mayor Robert Knecht was at its helm, and I was one of its officers. But when high-rise buildings became the mantra for saving the downtown, I dropped out. We were spending millions of dollars buying the mountain backdrop, and high-rise buildings would block the view; we would also lose the intimacy of our historic downtown. I went back to law school, where I wrote a research paper resulting in a proposed city charter amendment to limit building height to 55 feet. In September 1971 the city council adopted an ordinance to permit up to 50 buildings 140 feet high downtown and east to the Arapahoe and Crossroads Shopping Centers ! However, the citizens had already gathered enough signatures to put the 55-foot charter amendment on the November ballot. And the rest is history. The pedestrian-friendly downtown, with its historic buildings, has become one of the most successful malls in Colorado, from which we can still view our untrammeled mountain backdrop.

Over the past 50-some years, the citizens of Boulder have taken some major actions — not to create, but to save, our "fabulous natural setting." I applaud the Camera's appreciation of Boulder's natural beauty, and while change is inevitable, there is no reason not to continue to protect our natural environment.

Ruth Wright lives in Boulder.