After Hugely Successful Equity Crowdfunding Round, SecuGate+ Offers Rewards on Kickstarter.

Secucloud, a provider of cloud-based IT-Security, has unveiled SecuGate+, their network security solution for Home & Small Business – and they are crowdfunding on Kickstarter. The rewards round follows an incredibly successful equity round in Germany.

This past November the company raised €500,000 in less than 2 days. Demand for the shares was overwhelming and the initial target of raising €250,000 was doubled as investors stormed in – eager to own a part of the promising startup company. The equity raise was listed on German platform Seedmatch, where 451 investors funded the seed round for the company which had a pre money valuation of €2,500,000.

“In Europe, we are currently focused more on small businesses and this is what our Seedmatch campaign was all about,” said Dennis Monner, CEO, Secucloud. “In the US, however, we are targeting home users and have geared our Kickstarter towards this very important market.”

Now SecuGate+ has hit the shores of the United States and they are looking to raise $50,000 to aid their market entry into this country.

Packaged in a sleek wireless router that will look great in any home or office, SecuGate+ connects instantly and securely to a network of cloud-based servers to offer complete protection for connected computers, Smart TVs, videogame consoles, tablets and smartphones from today’s high-threat intrusions. With no additional costs for software, updates or maintenance fees, the SecuGate+ system wants to disrupt the Home & Small Business networking market by delivering enterprise-like IT security to users at a fraction of the cost.

SecuGate+ is available in four versions, users have multiple choices to suit their networking needs – whether for home or business. With fast 2.4GHz and 5GHz wireless connectivity and data transfer rates between 150Mpbs and 750Mbps, families and employees can stream videos, send emails, or download music simultaneously on multiple devices – all without interrupting, interfering or slowing down the connection.

Accessible from any connected device or through a web browser, the SecuGate+ cloud-powered dashboard allows users to easily monitor and control Internet usage, create separate secure zones for family, employees or guests, configure the privacy and security settings for the network, and offers direct insight into how the network is used.

Via the SecuGate+ mobile App (compatible with any device and operating system), users also receive comprehensive on-the-go mobile security for smartphones, tablets and laptops while on public Wi-Fi and 3G/4G networks. This means users can keep their personal information confidential while away from home and are just as protected from cyber attacks and malware while on the road.

The hardware offers “safety measures” for parents worried about protecting their children from inappropriate content and malware on the Internet. With easy to configure controls, parents can block access and/or set time limits on social media sites and playing video games online. Extending beyond the home, SecuGate+ can also protect a child’s privacy and reputation while on their mobile devices to ensure they can play and learn in safety even when not on the home network.

Via a centralized web-interface, business owners can easily manage user privileges and monitor employee activity to help avoid illegal downloads and enhance productivity by limiting time spent on the web, and shopping and playing video games online (e.g. only allowed during breaks).

Rewards levels are pretty affordable with the early-bird package starting at only $89. Now that includes a one year subscription as well. After that first year, depending on the level of usage, you will have to re-up for a price.

“Our SecuGate+ network security system is more powerful, more secure and more cost efficient than anything else in the market right now,” said Dennis Monner, founder & CEO, Secucloud. “Whereas our competitors place the security components directly in the devices they’ve created, we place this essential intelligence in the cloud. Now, we are looking to backers on Kickstarter to help us bring this powerful, fully secure system to market and share in our success.”