Buy Photo A row of solar panels reflects clouds overhead at the 550-megawatt Desert Sunlight solar farm in Riverside County. It’s one of more than 50 large-scale renewable energy projects on federal land approved by President Barack Obama’s administration. (Photo: Crystal Chatham/The Desert Sun)Buy Photo

Seven years ago this month, Barack Obama stood on a stage in St. Paul, Minnesota, and claimed victory in the Democratic presidential primaries. Hillary Clinton hadn't conceded, but the numbers told the story. Obama had clinched the nomination.

He made some bold predictions that night. Among them: Future generations would tell their children that "this was the moment when the rise of the oceans began to slow and our planet began to heal."

With four-fifths of Obama's presidency now behind him, experts say he's done more to protect the environment than any president since at least Richard Nixon, even if he hasn't lived up to his soaring campaign rhetoric. The centerpiece of his climate policy, a sweeping plan to regulate coal-fired power plants, would reduce the country's carbon emissions at least 26 percent below 2005 levels by 2025.

Obama has also funded renewable energy, raised vehicle fuel-efficiency standards and pushed other countries to reduce their emissions. His landmark climate pact with China, which may have started to take shape here in the Coachella Valley, has raised hopes for a meaningful global deal by year's end.

But with climate change already bearing down on humanity — in the form of higher temperatures, rising seas and more extreme weather — critics say Obama's environmental legacy is still up in the air.

In part, that's because he's aggressively promoted new oil and gas development, onshore and offshore. It's a strategy that has confused and disappointed many scientists and environmental advocates, who say it cuts directly against his efforts to limit the greenhouse gas emissions that are causing global warming.

"That's just incompatible with the path that we know we need to take," said Michael Mann, a Pennsylvania State University climatologist whose work has been instrumental in understanding long-term temperature changes. "We really need to be incentivizing a dramatic transition away from our reliance on fossil fuels."

Obama is also negotiating a controversial free trade agreement that environmental groups fear would undermine many of his climate policies. And he has yet to approve or reject the proposed Keystone XL oil pipeline, a political hot potato that carries enormous symbolic weight for opponents and supporters.

For the fossil fuel lobby — and for others who argue that climate change isn't real, or isn't caused by human beings — the idea that Obama could be doing more to combat climate change is probably laughable. But for many scientists, environmental policy groups and climate activists, it's become something of a given.

"When you talk to the oil industry or others, they're going to talk about him as being public enemy No. 1, and that's ridiculous," said Tyson Slocum, director of the energy program at Public Citizen, a Washington, D.C.-based consumer advocacy group. "It is a very mixed legacy."

Words and deeds

Since Obama took office, climate science has painted an increasingly dire picture of our planet's future.

Globally, 2014 was the hottest year on record, and the amount of carbon already built up in the atmosphere virtually guarantees decades of continued warming. Massive ice sheets in Antarctica and the Arctic are melting faster than expected, and some scientists fear that continued warming could contribute to "megadroughts" in the U.S. Southwest far worse than the one currently afflicting California.

Obama knows all that. In an April speech from the low-lying Florida Everglades — which are threatened by rising sea levels — he said that climate change "is not a problem for another generation. Not anymore."

"The president himself has often raised the issue, drawn attention to it, including in major speeches, inaugural speeches, State of the Union speeches," said David Goldston, director of government affairs for the Natural Resources Defense Council.

Obama's most forceful move to limit climate change came two summers ago, when he announced that the Environmental Protection Agency would regulate greenhouse gas emissions from existing coal plants for the first time. The so-called "Clean Power Plan," which is set to be finalized this summer, is considered critical because America's 500-plus coal plants are its single largest source of carbon dioxide emissions.

Buy Photo U.S. Interior Secretary Sally Jewell, right, and Georges Antoun, chief operating officer of First Solar, tour the 550-megawatt Desert Sunlight solar farm in Riverside County, which opened in February 2015 as the world’s largest solar plant. It’s one of 52 large-scale renewable energy projects on federal land approved by President Barack Obama’s administration. (Photo: Jay Calderon/The Desert Sun)

The Obama administration has tackled emissions from other sources as well, moving forward this month on new rules for airplanes and heavy-duty trucks. Three years ago, Obama increased the fuel-efficiency standard for cars and light trucks from 35.5 miles per gallon by 2016 to 54.5 miles per gallon by 2025. The move will have enormous climate implications, since transportation accounts for more than a quarter of U.S. carbon emissions.

Renewable energy has also been a priority.

The economic stimulus package Obama pushed through Congress after taking office included $90 billion in funding for clean energy programs. And during Obama's presidency, federal officials have approved at least 52 large-scale solar, wind and geothermal projects on public land — many of them in the California desert.

Conservative lawmakers have derided the administration's renewable energy funding, pointing to the high-profile bankruptcy of Solyndra, a Fremont-based solar panel manufacturer that received a $535 million federal loan guarantee. But the Department of Energy reported last year that companies had defaulted on just 2.28 percent of total loan guarantees, and that it expects to make a profit of $5 billion to $6 billion from the loan guarantee program.

Carol Browner, who ran the EPA for eight years under then-President Bill Clinton, served as Obama's top energy and climate advisor during his first two years in office. She was a driving force behind the energy funding that made it into the stimulus package, which she called "the largest investment ever in clean energy in the United States."

"It was hugely important for sustaining that industry through an economic downturn," Browner said. "The industry was really still nascent, and it couldn't get the money from Wall Street anymore, and it needed this bridge."

'All of the above'

Most climate advocates agree that Obama has taken strong action to reduce emissions from coal, especially given that there's no chance of a Republican-controlled Congress passing climate legislation. But when it comes to the president's relentless support for domestic oil and gas drilling, they see a fundamental disconnect.

"On the one hand, he is ratcheting down on coal and carbon emissions from power plants. But on the other hand, he's still saying we want an 'all-of-the-above' energy policy," said Debbie Sease, national campaign director for the Sierra Club. "Obama does not seem to understand the connection between that and meeting his climate goals."

Obama has used his support for oil and gas to cast himself as a moderate, pragmatic president. In his 2014 State of the Union address, he promised that his administration would "keep working with the industry to sustain production and job growth while strengthening protection of our air, our water, and our communities."

It's more than talk: Obama's administration has leased more than nine million acres of federal land for oil and gas production, while doing little to impede the growth of hydraulic fracturing, a controversial drilling technique that has allowed energy companies to tap vast new reserves. On Obama's watch, the United States has become the world's top producer of oil and gas, beating Saudi Arabia, Russia and other traditional fossil fuel powerhouses.

Buy Photo The Sentinel power plant in Desert Hot Springs, which provides power during peak demand times, runs on natural gas. Obama has touted domestic gas production as part of his “all-of-the-above” energy strategy, to the chagrin of some climate advocates. (Photo: Jay Calderon/The Desert Sun)

Environmental groups were outraged when the Obama administration indicated last month it would allow Shell to drill for oil in the Chuckchi Sea, off the coast of Alaska. But the decision wasn't an outlier. While Obama is trying to prevent drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, he has also proposed to open vast swaths of the Atlantic Ocean to offshore oil production.

Supporters of Obama's "all-of-the-above" energy strategy describe new oil and gas drilling as a practical necessity, if only because it's better than depending on countries such as Saudi Arabia and Russia for oil. And natural gas, they say, can serve as a "bridge fuel" to an all-renewable future, since it emits far less carbon than coal and oil.

"In a perfect world, you'd want us all to be driving cars that didn't pollute, and using electricity that was absolutely renewable. That's not the world we live in," Browner said. "Obviously natural gas is better than other fossil fuels when it comes to making electricity."

Keeping it in the ground

Early in Obama's presidency, several major environmental groups supported his efforts to ramp up natural gas production. At the time, they saw it as a reasonable alternative to coal while renewable energy continued to develop.

But as industry started investing billions of dollars in natural gas infrastructure — and as evidence mounted that hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, could contaminate water supplies — climate advocates changed their tune. Their fear is that energy companies will treat gas as a long-term solution rather than a short-term fix, slowing the country's transition to renewable energy.

And time is of the essence, because the world can only afford to burn so much more carbon before the worst consequences of climate change become irreversible. In 2012, environmental activist Bill McKibben famously calculated that four-fifths of the world's proven fossil fuel reserves must stay in the ground if we are to limit global warming to two degrees Celsius, long considered a dangerous threshold to cross.

That urgency helps explain why so many climate scientists, policy groups and environmental activists have been frustrated by Obama's support for oil and gas.

"There's a lot of carbon on the line," said Kelly Mitchell, climate and energy director for Greenpeace. "These are decisions that are going to have global implications for climate change, and there are easy steps the president can take to keep fossil fuels in the ground."

Buy Photo The 377-megawatt Ivanpah solar project, in the Mojave Desert in California, is the world’s largest concentrated solar power plant. It’s one of 52 large-scale renewable energy projects on federal land approved by President Barack Obama’s administration. (Photo: Jay Calderon/The Desert Sun)

As a key Senate staffer in the early 1970s, Leon Billings was the chief author of the Clean Air Act, one of the nation's most powerful environmental laws. Billings said he has long been "puzzled" by Obama's oil and gas agenda.

"It creates a very real question mark over Obama's overall climate change strategy," he said.

Some climate advocates have honed in on the proposed Keystone XL oil pipeline as a proxy for the larger debate over federal support for oil and gas development. Obama said on "The Colbert Report" last year that building the pipeline could have a "disastrous" impact on the climate, but he has yet to make a final decision.

Among climate advocates, there's disagreement over how much of a tangible impact the pipeline would really have on climate change. But now that the pipeline has become such a focus for some environmental groups — and for congressional Republicans — observers generally agree that Obama's decision will carry enormous symbolic weight.

Mann called Keystone "an important line in the sand." The Canadian "tar sands" that Keystone would transport cause far greater carbon emissions than conventional oil.

"What does it say...to be investing in decades of infrastructure that will ensure the continued extraction of the dirtiest potential fossil fuel sources of energy?" Mann asked.

President Barack Obama waves to the crowds as he disembarks Air Force One at Palm Springs International Airport on Feb. 14, 2015. Obama spent President’s Day weekend playing golf in the area. (Photo: AP Photo/Rodrigo Pena)

'The art of the possible'

While Obama's support for oil and gas has been fairly consistent, his big-picture climate strategy has changed dramatically since he took office.

During his first presidential campaign, Obama pledged support for "cap-and-trade," a market-based mechanism to incentivize industries to reduce their carbon emissions. Energy, he said at one point, would be his first priority upon taking office; health care would come next.

But that's not what happened. Obama and Democratic leadership started working on climate and health care legislation simultaneously, and eventually it became clear that health care had a better chance of passing. Obama threw his weight behind the Affordable Care Act, while cap-and-trade died a slow death in the Senate.

Some climate advocates have criticized Obama for not pushing harder for a climate bill, although most now concede that his current plan for regulating emissions is just as effective. And at least from Browner's perspective, the cap-and-trade bill didn't fail for lack of effort.

"As the person who was on the Hill virtually every week working on this — legislation is about the art of the possible," she said. "Harry Reid tried so, so hard, but even among the Democratic membership there wasn't agreement."

It turned out to be Obama's last, best chance to sign climate legislation into law. Once Republicans took control of the House of Representatives in 2010 — swept into power partly by the Tea Party backlash to Obamacare — it became clear that even modest measures to lower carbon emissions would be out of the question.

So Obama changed course. Especially in his second term — unburdened by a re-election campaign — he has used existing laws and executive authority to wage war against greenhouse gas emissions.

Buy Photo Cars and trucks sit in traffic on the Interstate 10 near the Highway 111 exit, just outside the Coachella Valley. (Photo: Richard Lui/The Desert Sun)

The most obvious example of that strategy is Obama's plan to regulate coal plants. The plan makes use of the Clean Air Act, which gives the Environmental Protection Agency wide authority to regulate air pollutants.

Obama's harshest critics have described the plan as nothing short of tyranny, even though the Supreme Court ruled in 2007 that the EPA must regulate carbon under the Clean Air Act. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell — who hails from Kentucky, one of the nation's largest coal producers — has encouraged states not to comply.

Climate advocates believe the law is on their side, but many of them acknowledge that the Clean Power Plan is at least somewhat vulnerable to inevitable legal challenges. At the very least, Obama's proposal takes a novel approach to applying the Clean Air Act.

"It's not a frivolous legal challenge. It will probably come down to the U.S. Supreme Court," said Ann Carlson, an environmental law professor and the co-director of UCLA's Emmett Institute on Climate Change and the Environment. "It will probably be another 5-to-4 decision, and we'll probably all be wondering what Justice Kennedy thinks."

Some environmental groups have also criticized Obama's ongoing negotiations on a free-trade agreement known as the Trans-Pacific Partnership. Negotiators haven't released many details, but leaked documents suggest the agreement might allow multinational corporations to fight environmental regulations they don't like — such as the Clean Power Plan — through independent international tribunals.

The Clean Power Plan has another flaw: It could be dismantled by the next president. While Obama's successor couldn't just abandon carbon regulation altogether, Carlson said, he or she could replace Obama's plan with a much less rigorous one.

Billings, for his part, thinks Obama is making good use of the Clean Air Act. He also believes that Maine Sen. Edmund Muskie — his old boss in the Senate — would approve of how Obama has applied his signature bill.

"We didn't write the Clean Air Act to place constraints on the executive. We wrote the Clean Air Act to provide the executive with the tools that they would need to deal with air pollution issues," Billings said. "And among those happen to be carbon, methane and other greenhouse gases."

The international stage

As Obama's critics often point out, the United States alone can't solve climate change. Greenhouse gas emissions are a global problem, and limiting temperature increases to manageable levels — or at least non-catastrophic levels — will require global solutions.

Past efforts at international climate deals have ended poorly. The Kyoto Protocol was crippled by the withdrawal or non-cooperation of several major emitters, including the United States, Canada and Russia. Obama's first attempt to negotiate a climate deal, at Copenhagen in 2009, ended in a vague statement of principles that didn't include national emissions targets, binding or non-binding.

For many climate advocates, this December's climate summit in Paris presents the world's last, best hope of achieving a serious deal before the two-degree threshold falls out of reach. The summit won't yield legally binding emissions targets, but many nations — including developing countries, from China to Ethiopia — are already volunteering non-binding targets. Those targets would likely be the basis for any agreement.

Many of Obama's domestic actions have been geared toward showing the world that the United States is serious about tackling climate change, long a point of contention for the international community.

"This is the first time where the U.S. will come with a long list of actions in place," Browner said.

Obama's deal with China, too, is intended to spark further international cooperation. Announced in November — 17 months after Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping negotiated a smaller climate agreement at the Sunnylands Center and Gardens in Rancho Mirage — the deal requires China's carbon emissions to peak no later than 2030, a landmark concession for the rapidly developing nation.

President Barack Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping walk at the Sunnylands Center and Gardens in Rancho Mirage on June 8, 2013. The two leaders negotiated a modest climate deal at Sunnylands, paving the way for a larger agreement 17 months later. (Photo: AP Photo/Evan Vucci)

Many national policymakers, including Republicans and Democrats in the United States, have been critical of past climate negotiations for exempting developing nations — especially China, which is now the world's largest carbon emitter. Obama's deal with China could undermine that argument.

"It doesn't matter if the U.S. stops emitting everything tomorrow if China keeps building a new coal-fired power plant every week," Slocum said. "Climate change demands a global response, and in that sense Obama has played a very good leadership role."

Some climate advocates are optimistic about a groundbreaking deal in Paris — others less so. Generally, they agree that the important work will come afterward, as countries work to meet their emissions targets.

"Regardless of what does happen in Paris, the solution to this problem is not going to be achieved in one year or two years. It's not going to be achieved by a single negotiation," Mann said. "It's only going to be solved by a long-term, concerted commitment, for all the nations of the world to sign on to this transition away from fossil fuel energy."

Two degrees

Mann makes a key point: Even if Paris yields a landmark agreement, it won't solve climate change.

Many of the national emissions goals released thus far — including the U.S. target, a 26 to 28 percent reduction by 2025 — are more ambitious than any that have come before. But experts say they still aren't good enough to limit global warming to two degrees Celsius, past which points scientists fear that the consequences of climate change would be far worse than they will be otherwise.

Climate advocates don't fault Obama for not adopting a higher target, or for not pressing for a legally binding agreement.

"Part of the problem is no nation wants to sacrifice any sovereignty to an international institution, and with an issue like climate change, you have to do it," Billings said. "This will not be resolved by Barack Obama. That's not a criticism of Barack Obama. It's just the reality of American politics."

Within the environmental community, California is seen as a model for future federal action on climate change. The state implemented a cap-and-trade system in 2012, and major utilities are required to buy 33 percent of their retail electricity from renewable sources by 2020. Officials have also set a goal of reducing emissions 40 percent below 1990 levels by 2030, and 80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050.

Mary Nichols, chair of the California Air Resources Board, praised Obama for his commitment to dealing with climate change, particularly in light of congressional inaction. She also said the federal government has more to learn from California's climate policies.

"We have continued to hope that there will be ways for the national government, and for other states, to increase their level of ambition and activity in switching to cleaner fuels and promoting energy efficiency," Nichols said. "What we have done (in California) is have the first and so far only comprehensive climate program, and that is something that we continue to hope that others will join us in."

Calif., Gov. Jerry Brown answers a question concerning the budget agreement reached with legislative leaders at a Capitol news conference in Sacramento, Calif., Tuesday, June 16, 2015. Accompanied by Assembly Speaker Toni Atkins, D-San Diego, right, and Senate President Pro Tem Kevin de Leon, D-Los Angeles, unseen, Brown outlined the budget plan that send billions more to public schools and universities in the fiscal year that begins July 1. (AP Photo/Rich Pedroncelli) (Photo: Rich Pedroncelli, AP)

Climate change isn't the only issue that will determine Obama's environmental legacy.

The EPA's "Waters of the United States" rule, still a work in progress, could have a major impact on how the federal government regulates water pollution. Obama's administration has also developed new rules to limit smog and mercury in the air, and some environmental groups consider the president's ocean policies to be among his crowning achievements.

"When President Obama took office, most people accepted the story that most fish in the ocean were destined to disappear," said Diane Regas, executive director of the Environmental Defense Fund. "The administration has helped to turn that story around."

But climate change is the most significant environmental threat the world has ever faced, and Obama's environmental legacy will largely be determined by his climate policies. And that story is still being written.

"What one president does in even two terms is not going to be enough to solve the problem, even if he does a whole lot more than he's already done," Sease said. "But clearly what he's done is more than any president in history. Is there more that he can and should do, before his term ends? Yes."

Sammy Roth writes about energy and water for The Desert Sun. He can be reached at sammy.roth@desertsun.com, (760) 778-4622 and @Sammy_Roth.

Read or Share this story: http://desert.sn/1Llrj13