In Georgia, veteran middle school teacher Nancy Perry has been forced to resign after telling her students that President Barack Obama is a baby killer. The schools superintendent, Chuck Ledbetter, said Perry will retire at the end of the school year.

He said, “On behalf of the School District, we want to apologize to the student and to his parents. It is not the place of teachers to attempt to persuade students about religious or political beliefs.’

According to th e Daily Mail, a 12-year-old boy brought the complaint against the teacher to his father, Jimmie Scott. Then Scott met with Perry at a parent-teacher conference. He said she showed him some “internet propaganda” and commented, “See, Obama is a baby killer. He aborts babies at nine months old as they’re coming through the birth canal.”‘

Although it could be argued that Perry’s statement was inappropriate considering the setting, her comments about Obama weren’t completely unfounded. From taxpayer funding of abortions in America and around the world, to the stacking of the Supreme Court and federal courts with hardcore abortion advocates, Obama has been a relentless support of abortion-on-demand.

For example, earlier this year, President Obama’s administration issued a veto threat concerning the Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act, which would protect babies after 20-weeks from abortion based on the concept that they can feel pain.

And in 2013, he praised Planned Parenthood’s abortion business and said he wanted God to bless them.

He said, “As long as we’ve got to fight to make sure women have access to quality, affordable health care, and as long as we’ve got to fight to protect a woman’s right to make her own choices about her own health, I want you to know that you’ve also got a president who’s going to be right there with you, fighting every step of the way,” said Obama. “Thank you, Planned Parenthood. God bless you.”

Additionally, in 2009, president Obama promised the American people that Obamacare would not fund abortion. He made this promise because he knew that the religious and pro-life community was concerned that Obamacare would make them pay for the killing of children through abortion. Now, we know for sure their concerns were valid because in 2014, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) released a report that identifies 1,036 ObamaCare plans that cover abortion on demand and receive taxpayer subsides.

ACTION: Contact the Dublin Board of Education to support Perry.