Margaret Thatcher is to blame for Scotland's destructive relationship with alcohol, the SNP’s health minister has claimed.

Alex Neil said the late Tory Prime Minister was responsible for a 60 per cent surge in deaths among working age men over the last three decades.

He told a pro-independence rally that the increase was a direct result of her closing heavy industry and failing to create new jobs.

But the Tories described the intervention as "preposterous" and said Neil was "parroting myths about Baroness Thatcher nearly 25 years after she left office".

His comments emerged as Mr Neil stepped up his campaign for a minimum alcohol price by arguing that it is possible to purchase the maximum recommended amount of drink for only £4.50 per week.

Speaking in Airdrie, he said research by Sir Harry Burns, the outgoing Chief Medical Officer, showed Scotland has gone from having the world's lowest liver disease rates to one of the highest over the last 30 years.

The Sunday Post reported that the Health Minister said most of the increase in deaths “since Thatcher took power in 1979” was down to alcohol and drug abuse, violence and suicide.

"According to Sir Harry's analysis it is down to one factor and that is the total lack of work and the failure to replace jobs in the traditional industries, like steel and like coal mining, with other well-paid jobs,” he said.

"What has happened is that the men have lost their dignity, their pride and their respect and have turned to drugs, they have turned to violence and they have turned to alcohol abuse because they have lost that respect and that dignity. That is at the core of the social problems we have in Scotland today."

Scotland has one of the highest death rates from chronic liver disease in Europe, only beaten by Hungary.

But Jackson Carlaw, the Scottish Tory deputy leader, said: “This is one of the most preposterous interventions in the referendum debate to date, even by Alex Neil's standards.

"Figures demonstrate that the deterioration in Scotland's record with alcohol began almost to the day Margaret Thatcher left office – make of that what you will.

"Subsequent governments allowed alcohol to become more affordable and it remains a critical problem in Scotland today.”

In a second controversial outburst at the same meeting, Mr Neil said Scots who work in shops or the fast food chain McDonald's do not have "good jobs".

Asked about youth unemployment, Mr Neil said training and education was essential to have "any prospect of having a good job, and I am not talking about jobs in McDonald's or at a checkout counter."

Around 240,000 Scots work in the retail sector, while McDonald's employs around 7,000 in Scotland.

James Kelly, a Scottish Labour MSP, said the minister was showing "contempt for working class people".

A spokesman for shopworkers union Usdaw said: "These remarks could be considered as insulting by many people who work in retail and are ill-advised.

"The evidence out there supports the fact that a career in retail can be fulfilling. There are plenty of 'good jobs' and these comments are not helpful."