The Outrage Machine is a weekly opinion column by voices from the left and right on Washington. Look for the top ten Republican highlights next week in this space.

In the spirit of the holiday season,

Let’s review 2015 and the number one reason,

The Democrats believe this was a banner year,

Because instead of spreading good nature and cheer,

The GOP did nothing but instill fear,

In an electorate that is seeking leaders who lead,

Not war-mongers who feed,

On the American people’s angst and worry,

For their own political gain and glory.

So let’s review the Top Ten Most Memorable People and Moments for Democrats in 2015:



Business mogul Donald Trump’s previews the tenor of his candidacy when he formally announces at Trump Tower on June 16, 2015 in New York City, calling some Mexican immigrants criminals and rapists. (Photo by Christopher Gregory/Getty Images)

Number 10 – Donald Trump:

From the moment Trump announced his candidacy for the GOP nomination for the presidency, he has been, for Democrats, the gift that keeps on giving. Trump has delivered some unbelievable doozies, starting with his annoucement speech broadside, in which he said Mexican immigrants were criminals and rapists. Reference to a “great wall” was there from the start, along with the mandate that Mexico must pay for it. Then, there was the declaration that he would create a “deportation force” to remove all 11 million undocumented immigrants if he becomes president. Gracias Señor Trump!!



The White House was bathed in rainbow colors to celebrate the June ruling by the Supreme Court legalizing gay marriage.

Number 9 – The Supreme Court ruling on gay marriage:

The June SCOTUS ruling declaring the right to marry is protected for all Americans under the U.S. constitution made history and was a huge win for the country. It was also a win for the LGBT community, for American values, for President Obama, and for Democrats who had embraced this issue as one of freedom and equality for all under the law.

Number 8 – The Supreme Court decision upholding the Affordable Care Act, and the 18 million Americans now covered by Obamacare:

Over the summer, the Supreme Court upheld a critical part of the Affordable Care Act that provides federal health insurance subsidies to Americans who qualify, solidifying President Obama’s legacy-making domestic achievement and handing him and the Democrats a huge political win. Proving good policy is good politics, more important than the political win are the millions of Americans now covered by Obamacare who can sleep soundly knowing they will not go broke if someone in their family gets sick.

Number 7 – Continued record job growth:

The country has seen 69 straight months of private-sector job growth – a record – and the unemployment rate is down to 5 percent. Wages are starting to go up and more people are jumping into the job market.



Secretary of State John Kerry, and other dignitaries watch as U.S. Marines raise the U.S. flag over the newly reopened embassy in Havana, Cuba. Friday, Aug. 14, 2015. Kerry traveled to the Cuban capital to raise the U.S. flag and formally reopen the long-closed U.S. Embassy. (AP Photo/Pablo Martinez Monsivais, Pool)

Number 6 – The re-opening of the U.S. embassy in Cuba:

When President Obama announced the thawing of U.S.-Cuba relations in December of last year, most Republicans flew off the handle, proving once again they are stuck in the past, embracing a failed Cold War mentality and a decades-old policy that hurts the very people Republicans claim to want to protect – the Cuban people. Over the summer, in a beautiful, solemn ceremony that opened up the U.S. embassy in Cuba, there was a feeling of renewed optimism and hope for the Cuban people, the majority of whom support the new policy. A majority of Americans, including majorities of Latinos, also support this new policy. Gracias Presidente Obama!



Donald Trump defends his plan to bar all Muslims from entering the country during a rally in South Carolina.

Number 5 – Donald Trump:

Turns out Trump was just getting started when he insulted a whole country and demonized Latinos and immigrants. As The Donald got warmed up at campaign rallies, at GOP debates, and in innumerable interviews he can’t say no to, we experienced diatribes that insulted whole swaths of voters including women, nursing mothers, POWs and veterans, and in the most recent and egregious pronouncement, all Muslims in the country and around the world by supporting a policy that would deny entry into the U.S. to any Muslim from abroad.



Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton testifies, and reacts to Chairman Trey Gowdy (R-S.C.) and ranking member Elijah Cummings (D-Md.) arguing, during the House Select Committee on Benghazi hearing on Oct. 22, 2015. (Photo by Melina Mara/The Washington Post)

Number 4 – Rep. Kevin McCarthy’s (R-Calif.) short-lived House speaker campaign:

When Kevin McCarthy, House Majority Leader, uttered the words that proved the Benghazi Committee was set up solely to bring down Hillary Clinton’s poll numbers, a political tsunami ensued clearing the way for Secretary Clinton — and the Democrats — to put the Benghazi issue to rest. Clinton’s 11-hour testimony before the Benghazi Committee comes in as number 4a on this list because of her skill and aplomb in the face of bombastic and incessant badgering by her questioners. But McCarthy’s comments no doubt set her up nicely as they exposed the real motives for the GOP Benghazi probe, of which the American people were already suspicious.



Republican presidential candidates take the stage during the CNN Republican presidential debate at the Venetian Hotel & Casino on Dec. 15, 2015, in Las Vegas. (AP Photo/Mark J. Terrill)

Number 3 – The Republican debates:

With every passing GOP debate, the stark contrast becomes clearer between what has been a complete circus on the Republican side and the more serious candidates on the Democratic side. The American people are able, on national television, to witness the GOP’s extreme move to the right, as candidates trailing Trump tried to embrace his hardline views in an effort to gain traction in the polls without alienating his supporters. That strategy has failed. Trump continues to lead by massive margins nationally and in most states, making the Republican Party look more and more out of touch with the American people (and with reality) with every passing day.



Democratic presidential hopefuls participate in the a debate hosted by ABC News at Saint Anselm College in Manchester, N.H., on Dec. 19, 2015. AFP PHOTO / JEWEL SAMADJEWEL SAMAD/AFP/Getty Images

Number 2 – The Democratic debates:

There was no better contrast for Democrats than their own debates juxtaposed with the circus-like atmosphere, the insult-ridden demagoguery, and fact-free hot-air messes that were the Republican debates (see #3). The Democratic debates were the complete opposite. They were substantive, robust and passionate discussions about policies the Democratic candidates support to lift middle-class families, keep the economy surging for everyone, and keep Americans safe and secure without the fear and war-mongering. While the Democratic debates did not emanate as much heat, they projected much more light than their counterparts. And light is what we need most at this particular moment.



Trump speaks at a campaign rally in Mesa, Arizona, Dec. 16, 2015. REUTERS/Nancy Wiechec

Number 1 – Donald Trump:

Need I say more? When many Republicans say that if Trump becomes the nominee – and there is not much at the end of 2015, with just a few weeks left before the first votes are cast in Iowa and New Hampshire, to say that he won’t – they will vote for Hillary, it’s obvious that the ex-reality TV star is truly the best thing to have happened to Democrats this year.

Here’s to a terrific past year for Democrats and for millions of Americans and their families who benefited from the policies we fought for. And may 2016 bring even better tidings of comfort and Donald Trump! Er, I mean joy. Happy New Year!

Maria Cardona is a Democratic strategist and principal at the Dewey Square Group, a CNN and CNN Español political commentator, a former senior adviser to the 2008 Hillary Clinton campaign and former Democratic National Committee communications director. She’s also a fellow at the George Washington University Graduate School of Political Management.