More tools are available on the beWellnm website this year to help New Mexicans prepare for the enrollment process and understand their insurance options.

Buy Photo John Franchini, New Mexico's insurance superintendent, and New Mexico Health Insurance Exchange CEO Amy Dowd go over their schedule of recent presentations to insurance companies at Doña Ana Community College. (Photo: Jett Loe / Sun-News)Buy Photo

LAS CRUCES - New Mexicans enrolling in 2016 health insurance plans or making changes to their existing plan through the Health Insurance Marketplace will notice a few changes during this year's open enrollment period, which begins Sunday and ends Jan. 31.

Last year, five health insurance providers were available through beWellnm, New Mexico's Health Insurance Exchange, including Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New Mexico, which recently left the marketplace.

"Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Mexico had proposed rate increases that were not approved through the Office of Insurance through the superintendent," Amy Dowd, CEO of NMHIX said.

According to a news release by the New Mexico Office of Superintendent of Insurance, BCBSNM submitted a rate increase request for an average increase of 51.6 percent on its individual health plans effective Jan. 1.

"(OSI) has to make sure that the rates (insurance carriers) ask for are justified by an actuarial analysis and they can prove that they really deserve that rate and Blue Cross Blue Shield did not prove that to us," state insurance superintendent John Franchini said.

New Mexico consumers still will be able to choose from plans provided by the four remaining carriers: Molina Healthcare of New Mexico, New Mexico Health Connections, Christus Health Plan and Presbyterian Health Plan Inc.

"All four of these carriers are very experienced at handling complicated medical claims and all these carriers have expanded their contracts with doctors and hospitals across the state of New Mexico," Franchini said. "They have doubled their providers list in this last year, and the reason they've done that is in anticipation of picking up the policy holders that had PPO plans and exchange plans with Blue Cross Blue Shield, so their marketplace has expanded."

Other changes taking place this enrollment period include more assistance for people purchasing health insurance through the marketplace and more tools available on the beWellnm website to help people prepare for the enrollment process and understand their insurance options.

Buy Photo John Franchini, state insurance superintendent, looks over a beWellnm checklist designed to help people sign up for health insurance. (Photo: Jett Loe / Sun-News)

More than 52,300 New Mexicans selected plans for 2015 through the marketplace (a 63 percent increase from the prior year), and as of February this year, more than 5,600 people from Doña Ana County had selected plans, according to information provided by NMHIX.

While New Mexicans currently enrolled in Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New Mexico plans will see no change in their coverage for 2015, they will need to select a new plan with a new carrier during the upcoming enrollment period for 2016 coverage. Certain individuals may also need to alter their plans, depending on changes in health status, family makeup or financial situations.

"We estimate that about half of people who are currently enrolled will have to go in and make a change," Dowd said.

Those who don't need to take action, because their plan will not be discontinued or because they are happy with their coverage, are encouraged to visit the beWellnm website and shop the marketplace, Dowd said.

"It's good to come in during the open enrollment period, shop, update your financial information," she said. "You may be eligible for additional premium assistance, or you may find that you need a different plan."

Individuals may find that they are eligible for a tax credit, which can reduce the monthly cost of their insurance plan.

Buy Photo Representatives from the four insurance companies participating in the Affordable Care Act exchange in New Mexico listen to recent presentations about the exchange at Doña Ana Community College. Open enrollment for health insurance offered through the marketplace begins Sunday. (Photo: Jett Loe / Sun-News)

"When a person is at the poverty level, they go into Medicaid," Franchini said. "If they're past the poverty level, they get all these credits in the exchange. You can get as much as 85 percent credit in the exchange if you're just above the poverty level, which means that a $400 dollar policy will only cost you $50 dollars a month."

Health insurance plans range from catastrophic, in which members generally pay all of their medical costs up to a certain amount, to platinum plans, which have higher monthly payments and lower out-of-pocket costs when visiting the doctor. However, most plans are offered at the bronze, silver or gold level, Dowd said.

Don't wait too long

"Nationally, in New Mexico, our health insurance rates continue to be very low, so there's plenty of choices," Dowd said. "There's lots of market competition helping to keep the prices low and our uninsured rate is dropping, so we're hoping to keep up the really good momentum this coming year."

Dowd said one of the common mistakes people make when getting enrolled is that they wait too long to make a decision.

"Health insurance isn't like going online and buying (plane) tickets," she said. "It's a little bit more involved. We find it takes people sometimes two or three visits to the website to shop, to talk to their significant other or their family and to understand if it's the best plan for them for next year."

While open enrollment ends Jan. 31, consumers who need health coverage effective Jan.1 will have to select a plan no later than Dec. 15, Dowd said.

"If you miss that deadline, you face having a gap in coverage and, of course, that's bad because you never know what's going to happen," she said.

Penalty increases

Those who miss the the final enrollment deadline will not be able to get health insurance for 2016 unless they qualify for special enrollment. Families and individuals who don't have coverage in 2016 will face penalties when they file their federal income tax return.

"The penalty increases this year," Dowd said. "What we always tell people is go out and see what you can find for coverage, because it may be less overall for you to have insurance than to pay the financial penalty, and that becomes ever more real each year."

The fee for not having coverage in 2016 is 2.5 percent of household income or $695 per person ($347.50 per child under 18) for the year — whichever is higher, according to HealthCare.gov.

"We don't want people to wait until the last minute," Dowd said. "Start the process early. You can go on (the website) and you can shop, and you can go all the way up until the end of the process, where you hit you want to apply. The information is saved. You can log back in again, re-shop if you want."

This year, several informational events and kiosks are scheduled to take place at various locations throughout the state to help people get insured during open enrollment, Dowd said.

A beWellnm information table will be set up at the Farmers & Crafts Market on Saturday.

For a calendar of events and more information about the New Mexico's Health Insurance Exchange, visit nmhix.com. To shop the marketplace or get free help from an agent, broker or enrollment counselor, visit beWellnm.com.

Alexia Severson is a features reporter and may be reached at 575-541-5462 and aseverson@lcsun-news.com. Follow her @AlexiaMSeverson on Twitter.

How to enroll

1. Call 1-855-996-6449. Assistance available in English and Spanish from 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. Monday through Friday.

2. Visit beWellnm.com

3. Get free one-on-one assistance from an insurance agent, broker or enrollment counselor. Get help by calling beWellnm or visiting the beWellnm.com.

Important dates: Open enrollment begins Sunday and ends Jan. 31, 2016. Must enroll in a plan by Dec. 15 to get coverage effective Jan. 1.

Enrollment checklist

1. Personal information: Date of birth, social security number

2. Proof of marital status: single, married, divorced, widow or widower

3. Number of family members living in the household

4. Household income

5. Immigration status

6. Tribal status

7. Current insurance policy (if you have one)

Read or Share this story: http://lcsun.co/1MiiW1M