Delmont, SD

The Zion Lutheran Church in Delmont used to stand as a historic structure, until a May tornado destroyed the building. Now, members of the congregation are determined to rebuild after a unanimous decision.

When church members David Villmow and Tim Kaufman first saw the destruction to the building that had stood for more than 100 years, they were stunned.

"I was at a loss for words," Villmow said. "I couldn't, I couldn't fathom it for awhile."

"Sadness, and pain, and fear, just everything," Kaufman said. "Maybe even a little anger."

Now, both men are members of the seven-person building committee for a new church. Plans are still in the initial stages, and building committee members say they plan on meeting with architects this week.

Pastor Bucklew says donations have been pouring in from around the country to rebuild the historic church that used to stand in Delmont.

"In the district account, which is where most of it is being funneled at, we had about $65,000, and that was a couple weeks ago, and you know, a couple weeks before that it was like at $45,000, so it's just growing and growing," Pastor Bucklew said.

Pastor Bucklew says some congregation members want the process to move faster, while others are just thankful for something to look forward to. With donations coming from as far as Texas, Pastor Bucklew says the generosity people have shown so far is reassuring.

"It's a reminder that we're not alone," Pastor Bucklew said. "I mean, Christians from all kinds of denominations have given to our church, and even some non-Christians, you know, and it's so encouraging to see that love and support."

Although there's a long road ahead for members of Zion Lutheran, Kaufman says he has hope for the new church.

"We've so far been working together as a family, and I think it'll come together as a family, we'll all worship as a family again," Kaufman said.

When it was still standing, Zion Lutheran Church saw anywhere from 100 to 125 people each Sunday. Pastor Bucklew says the new church will probably have a capacity of 200 or less.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.