ORLANDO -- Although they have differed over policies like immigration reform and foreign affairs, the 14 Republican candidates for president who attended the Florida GOP’s “Sunshine Summit” are united on one issue.

They want to repeal Obamacare, the signature policy achievement of Barack Obama’s two terms as president.

“Obamacare has to be repealed because it’s failing. It’s failing the very people it was intended to help,” Carly Fiorina said at the GOP’s debate in Milwaukee earlier in the week.

But repeal of the landmark federal health care law immediately raises the question of how the candidates would replace it or at least deal with the consequences of its repeal.

It’s an important issue in Florida, a state that continues to rank among the worst when it comes to providing health care coverage for its growing population.

A new national survey by the personal finance website WalletHub was released this week, highlighting the states with the highest and lowest uninsured rates in 2014. It showed Florida had the third highest rate of uninsured residents at 16.57 percent, trailing only Alaska and Texas.

But there has been significant improvement under Obamacare, with 695,899 persons gaining health insurance since 2010 and the uninsured rate falling from 21.26 percent, WalletHub said.

Florida still has many challenges, including ranking 46th among all the states with 9.34 percent of its children uninsured in 2014. Massachusetts was the national leader, with only 1.54 percent of its children uninsured. Florida’s adult uninsured rate was 18.45 percent last year.

Another trend is that the uninsured rate is higher in the states, like Florida, that did not expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act. Those states had an uninsured rate of 12.74 percent, compared to 9.35 percent in the states that expanded Medicaid, WalletHub said.

Ohio Gov. John Kasich, whose state has expanded Medicaid, has differentiated himself on that issue from the other candidates, calling for Obamacare’s repeal but saying he wants to find a way to retain the Medicaid expansion effort.

Most candidates have not outlined detailed health care plans. At the Milwaukee debate, Fiorina told a moderator that states could replace the health care coverage for its sickest residents with chronic diseases by providing state-run “high risk” insurance pools.

The problem is the high-risk pools have a spotty history. The coverage plans remain expensive for individuals and even with higher premiums, the states must subsidize the coverage costs. Florida tried it but closed its pool to new participants in 1991 because of the cost.

Obamacare will also be an issue that will unite the Democrats in next year’s presidential election. They will rally their supporters in defense of the health care plan.

U.S. Rep. Corrine Brown, D-Jacksonville, said this week she is supporting a state constitutional amendment to expand Medicaid to cover people who earn 133 percent of the federal poverty level, $32,252 for a family of four.

“Why were you re-elected? You were elected to do something,” Brown said. “And one of the things I am doing is helping leading the fight to get (this amendment) on the ballot, telling the Legislature I served in for 10 years to take the money.”