First, traditional brokerages had to contend with Silicon Valley startups that aim to make investing automatic and appealing to people with limited funds to invest.

Now one of those online firms, sometimes dubbed “robo advisers,” is edging into the business of providing wealth-management services to people with $1 million or more.

Some of the biggest U.S. brokerages and private banks already have reacted to the growing demand by investors for online services by rolling out new mobile applications and engaging clients with web-chat communications and improved website functionality.

Personal Capital, an online adviser in San Francisco, is now offering private-banking services—including customized portfolios of stocks and other investments, credit lines and mortgages—to customers who invest $1 million or more with Personal Capital’s investment-advisory unit. So far, 100 customers with a total $200 million in assets at Personal Capital—about one-quarter of the firm’s total $760 million under management—have signed up.

Advisers are expanding mobile services. Here, Morgan Stanley app. Morgan Stanley

The loans are through Bank of New York Mellon, the parent company of Personal Capital’s asset custodian, Pershing.

Personal Capital, one of the biggest of the new breed of online advisers that have cropped up since the financial crisis, is taking direct aim at the wealth-management divisions of the biggest U.S. brokerages, including Bank of America’s Merrill Lynch, Morgan Stanley, Wells Fargo and UBS, says Jay Shah, Personal Capital’s chief operations officer.

Teams of advisers assigned to each customer will do quarterly reviews of the customer’s finances, he said, and they can pull in accountants and estate planners to advise as needed. Unlike a typical brokerage, most of Personal Capital’s interaction with clients is online, through mobile apps, videoconference or by phone.

Personal Capital’s new private-client unit charges 0.79% annually on the first $3 million invested with it and the fee scale falls to 0.49% of assets annually for accounts over $10 million. Traditional brokers often charge 1% of assets annually, though they also scale the fees down for larger accounts.

Personal Capital’s typical client is in his or her early 50s, with finances that have grown complex. “We see the do-it-yourselfers graduating” to using the online adviser, Mr. Shah said.