For a half, there was nowhere to turn on the stats sheet, nowhere to hide.

Pretty much nothing to spin in a positive direction.

But there are two halves.

Boy, are the Nuggets glad there are two halves. And two overtimes.

Because as dramatic turnarounds go, this was one of the best of the season in Friday night’s game against Dallas. But all of the extra time couldn’t save the Nuggets from a heart-pounding 144-143 double-overtime loss at the Pepsi Center, and it was a former friend who inflicted the final blow.

Raymond Felton’s layup with 1.5 seconds left in the second overtime was the difference. The scoreline was a throwback to the Nuggets-Mavs clashes in the 1980s.

The loss was the Nuggets’ 50th of the season, the first time they’ve lost at least 50 games since the 2002-03 season.

“I’m playing in my head, the little things that we could have done. But all that being said, those guys played their tails off. An incredible game,” Nuggets coach Melvin Hunt said.

Danilo Gallinari scored 47 points for the Nuggets on 15-of-23 shooting from the field, including 7-of-12 from 3-point range, and a perfect 10-of-10 from the free-throw line.

Wilson Chandler added 20 points and 11 rebounds and Ty Lawson had 19 points and 18 assists.

Down 23 points at one time, the Nuggets stormed back to make it a back-and-forth affair.

The third quarter was a complete turnaround from anything else that happened in the game prior to that point. The Nuggets had allowed 73 points in the first half as the Mavericks did just whatever they wanted.

But things changed in the second half.

The Mavericks big bench production from Al-Farouq Aminu, J.J. Barea, Devin Harris, Amar’e Stoudemire and Charlie Villanueva always had a short shelf life. It had to. Many had equaled or exceeded their season points averages by halftime. But it took the Nuggets a while to get the clamps put on them.

The Nuggets got control of those five in the third, and once they did, began chopping big-time into the lead. Trailing by 21 at halftime, the Nuggets cut it to four by the start of the fourth quarter using a 21-7 run to end a third in which they outscored Dallas 37-20.

“Want. Heart. Desire. Can’t question them,” Hunt said. “After a night like that, you can’t question them. They could have laid down, they could have packed it in, easily. And everyone would have understood. But their hearts wouldn’t allow them to pack it in.”

But.

Dallas coach Rick Carlisle put the starters back in. And with them back in the game, the Nuggets had their work cut out for them.

Still, they scrapped and scraped.

They tied the game at 105, and then at 107. And when Kenneth Faried caught an alley-oop dunk with 2:45 left in the game, the Nuggets finally had their lead (113-112). A Lawson 3-pointer put the Nuggets up 119-115 with just under two minutes to go. Dallas answered with four straight points, two on a goaltending call on Faried, to tie it at 119 with 53.1 to play. The two teams went into the first overtime tied at 121.

When Lawson missed a jumper at the end of the first overtime, which sent it into the second. Dallas, already resting players, pulled its main starters and counted on its bench to seal the deal. And they did.

“They are disappointed because we laid everything out there. We wanted to win this game against a very good team,” Hunt said.

Dirk Nowitzki scored 25 points and Richard Jefferson added 24 for Dallas.

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dempseypost