When you think about what you want to leave to your children at your death, don’t forget to think about something that doesn’t carry dollar signs.

In short, you want to pass along your values, as well as your money.

You want your heirs to become good stewards of the assets you leave them. You want them not just to manage money well but also to be able to put it in its proper perspective. You want to know what role money will play in the life of your children and the lives of their children.

“Too often, wealthy parents and grandparents pass down their money, whether a weekly allowance or a large inheritance, without taking care to pass down their values, their work ethic, passion, motivation and drive for success,” said Brad Klontz, a financial psychologist at Kansas State University.

“Values drive behaviors,” he added. “It is important to teach them the value of hard work, the benefits of being able to delay gratification, and how to be good stewards of their financial resources, through saving and charitable giving. Without passing along these values and skills, children are likely to mismanage and squander their inheritances.”

It’s not the amount that you’re leaving to your children that’s so important; it’s whether when they become adults will they understand that this money reflects your hard work and values.

“Regardless of the amount of money you have, helping your children learn the necessary skills to become good stewards of funds, which they earn or eventually inherit, is an essential life skill for them,” said Tom Murphy, certified financial planner at Murphy & Sylvest in Dallas.

To help them become that, it’s important to start educating them early about money. Murphy said 7 to 9 is generally the age range at which a child begins to understand the concept of money.

Teach responsibility

Bob and Susan Murrill of Dallas opened bank accounts for their children, Justin, now 34, and Jennifer, 39, when they were teenagers so they could build up funds for certain purchases.

“They saved a lot,” said Bob, a retired attorney. “It was their money, and we allowed them to spend a certain amount of it as long as they kept a certain amount in savings.”

The Murrills wanted their kids to learn how to make decisions and “judgments on the value of the dollar,” Bob said.

“If they bought something frivolously, it doesn’t really have much consequence if it’s a low-dollar amount. But the greater the dollar amount, the more of the consequence,” he said.

Justin and Jennifer learned from each other and their friends.

“Our daughter was the best teacher,” Bob said. “She was so cheap she didn’t want to spend money for much.”

As your kids get older, give them more responsibility, said Shellee Henson, senior financial therapist at Dallas-based Financial Strategies Group.

“By the time they get to high school, help them open a checking account, get a debit card,” she said. “Give them a credit card that they can use to put gas in their car. They may not pay the bill, but they’re responsible for their charges.”

Set boundaries

“The best outcomes for children, including financial, social and emotional, occur when parents provide high levels of both love and limits,” Klontz said.

“Love without boundaries is harmful and creates spoiled, anxious and depressed children. In the same way, money and gifts without structure and limits can create financially irresponsible and dependent children.”

Klontz said parents should hold a tight rein over allowances.

“Do not give allowances without strings attached and then bemoan the fact that your children spend irresponsibly,” he said. “Structure allowances. The earlier, the better.

“For example, have your children put their allowance money into three buckets: one for saving, one for spending and one for giving away to charity. This teaches children the value of delaying gratification and service for others, while allowing them to also enjoy reasonable spending.”

Allow for mistakes

“The best way to teach them financial responsibility is to give them an allowance and give them freedom to spend the money as they choose,” Henson said.

“But one of the conditions also with it is, ‘You buy birthday presents for the family, you buy your own Christmas or holiday gifts.’ You give them reason to save some of it.”

Inherent in this is the chance that your child may make a mistake and spend their money on something frivolous that they later come to regret.

“When the child wants to buy something, you say, ‘Sure, you can buy it, but since that is not something you really need, you have to use your own money,’” Murphy said. “Two weeks or two days later, when the child is tired of the item and wants something else, the parent can say, ‘Since you already spent your money, you will have to wait.’

“The child will quickly learn the lesson of prioritizing spending ... and will learn the deferred gratification skill you want him or her to master.”

Don’t bail them out

“You help them strategize, but you don’t bail them out,” Henson said.

If you step in each time they get into financial trouble, she said, “it teaches them that Mom and Dad will bail you out, so it doesn’t really matter what you do because they’ve got your back.”

Consider this example: You tell your son that the money is his to spend, but he must also use it to buy birthday and holiday gifts for family members. Now, his sister’s birthday is approaching and he didn’t save up the money to buy her a gift.

“You don’t step in and say, ‘I’ll give you some money to buy your sister a present,’” Henson said. “You let them figure out what to do so they experience the consequences of the decisions that they make, to really understand what the consequences are of not being responsible.”

Provide rewards

When the Murrills’ children saved money in their bank accounts, their parents matched their contributions.

“That rewarded them for saving,” Murrill said.

He and his wife did keep an eye on how their kids were spending their money.

“We monitored what they were using their money for, not so much for control but to advise,” Murrill said. “Then we gave them an allocated amount before the school year and at Christmas to buy clothes so they could freely use that amount. But if they went over, then it was on their own nickel.”

Today, Justin and Jennifer have grown so financially adept that the Murrills are paying for them to see Murphy, their financial planner, and his partner, Susan Sylvest, each quarter.

“Being a good steward of money, in essence, means making your money work for you,” Murphy said. “Never spend your principal on anything other than an income-producing asset. Live below your means. Prioritize to use your funds for those things which are really important to you and your family.”

On Twitter:

@pamelayip