On Self-Governance Peter Giersch's blog is part of our Purple Wisconsin project. Giersch is a managing director with Cathedral Consulting Group. A native of Milwaukee, he lives in Thiensville with his wife and 5 children. SHARE

By

The latest “Trump Dump” scandal happened when reporters were unable to force him to confirm that he would not start a registry of Muslims in the US. Yes, that is a convoluted way of saying it, but it was obvious that these reporters were trying to make him say something that would confirm that he wanted to start a registry. They didn’t get that. The best they could get out of him was that he did not completely deny it.

So this was liberal media at its most obvious. Their ability to put words in his mouth was almost chilling. But never mind all that. What is worth highlighting here is that this yet another example of what Trump is missing: diplomacy, the art of dealing with people in a sensitive and effective way.

The notion of diplomacy is that it is meant to be a veneer upon the acts of the statesman by which the hard choices and important acts of state are made more palatable and agreeable to the governed. Diplomacy is not, itself, statesmanship. Statesmanship is the ability to steer the affairs of state with the courage and hard work necessary to get things done. Statesmanship is the management of the state, the way that penmanship is the management of the pen. Diplomacy is the spoonful of sugar that makes the medicine go down.

What we see with Trump is an attempt at statesmanship, with no diplomacy. Medicine, with no sugar. It is jarring, to be sure. People are not used to it, but they are strangely drawn to it, as his strong polling numbers show.

What sets him apart so much from all of the other politicians of our day is that most of them have fallen so in love with diplomacy that they are all sugar and no medicine. We get promises that we can have everything – $15/hr minimum wage, universal health care, and free higher education for everyone! Politics have become all sugar, no medicine.

As long as Trump keeps giving the medicine without sugar, he will make his enemies. But there seem to be enough people in the country who appreciate the need for medicine. Whether or not the prescription Trump is offering is the right medicine, people seem to know that medicine of some kind is what is needed. At some point, the politicians should be asking the citizens to step up, work harder, sacrifice and be selfless. We should expect to hear that prosperity is hard work, peace requries strength, and all that Churchillian inspiration we see in the old war movies. Perhaps people feel the world is entering such a time again.

The backlash against Washington insiders is a sort of sugar shock. Sometimes, you just need to take your medicine and everyone knows it.

Editor's Note: Purple Wisconsin is a collection of community bloggers with views from across the political spectrum. The Journal Sentinel hosts these blogs as a way to encourage thoughtful debate about the important issues facing Wisconsin and the Milwaukee region. The opinions voiced here are those of the individual bloggers alone; they are responsible for their posts. The Journal Sentinel does not edit or direct the bloggers in any fashion.