Open thread : Sunday morning talking heads

posted at 8:01 am on March 16, 2014 by Ed Morrissey

Today the Sunday talk shows will mostly focus on two foreign-affairs stories, which is unusual but understandable considering the past week. Most of the shows will feature discussion of either the disappearance of Malaysia Air Flight 370 or the apparently imminent invasion of Ukraine by Russia, or both. Only Meet the Press has prioritized domestic politics this week by giving its first segment to Barack Obama’s chief political adviser to discuss the upcoming midterms. (Be prepared to get a lot of sunshine blown up your kilts on the day before St. Patrick’s Day in that interview.) CNN’s State of the Union will get to it later with Reince Priebus, but John McCain will most likely be discussing Ukraine and his anger over the failure of the Senate to pass an aid package this week.

Otherwise, the politics will have to wait for the roundtable segments, but that may not even be true on Face the Nation, where America’s favorite retired airline pilot Sully Sullenberger offers his expertise on a story that needs it more than most. I might watch the MTP roundtable, though, as my friend Jon Ralston will take part in it. Get ready for more foreign-affairs talk today than you’d normally hear in three months of Sunday shows.

ABC’s This Week: Rep. Peter King (R-NY); Sen. Chris Murphy (D-CT); roundtable includes Matthew Dowd, Michael Eric Dyson, William Kristol, Katrina vanden Heuvel, and Greta Van Susteren.

CBS’ Face The Nation: Rep. Mike Rogers (R-MI); Tom Donilon; roundtable includes Capt. Sully Sullenberger, former NTSB chair Mark Rosenker, and Bob Orr.

CNN’s State of the Union: Former DNI John Negroponte; airline experts Colleen Keller, Steven Wallace, and Richard Aboulafia; Sen. John McCain; Reince Priebus; roundtable includes Charles Blow, Ana Navarro and Ron Brownstein.

Fox News Sunday: Rep Michael McCaul (R-TX), former NTSB managing director Peter Goelz; Sens. Robert Menendez (D-NJ) and Bob Corker (R-TN); roundtable includes George Will, PBS’ Judy Woodruff, Karl Rove, and Juan Williams.

NBC’s Meet the Press: White House senior adviser Dan Pfeiffer; Sens. Jeff Flake (R-AZ) and Dick Durbin (D-IL); roundtable includes Robert Gibbs, Heritage Foundation’s Israel Ortega, Jon Ralston of “Ralston Reports,” and New York Times Washington Bureau Chief Carolyn Ryan.

Note: Allahpundit is on vacation until March 24th.

Related Posts: