Topics: Music, presidents, presidents day, songs, Video, Entertainment News

With George Washington’s birthday coming up, it seems like a good time to reflect on our great presidents and the stirring songs devoted to them — and/or to our mediocre or terrible presidents and the silly songs devoted to them. Starting then from the founding:

Brad Neely, “George Washington”

You’d think out first president would be the subject of numerous songs celebrating his wooden teeth and refusal to lie, but in fact he doesn’t seem to have made much more impact on popular music than Millard Fillmore. If you can only find one Washington song, though, you could do worse than this quite NSFW effort by cartoonist Brad Neely, which presents our Founding Father as a thuggish superhero sporting multiple phalluses of doom. It does make you feel sorry for the British children, though.

Johnny Horton, “The Battle of New Orleans”

A cheerful tribute to the military exploits of Colonel-and-later-President Andrew Jackson, complete with cruelty to gators. The song is focused on fighting against the British, though much of Jackson’s campaign involved crushing the Creek nation. Later, as president, Jackson pushed through the Indian removal acts and the Trail of Tears. That’s not the sort of thing you want to put in a jaunty song, though.

The Walnut Collective, “James Buchanan”

Little known psych-punk outfit the Walnut Collective sling power chords while bellowing pro forma lyrics about how Buchanan had a heart of gold (he didn’t) and owned slaves (he didn’t do that either; he just supported slave owning on general principle). The utter lack of interest in the subject matter, underlined by images of slacker dudes drinking and partying, seems a fitting commemoration of our worst president.

Best Friends Forever, “My Head in Front of Your Head”

If the Shaggs performed “Schoolhouse Rock,” you’d get something like this. Minneapolis indie pop duo Best Friends Forever assure Honest Abe that they would have put their heads in front of his head to take Mr. Booth’s bullet, and made sure his kids didn’t get smallpox (not necessarily in that order.) Spielberg’s “Lincoln” would have been infinitely improved if this had played over and over and over on the soundtrack.

Norman and Nancy Blake, “Mr. Garfield”

Presidential assassinations generate a lot of music. This is a traditional song that turns a moment of national mourning into an extended exercise in dry, low-key humor. It does include the important historical detail that President Garfield’s wife called him “James.” Never know when that’s going to be on an exam.

Charlie Poole, “White House Blues”

Yet another insouciantly chipper song about presidential assassination: Poole’s declaration “you’re bound to die” seems a good bit too sanguine to be altogether seemly. The Roosevelt doing his best here is Teddy; you can imagine him twisting his mustache and squinting that monocle to the sprightly fiddle. Bill Monroe also did a lightning bluegrass version of this tune.

Annie the Musical, “We’d Like to Thank You Herbert Hoover”

I can’t be the only one who thinks of this song every time Herbert Hoover’s name is mentioned. A nicely mean-spirited counterpart to the better-known “Tomorrow.”

Attila the Hun, “Roosevelt in Trinidad”

Calypso performer Attila the Hun (Raymond Quevedo) celebrates FDR’s trip to Trinidad in 1936, managing somehow to give even the most banal campaign message lyrics (“charming and genial personality/and his wonderful urbanity/we were struck by his modest style”) a pleasing lilt. Ry Cooder covered the song too, with slicker production and less assured vocals. It’s not ideal, but Roosevelt was genial enough that he probably wouldn’t have minded.