'It was the Press's fault I went to prison': Shamed Huhne blames the media for speeding points scandal

Chris Huhne admitted perverting the course of justice after asking then-wife Vicky Pryce to accept speeding points for him

But now he says the scandal was down to a Press vendetta against him

Claims Murdoch papers targetted him due to phone-hacking scandal



Jailed: But Chris Huhne now says it was the media's fault he was prosecuted for perverting the course of justice

Shamed cabinet minister Chris Huhne has blamed the Press for sparking the speeding points scandal which led to the end of his political career.



The former Liberal Democrat, who was jailed for eight months in March for perverting the course of justice, claims a ‘new media aggression’ has become ‘a problem for us all’.



In an audacious return to the public eye, he accused two newspapers of targetting him, first to expose his affair with an aide and then to reveal he had passed off speeding points to his wife Vicky Pryce.

And he appeared to suggest his law-breaking and cheating were only exposed because he spoke out against phone-hacking.

The speeding points revelation saw Huhne, 58 and Pryce, 60, appear in court in an acrimonious trial in which intimate details of the breakup of their marriage were aired.



Sentencing the couple in March, Mr Justice Sweeney said ‘any element of tragedy is entirely your own fault’.



The judge told Huhne: ‘Despite your high office you tried to lie your way out of trouble by claiming you were innocent, by repeating that lie again and again during your extensive interviews by the police.’



The former politician - who one day dreamed of leading the Liberal Democrats - has previously admitted he ‘lied and lied again’ to avoid the truth.



But Huhne has now gone on on the offensive, accusing ‘the Murdoch press’ of targetting him because he called for the police to reopen the voicemail hacking inquiry.

Giving his account on the scandal for the first time since he was released from prison, he claimed the now-defunct News of the World tailed him to expose his affair with his aide Carina Trimingham, 46.



He also accused another of Rupert Murdoch’s papers, the Sunday Times, of having ‘groomed’ his wife to reveal how she had taken three penalty points for him before the breakup of his marriage.



And he blamed the wider Press of a ‘new media aggression’ for undermining how voters view politicians.



Ex-wife: Huhne convinced Vicky Pryce to accept speeding points on her licence even though he was driving

Writing in the Guardian, he urged politicians to ‘combat concentrations of power’ in the media - including that of Mr Murdoch, who ‘has used his media muscle to bulldoze a way for his business interests’.



He said: ‘My own behaviour has not helped, and I am not proud of that. It is an explanation, but not a defence, to point out that the AA’s pollsters say 300,000 people have swapped speeding points and that it seemed like a minor matter back in 2003.



‘I should not have done it. The personal consequences were monstrous for my family and me, including two months in prison.’

'I am no saint... but nor did I claim to be'

Chris Huhne



But he added: ‘The News of the World sparked the end of my marriage, but another Murdoch title, the Sunday Times, then groomed my ex-wife until she told them about the speeding points.

‘The political editor bought dinners, sent flowers, offered breaks at smart hotels, and reassured her that she would not face any unpleasant consequences (such as prison).’

He went on to write: ‘The moral of this story? First, none of this would have been possible without my own mistakes. I am no saint (but nor did I claim to be).



‘Second, politicians now have to live with a 24-hour media, which is more intrusive and hurtful for the people they love, and this is having a corrosive effect on how the public view politicians, and politics itself.



‘Ultimately, the new media aggression is not just a problem for those individuals directly affected, it is a problem for us all.’

Couple: Huhne's marriage collapsed when the Press revealed he was having an affair with Carina Trimingham

In a radio interview this morning Huhne went further, claiming he was a victim of a conspiracy by the Murdoch empire to further the media mogul's business interests.

He said the News of the World had known about his affair before the 2010 general election but delayed publication until a month after polling day 'when at that time Murdoch was, of course, trying to get approval to buy the rest of BSkyB'.

But the story was also exposed on the same day by the Sunday People newspaper, and as Energy Secretary Huhne had no role to play in media regulation.

Huhne told BBC Radio 4's Today programme: 'You know, you would have thought if they knew that I was lying before the election then that’s the time when they should have run the story.

'So I think the very clear implication here, just by the coincidence of when the investigation starts, the fact the story is not then run until substantially later suggests that there is another agenda.

'I’m saying very clearly I take responsibility for my own mistakes I would not have been vulnerable if I had not things which I regret and were clearly wrong.

'But what I am pointing out, from I suppose a rather unique vantage point, is sometimes newspaper groups and media groups have their own interests as well.