John Koskinen will oversee how his agency figures out who's fibbing about having Obamacare. Can tax pros prepare for Obamacare?

The Internal Revenue Service is ramping up to figure out who has health insurance and who doesn’t under Obamacare — but for now it is giving people the benefit of the doubt.

For the first time, come January, people will have to indicate on their 2014 tax forms whether they have health coverage. The IRS will have to figure out who is covered and who is fibbing to avoid the Affordable Care Act’s penalty for not holding insurance.

Story Continued Below

Congressional scorekeepers expect about 4 million individuals to owe the fee in 2016.

A key question is — how many will be honest and pay it voluntarily? Professional tax preparers — used by more than half of Americans — will be the first line of defense.

The IRS tells the preparers to use current standards and common sense — just as they always have. But some are worried that won’t be enough to guide them through this new world of coverage, mandates and penalties.

“Those that for whatever reason want to mislead the system — what do you do about them?” asked Mark Steber, chief tax officer at tax prep firm Jackson Hewitt. “The IRS tells us to use the current rules. We would have liked to have a little bit more security with such a dramatic change in the tax law in the last 25 years.”

The key question comes on Line 61 of the 1040 Form, which in its 2014 draft form simply reads: “health care: individual responsibility.”

If you’ve got insurance, you check the box. If you qualify for one of the myriad exemptions, you submit a new Obamacare tax Form 8965 (although that process has pitfalls of its own).

The IRS says it is not issuing new guidance to spell out how preparers must make sure that a taxpayer has a minimum level of health coverage — or is trying to avoid the 1 percent or $95 first year charge. An agency official told practitioners recently it should use current “due diligence” standards but also, in some cases, just rely on what the taxpayer tells them.

The tax agency uses third-party reporting — in this case, health insurers and the marketplaces — to verify individuals’ information. Preparers typically ask for supporting documentation, but they have latitude depending on the question.

“Tax preparers should follow their normal due diligence in determining if their client has appropriate health coverage,” IRS spokesman Bruce Friedland said.

It’s a type of honor system the tax system is largely based on.

For example, a homeowner who claims the mortgage interest deduction doesn’t need to include the proof because the bank is also sending the IRS forms. Most taxpayers know they are taking a risk, though only a fraction of filers are audited.

But as with most things related to Obamacare, compliance is more complicated than that, especially in the first year.

The delay in the employer mandate — it won’t start to go into effect until next year — means most businesses don’t have to document health care coverage to either employees filing taxes or the IRS for tax year 2014.

And smaller businesses aren’t required to cover workers, so they have no reporting requirements.

The IRS has for months been holding meetings with the slew of professional groups that help consumers file tax returns, including certified public accountants and enrolled agents.

“This has been a repetitive theme among CPAs and independent practitioners: What are the due diligence requirements?” said Kathy Pickering, executive director of the Tax Institute at H&R Block who has attended many of these calls.

“There is enough good third-party information to validate — there really isn’t a lot of obvious areas for fraud here,” she said. “I really don’t understand why the CPAs and others are so concerned about this,” though she speculated that law’s newness and enormous size are likely factors.

The IRS’ Friedland said, “Taxpayers are responsible for the accuracy of the information on the tax returns that they sign.”

The agency has said it has “hundreds of employees” devoted to implementing the tax parts of the law, though at the same time Congress has cut its budget to below 2010 levels.

Republicans, most of whom make no secret of loathing the entire health care law, have been hounding the administration for the potential for fraud, likening it to the earned income tax credit.

The agency gives preparers a long list of requirements to ensure against fraud in that tax program for low-income earners. Preparers face a $500 fine if they fail to comply with this due diligence.

But tax preparers and other experts said the potential for fraud with the Obamacare tax credits — a separate issue from the individual mandate — is much lower than with the EITC.

For starters, the EITC worker tax credit is refundable for cash. But the insurance tax credit works differently. The government usually pays the premium tax credit in advance, directly to the insurer. It doesn’t end up in the consumer’s pocket.

Consumers could pay for health insurance upfront and then try to claim the credits improperly — but most preparers say that is unlikely.

Not all preparers think they need more guidance from the IRS.

“The last thing we need is another checklist, the EITC has an enormous checklist, which can be arduous,” said Bob Kerr, senior director for government relations at the National Association of Enrolled Agents, which represents mostly small offices of self-employed tax preparers. “We are expected to exercise our judgment — not to pre-audit returns — and rest assured, we are going to interview our clients and then use our best judgment.”

One tricky issue for tax preparers is that the law has its naysayers, to put it mildly.

“You have tax professionals on the front line of something that it is safe to say is fairly controversial — and enrolled agents will have clients who are not fans of the ACA,” Kerr said.

The American Institute of CPAs doesn’t have an official position on whether the IRS should issue more guidance on verifying minimum coverage.

“We’re going to be asking probing questions, so you don’t leave yourself open for penalties,” said Kristin Esposito, a technical manager on the AICPA staff.

It might not be as simple as finding an insurance form — because that might not spell out how plans actually qualify for minimum essential coverage. Most employer-sponsored insurance and any obtained through the marketplace meet the law’s requirements.

For now, preparers are bracing themselves to handle a giant new federal tax program.

“Whether we need more rules depends on how voluminous the bad behavior is — we just don’t know,” Steber said.