On Friday, Amanda Carpenter, a former speech writer for Sen. Jim Demint, R-S.C., and a former communications director for Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, produced a list of conservative and Republican office holders she said needs to be "blacklisted" for endorsing GOP front-runner Donald Trump, the candidate who called her an "idiot" in January. The fairly lengthy list includes former GOP presidential candidate Ben Carson and former Alaska Governor Sarah Palin, both of whom have endorsed Trump.

"It’s time to make a list," she wrote at Conservative Review. "A list of those so-called conservatives and Republicans endorsing Donald Trump, the megalomaniac who regularly threatens his opponents and the press, raves about making members of our military adopt ISIS-like tactics, has funded Obamacare and Gang of Eight Democrats, promises to forcibly relocate American companies to his liking, and has demonstrated again and again he intends to govern as a tyrannical King rather than a President."

Carpenter said she doesn't care what people call the list adding that she's "done" with those who have publicly endorsed Trump. And, she says, other conservatives should be as well.

"Anyone who will defend a man condoning random acts of violence at his rallies has lost his morals; he will defend anything at all," she wrote. "So, I’d like to remember who supported Trump so I never give any kind of credence to their judgment. 'Never Trump' means never those who support him as well."

In addition to Palin and Carson, Carpenter listed Florida Attorney General Pam Bondi and Arizona Governor Jan Brewer. Former GOP presidential candidate and New Jersey Governor Chris Christie also made the list, along with Maine Governor Paul LePage, Florida Governor Rick Scott and Alabama Senator Jeff Sessions.

Carpenter is not the only one to produce such a list. Earlier in the month, Red State contributing editor Ben Howe spoke of a high-tech blacklist website and Matt Walsh took umbrage with a number of movement conservatives he said have been co-opted by Trump and compiled a list of his own at The Blaze.

Sean Hannity, Ann Coulter, Bill O'Reilly and Laura Ingraham made his list along with Palin, Christie and Carson. He also targeted Fox News, the popular Drudge Report and Breitbart.com for jumping on the Trump bandwagon. Other conservative blogs, like the Gateway Pundit, have turned into Trump-friendly outlets, but they did not make Walsh's list.

Two Christian leaders -- Jerry Falwell Jr., and Robert Jeffress -- made the list, with Walsh excoriating them as "nefarious and loathsome" for supporting Trump. He went on to say the "capitulation that many conservative and Christian leaders have shown towards Trump goes well beyond what the liberal media shows towards Obama."

"I’ve never in my life seen anything like this," he added, "and I suspect I’d have to take a flight to North Korea to witness an equal level of unthinking deference." Breitbart fired back, asking what these individuals and organizations should be blacklisted from.

"Are you banning the Trump supporters from a movement in which Tea Party Patriots featured Trump as a headliner at their rally against the Iran deal back in September — only to have Jenny Beth Martin come out at CPAC and tell people that he loves himself more than America and that he’s not really a member of the Tea Party movement?" Breitbart's Patrick Howley asked. Howley suggested a blacklist "for conservatives who sold out the movement, and their own country, by embracing amnesty and the doctrine of open borders."

"Why not a 'blacklist' for those who wrecked the New American Century within three years by staging a trillion-dollar nation-building experiment in the Middle East?" he asked. "Why not a 'blacklist' for those currently trying to broker the convention to throw out the will of the people, or those who would rather support Hillary Clinton because at least they’ll still be able to gin up donations for opposing her?"

One thing is certain: The 2016 GOP primary has divided conservatives worse than at any time in fairly recent memory. Whoever emerges as the GOP nominee will have quite a job putting all the pieces back together.