F. Charles Froelicher, former executive director of the Gates Foundation, died Oct. 17 at home in Denver. He was 89.

As the head of one of Colorado’s leading philanthropic organizations, Froelicher helped to grow Gates from a $35 million endowment to a $110 million endowment. The robust growth allowed Gates, with Froelicher’s influence, to distribute $50 million over 17 years, the time Froelicher was with the foundation, to various civic and community causes including the South Platte Greenway Foundation, Leadership Conferences at Keystone, the 10th Mountain Division Trails System, Outdoor Colorado, Evans Ranch and various Colorado schools.

After retiring as executive of the foundation in 1992, Froelicher continued to serve as a board member.

Born on Dec. 9, 1924, in Philadelphia, Froelicher came to Denver in 1955 to be headmaster of Colorado Academy.

He is credited with transforming the academy “from a declining military academy to a prestigious, successful, college preparatory school,” according to a post on the academy’s website by Mike Davis, the school’s current headmaster. Froelicher served the academy from 1955 to 1975.

Davis referred to Froelicher as a friend and mentor.

“Over the years, Chuck and I would talk about our respective outdoor adventures, our love of history and politics, and our vision of schools and education,” Davis said. “I will miss those conversations greatly.”

Froelicher was a principal founder of the Colorado Outward Bound School, a developer of Copper Mountain Ski Area and was named to the Governor’s Task Force for Excellence in Education and Control Substance Abuse by Gov. Richard Lamm.

“Although we knew it was coming, his death still came as a shock to our family as we were all convinced he was invincible,” said his grandchildren, Sarah Emery, Weaver Froelicher and Eric Froelicher, in a written statement announcing his death.

A few weeks before his death, Froelicher, with the help of family, fished the Roaring Fork near Carbondale.

“He caught two trout,” said his son, Franz Froelicher. “He loved the art and science of fly fishing, loved to watch the flies hatch and currents play.”

A celebration of life will be held at 11 a.m. on Nov. 1 at the Newton Gymnasium, Colorado Academy, 3800 S. Pierce St., Denver.

Memorial contributions may be made to the F. Charles Froelicher Fund for Colorado Academy, or to a charity of the donor’s choice.

Kieran Nicholson: 303-954-1822 or knicholson@denverpost.com