Sioux Falls, SD

A court hearing reveals a man who faces murder charges for allegedly shooting someone in the head, has also shot someone in the face before.

In a little less than a week, 18-year-old Conner Hanson will know whether he will remain in adult court, or be tried as a juvenile. Hanson is accused of pulling the trigger and killing 18-year-old Anthony Gabriel in January, after a car chase ended near the Empire Mall. Hanson was 17 at the time, and pleads not guilty.

Minnehaha County prosecutors say Hanson should be tried as an adult. On day two of the hearing, they brought up Hanson's criminal history including stays in five juvenile rehabilitation facilities. He was arrested in the Gabriel shooting just two months after being released from the fifth facility. Attorneys believe the juvenile system had many chances to turn Hanson into a responsible citizen, but they say it "failed."

Prosecutors also say he has a "horrible juvenile record." They pointed to a 2014 case in which Hanson shot someone in the face. Hanson was adjudicated in juvenile court for aggravated assault. The details of that case are sealed because he was a juvenile.

Prosecutors told Judge Robin Houwman Hanson is a danger to the public, and they believe only an adult trial and punishment will protect citizens.

Hanson's defense wants him to be tried as a juvenile. On Friday, his attorneys say he may have been through a number of facilities, but they say he thrived and was successful while he was in those programs. They also add that Hanson only got into trouble when he was released and was not in a structured system. During day one of the hearing, his attorneys also brought in a children's neurobehavioralist, who says Hanson's brain is still developing. The behavioralist also adds it is very likely Hanson can learn better judgment as he matures, and he can still be helped by the juvenile system.

The defense says Hanson is easily influenced, and emphasized Gabriel threatened him and others with a gun the night of the shooting.

Co-defendent Robert Montes testified against Hanson Friday; this is part of a plea deal that lessens his charges. The judge's decision is expected on Thursday.

News

Courts {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.