Buy Photo Lisa Budreau, curator for the new War Memorial Building exhibit at the state museum, discusses the designers' original plans on Saturday, Nov. 7, at the military branch of the state museum in Nashville. (Photo: Nate Rau / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

World War I was dubbed the war to end all wars, so when the fighting finally ended in 1918, communities across the country went to work honoring the soldiers who served and sacrificed.

In Nashville, the state of Tennessee combined with community leaders to undertake a massive civic project that elicited great debate and planning.

The War Memorial Building was the Music City Center project of its day. The War Memorial Building project was rife with debate about its financing through a special bond issuance and public discussions about the monument’s aesthetics.

The Tennessee State Museum unveiled a new public exhibit on Saturday that tells the story of how the War Memorial Building became Tennessee's monument to the nation's great war.

Exhibit curator Lisa Budreau, who authored the book "Bodies of War" about how the United States commemorated World War I, said it was Tennessee women who initiated the idea to build the memorial. Approximately 3,400 Tennessee soldiers sacrificed their lives in the war, she said.

"Elite society women came up with the idea that we needed a war memorial to remember those who fought for the state in World War I," Budreau said. "The memorials' remembrance, controversy always surrounds them because one person would want one thing, and another person would want something else. And that was no exception in this case.

"There was a debate, do we have a memorial that is a thing of beauty, or does it need some functional utilitarian purpose? So they compromised, and we have a memorial that not only remembers the dead, those who fought; we also have offices for our legislature and a place of entertainment."

War Memorial Auditorium would go on to become a top music venue, which turned 90 earlier this year. For a short time, the Grand Ole Opry called the venue its home, and artists ranging from Ernest Tubb to David Bowie have performed there.

No commemoration of Tennessee's involvement in World War I is complete without recognizing war hero Sgt. Alvin York, who was recognized with capturing over 130 German soldiers following daring strategic maneuvers during a 1918 battle in France. York, from Pall Mall, returned home a massive hero. He went on a national speaking tour to raise funds for what became the Alvin C. York Agricultural Institute. And Hollywood film "Sergeant York," which featured an Oscar-winning performance by Gary Cooper, told the story of York's heroic actions.

The war hero's great granddaughter Debbie York attended the opening of the new exhibit on Saturday. York said she looked forward to the opening of the new Tennessee State Museum, which is planned to be completed in time to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the end of World War I in 2018.

"The first time I realized my great grandfather was a war hero was when my dad brought his movie — it was a reel-to-reel — when I was in grade school and showed it to my entire class," York said, speaking in front an exhibition case of her great grandfather's war medals and uniform. "That's the first time I realized, 'Wow, maybe my great grandfather was different.' "

Visitors can see the new exhibit about the War Memorial Building for free by visiting the military branch of the state museum located at War Memorial Plaza across from the Sheraton Hotel in downtown Nashville. The branch is open Tuesday through Saturday from 10 a.m. until 5 p.m. and on Sunday from 1-5 p.m. It is closed on Monday and holidays.

Reach Nate Rau at 615-259-8094 and on Twitter @tnnaterau.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1NAfBQQ