A Fayette County mother is thankful for the kindness and quick thinking of customers and workers at the Greensburg, Westmoreland County Sam's Club store.

VIDEO: Watch Ashlie Hardway's report

Julie Michaels' 5-year-old daughter, Sydney, lives with Dravet Syndrome -- a rare, genetic and catastrophic form of epilepsy. The condition used to cause anywhere from 300 to 1,000 small seizures a day, but within the past year, seizures have occurred less frequently. When they do occur, they're traumatic. "She tends to turn very blue due to lack of oxygen, a lot of very heavy convulsive seizure shaking like this," Michaels said.

Michaels took her father and Sydney to the Greensburg Sam's Club Tuesday night so they could purchase items for an upcoming fundraiser for Sydney.

"The car ride over was uneventful, but as soon as we got to Sam's Club and got into the door, she went into what they used to refer to as a grand mal seizure," Michaels said. "That type of seizure can be very difficult for someone to witness if they're not used to it."

Michaels had barely made it inside the first set of doors when it happened, so she pulled Sydney out of the cart and ran past the store greeter to lay the girl on her side. At that time, Michaels said, the store greeter and other customers ran over to help.

"I laid her down, and you could tell once she [the greeter] realized what was going on, she became very concerned and worried," Michaels said. "There was just a bunch of employees and people standing around saying, 'What can we do? How can we help?'"

A former emergency medical technician also helped Michaels until Sydney's seizure stopped and the girl passed out, which Michaels said is common after an episode. Michaels said she still had to shop for the fundraiser items, so she asked for a second cart to lay Sydney down in.

"That's when (bystanders) started to pull out, 'Here, here's my coat! Here's,' some other article of clothing. They were lining the cart with stuff," Michaels said. "(The store manager) ran back to another aisle and was tearing open packages of this pillow and that soft blue blanket. He said, 'You don't worry about it. You can use this stuff.' It was really, really kind and thoughtful of him to do that."

The kindness took Michaels aback so much, she posted about the incident on Sydney's Facebook page.

"Wow, how grateful we were just to see that, to witness that. I can tell you, I've been in this situation numerous times before, and this is the first time I've seen it like this. We have actually had people step over us and say nothing to us at times," Michaels said. "The employees at the Greensburg Sam's Club were just amazing."

Michaels said Sydney is currently taking an FDA-approved cannabis-based oil that has dramatically helped her brain development and motor skills and has drastically reduced the frequency of her seizures since starting the medication in August. The trial expires in August, so the Michaelses will be paying out-of-pocket for each unit of the oil. To help offset costs, they're holding a fundraiser Saturday at Connellsville Junior High School. The event is free and open to the public and will run from noon to 5 p.m.