So there’s a new vewy scawy “Uncle Sam” Web ad that’s intended to scare young people away from signing up for Obamacare.

Sadly, whoever came up with the ad is a bit of a moron. The ad ends up being an advertisement for young people GETTING insurance, which is exactly what Obamacare is all about.

First, some background. You might recall the previous ad from these folks – the one where a very scary Uncle Sam figure pops up in some young college student’s gynecological exam. The idea is that somehow, if you sign up for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act’s exchanges, you’ll have “the government” involved in your health care, or something.

At the time that ad came out, I did a post noting that I’d rather have Uncle Sam between my legs than John Boehner with a trans-vaginal probe. Of course, I’m still waiting for someone to do an ad about the GOP health care plan, with Lindsey Graham checking your prostate (“turn your head and couch, y’all”).

So fast forward to their new ad. Another vewy vewy scawy, this time Halloween-themed, ad to convince young people not to sign up for Obamacare. This time, some guy who looks like Freddie – no, not that Freddie, rather Freddie Mercury from Queen – keeps appearing on your TV even though the TV is unplugged.

At one point, Freddie tries to really scare the young college guy by telling him “we’ve got your cell phone and your email.” Well, duh. Facebook’s got their cell phone and their email too. As do a gazillion other Web sites, and every doctor they’ve ever visited. What kid today doesn’t assume that everyone, including the government, has his cell phone and his email?

But the best part of the video is towards the end, after Uncle Sam comes and “scares” you. The video puts up two screens as the big finale. Now, keep in mind that the entire point of these videos is to scare kids away from getting health insurance since having young people insured is a key component of health care reform, in part because the system needs healthy people in addition to sick people in order to be more affordable for everyone. So the intent here is to scare away young people, and thus hopefully make health care more expensive for everyone (and thus hurt the Affordable Care Act’s image, oh yeah and hurt everyone else too by making everyone pay more for their insurance).

Here’s the first screen:

And here’s the second:

“Get the insurance…” Huh?

Let’s put aside for a moment the fact that college kids are already going to end up having insurance anyway, until the age of 26, because under Obamacare they can remain on their parents’ plans. They couldn’t before.

But far more importantly, what really caught my eye was the fact that the entire ad culminates in a message that reinforces the point that young people should get insurance, which is one of the main points behind the President’s health care reform package.

Young people often don’t get insurance, because they think they’re invincible. So we’d welcome a message that tells kids that they really ought to get insurance.

As for young people making sure that they get the “right” insurance, well duh. I’m all for people checking the exchanges AND talking to their insurance company, and picking what’s “right for you.” Of course, once they go to the exchanges they may very well find out that they’ll get better insurance than they would elsewhere, but there’s another thing young people are going to like about Obamacare. A lot of them might be eligible for subsidies that pay for part, or all, of their insurance. That won’t happen if they go to an insurance company directly. And what kid doesn’t like a free lunch?

So thanks, Uncle Sam! And Freddie.

Follow @aravosis