Gosh, I bet Republicans are starting to regret their systematic alienation of women.

Not only have 99 percent of sexually active women ages 15 to 44 in America used birth control, but by a 2–1 margin, American women support the requirement under Obamacare that private health insurance plans cover the full cost of birth control. Three in five women support the requirement, even if it violates the personal religious beliefs of a company’s owners. Among younger women, that support skyrockets.

The Republican war on women may already be making it difficult for conservatives to win women voters in 2016. Hillary Clinton makes it impossible: a strong 68 percent of independent women say they would vote for Clinton if she runs for president, as would 35 percent of Republican women. It’s no wonder Republicans are in an all-out battle to attack every single thing Hillary Clinton says and does: if she runs for president, the Republicans are screwed.

Of course, they wouldn’t be if there were a credible conservative woman to run against her. Let’s examine the G.O.P. track record on this front. It begins and ends with Sarah Palin. Personally delightful. Politically colorful. But not exactly a credible candidate for a party needing to win credibility with women voters—or anyone else for that matter.

So who else is there? Well, most often the GOP 2016 contenders mentioned are all men. But there are some women who could and should be considered. When pressed to come up with some XX- chromosome contenders, Republicans most frequently mention South Carolina Governor Nikki Haley, New Mexico Governor Susana Martinez, and New Hampshire Senator Kelly Ayotte. One could even add Oklahoma Governor Mary Fallin to the list and point out that, generally, while Republicans are struggling to find support at the national level, the party is doing fairly well in those states. And it’s worth noting that four of the nation’s five female governors are Republicans.

As for the governors, Haley is charismatic but seems like a long shot; even within heavily Republican South Carolina, an equal percentage of voters disapprove of Haley as approve of her. But Fallin and Martinez are both more popular (64 percent of Oklahomans think Fallin is doing a good job, and 61 percent of New Mexicans rate Martinez favorably), plus Martinez hails from a coveted swing state. And yet the 2016 attention focuses on the likes of John Kasich (Ohio), Scott Walker (Wisconsin), Rick Snyder (Michigan), and Bobby Jindal (Louisiana). Yet Kasich and Walker are both far from popular, disliked by almost as many voters as they are liked. And polls show more voters actively disapprove of Snyder and Jindal than support them. That’s in their home states!

When it comes to the Senate, Republican presidential pickers tend to focus not on Ayotte but on Ted Cruz (Texas), Marco Rubio (Florida), and Rand Paul (Kentucky). But bear this in mind: Ted Cruz won 56 percent of Texas votes in 2012, only one percentage point more than John McCain earned in the Lone Star State in the 2008 presidential election. In 2010, 56 percent of Kentucky voters backed Rand Paul, but 58 percent backed McCain in 2008. In 2010 in Florida, Marco Rubio carried 49 percent of all voters; McCain lost the state in 2012 with 48 percent of the vote. In other words, even in their home states, Cruz, Paul, and Rubio aren’t uniquely, nor even widely popular; they’re just Republicans—faring as well as other Republican candidates.

By comparison, in 2008 Obama won 54 percent of the New Hampshire vote, and McCain got 45 percent. But in 2010, Ayotte won statewide with 60 percent support. That makes Kelly Ayotte a uniquely popular Republican with broad bi-partisan appeal, especially compared with the other guys.

Of course, Jindal, Kasich, Walker, Snyder, Fallin, and Haley have all signed extremely draconian laws restricting abortions, so their appeal to moderate voters is questionable. And certainly Rubio, Paul, and Ayotte would face a significant hurdle with voters who are fed up with Republican obstructionism at the federal level and rate Republicans in Congress in general lower than dirt.

If Republicans want to have a fighting change with women voters in 2016 and with mainstream American voters in general, abandoning their extremist and extremely unpopular anti-women agenda would also help. But in the meantime, some rebranding couldn’t hurt. Out with the Palin, in with the new.

Ayotte and Martinez, and even Haley and Fallin, have all kinds of political and demographic advantages, in addition to the obvious reality that they would stop Hillary Clinton from automatically winning the “vote for the first female president” vote. Ayotte and Martinez in particular should be rolling off the tongues of the Republican chattering class as they name top contenders for the presidential ticket. But they aren’t.

Why is that, exactly? There couldn’t possibly be sexism within the Republican Party. After all, these folks don’t believe sexism exists.