Over $9,000 estimated to have been raised for Gerlach family

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

»

Less than two months after losing one of their own, the Logan County community rallied together on Saturday in a time to heal, and to celebrate the life of Scott Gerlach in the first annual Scott Gerlach Memorial 5K Run.

Gerlach, a 44-year-old Posse deputy for the Logan County Sheriff's Office, was killed in a three-car crash on May 21 that happened 13 miles east of Ault.

On Saturday, the community honored Gerlach, a running enthusiast and past marathoner in his own right, as 182 registered participants took off from the starting line at Plainsmen Park.

An estimated $9,000 was raised from donations from the race alone — the Sterling Xpress baseball team also donated admission sales from Saturday night's game against Northern Colorado, as well — with all proceeds going to the Gerlach family.

"It was beyond our expectations," said Alma Blagg, who, along with Wendy Jerman, Amanda Owen and Johnna Harris helped coordinate the memorial run. "We never in our wildest dreams thought the memorial race would be this incredible. The support from the community, our amazing volunteers, and everyone in this community was just incredible. We had no idea it was going to be such a big event."

A pair of Sterling High School cross-country runners, Isaac Bernatchez and Marc Tapparo, finished first and second, respectively, while Ashley Atkins finished first for the females.

But, perhaps the best moment of the day came when Debbie Gerlach, Scott's wife of 25 years, crossed the finish line at 47 minutes, 50 seconds and yelled out four familiar words: "I love you, Scott!"

Advertisement

For Debbie, the time was a personal record for her in a 5K and an achievement she credits Scott for helping her reach.

"I knew Scott helped me finish that race. And set a PR (personal record)," said Debbie Gerlach, who describe her relationship with Scott as "love at first sight."

Debbie said the two knew each other in high school and, after just two weeks of dating during their young adult years, they each knew they found "the one" and Scott proposed to her in July — making the Saturday, July 12, event date that much more meaningful.

Wendy Jerman (left), Debbie Gerlach (center) and Alma Blagg (right) near the finish line during Saturday's Scott Gerlach Memorial Run 5K race. Gerlach yelled "I love you, Scott!" after crossing the finish line with a personal best time of 47 minutes, 50 seconds. Jerman and Blagg each helped coordinate the event. (Sara Atkinson / Sterling Journal-Advocate courtesy photo)

The idea to have a 5K race in honor of Scott came from another member of the Gerlach family: Scott's daughter, Amber, who also designed the memorial T-shirts for the event.

Debbie said it was Amber, just a few days after Scott's passing, who suggested the idea for a 5K race.

A few days later, Blagg, who ran in the Boston Marathon this year and has a slew of distance running event experience, also approached Debbie with the memorial idea, which got the ball rolling on making the 5K idea a reality.

"I put it to Alma and Wendy for doing such a great job of getting people together to help with the race," Debbie said. "There was no way I could have done that. My daughter came up with the idea that Friday night (after Scott's accident) and Alma came over that Saturday and said 'We should do a 5K race.' I was like 'Amber, here you go!'"

Distance running wasn't always a passion for Scott and Debbie, but rather an unexpected bonding exercise brought on by a desire to stay fit for their grandchildren.

"In 2011, we decided we needed to be around for our granddaughter, who was born in 2012. In June of 2011, we started watching the 'Biggest Loser' and started working out, exercising, and doing all we could to get fit," Debbie said. "In August, after watching an episode where they put on a half marathon for the "Biggest Loser," we decided if they can run one, we can too. We trained for the next eight months and ran in the Colorado Marathon."

That marked the first of three Colorado Marathons they would run together. Debbie said her son, Austin, will now run in his father's spot as her distance race running mate.

As for the future of the Scott Gerlach Memorial run, Debbie said the family would like to make it an annual event, with future proceeds going to charity or scholarships.

"We've been tossing around ideas. My granddaughter got really sick and if it wasn't for Children's Hospital, I don't think she would have made it, so one of our ideas is to donate proceeds to Children's Hospital," Debbie said. "We also want to give proceeds, in years forward, toward scholarships. We haven't decided which ones or what they'd be for, but that's where we are heading with it."

The desire for future Scott Gerlach Memorial runs is one also shared by Blagg and Jerman, who each said they would not hesitate to help put on the event again.

"We don't want him (Scott) forgotten because he was such an incredible human being," Jerman said. "That man had a smile 24/7 and we were honored to be a part of his life."

Contact David Wilson at 970-526-9285 or dwilson@journal-advocate.com