Sara Kemp, left, and Kilee McCaleb, right, prepare a dog for surgery Friday at the Fort Collins Cat Rescue & Spay/Neuter Clinic in Fort Collins. The clinic joined with the Larimer Humane Society to offer free transportation services to provide access to low-cost spay-neuter surgeries. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

If you go What: Free transportation services for Loveland-area pets in need of spay/neuter surgeries. When: The third Wednesday of the month, alternating between dogs and cats, starting with dogs Wednesday, Jan. 21; drop off 6:45-7:30 a.m. and pick up 5:15-6:15 p.m. Where: Dog Baths and Beyond, 1221 W. Eisenhower Blvd. Reservations: Because space is limited, reservations and a confirmed surgery appointment are required by calling the Fort Collins Cat Rescue & Spay/Neuter Clinic at 970-484-1861. Surgeries range from $44 to $134. Financial assistance: Pet owners who need help paying for a spay or neuter surgery for a dog or cat can apply to the clinic's Prevent A Litter Plus (PAL+) program to pay a $20 co-pay for the service; call the program coordinator at 970-817-5952.

Up to a dozen dogs will be getting a ride Wednesday from a new transportation service provided by two animal welfare agencies.

In fall 2014, the Larimer Humane Society and the Fort Collins Cat Rescue & Spay/Neuter Clinic partnered to offer a free transportation service to the clinic to make it easier for pet owners to access low-cost spay and neuter surgeries for cats and dogs starting in 2015.

The idea is to help pet owners overcome transportation and cost barriers.

Advertisement

"The ability for them to get there — they just don't get it done because they don't get there — this ends all that," said Sue Castaneda, director of development and community relations for the Humane Society, 6317 Kyle Ave. in Fort Collins.

"As long as they have access to low-cost spay/neuter surgeries, there's no reason for them to not get their pet altered," she said.

The Humane Society, a nonprofit animal shelter and provider of animal protection and control, is using its community outreach van to give the rides to the Fort Collins Cat Rescue, a nonprofit cat shelter and low-cost sterilization clinic for dogs and cats at 2321 E. Mulberry St. in Fort Collins.

The van, not used full time, is dedicated to transporting animals into and out of the animal shelter.

The service will be run primarily by volunteers of the Humane Society and the cat rescue. Humane Society volunteers will drive and load and unload the van, and cat rescue volunteers will check in the animals and fill out the paperwork.

The rides will be offered the third Wednesday of the month, alternating between dogs and cats. The first transport will be Jan. 21 for eight to 12 dogs, depending on their size. Up to 20 cats will be transported Feb. 18.

Pet owners are required to make a reservation for the transport and a surgery appointment the same day. They'll be able to drop off their pets in the morning and pick them up in the early evening from Dog Baths and Beyond in Loveland, instead of having to drive to north Fort Collins and wait three to four hours for the recovery time.

The Humane Society and the Fort Collins Cat Rescue started the service to help decrease pet overpopulation and the intake of unwanted pets at the Humane Society's animal shelter. In 2014, the animal shelter took in 1,339 dogs and cats from Loveland, accounting for 25 percent of pet intakes for all of Larimer County.

"This will help prevent unplanned litters that might occur because they can't get their pet to the vet for a spay/neuter surgery," said Ashley Boothe, marketing and grants manager of Fort Collins Cat Rescue.

The cat rescue offers spay/neuter surgeries by appointment Wednesday and Friday from 7 a.m. to 6 p.m. and for limited hours on Sunday and Monday.

The cat rescue wanted to maintain a presence in Loveland after closing its satellite office in August 2014. It still offers monthly low-cost vaccine services at Hank's Pet Food Market, Boothe said.

"While this program was originally created to help the people and pets of Loveland, it is not limited to just Loveland residents or low-income pet owners," said Judy Calhoun, executive director of the Larimer Humane Society, according to a press statement.

"Anyone having difficulty getting their pet to the Fort Collins clinic from south Larimer County is welcome to apply," she said.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, www.twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.