Slowing growth in Medicaid spending and fewer kids locked up in juvenile prisons are easing pressure on Virginia's budget, Senate Finance Committee staffers told senators at the committee's annual retreat Friday.

And that could mean a boost for Virginia's underfunded mental health services, said state Sen. Emmett Hanger, R-Mount Solon, who will be a co-chairman of the committee in the 2016 session.

"What's going to be needed is a focus on community-based services in a broad context," Hanger said.

He thinks a boost in those programs could be paid for by using savings from closing juvenile prisons, as well as the breathing space from slowing growth in Medicaid – even before savings from major Medicaid reforms due in two years' time.

The state's juvenile correctional centers are emptying out, as juvenile crime, arrests and commitments plunge, but the kids who remain behind bars have severe mental health and substance abuse problems, the committee's deputy staff director, Dick Hickman, told the senators.

He said legislators might want to use savings from closing one or both of the aging, remaining centers to fund a new facility that's more oriented toward treatment, as well as boosting community programs,

It's an approach that state Sen. Dave Marsden, D-Fairfax, wants to push this session, as the former juvenile justice official has tried through the past three administrations.

"The old teach 'em a lesson approach doesn't work," he said.

Medicaid growth slowing

Medicaid spending for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2016, should rise 3.8 percent, with spending the following year rising 2.9 percent, well below the 6.5 percent average since 2007, finance committee analyst Mike Tweedy reported.

Pressure on the state budget from Medicaid could ease even more after 2017, when the state begins a managed-care system for long-term care and supportive services for people with disabilities.

Less than one-third of Virginia's Medicaid recipients are the aged, blind or disabled who use these services, but they account for about two-thirds of the cost of Medicaid. Most Medicaid beneficiaries are children of low-income families.

But sometime before the June 30 end of the current fiscal year, Medicaid will need more money than the General Assembly expected.

The reason is an unexpected jump of 11,000 low-income parents who apparently realized for the first time that they were eligible for coverage. A single parent with one child needs to earn less than $3,823 in most of Virginia, and $7,646 in Northern Virginia, to get Medicaid.

Medicaid officials believe many of these people discovered they were eligible for Medicaid because the Affordable Care Act – Obamacare – has suggested to so many uninsured Americans that they could get health care coverage.

The cost of insuring those 11,000 Virginians, estimated at $68 million, is far below the $196 million in savings from various cost-cutting measures recognized in this year's budget.

Both that cost and another $74 million the legislature will have to appropriate in order to make payments that the Medicaid system delayed paying last year are well below the additional taxes the state now is on track to collect this year. The tax collection projections are about $746 million more than the estimate the General Assembly used in this year's budget.

Medicaid costs Virginia about $4 billion a year. The program, which is half funded by the state and half by the federal government, covers low-income children, pregnant women and the disabled, as well as nursing home care for thousands of Virginians.

Ress can be reached by telephone at 757-247-4535.