Patti Feeney’s 5-year-old daughter Brianna was born with a genetic disorder so obscure, most doctors and insurance companies have never heard of it.



Pallister Killian Syndrome, or PKS, has robbed Brianna of the ability to see, speak and walk, and limited her capacity to learn. Feeney said she has had to become fluent in medical codes and insurance jargon in order for her daughter to get the complex care and extensive medical equipment her needs.



“The doctor sat us down and told us (Brianna) will never walk, talk and (will) need extensive care for the rest of her life,” said Feeney, a 41-year-old freelance writer living in South Plainfield with her three children. “You hear that and you are completely devastated. The last thing you want is all of these bills. I was just paralyzed.”



After years of seeing families like the Feeneys juggle the demands of taking care of a disabled child while trying to advocate for their medical needs, Children’s Specialized Hospital in Mountainside has developed an online tool to make the process easier, CEO Amy Mansue said.



The Health Insurance Education website features include “6 Steps to Help You Understand your Family’s Insurance Options,” a glossary on common insurance terms, tips from other parents, and a fill-in-the-blank form that helps people compare their child’s needs versus what their insurance plan covers.



“We worked with families and asked them, what information do you want?” Mansue said.



The Oct. 1 launch was timed to coincide with the November open enrollment periods for most insurance plans, including Obamacare, Mansue said. The health care reform law has spawned a lot of different options offered by employers, including private exchanges and high-deductible plans, she said. If parents are not careful, they could sign up for coverage that drains their bank accounts and denies the equipment or treatment their children need, she said.



“My fear is it will be driven by what is cheapest and the consequences for parents whose children have long-term conditions will be catastrophic,” Mansue said.



About 3,000 people have logged on to the website since its Oct. 1 launch, hospital’s spokeswoman Rebecca Mazzarella said.



The Statewide Parent Advocacy Network, an organization representing the interests of special-needs children and their families, gave feedback on the site before it went live, SPAN co-executive director Diana Autin said.



“Now we are having all of our staff using it as we talk to families,” Autin said. “It’s a great tool.”



Autin pointed to the results of a national survey that found about 50 percent of participants said their insurance coverage was inadequate or that they lacked coverage.



Thirty percent said they spent a minimum of $1,000 on out-of-pocket expenses, and one-quarter reported having trouble getting referrals to a specialist, according to 2009-10 National Survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs, the most recent data available.



“Overall compared to other states in the country, children in New Jersey have access to a stronger array of services,” Autin added. “But we still have a situation where families have a difficult time finding plans that are affordable and include in-network the specialists they are seeing.”



Brianna Feeney -- one of the 24,000 patients Children’s Specialized Hospital treats every year – relies heavily on expensive medical equipment, her mother said. A “stander,” a device that holds her upright, is $7,000. She’s growing out of her wheelchair and bed, which will cost $8,000 and $10,000, respectively.



“Each piece of equipment takes several visits to the doctor for letters and prescriptions, phone calls to the insurance company, appeals for anything that is denied - which often happens - and finding the money to pay for the percentage the insurance company will not pay,” Feeney said.

The cost of home health aides and nurses is substantial but these services are equally as important as the having the equipment, Feeney said. Finding an insurance company willing to cover these services is tough, she said.

"Personally, I think it is vital that parents make it a point to pinpoint exactly what is covered as far as respite care within the plans available," said Feeney, who has two other children, ages 10 and 11. "Caring for a profoundly disabled child alone while caring for other children and fighting to get the medical equipment and services that Brianna needs is exhausting. I know that parents like me need help on a daily basis or it can be difficult to continue to advocate effectively."

Although Brianna is covered by her father’s insurance, she is shopping around for her own coverage with her daughter’s needs in mind. "I have to constantly look ahead and make sure that I have adequate health insurance for Brianna given her extraordinary needs that are only increasing as she gets older," she said.



The website has been a comfort, she said.



“I have found it really useful in deciphering the often mysterious terminology used when describing the health insurance services, processes and coverage,” Feeney said. “I'm finding it helpful to not feel so alone through the process of picking health insurance -- a really crucial decision that will impact Brianna's life for year's to come.”

A video made by Children's Specialized Hospital that explains how to use the website may be found here.

Susan K. Livio may be reached at slivio@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @SusanKLivio. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.