Print Email Font Resize Font Resize CU-Boulder police investigating adult male found dead on campus

University of Colorado police and the Boulder County Coroner's Office are investigating the death of a unidentified man who was found unresponsive Saturday night on the CU campus.



Emergency crews at 8:40 p.m. responded to the Bruce Curtis Building, located near the intersection of Broadway and College Avenue, on reports of an adult male who was unconscious.



Paramedics determined that the man was deceased, according to Cmdr. Robert Axmacher with the CU police.



The man, whose identity has not be released, is believed to have been in his 30s or 40s and is not believed to have been a CU student, Axmacher said.



The cause and manner of the man's death have not been determined, but Axmacher said there does not appear to be an ongoing threat to the public related to his body being found.



It is the second time in two days that a person has been found dead in a public place near Broadway in Boulder.



Boulder police on Friday night investigated the death of a woman whose body was found in the Boulder Creek Path underpass near Broadway and Arapahoe Avenue.



Officials with the coroner's office on Saturday said they are still working to determine the woman's identity.



Police said there were not outward signs of foul play in her death.



Further information about the man found on the CU campus will be made available at















University of Colorado police and the Boulder County Coroner's Office are investigating the death of a unidentified man who was found unresponsive Saturday night on the CU campus.Emergency crews at 8:40 p.m. responded to the Bruce Curtis Building, located near the intersection of Broadway and College Avenue, on reports of an adult male who was unconscious.Paramedics determined that the man was deceased, according to Cmdr. Robert Axmacher with the CU police.The man, whose identity has not be released, is believed to have been in his 30s or 40s and is not believed to have been a CU student, Axmacher said.The cause and manner of the man's death have not been determined, but Axmacher said there does not appear to be an ongoing threat to the public related to his body being found.It is the second time in two days that a person has been found dead in a public place near Broadway in Boulder.Boulder police on Friday night investigated the death of a woman whose body was found in the Boulder Creek Path underpass near Broadway and Arapahoe Avenue.Officials with the coroner's office on Saturday said they are still working to determine the woman's identity.Police said there were not outward signs of foul play in her death.Further information about the man found on the CU campus will be made available at police.colorado.edu , Axmacher said.