How to contact the governor: Call 1.866.366.1121 toll free. Fax 1.225.342.7099. Go to gov.louisiana.gov/ for email link.

Gov. Jindal's refusal to accept almost $16 billion in extra Medicaid money was destined to hurt thousands of low-income Louisiana residents who lack health insurance. That has been clear for months, as study after study - including the state's own -- showed that tens of thousands of people would benefit if Louisiana accepted the Medicaid expansion that is part of President Obama's health care act.

But a new analysis by the Kaiser Family Foundation puts the situation in stark terms: Without the expansion, 242,150 poor Louisiana residents won't have access to the insurance offerings the Affordable Care Act was designed to provide.

That includes 87 percent of the adults in Louisiana -- excluding the elderly -- who live in poverty. They don't qualify for Medicaid now because of the way the program was designed and funded. They earn too little to be able to afford to buy insurance on the new health care exchanges and aren't eligible for the Affordable Care Act's insurance tax credits.

And yet Gov. Jindal continues to reject the federal money that could help make them healthier and ease their financial burdens. He has provided various excuses, but it's hard to believe the rejection is anything but a political calculation.

The governor has long had aspirations to the White House. And although he told reporters Thursday that he hadn't made a decision about running in 2016, the launch of his new nonprofit -- America Next -- is fueling speculation that he might. If so, accepting $15.8 billion from President Obama's health care act probably wouldn't play well with some of his likely supporters.

What a shame if the governor's ambitions were to trump his own people's needs.

Historically, Medicaid eligibility has been restricted to children, their parents, the elderly and individuals who are disabled, Kaiser points out. Other adults weren't eligible in most states, no matter how poor they were. Even for families with young children, only the poorest parents have been covered in Louisiana.

The Affordable Care Act was written to change that and to close gaps in Medicaid by broadening coverage to a greater percentage of low-income residents.

But Gov. Jindal's rejection of the money means those residents are still out of luck in Louisiana.

That is a hard-hearted position. And it is one that other conservative governors have not been able to stick with. Ohio Gov. John Kasich, Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder and Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Corbett -- all Republicans who've opposed the Affordable Care Act -- agreed recently to take the Medicaid money. The reason is simple: It's good for the people they serve. Gov. Jindal ought to add his name to that list.

Lawmakers, health advocates and many others -- including our Editorial Board --have pushed for months for him to change his mind about the expansion. Those efforts have yet to succeed.

But the fight goes on, and it should keep going on. In September, two dozen ministers, doctors, nurses and public health advocates traveled by bus from New Orleans to Baton Rouge to call on Gov. Jindal to accept the Medicaid expansion. They carried 7,000 signatures gathered at churches in the New Orleans area.

Comments then by Dr. Don Erwin, the founder and CEO of the St. Thomas Community Health Center, were prophetic: "For those states that don't accept Medicaid expansion, that means the poorest of our people will not be eligible for anything. They won't be eligible for insurance exchanges, they won't be eligible for Medicaid, and they represent right now a real serious problem for our state."

Kaiser's new analysis shows just how serious the problem is.

Gov. Jindal has said he is opposed to the Medicaid expansion because of concerns about costs to the state and not wanting to have so many people on government-provided insurance. Would he really rather they have no insurance?

The state's costs for the expansion are minuscule. The federal government will pay 100 percent of the cost in the first three years, with the state paying no more than 10 percent after that.

Gov. Jindal's own Department of Health and Hospitals found that the state would save as much as $367.5 million over the first 10 years of the expansion. DHH's worst-case scenario is that Louisiana would have to spend as much as $1.71 billion over a decade.

But even $1.71 billion, if that amount proves true, is precious little compared with the benefits of providing almost a quarter of a million Louisianians health coverage.

The letters delivered to the governor by the ministers, doctors and other advocates in September emphasized that point. People are dying in our community because they lack health care, they said. There is no moral reason for Louisiana to refuse billions in federal dollars that could change that, they said.

No moral reason at all. Let Gov. Jindal know that. Call him. Email him. Get your friends and neighbors to do the same.

It's not right to leave all these people stranded when it would be so easy to help them.