It was just a month ago that Rockies talk was a hot item at the GM meetings in Phoenix. Remember?

When new GM Jeff Bridich said the Rockies’ “eyes and ears were open” to trades for anyone — including Troy Tulowitzki and Carlos Gonzalez — that set the rumor mill churning.

Usually, Bridich’s words would simply qualify as “GM speak.” But in fact, it was a dramatic change of course regarding Tulo and CarGo, who were previously off the market at the behest of owner Dick Monfort.

So where does that leave the Tulo/CarGo situation as baseball’s winter meetings open Monday in San Diego? I would be surprised if anything happens this week. As was one major-league executive told me, “If I was a betting man, I sure wouldn’t put down money on a trade.”

The conventional wisdom seems to be that any trade for Tulo or CarGo would not come until next spring or early summer after both of them have proven they’re healthy after coming back from injuries that required surgery in August. However, there is still some interest out there right now and there will be discussions in San Diego.

“I think you could divide the interested teams into threes,” a major-league source said. “There are those that no longer have an interest; those that are in a wait-and-see mode; and those that are still interested right now.”

So, while I don’t think the Rockies are going to pull off a blockbuster deal in San Diego, the situation regarding Tulo and CarGo bears watching.

Bridich is on the record saying his primary offseason goals are to add a starter to the rotation and beef up the bullpen. He’s also acknowledged that the Rockies will listen to trade offers for catcher Wilin Rosario.

Bridich, however, stressed that he is not going to make a move just to make a move. In other words, even as a first-time GM, he doesn’t feel compelled to “make a splash” at the winter meetings.

“You have to remember that this is just one week in time — a few days really,” he last last week. “We have been working hard, laying things out. We will go into San Diego listening and open, but we will not force something. It has to fit our plan.”