“Our gay battles are over cake,” the HBO host jokes

Bill Maher closed out Friday’s “New Rules” segment by ripping apart Indiana’s new “religious freedom” law, and bringing its message closer to home. As he found, bigotry is not just limited to the middle of the country — where many coastal Americans like to believe it exists.

For example, idiotic California attorney Matt McLaughin proposed a ballot initiative to literally “kill the gays,” which Maher figuratively shredded during “Real Time.”

“Better that offenders should die than that all of us should be killed by God’s just wrath,” the Orange County lawyer had penned.

Also Read: Indiana Pizzeria’s Donations Reach Whopping $842,387 in Wake of Anti-Gay Marriage Backlash

“If you believe that God wiped out Sodom and Gomorrah for being too gay, then, yeah — He must be itching to hit West Hollywood,” Maher joked to big applause.

Maher then took the one-sided discussion to a global level.

“Now, is California really going to consider Mr. McLaughlin’s gay-killing bill?” Maher added. “Of course not. But as batshit as this asshole is, just imagine if there was a whole country of Matt McLaughlins.”

Also Read: Bill Maher Blasts Media’s Easy Treatment of ‘Blatant, Bald-Assed Liar’ Bill O’Reilly

“Well there is, it’s called Saudi Arabia,” the HBO host continued, calling for someone to update the Quran. “It’s called Iran. It’s called Pakistan. I could go on.”

He did, doling out a solid Hillary Clinton joke and handing some serious side-eye over to one of his panel guests in the process.

Also Read: Bill Maher Says Brian Williams Isn’t the Problem: ‘NBC Nightly News Sucks’

“There’s so much wrong with America these days, take pride in the one thing that’s so much better: We don’t let fundamentalists rule our shit,” Maher stated.

“What’s the proof?” the comedian concluded. “Our gay battles are over cake.”

Watch the video above.

Indiana Pizzeria Scandal: 11 Other Fast-Food Controversies to Chew On (Photos) Indiana-based pizzeria Memories Pizza found itself at the center of controversy this week, when it was announced that the company would not cater same-sex weddings following the passage of Indiana's Religious Freedom Restoration Act. The company can at least take comfort in the knowledge that it's not alone. Here are 11 other food-related scandals that left some people choking on outrage.

DiGiorno Pizza Serves a Slice of Outrage A case of social media marketing gone wrong. DiGiorno was forced to issue an apology when it tweeted the hashtag #WhyIStayed, coupled with the message "You had pizza." A seemingly innocent tweet, until they company found out that the hashtag was actually launched in response to domestic violence, after video surfaced of football player Ray Rice punching out then-fiance Janay Palmer.

Starbucks' 'Race Together' Program The ubiquitous coffee chain's effort to spark a dialogue about race relations in America was met with widespread criticism, probably because most of the company's customers are just trying to get their caffeine fix and go without a lecture from their baristas.

SpaghettiOs' Pearl Harbor Flap Uh-oh, SpaghettiOs, indeed. In 2013, Campbell Soup, the company behind the circular pasta treat, issued a mea culpa after the SpaghettiOs Twitter account tweeted an image of a cartoon SpaghettiO holding an American flag with the message, "Take a moment to remember #PearlHarbor with us" on Dec. 7. Not surprisingly, the crass marketing ploy bombed with the public.

Chick-fil-A's Anti-Gay Boss How about a side order of homophobia with your chicken sandwich? Chick-fil-A stepped into a big pile of controversy when its president Dan Cathy piped up on the subject of gay marriage, stating that "we’re inviting God’s judgment on our nation when we shake our fist at him and say we know better than you as to what constitutes a marriage." Some people boycotted; others, unable to avoid the restaurant chain's tasty fare, swallowed their pride along with the chicken.

Papa John's Obamacare Scare Enjoy your pizza hot, tasty and cheap? Papa John's CEO John Schnatter had some bad news for you in 2012, when he declared that the the passage of Obamacare would raise the cost of a Papa John's pizza by 11 to 14 cents. Sure, and if you find yourself shorted on your breadstick order, go ahead and blame Obama for that too.

Entenmann's Casey Anthony Twitter Goof Sweets-maker Entenmann's hit a sour note when it tweeted the message, "Who's #notguilty about eating all the tasty treats they want?!" Unfortunately, the company was found guilty of using a hashtag associated with the controversial not-guilty verdict of Casey Anthony, who had been accused of murdering her two-year-old daughter. Oops.

Domino's Delivers ... Anti-Choice Support? Domino's Pizza founder Thomas Monaghan's donations to pro-life groups such as the controversial Operation Rescue have left a bad taste in some consumers' mouths.

The Pizza Underground A pizza-themed Velvet Underground tribute band? That includes former child star Macaulay Culkin? Seriously -- that's cheesy.

Krispy Kreme's Klan Kontroversy A British franchisee of the donut company raised eyebrows in February when it launched a "KKK Wednesday" promotion, apparently unaware that "KKK" is a widely known abbreviation for white supremacy group the Ku Klux Klan.

Kentucky Fried Controversy Not everybody needs a little KFC -- least of all PETA, which has targeted the fried-chicken chain for allegedly abusing chickens before serving them up to customers.

Starbucks' 9/11 Gaffe Americans were a tad on edge following the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. Unfortunately, some of that national unease landed on Starbucks, whose poster for its "Collapse Into Cool" campaign evoked traumatic memories for some. Previous ; Next 1 of 12 When questionably nutritious eats meet questionably tasteful corporate action Indiana-based pizzeria Memories Pizza found itself at the center of controversy this week, when it was announced that the company would not cater same-sex weddings following the passage of Indiana's Religious Freedom Restoration Act. The company can at least take comfort in the knowledge that it's not alone. Here are 11 other food-related scandals that left some people choking on outrage.