Elderly patients and dementia sufferers have been ‘restrained unnecessarily’ and given ‘inappropriate sedation’ at a hospital where health watchdog inspectors have declared a major incident, it has emerged.

A ward at Colchester Hospital, in Essex, has now been closed to new admissions after inspectors from the Care Quality Commission (CQC) found it was struggling with “unprecedented demand”, with patients being urged to got to it’s A&E department only if they have a serious or life-threatening condition.

But it is understood that serious concerns were also raised by CQC staff about the inappropriate restraint, sedation and inappropriate resuscitation of elderly people, some of whom were suffering from dementia.

One "safeguarding concern" raised by the CQC is understood to have involved a patient's note detailing that an invasive procedure had been carried when that patient could not give their consent.

Inspectors questioned whether some patients in the hospital’s emergency assessment unit had given informed consent for a number of medical procedures. The unit has now been closed following the inspection.

There are also claims that patients were resuscitated despite a “do not resuscitate” (DNR) notice.

This is the latest crisis to hit the troubled hospital, which was placed on special measures by the health regulator Monitor last November after data inaccuracies in cancer treatment targets meant it had breached its licence to provide certain services. The CQC found that staff were allegedly being bullied to change figures and a police investigation was launched into the claims.

An emergency control centre has now been put in place at Colchester Hospital to handle problems with capacity. Routine elective operations are being rescheduled, hospital managers are trying to discharge as many patients as they safely can and extra staff are being brought it.

Professor Mike Richards, the CQC’s chief inspector, told The Guardian: “CQC carried out an unannounced inspection at Colchester hospital this week in response to concerns. The inspection looked at the accident and emergency department and the emergency assessment unit (EAU).

“Following the inspection, we gave feedback to the trust about our safeguarding concerns so that it could take appropriate action to ensure the safety and well-being of its patients. We will return to carry out further inspections at the trust and we are working urgently with Monitor to resolve these issues.

“A full report of CQC’s findings will be published on our website in due course.”

The crisis at Colchester Hospital University NHS Trust comes as Jeremy Hunt, the health secretary, warned of “real pressure” on A&E departments this winter and announced a £300m fund to help alleviate the situation.

Mr Hunt said on Friday: “The pressures are higher than they have ever been before in the system.”

The ‘major incident’ at Colchester was announced on Friday during the public part of a scheduled hospital board meeting, although the findings from the CQC visit were discussed in the private part of the meeting, from which the press and public were excluded.

A spokesman for Colchester Hospital refused to either confirm or deny a number of specific allegations about the use of restraint, inappropriate sedations and patients being resuscitated despite DNR notices.

However its chief executive, Dr Lucy Moore, admitted that safeguarding concerns had been raised.

She said: “The Care Quality Commission raised a small number of safeguarding concerns when its team gave immediate feedback and the end of the inspection on Wednesday.”

Peter Wilson, the acting chairman of the hospital trust, said: “The Care quality Commission visited here and visited A&E and emergency admission unit departments. Disappointingly, although they commented favourably on some aspects their general view was that the situation had not improved. We have already put actions in place to address some of the issues they face.

“We are, however, facing an unprecedented demand at the front end and have declared today a major incident, which means a whole-hospital review of demand, capacity, staffing levels and discharge processes and other opportunities for improvement.”

But patient groups have described the alleged ill-treatment of patients as a “horrific” situation.

Katherine Murphy, chief executive of the Patients Association, said: “I’m saddened, horrified and distressed to hear of such allegations. If they are confirmed, they are horrific. It’s deeply alarming that despite Mid-Staffordshire, Winterbourne View and all the reports that have been published, that this inhumane treatment and lack of care and compassion continues to happen today, especially with such vulnerable patients.”

North East Essex clinical commissioning group, the GP-led NHS body that sends patients to the hospital and pays for their treatment, said it was concerned by the CQC’s findings. A spokesman for the group said: “We are very disappointed to hear that the CQC has seen little improvement to A&E services since their last visit earlier this year [and] of particular concern is the issue of safeguarding patients.

“While we await their full report, we are working with the hospital trust and other partners to address the CQC’s urgent concerns highlighted during their visit this week. This includes supporting safe discharges and preventing avoidable admissions.”

The CQC’s most recent inspection report on the hospital, published in July, found that it required improvement in the key areas of safety and responsiveness and had inadequate leadership, although it was found to be good in terms of how effective and caring it was.