CHICAGO--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Kairos Consulting Worldwide today announced it won a contract to develop report cards to help the public assess the quality of healthcare providers. Kairos will work with the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) to create and implement healthcare-specific measures for public report cards that assess the quality of hospitals, clinics and other healthcare providers as part of the Affordable Care Act.

Kairos is part of the team led by Abt Associates, Inc., a global leader in research and program implementation. The team was awarded the competitive contract to support the CMS Measure and Instrument Development and Support (MIDS) program. The MIDS program promotes the quality of healthcare by emphasizing major strategies for evaluating and improving care.

Kairos will provide business process improvement and change management services to help CMS develop, test, implement and publicly report healthcare-specific measures. Kairos, a Chicago-based consultancy, established a Washington office in 2012 to service its federal clients, which also include the Department of Defense, Department of Energy and the National Nuclear Security Administration.

“This program has the potential to give every American the information they need to make the best healthcare choices for themselves and their families,” said Lynn Sutton, Kairos Worldwide managing principal. “We are proud to bring our proven healthcare process improvement methodologies to the MIDS program as part of Abt Associates’ world-class team. This is a critical effort to improve healthcare with a focus on cost, quality, service and speed of delivery.”

The Kairos healthcare team provides government, Fortune 500 companies and leading academic institutions with performance improvements that drive significant results—on time and on budget. Since 2005, Kairos has developed processes to lower costs and improve the quality of healthcare with improvement initiatives ranging from the point-of-service through middle-management and into the ranks of senior healthcare executives.

About Kairos Worldwide

Kairos Consulting Worldwide, an SBA 8(a) certified company based in Chicago, serves private and public sector clients with global, national, regional and local operations. Kairos was founded in 2004 by engineers with extensive corporate backgrounds. The company is certified as both a Woman-owned and Minority-owned Business Enterprise.

Kairos applies engineering principals to improve critical business processes, creating time and cost efficiencies that also reduce errors and increase quality. Kairos produced significant results for clients including the U.S. Department of Defense, the U.S. Department of Energy, Abbot, Ameren, University of Illinois, University of Chicago Hospitals, the American Hospital Association and the National Nuclear Security Administration.