Just two weeks after the early April opening of its new $12 million health center in Bartonsville, Monroe County's third largest employer, Pocono Health System, was left without its president and CEO, Kathy Kuck, who abruptly resigned after six years.

The same day, the health system's directors promoted senior vice president and chief operating officer Jeff Snyder to interim president and CEO. An employee of the health system since 2012, and with 25 years of experience in hospital management, including several top roles with large health networks, Snyder was chosen a month later as PHS's new president and CEO.

Snyder is tasked with the vital responsibility of maintaining and advancing a system that has roots a century ago when it was once the only health care system in Monroe County.

Snyder, 49, is confident in his ability to move PHS forward in an industry that is faced with constant change and, in the Greater Lehigh Valley, increasing competition.

“I strongly share our organizational mission, vision and values …,” said Snyder, a Schuylkill Haven High School, Albright College and Widener University alumnus. “I am confident we can continue to grow our health system by improving and strengthening the physician affiliations, differentiating Pocono Medical Center through high quality care and service excellence, and increasing the value in health care delivery.”

Prior to arriving at East Stroudsburg-based Pocono Health System, Snyder was CEO of Mercy Suburban Hospital in East Norriton and CEO of St. Christopher's Hospital for Children in Philadelphia. He also had leadership roles at Saint Clare's Health System in Denville, N.J., Virtua Health in Voorhees, N.J., and Meridian Health in Neptune, N.J.

In an exclusive question-and-answer with the man responsible for 1,850 employees – and a system that last year had nearly 12,000 admissions and more than 185,000 outpatient visits – Snyder talks about challenges and opportunities, including strengthening the network's physician affiliations.

Lehigh Valley Business: What were some of your roles and achievements before coming to Pocono Health System/Pocono Medical Center, and what skills do you bring to the table to move the health network forward?

Jeff Snyder: Before being appointed president and CEO of Pocono Health System/Pocono Medical Center, I served for nearly two years as senior vice president and chief operating officer, providing leadership to ensure the optimal operating effectiveness and strategic positioning for operations of our health system. …

I possess over 25 years of hospital management experience in administration, hospital operations, strategic planning, business development, managed care and financial planning. Therefore, I am prepared to move Pocono Health System/Pocono Medical Center forward as we continue to meet the health care needs of our community by focusing on the mission of providing world-class care, close to home and vision of building a healthier community.

LVB: Upon taking the position of CEO, what were some of the main issues the board of directors instructed you to first tackle?

Snyder: Since I had served as senior vice president and chief operating officer here previously, I recognized both the challenges and opportunities that would need to be addressed to continue to grow our health system and ensure we are the health care provider of choice. With that said, building stronger relationships with all of our physicians and providers as well as differentiating Pocono Medical Center through high quality care and service excellence stand out prominently.

LVB: What makes Pocono Health System stand out in Monroe County among the pack of other health networks, and how does your role fit in to assure that it does?

Snyder: Pocono Medical Center has served as Monroe County's sole provider for nearly 100 years. In fact, in 2015, we will celebrate 100 years of providing health care services to this community.

We have grown from our humble origins as a small, community hospital to becoming a strong regional health system with services usually only available in larger facilities like trauma, neonatal, spine surgery, among many others. Our strong commitment to the mission, vision and values and service to the community are certainly aspects that set us apart.

Furthermore, I am confident that improving and strengthening our physician affiliations and differentiating Pocono Medical Center through our high quality and service excellence will further demonstrate to the community why we should be the provider of choice.

LVB: Why did Pocono build a coordinated care facility in Bartonsville? Are there plans for more of them, and where?

Snyder: We built the Bartonsville Health Care Center in an effort to provide more personalized accessible, effective and efficient care. As a patient-centered medical home, the Bartonsville Health Care Center provides services in a comprehensive and coordinated manner, all in one. location. Therefore, it serves as a center that delivers wellness, prevention and chronic-disease management.

Yes, we are currently engaged in building a 30,000-square-foot West End Health Care Center in Brodheadsville, also known as the West End of Monroe County, which will also serve as a patient-centered medical home. Both the Bartonsville Health Care Center and the future West End Health Care Center also bring new services to that area.

So, for example, in Bartonsville we have a certified vascular lab, wound care center with two hyperbaric chambers and a new breast center. In the West End, we will have urgent care, expanded primary care services, among other specialty services designed just for the residents there.

LVB: How is your health network responding to health care reform?

Snyder: We are responding to health care reform by investing in the development of patient-centered medical homes where all services are comprehensive and coordinated in one location. Both the medical homes and the PMC physician associates network are committed to being centers that deliver wellness, prevention and chronic-disease management. This is enhanced by our endocrinology service line, diabetic education program and nutrition services.

In addition, PMC has three immediate care centers that provide exceptional care for treating most major illnesses and injuries for all ages, along with routine physicals, screenings and more. In addition, we are also committed to increasing the value in health care delivery by focusing intently on quality.

Furthermore, in addition to our effort to provide more coordinated care, in alignment with the Affordable Care Act, our team-based financial counselors will continue to assist patients and their families with navigating both the health insurance marketplace, as well as providing guidance on hospital billing.

LVB: Related, what changes or improvements has Pocono made — or is planning to make — to attract and retain patients?

Snyder: We have invested in the development and growth of our physician network and provider affiliations. To that end, we have successfully recruited new primary care providers to fulfill our vision of building a healthier community and ensuring that our medical homes are robust with a strong primary care presence.

Furthermore, we have partnered with other health systems like Thomas Jefferson University Hospital to bring new services to our community like Telestroke, GYN surgical oncology and a medical oncology second opinion program. We have also expanded OB-GYN and medical oncology services to Pike County in partnership with Dingmans Medical, and now offer robotic urology services in partnership with the department of urology at SUNY [State University of New York] Upstate Medical University.

LVB: Any other initiatives, projects or expansions planned for the health system and/or medical center?

Snyder: Besides the West End Health Care Center, we are also currently involved in expanding the number of neonatal intensive care unit beds from four to eight, due to an increased need to keep those babies and families receiving care here in our community. As is true of any growing enterprise, Pocono Health System is always considering its future needs in terms of its physical plant and facilities.

LVB: What is your overall vision for the health system and/or medical center?

Snyder: I strongly share our organizational mission, vision and values but would add that I am confident we can continue to grow our health system by improving and strengthening the physician affiliations, differentiating Pocono Medical Center through high quality care and service excellence, and increasing the value in health care delivery.