Schiliro says the administration learned an important lesson: Just listen to people. Schiliro's Obamacare lessons

For the whole month of January, Phil Schiliro and the rest of the administration’s Obamacare team had one goal: Treat every day like a potential Y2K.

That was the crisis that never actually happened, of course — the massive computer meltdown that was supposed to happen on New Year’s Day 2000. But by January 2014, the Affordable Care Act rollout had already had its equivalent of an actual Y2K: the federal website disaster that started the enrollment season on such an embarrassing note.

Story Continued Below

So when Schiliro returned to the White House in December to help put implementation back on track, he and the rest of the team wanted to become more active in foreseeing other disasters. And one of the most widely predicted ones — which had actually happened to seniors during the Medicare Part D launch in 2006 — was that hordes of Obamacare customers would think they were covered and then find out that they weren’t.

Schiliro is back in Santa Fe now, his temporary stint at the White House finally over after being extended a few times. In a wide-ranging phone interview about the law and the rescue effort, Schiliro said the all-out effort to prevent even worse disasters from happening — and for the administration to be better prepared than it was at the initial launch — was a prime example of the lessons the Obama administration learned from the early rollout stumbles.

( Schiliro Opinion: The Affordable Care Act Is Working)

“We had to approach every day as if it was Y2K,” Schiliro said. The be-prepared-for-anything approach worked, he said — because the feared wave of stories of angry, uninsured Obamacare customers never happened.

The administration reached out to insurers, hospitals, providers and pharmacies to get their ideas on how to head off troubles, Schiliro said. Pharmacies helped by volunteering to provide prescription medications for a month if customers said they were having coverage disputes.

And the administration put together a team of specialists, based at the Department of Human Services and the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services to handle any difficult coverage disputes that did come up, with the ability to help solve them in real time.

“We had a team … that was ready to respond to anything on Jan. 1,” Schiliro said. “And then, when we got through Jan. 1, we had to prepare as if Jan. 2 was Y2K. And then we had to stay on alert for the whole month of January.”

They also staffed up the call center at HealthCare.gov, the federal enrollment website, to handle questions from customers, hospitals and pharmacies — with the most complicated cases being given to the special response team.

( CARTOONS: Matt Wuerker on Obamacare)

The disaster-prevention strategy was just one of the lessons the administration learned from the rollout, Schiliro said. The government also needs to change its procurement practices, he said, as President Barack Obama has talked about. But another key, he said, is to eliminate uncertainty among the health care industry groups that are affected by the law.

That’s why he said the administration made a point of releasing the rules for the next enrollment season early. The 400-page rule on health exchange and insurance standards for 2015 came out last week, and he said the goal was to give insurers plenty of time to prepare and avoid a repeat of what happened last year, “when the rules were still being changed very late.”

Another lesson, he said, was that the White House needs a senior-level permanent staffer — rather than a temporary one like he was — who can focus on the law’s implementation and have easy access to Obama and White House chief of staff Denis McDonough when disputes arise between agencies and departments.

That’s the role he says will now be filled by Kristie Canegallo, the new White House deputy chief of staff who will replace him overseeing the ACA but also has a broader portfolio of other policy implementation issues.

( Also on POLITICO: NRA stalls surgeon general pick)

“She’s just an extraordinarily impressive person,” Schiliro said of Canegallo, who worked closely with him on the rescue effort. He said her multi-issue assignment shouldn’t be a problem: “She can handle a lot of issues at once, but she’s also able to drill down on any one of them in a great amount of detail.”

Schiliro said the administration also learned an obvious-sounding but important lesson: Just listen to people.