ASPEN — It would have been hard enough to take if she’d merely lost a race she could have won, but this was harder for Mikaela Shiffrin. It was a race she should have won.

Bidding to become the first American woman to win a World Cup race on Aspen Mountain since Tamara McKinney in 1981, the EagleVail resident was in the lead two gates from the finish Friday when she suffered an uncharacteristic lapse of concentration and fell in a giant slalom she seemed sure to win.

“That was kind of heartbreaking, but I was attacking, I was really fighting,” said Shiffrin, 20. “I’m going to look at the video, and I’m sure I’ll see a bunch of things I should have done better like, second to the last gate, staying on your outside ski. Some of the basics.”

Shiffrin had the fastest first run, and all of the other racers were finished when she entered the starting gate for the second one. Skiing through a heavy snowfall, she had a lead of 0.68 seconds at the final intermediate timing. Victory seemed certain — and then it was gone in a sliding fall and a puff of snow. Lara Gut of Switzerland was the beneficiary, winning by 0.1 of a second over Eva-Maria Brem of Austria.

Watching Shiffrin approach the finish, Gut was sure Shiffrin would win.

“She was skiing awesome,” Gut said. “We are in the States, so I felt like, ‘OK, it’s all right if she wins,’ and then, ‘She crashed, she can also make mistakes, so I win.’ It’s unusual that Mikaela does mistakes like that.”

Shiffrin’s mistake was getting her weight on her inside ski in a turn, which she called an “inexcusable mistake for somebody who’s able to win.” Her outside ski lost grip and slipped from underneath her.

“It (the course) kept turning towards the finish and I knew that it did,” Shiffrin said. “I got past the bigger turns and I was like, ‘That felt quite good.’ But I was also thinking in my mind, ‘Wow, I can’t believe I made it this far, it was kind of rough.’ No sooner did I think that …”

Shiffrin has dominated slalom the past three seasons, winning gold medals at two world championships and the Sochi Olympics. Her GS has improved to the point where she expects to contend in every race. She was second in the season’s first GS race last month in Soelden, Austria.

She can gain some consolation here with slaloms Saturday and Sunday.

Vail’s Lindsey Vonn crashed on the first run after her left ski popped off when she pressured it to make a hard right turn.

“It wasn’t even really bumpy, so I’m kind of perplexed as to how that happened,” said Vonn, 31. “It’s never happened to me in a race before. To have it happen in Aspen is definitely disappointing, but (stuff) happens. Next week is Lake Louise, so I’m just going to move on and focus on that. I’m fine (physically). Just super annoying.”

Vonn has owned the World Cup races at Lake Louise, Alberta, claiming 15 of her women’s record 67 victories there. She will race two downhills and a super-G there next week.

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or @johnmeyer