Anand Parekh and Robert Schreiber

July 10, 2015

As our health care system transforms more quickly than ever from paying for volume to paying for value, providers have strong incentives to ensure that their patients’ care plans are reinforced and supported outside the clinical setting in people’s homes and communities.

This is particularly important for older adults with multiple chronic conditions, who comprise 66 percent of Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries and account for 93 percent of total Medicare expenditures. In addition, it is well known that individuals with both chronic conditions and functional limitations requiring long-term services and supports are at highest risk for poor outcomes and high health care expenditures.

For these individuals to achieve better health, providers must be able to connect their patients to social supports and human services while focusing on prevention and wellness in ways that emphasize behavior change. By partnering with community-based organizations (CBOs), such as Area Agencies on Aging (AAAs), providers can help individuals manage their chronic diseases and meet their often overlooked social needs.

CBOs can improve patient outcomes by activating patients, avoiding both short- and long-term nursing facility stays, and preventing unnecessary hospital admissions.

Figure 1. Opportunities For Community-Based Organizations To Add Value

Note: ACL: Administration for Community Living; LTSS: Long-Term Supports and Services

Elder Services Of The Merrimack Valley

Take for example, Elder Services of the Merrimack Valley, Inc. (ESMV), an AAA in Lawrence, Massachusetts. ESMV has a community-care transitions program that has helped six community hospital systems decrease 30-day readmissions by 39.6 percent among at-risk patients through the use of “Care at Hand,” a technology tool that guides health coaches through a series of simple survey questions to identify early changes in an individual’s health condition.

ESMV also helps people with multiple chronic conditions take an active role in their health and medical care through the use of evidence-based self-management programs disseminated by a statewide collaborative known as the Healthy Living Center of Excellence. Yet another intervention involves identifying supportive housing for at-risk individuals, which has the potential benefit of decreasing admissions to hospitals and nursing homes.

Through these interventions, ESMV staff leverage community resources to help individuals remain in their homes and communities and prevent hospitalizations and nursing home admissions.

Evaluating And Supporting The Role Of Community-Based Organizations

In a retrospective study of Medicare beneficiaries, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) found that several physical activity, falls prevention, and chronic disease self-management programs offered by CBOs may have driven down total health care costs for participating beneficiaries or at least demonstrated reductions in unplanned hospital utilization and costs. A prospective study is now underway and slated to be completed by 2017.

In addition, CMS’ Community-based Care Transitions Program—in which CBOs, either alone or with acute care hospitals, work to effectively manage high-risk Medicare patients’ transitions and improve their quality of care—is currently being evaluated to assess the program’s reductions in preventable hospital readmissions.

Efforts are now also underway by entities such as The SCAN Foundation to better prepare CBOs for successful health care partnerships. Core competencies that have been identified include ensuring CBOs plan and promote their services and make a clear business case, deliver services successfully and profitably, and evaluate their services.

In addition, recently, the U.S. Administration for Community Living (ACL, which includes the Administration on Aging) announced that it was expanding a program for aging and disability community-based networks to strengthen partnerships with the health care sector in 11 communities. These communities are participating in ACL’s second Business Acumen Learning Collaborative, where they receive targeted technical assistance and engage in peer-to-peer learning in areas such as organizational culture change, business planning, marketing, contracting, and pricing services.

Additional Opportunities

There are additional opportunities to accelerate integration between health care providers and CBOs. First, private sector standards and public sector requirements for patient-centered medical homes could strongly encourage, if not require these medical homes to provide referrals to community resources.

Second, to maintain their tax-exempt status, non-profit hospitals must now complete community health needs assessments and enact implementation plans to address these needs on a regular basis. This requirement provides an opportunity for hospitals to reach out to local CBOs to collaborate on improving the health of vulnerable populations.

Third, Medicare, Medicaid, and commercial accountable care organizations (ACO) should be aware of the specific services that CBOs provide in their catchment area. Efforts to geographically map ACOs specifically with AAAs in their same region could be a practical initial step. In addition, model contracts between these entities could be developed and shared to more easily scale these relationships.

Fourth, states participating in CMS’ State Innovation Models Initiative are in a prime position to serve as matchmakers between aging CBOs and care providers. Several states, such as Vermont, receiving model test awards are focused on connecting patients with relevant community services.

The Affordable Care Act has changed the health care environment: clinical-community linkages are increasingly necessary to meet the accountability standards that payers demand. Investment in community-based health and human service delivery systems is needed to fill the gaps that physicians have identified as essential to meeting the broad needs of an aging population.

As more CBOs develop and strengthen relationships with health care entities, they will together expand their knowledge base of factors most important for successful partnerships to demonstrate improved outcomes and return on investment. Standardized approaches can then be disseminated. And the quicker the pace of these efforts, the better for value-based health care transformation.

Authors’ Note

Dr. Schreiber is funded through grants from both the John A. Hartford Foundation and the Tufts Health Plan Foundation to work with Elder Services of the Merrimack Valley, Inc. and is employed by Hebrew SeniorLife. We acknowledge Ms. Laura Lawrence and Ms. Marisa Scala-Foley of the Administration for Community Living (ACL) who provided comments on the blog. Ms. Marisa Scala-Foley also provided the Figure.