Topics: Alice Roosevelt Longworth, American History, Books, Eleanor Roosevelt, News, Politics News

Eleanor Roosevelt hoped no one would come to her funeral. What she really wanted was to scotch the whole affair and just have someone announce her death after she’d already been buried. “I’d like to be remembered happily if that is possible,” she said. “If that can’t be I’d rather be forgotten.” Forgotten? “I had to tell her,” said her friend William Turner Levy, “that she was being unrealistic.”

Unrealistic, but not surprising. After all, this was the famously unfussy First Lady who served hot dogs to the king and queen of England during their 1939 state visit, who dragged her own suitcase around the world on countless humanitarian missions, and who insisted, after her husband died, that she’d never do anything newsworthy again. Naturally, she wanted her afterlife to be just as unpretentious as what came before. “Just a plain pine coffin covered with pine boughs. Inside the coffin are to be plain pillows and sheet with cloth,” she’d written in a letter to her doctor years earlier.

The service was held in Hyde Park’s St. James’ Church, which seated just 250 people. Among those who didn’t make the guest list: Horace W. B. Donegan, the grandstanding Episcopal bishop of New York. The five Roosevelt children refused to invite him, dreading he would eulogize their mother at length. (He showed up anyway but otherwise kept quiet.) Even the weather seemed to cooperate with Eleanor’s wishes. November 10, 1962, was a cold, damp day with the wind blowing off the Hudson River and pushing the chill through the streets of the town.

Yet the mourners, like the good bishop, weren’t going to let a cold shoulder stop them from saying good-bye. Thousands lined the roads, some standing five-deep to watch the hearse carry Mrs. Roosevelt from St. James’ to the Roosevelt mansion, Springwood, two miles away. For generations, the Roosevelts of Hyde Park had been buried in the quiet graveyard behind the little church, but President Roosevelt had requested that he and Eleanor be laid to rest in the large rose garden just to the side of the family home. It was, in its way, the perfect spot. After all, “Roosevelt” in Dutch means “field of roses.” Perhaps just as important, FDR’s overbearing mother, Sara, was tucked a safe distance away, resting in uncharacteristic silence back behind the church.

The president’s arrangement, however, helped produce exactly the kind of funeral Eleanor wanted to avoid. It was as if someone had picked up the entire Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade and dropped it into small-town America. The nightly news, including the BBC, delivered extensive coverage. Limousine-lock tied up the roads; amid all the excitement, two local keystone cops crashed their cruisers into each other right in front of the Hyde Park state police barracks. Most people were fans, but there were haters, too. One man standing along the funeral route waved a sign that read, “I’m glad you’re dead, Eleanor.” Two other men were arrested for carrying “derogatory” signs.

The roster of invited guests might have been small, but it was A-plus-list. President and Mrs. Kennedy arrived on Air Force One (which was taking its maiden voyage and would be used, almost exactly one year later, to transport JFK’s body back from Dallas). Vice President and Mrs. Johnson came, as did the former presidents Truman and Eisenhower, making this the first time that three presidents attended the funeral of a First Lady. Chief Justice Warren, Secretary of State Rusk, Secretary of Defense McNamara, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, Governor Rockefeller of New York, the United Nations ambassador Stevenson, and a sizable contingent of the Washington establishment were there. One well-aimed Soviet missile would have decimated the U.S. government.

That was no idle concern. Mrs. Roosevelt’s funeral came at the tail end of the Cuban missile crisis. Just days earlier, Nikita Khrushchev had agreed to dismantle the Soviet missiles he’d lined up in Cuba like cigars ready to be lit, and Castro was still threatening to shoot down anything bigger than a kite that wandered into his airspace. The U.S. military was so concerned, the Pentagon wanted to install a kind of hotline in the pew at St. James’ where President Kennedy was to be seated. The Reverend Gordon Kidd said no. “If he had to talk on the phone during the service it would be terribly frustrating and confusing,” Kidd reasoned.4 The Feds settled for a phone placed unobtrusively on an outside wall of the church, though Eleanor would undoubtedly have scoffed at that, too. After all, Khrushchev didn’t scare her. She had visited him on his home turf in 1957 for a magazine interview, a somewhat tense meeting that ended with Khrushchev’s declaring his own sort of détente with one of the world’s most formidable women. “At least,” he said, “we didn’t shoot each other.” When he popped in for a visit at her woodsy Val-Kill cottage two years later, Eleanor had only one real worry. She realized she had no vodka—even though Khrushchev was coming at 7:00 a.m. (Her son John dutifully ran down a bottle.)

Given all the world leaders Eleanor met and hosted over the years, it’s hardly surprising that she received what was arguably the first power funeral of an American woman. What was notable was that one of Washington’s most influential women was among the few who declined to attend. Her name was Alice Longworth. Mrs. L., as she was known, was a battle-ready Republican, a Capitol Hill institution with a biting wit, and a woman who, like Eleanor, tossed aside gender barriers as easily as she flicked the ashes off her long-stemmed cigarette holder. She was also Eleanor’s first cousin.

Alice’s father, Theodore Roosevelt, was the older brother of Eleanor’s father, Elliott. To her cousin Eleanor, Alice was a childhood playmate, a teenage confidante, and, in adulthood, a relentless rival. Their relationship had taken a sharp turn for the worse thirty years earlier, when Franklin Roosevelt was elected president, a job Alice believed rightly belonged to her favorite brother, Theodore Roosevelt Jr.

Over the years, the press played Alice and Eleanor off each other like rivals in a blue-blooded version of Oz: the good witch and the bad witch. Eleanor was the saint, the woman who revolutionized the role of First Lady with her very public activism, obvious concern for the poor and oppressed, and outspoken passion for human rights. She did more to cement the role of the United Nations in American and world diplomacy than any other woman and almost any man. Alice played the troublemaker. She relished any opportunity to tweak the stodgy establishment, and no one was more establishment—or, in Alice’s eyes, more sanctimonious— than Anna Eleanor Roosevelt Roosevelt. Eleanor didn’t just marry into the esteemed Roosevelt clan when she wed her fifth cousin Franklin. Roosevelt was also her maiden name.