Important updates for Dublin High School parents from the Dublin High PFSO. Prior updates available here. Contact the Dublin High PFSO at dublinhighpfso@dublinhighpfso.com.

Dublin High School Events Calendar June 2014

6/2 Performing Arts Center Ribbon Cutting / Open House 6:00 p.m., Perf. Arts Center

6/2 Athletic Boosters Meeting 7:30p.m. (note later start time) Staff Lounge (H-3)

6/6 Senior Breakfast 7a.m. & Senior Picnic 8-5p.m.

6/8 Senior Baccalaureate 4p.m., Cornerstone Church, Livermore

6/9 Band Booster Meeting, 6:30p.m., Career Center

6/10 – 12 FINALS- Minimum Day Schedule

6/11 Graduation Practice, Gael Stadium 1:15p.m.

6/12 Graduation Practice , Gael Stadium 9:00a.m.

6/12 DHS Graduation @ Gael Stadium 6:00p.m.

6/12 Senior Grad Night 10p.m.-3a.m. Club Sport, Pleasanton

6/12 Last day of school, end of 4th-quarter

6/16 PFSO Meeting 7:00p.m., Staff Lounge (H-3)

6/19 Report Cards Mailed

PFSO SLATE FOR THE 2014/15 SCHOOL YEAR

President- Chris Bennett

Vice President- Catheryn Grier

Secretary Teretha Allaway, Irene Padnos and Melinda Reed

Treasurer- Cindy Hoffman

Senior Class Parent Reps- Tamara Elias and Patricia Wilcox

Junior Class Parent Rep- Stephanie Stanley, Kelly Timm and Kristen Finn

Sophomore Class Parent Reps- Terri Dyer, Shari Jackman and Rosemary Brassea

Freshman Class Parent Reps- Patty Luba, Melissa Strah and Tatia Wilkinson

Fireworks Booths are Coming!

This is a large fundraiser for DHS and a joint venture between the PFSO, Athletic Boosters and the Irish Guard Music Boosters. This year, we have gotten two booth locations that will be shared equally between the three organizations.

The booths are located at the Safeway on Dublin Blvd at 680 and down the street at Big 5. Please be sure to sign up for a shift or two and remember to purchase your fireworks at these locations.

SAVE THE DATES! Important Dates for Next Year

Check-in Days- 8/18- 8/21

8/27/14 – First Day of School

9/15/-9/20/14 – Homecoming (Dance is on 9/20)

12/22/14-1/2/15 Winter Break (minimum day on 12/21)

1/5/15 – School resumes after Winter Break

1/31/15 Raise Your Class Gaela

3/30/15-4/3/15 – Spring Break

4/18/15 – Junior Prom

5/16/15- Senior Ball

Goodbye to Cyber Stacey!

From Chris Bennett, PFSO President:

Please take a moment to join me in thanking an incredible person and volunteer at Dublin High, Stacey Maloney. Stacey, whose youngest is graduating from DHS this year, has consistently contributed to Dublin schools for many years. Stacey is always willing to go above and beyond, not only stepping into leadership roles but recreating and expanding those roles. Some highlights of her accomplishments include:

With Yvonne Nickles, creating and implementing the “Raise Your Class Gaela” to bring in more funding for Dublin High

Single-handedly inventing the “Cyber Stacey” parent communication role and process at DHS

Incredible loyalty to her son’s class working as a Parent Rep for four years

Serving as a leadership member of the Athletic Boosters team for seven years

Stacey is a strong advocate for things she believes will make Dublin schools better. She clearly and persuasively makes her point, isn’t afraid to debate when necessary, and inspires others through her hard work and tireless commitment. Most importantly, while some others talk a good game, we all know Stacey will “get ‘er done.”

If I asked any DHS parent who they get most of their information from, they’d answer without hesitation: “Cyber Stacey.” And just as a side note, it’s going to take 3-4 new volunteers to begin to fill her shoes next year!!

We so appreciate her hard work and we wish her all the best. DHS will miss her very much!

Fundraisers Galore

*** It’s that time of year again, the 2014 Alameda County Fair is right around the corner! The fair runs from June 18-July 6th and is open Tuesday-Sunday. The Class of 2016 is pre-selling fair tickets and carnival wristbands at a discounted rate. Orders will be taken through Friday, June 6th

*** The Class of 2015 is selling single strand Orchid Leis for Graduation. The cost is $20.00. Approximately 50 orchid blossoms are strung lengthwise to create this understated Hawaiian lei. Please send a check, made payable to DHS Class of 2015- marked “lei”, to :

Patricia Wilcox

3238 S Bridgepointe Ln

Dublin Ca 94568

Orders need to be turned in by Friday, June 6th. Leis will be ready for pickup around June 11. Any questions? Call Patricia 925-548-8201

***The Class of 2017 will be selling discounted movie tickets throughout the summer. These tickets will be available to pick up at several different homes around town for your convenience. These non-pass restricted tickets are $8 each.

For more information or to purchase tickets, contact Terri Dyer at bydyer@comcast.net. For smaller orders you can contact Shari Jackman (858-2500) or Rosemary Brassea at rbrassea@hotmail.com.

Special Thanks to our Parent Reps!

The PFSO would like to take the opportunity to thank our Parent Representatives:

Senior Reps- Stacey Maloney and Yvonne Nickles

Junior Reps- Tamara Elias and Patricia Wilcox

Sophomore Rep- Stephanie Stanley, Kelly Timm and Kristen Finn

Freshman Reps- Terri Dyer, Shari Jackman and Rosemary Brassea

The majority of the parent community probably isn’t aware of the depth of volunteerism and commitment required to be a parent rep. These ladies work tirelessly throughout the year, EVERY YEAR, for FOUR YEARS!!

Without their kindness and dedication to our students, there would be no Grad Night, no Senior Picnic, Senior Breakfast, Homecoming and the list goes on and on. If you happen to see these ladies, please make sure to take the opportunity to thank them for the great job they are doing!!

Dublin High School Schedule Change Town Hall Meetings!

The District will be holding two Town Hall meetings – one on Thursday, June 5 at Fallon Middle School and the second on Monday, June 9 at Dublin High School. Both meetings will begin at 6:30pm.

In an effort to boldly enhance educational opportunities for our students at Dublin High School, the district is in the process of developing a plan that will significantly improve the learning environment.

If approved by the Board of Trustees, the plan that is in development will alter the structure of the school day at DHS and is likely to lengthen the time students are on campus.

Please plan to attend one of the scheduled Town Hall meetings to learn more about the exciting plans.

Goodbye to Terri Oravetz

It is with a heavy heart that we say goodbye to Mrs. Oravetz in Student Activities at the end of this school year.

Terri has been a huge help to the PFSO throughout the years. From collecting money for our various fundraisers and events to answering questions and taking care of small details as we need them, without Terri we could not be the successful organization that we are.

We wish her much happiness in her retirement and thank her for her many years of service.

Thank You

I wanted to give a big thank you to Chris Bennett, our PFSO President who was also the editor and fact checker for my newsletters this year. I truly appreciate her help.

Sincerely, Stacey Maloney