Not that long ago, everyone wanted to live in the suburbs.

Particularly in Florida, new housing projects were measured in the thousands of homes. People camped out overnight for a chance, however slim, to claim a dirt plot in FishHawk Ranch waaaay southeast of Brandon.

Now, pffft! The suburbs are out of style, apparently, and all the cool kids want to live downtown.

“Mixed use” is the hottest idea in urban planning, and in just minutes of research I found tens of billions of dollars in giant, new mixed-use neighborhoods going up around the nation. Atlanta, Boston, Miami, Los Angeles. Some projects are several times larger than the 2.9 million square feet of new space that Jeff Vinik plans for the Channel District in downtown Tampa.

In other words, everybody all of a sudden wants to live downtown and Vinik is right at the front of the mixed-use wave. Hard hats for everyone!

Step back a minute and it’s striking how much this changes the American Dream.

For much of the 20th century, making progress in life meant escaping the cities, escaping the factories, escaping the crumbling brick streets of the downtown grid, and buying a house way out in the suburbs. (Periodic yellow fevers in swampy Florida cities helped encourage this trend.)

Subways, light rail lines and especially freeways accelerated this. A favorite story of mine is how an American industrialist actually built much of the subway system in London by advertising the quick commute between the city and clean, country life. How about that, jolly old England? An American built your “Tube”!

The futuristic capital of Brazil, Brasilia, was built in a flourish of architectural “modernist urbanism” in the 1950s and set aside specific, very separate, numbered blocks for banking, embassy, hotel, residential and other functions — each specifically separated with clean, concrete borders. French writer/icon Simone de Beauvoir complained the various residential “superquadras” all exuded “the same air of elegant monotony.” Ouch.

Even through the 1990s, metro areas quickly separated into downtown work areas and suburban residential areas, and even now some deed-restricted communities around Tampa prohibit residents from parking utility vehicles in driveways, lest a truck with a logo on the side besmirch the pastoral scene. A Cadillac SUV may be A-OK, but a pickup truck with racks for plumbing pipes will get you a nasty note from the homeowners association.

❖ ❖ ❖

Now the exact opposite is popular.

The hot phrases now in development are “mixed use” and “live/work/play” and “24-hour neighborhood.” Apartments over restaurants, offices over shops, hotels over nightclubs and everything mixed together. Your living room may be mere yards away from Starbucks. And where the customers want to live, the developers are right there to build. The amazing thing is the vast, vast expanse of Jeff Vinik’s 2.9 million- square-foot Tampa project is just one of several that scale underway.

♦ Avalon in Alpharetta, Georgia, may span 2.4 million square feet, with much of it opening this year.

♦ The Spring District project in Bellevue, Washington, may span 5.3 million square feet.

♦ The $1 billion Brickell City Centre project in Miami may span 5.4 million square feet.

♦ The Seaport Square project in Boston may span 6.3 million square feet on 23 acres, with offices, residential, retail and hotel space.

Similar projects are underway in Los Angeles and Philadelphia, and Minneapolis is building an entire section of downtown with new office towers, residential blocks and skyways to Vikings Stadium.

❖ ❖ ❖

So, what’s changed? Why all of a sudden do people want mixed-use neighborhoods?

Apparently, despite all their idyllic residential perfection, manicured lawns and community pools, the suburbs are boring. Maybe people are tiring of the tyranny of homeowners associations and their umpteen meddling rules.

Here’s another, particularly blunt perspective, from Dene Oliver, CEO of the mixed-use development specialist Oli­ver­McMillan of San Diego, who was speaking at a panel in 2011 for the Urban Land Institute.

“We don’t have a choice,” Oliver said. “There are more of us all over the world; we have diminishing resources. We’re not all going to be in the suburbs; we can’t afford the automobiles, we can’t afford the fuel; we can’t afford the time. Our infrastructure is going to hell. The question is: Where can you do it? And to me, it’s all about the experience.” The mixed-use experience, downtown.

There’s another big personal reason urban, mixed-use is taking off: Time.

People are simply getting sick of driving ever-longer commutes between downtown and the suburbs, said Taryn Sabia, an urban design professor at the University of South Florida.

“What really happened is now we have realized that a lot of the growth in productivity is because we’re always expected to be on the job,” she said. “And we don’t have time to be spending two hours commuting, when we can be doing other things for ourselves.”

❖ ❖ ❖

Think of it this way. Reduce your commute from two hours to 15 minutes a day and you gain an entire day of waking life each week. That’s where you get time for that yoga class.

It’s easy to start overstating the lure of mixed use.

Into this philosophy, one can dump just about any optimistic goal. For instance: Mixed use is healthier because people walk/bike/canoe to work. Mixed use saves the Earth because people drive less. Mixed use is better for infrastructure because it doesn’t rely on freeways. Mixed use is better for city budgets because property values/taxes are more compact. Mixed use is better for our sense of community because people actually see each other live/work during the day. Bert and Ernie didn’t live in the suburbs, they lived on Sesame Street, just across from Mr. Hooper’s grocery store.

No wonder a downtown grocery store is seen as so key to Vinik’s plans.

❖ ❖ ❖

Millennials want to live in cool neighborhoods and don’t want to own a house in the suburbs, and more empty- nester Boomers want to walk to Broadway shows and waterfront restaurants, Sabia said.

Vinik’s top lieutenant, Tod Leiweke lives just a mile or so from the waterfront Amalie Arena where Vinik’s hockey team plays, and he likes to tell the story of when he commuted to work one day on a stand-up paddleboard. Tampa Mayor Bob Buckhorn may represent suburban areas north of the skyline like Tampa Palms and Hunter’s Green, but most of the headlines lately are about his supporting projects in the urban core: new parks, new restaurants, bike-share programs and so on. Simply put, he loves urban cities.

Perhaps this new appreciation for a mixed-use life is part of the larger trend to reassess the need for structure in all parts of our lives. People are dropping their cable TV contracts for streaming Apple TV and Netflix. More people are using Uber or Lyft instead of owning a car. Rent-a-bedroom service AirBnB is wildly popular and giving traditional hotel companies a run for their money.

More companies use temporary labor instead of permanent employees, and everyone seems to expect they will need to move umpteen number of times in a career.

Compared to the risk of buying a whole house with a mortgage, why not just get an apartment downtown next to a funky Italian bistro?

rmullins@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7919

Twitter: @DailyDeadline