PLEASANTON, Calif., Feb. 25, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- ThinkHR, which is reinventing the way companies address HR through its online technology platform and live HR expert advice line, today announced the launch of ThinkHR Comply, its new cloud-based HR and compliance resource center designed to provide users with instant online access to vital information needed for workforce management.

(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20140225/SF70987LOGO)

"ThinkHR has long been known for its industry-leading live HR hotline service, which connects employers with HR experts who understand their challenges and can quickly provide the personalized responses to their questions," said Pete Yozzo, CEO of ThinkHR. "With the launch of ThinkHR Comply, we're enhancing our domain expertise with a cloud-based resource that is unparalleled in the market. ThinkHR Comply provides a convenient portal where businesses can go to get up-to-date answers on federal and state compliance questions, and other resources they need to make the right workforce management decisions."

ThinkHR Comply was built using a state and federal compliance library owned by Ceridian, which ThinkHR acquired last year. This resource quickly became a top-seller in the Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM) bookstore, receiving recognition as a SHRM "Great 8" in 2013.

ThinkHR Comply offers 24/7 online access to accurate and timely information, including HR newsletters, law alerts and educational white papers. Easy to navigate, the ThinkHR Comply website enables users to swiftly find answers and information they're seeking via drop-down menus, advanced keyword search functionality and quick links to hot topics.

Information available in the reference center includes up-to-the minute details about federal and state compliance; recruiting, hiring and terminating employees; health care reform, including the Affordable Care Act; worker classification; harassment and discrimination prevention; employee benefits; and employee leave. The resource center also provides users with access to important HR forms, documents, checklists, and a library of HR Certification Institute (HRCI) accredited webinars. Other features of ThinkHR Comply include tools to build employee handbooks, create job descriptions and do salary benchmarks; and an HR Q&A database.

Pricing for ThinkHR Comply starts at $39 per month for basic access. Enhanced plans and customized solutions for enterprises and strategic partners also are available.

About ThinkHR

ThinkHR is a comprehensive cloud-based HR resource center that offers a unique combination of online compliance and employee training solutions, as well as a live HR hotline staffed by seasoned HR advisors to help companies ensure HR compliance, quickly resolve people issues, and implement best practices and training to optimize employee performance. With this combined approach, ThinkHR delivers the fastest, most personalized issue resolution and learning platform in the industry. The company was founded in 2005 and is headquartered in Pleasanton, Calif. For more information, visit www.ThinkHR.com or follow @ThinkHRhotline on Twitter.

SOURCE ThinkHR