Gaps go unfilled

Tweaking the model

With the looming expansion of health care coverage under the Affordable Care Act, Northeast Ohio's free clinics are grappling with whether to retool fundamentally the way they do business and accept patients with insurance, or to stick with what they know best: providing health care only for the uninsured.Hordes of free clinics sprung up across the country during the cultural upheaval of the late 1960s. They're fueled by private donations from individuals, corporations and community foundations and, unlike traditional hospitals, provide care to the uninsured with no threat of a bill.But given that many of their patients will be eligible for subsidized coverage on the insurance exchanges or through Medicaid, clinics are concerned about how the law might impact the number of patients flocking through their doors. They're also worried their fundraising could take a hit if donors think everyone is covered under the new law.As a result, some free clinic have re-imagined themselves. Among them is the Free Medical Clinic of Greater Cleveland on University Circle, which last year was designated as a federally qualified health center, making it eligible for Medicaid and Medicare payments.North Coast Health Ministry, a free clinic based in Lakewood, is looking to follow suit in early 2014. Others, such as free clinics in Lorain and Lake counties, will stick with caring for just the uninsured.Danny Williams, executive director of the Cleveland free clinic, said its conversion “allows us to have resources to deal with the population we're already dealing with and expand staffing to absorb additional patients.”Though the money is welcome, the receipt of Medicaid and Medicare dollars won't turn these clinics into cash cows. Government payers rarely cover the cost of providing care. Plus, some clinics expect that Obamacare won't ease their patient loads, which have ballooned as people have lost their jobs and benefits amid the economic turmoil of the last few years.“Obamacare was never intended to meet the total need,” said Deb Miller, executive director of the Ohio Association of Free Clinics, a Columbus-based advocacy group. “It was never intended to be universal care. We tend to not hear that. That was not a message that was heard very well.”Despite Obamacare's unprecedented expansion of insurance coverage, roughly 630,000 people will remain uninsured in Ohio by 2020, according to an estimate by the nonpartisan Health Policy Institute of Ohio. The estimate is based on factors that are expected to include undocumented immigrants who are ineligible for coverage, people who qualify but aren't enrolled in Medicaid, or those who are unable to afford coverage on the exchanges despite the generous subsidies.The Congressional Budget Office estimates that 31 million people nationwide will remain uninsured by 2023.“This is not universal health care,” said Johanna Henz, executive director of the Lake County Free Clinic. “This is health insurance reform and not access to actual care. Our mission always has been to be here for people to provide care. We see the uninsured, and we've always seen the underinsured.”The Lake County clinic is a fairly small operation with six staff members, a $400,000 annual budget and an army of dedicated volunteers. Ms. Henz said the clinic weighed whether to apply for the ability to bill Medicaid and Medicare but opted to stick with its current model.It would be difficult for a clinic of its size to handle the administrative burden of processing Medicaid and Medicare payments, according to Ms. Henz. And it's possible the rate of Medicaid reimbursements might be less than the voluntary donations patients make.Ms. Henz expects volume of her free clinic to remain steady or even rise given that new Medicaid enrollees might find it hard to find a Medicaid-certified provider in Lake County. She also expects to see patients who typically wouldn't frequent the free clinic but might not be able to afford the high deductibles or other out-of-pocket costs associated with many of the plans offered on the Obamacare exchanges.If anything, the onslaught of Obamacare has added a few wrinkles to the otherwise straightforward way these clinics do business, according to Paul Baumgartner, executive director of the Lorain County Free Clinic.As it's now structured, Mr. Baumgartner's clinic steers Medicaid patients to providers that accept that form of coverage rather than provide the care itself. However, with the expansion of Medicaid eligibility, the clinic in 2014 may provide medical care for those individuals until he or she can secure a provider that accepts Medicaid patients.“It's one thing to give them an insurance card, but it's much different to give them timely access to that care,” Mr. Baumgartner said.The Free Medical Clinic of Greater Cleveland's transition from a free clinic to becoming a federally qualified community health center hasn't been an easy haul. Under that model, the clinic must charge its patient fees based on where they fall on a scale between 100% and 200% of the federal poverty level. At present, the clinic is covering those fees with revenue from its modest endowment.The state's Medicaid expansion will cover those who make up to 138% of the federal poverty level and should offer the clinic some relief, assuming the legal actions challenging the expansion fall through.“We're in much better shape than we would have been had we not taken this important step,” Mr. Williams said.North Coast Health Ministry's intention to accept Medicare and Medicaid dollars in the future is driven by its concern over a shortage of providers, according to Lee Elmore, the organization's executive director. She said about 70% of the organization's patients will qualify for Medicaid under the expansion, but she's unsure whether all those people could find a Medicaid-certified provider.Also, as things stands, the clinic must punt Medicare-eligible patients from their rolls, and Ms. Elmore said many of those patients wish to stick with the clinic.“It's important that our patients can access affordable care, and we want to help them in any way we can,” said Ms. Elmore, whose free clinic was the first in the state to be designated as a patient-centered medical home, allowing the clinic to track patient outcomes and quality metrics.If there's one thing the clinics want to stress, it's that the Affordable Care Act doesn't lessen their relevance.“Free clinics are going to continue to need the backing of the philanthropic community today just as much as we did in the past,” Mr. Baumgartner said. “Just because the (Affordable Care Act) is in place and certainly is going to help a lot of people, free clinics are still going to need that support.”