Buy Photo Scene before the Eagles concert at The KFC Yum! Center. (By Frankie Steele, Special to The Courier-Journal) Oct. 16, 2010 (Photo: CJ)Buy Photo

The revenue coming into a restructured taxing district to help finance the bonds for the KFC Yum! Center continues to increase.

The Louisville Arena Authority, which oversees the arena and repayment of the bonds, reported receiving a check from the state for $7.4 million this year, up from $5.7 million collected in 2013. The $7.4 million income is for the taxes in 2013.

The revenue from the tax increment financing district continues to climb, up from $3.5 million in 2012 and $2.1 million in 2011.

“It is going up on a pretty strong basis,” said Louisville Arena Authority member Jim King, who is also president of the Louisville Metro Council. “… The direction continues to be positive.”

The district is set up around the arena and is intended to take the growth in tax revenue from increased business surrounding the arena to assist in repaying the bonds.

The district’s boundaries were redrawn after the early returns came in under expectations. King said officials shrank the district to better incorporate businesses that are benefiting from the arena and to not include areas farther away that had closing businesses that were a drag on the revenue.

The 2014 total includes state sales tax, $6.84 million, and state property tax, $569,000.

For 2013, those totals include state sales tax of $5.2 million and state property tax of $500,000.

Based on the trend, the arena authority expects to begin restoring the Yum Center renovation fund, which had $3 million and is now empty, by placing up to $300,000 a year in reserve, King said.

King said they also eventually expect to reduce the city payment to below the maximum level of $9.8 million, which is the current allocation from metro government. He said that could begin with the next city fiscal year, which will start in July 2016. Mayor Greg Fischer and other officials had said they expected the city to continue to pay the maximum for several years.

King said he and those managing the arena expect to end the year with $6 million in an escrow account for future bond payments. He said a financial forecast by Hilliard Lyons “shows no problems with cash flow out into the future.”

The finances of the arena have been questioned after the two major bond rating agencies downgraded the bonds for the arena to “junk” status, in part because of concerns over whether the authority could meet its financial obligations because the arena and the TIF district were not generating the expected revenue.

“Our critics will continue to beat that drum” as long as the ratings are at the current levels, King acknowledged.

He expects the bond rating agencies to “like what they see with the new TIF numbers.” The rating assessments occur annually and he expects the agencies to look at the situation again this fall.

However, King said, the ratings “do not really matter” at this point “until we are ready to refinance the bonds,” which he does not expect for another year or two. The ratings do not affect the operation of the arena or the repayment of the debt, or make the debt more expensive, he said.

Some critics have questioned the financial solvency of the arena, with the bond ratings and the early performance of the TIF district and the arena itself. King and other arena supporters point out that the arena authority hired AEG Facilities to operate the arena after early troubles under the Kentucky State Fair Board and that the reshaping of the TIF district has dramatically increased the revenue.

AEG management expects to finish the fiscal year that ended in June with an operating profit of $1.42 million, ahead of the $1.25 million originally budgeted. The money is combined with the TIF revenue and other funds, including events by the chief tenant, the University of Louisville, to go to the authority to repay $350 million in bonds.

The authority is expected to pay $21.8 million toward the bonds in December. The amount does increase annually, reaching $37.4 million in 2029.

The growth in the TIF revenue is more than covering the increasing payments to repay the bonds, King said.

Reporter Sebastian Kitchen can be reached at (502) 582-4475. Follow him on Twitter at @writeonsk.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1txfwBA