It began with a nobody, with a look right and a pass dead straight, a missile. It took him a quarter and change, longer than you’d think it would take some football god poised to smash a record would take to get started.

It ended with the precision that only Peyton Manning possesses, with a 5-yard pass, those yards being exactly — exactly — what the Broncos star needed to get the NFL season record for yards passing a week ago in Oakland.

In between, from the opening- night victory over the Ravens to the season-ending rout of the Raiders, there were bullets, lobs and lasers, even the occasional run. There was Julius Thomas, the nobody who caught Manning’s first touchdown pass of the season, and Demaryius Thomas, who caught the last one. There were 55 touchdown passes and 16 touchdowns rushing for a total of 71 touchdowns by the offense, en route to Denver scoring 606 points, another NFL record.

In the process, five Broncos — Demaryius Thomas (14 touchdowns), Knowshon Moreno (13), Julius Thomas (12), Eric Decker (11) and Wes Welker (10) — scored at least 10 touchdowns, setting yet another NFL record.

Yeah, yeah. Records. Only a team like this could make them seem almost trivial.

Records, you see, have become the currency of these Broncos. Yardage, touchdowns, scoring … the list goes on and on. But most records are fleeting. These Broncos know that, most of all Manning, who took about 4½ seconds after setting the league season record for touchdown passes to remind everyone of just how soon it would fall.

These five players and their double-digit TDs, though, might last a long time. It’s an unusual record, the product as much of an elite quarterback as it is of circumstance, timing and an utter lack of jockeying for superiority.

“Team success is better than the records, but of all the records, in my opinion, the one that’s going to probably last a while is I call it the 5-10 group,” said Denver wide receivers coach Tyke Tolbert. “I don’t think it’ll be broken for a while. To have five guys with at least 10 touchdowns, that tells you about the guys we have on our team. … It’s just unbelievable.”

Before the 2013 season, 10 teams had three players score 10 or more TDs apiece in the same season. (Three teams were Manning’s Colts, in 2004, 2007 and 2009.) No team had ever had four players hit such a mark, let alone five, and here the Broncos are, heads and shoulders above the pack.

“First of all, I’m the worst person to ask,” said Julius Thomas, a tight end. “Last game, we had the opportunity to have the most points scored in the regular season. I had no idea. Nobody told me. I’m the worst.

“It’s obviously not something talked about in the meetings. It’s not something we talk about in a group. It’s not something that we pushed for. It’s just something that happened, and it speaks to the level we’ve been executing at this season.”

Everyone knew wide receivers Demaryius Thomas, Welker and Decker were going to be a force this season. But Moreno’s breakout year at tailback was nothing short of a shock, and Julius Thomas had played only 50 regular- season offensive snaps before opening night. They were going to be good, but this good? No way.

“It’s a credit to all of those guys,” Manning said. “It’s a credit to … the wide receivers and tight ends coaches getting those guys ready. But (there were) certainly some great individual efforts from all of those guys’ parts. … A lot of credit goes to them and their work ethic. They’ve distributed this year. I’m certainly proud to call all those guys teammates.”

Some might say it’s too good to be true. A more accurate description would be that it’s too good to last. Moreno and Decker will be free agents this year, and they earned themselves plenty of future cash with their performance this season. It remains to be seen whether the Broncos will — or, considering the financial ramifications, even want to — keep the 5-10 club together.

Who knows? For now, enjoy the playoffs and know that long after Marshall Manning or Benjamin Brady sets the next NFL season touchdown pass record, the names of Thomas, Moreno, Thomas, Decker and Welker may still be etched in the record book.

The 5-10 club Five Broncos scored at least 10 touchdowns this season:

WR Demaryius Thomas

14 touchdowns

92 receptions

1,430 yards

RB Knowshon Moreno

13 touchdowns

60 receptions

548 yards, plus 1,038 yards rushing

TE Julius Thomas

12 touchdowns

65 receptions

788 yards

WR Eric Decker

11 touchdowns

87 receptions

1,288 yards

WR Wes Welker

10 touchdowns

73 receptions

778 yards