.......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... ..........

ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. — Around 210,000 New Mexican have obtained health insurance through the expansion of Medicaid and provisions of the Affordable Care Act, but how to make the best use of that new benefit isn’t always immediately clear.

“I’ve fielded some calls from people who haven’t had insurance who aren’t even familiar with an insurance card and what the numbers on it mean,” said Janice Torrez, vice president of external affairs and chief of staff at Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Mexico.

Nora Anaya, relied on hospital emergency departments or clinics where she paid cash or made monthly payments. The world of deductibles, co-pays and provider networks was unfamiliar and complex.

“It’s not easy to understand,” said Anaya, 64, who obtained a plan through the health exchange with help from an enroller at Centro Sávila a clinic in the South Valley. Anaya said the enroller spent nearly three hours going over the details with her.

Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Mexico, Presbyterian Health Plan, United Healthcare and Molina Healthcare have contracts to manage Centennial Care Medicaid program. Blue Cross, Presbyterian, Molina, New Mexico Health Connections and Christus Health Plan provide insurance through the health exchange, which enables consumers to obtain subsidies to help them pay premiums.

Blue Cross started “Be Covered New Mexico” in 2013 an effort to work with community organizations spreading the word about the Affordable Care Act. They hold events at libraries and community centers where trained coordinators can go over the basics with new members.

Presbyterian has done “welcome calls” for new members for several years and recently added email communications.

“We want to make a connection with that member,” said Presbyterian vice president and chief service officer Jana Burdick.

Presbyterian has simple videos on the health plan page of its website ww.phs.org that explain health benefit details and patient costs. They have “navigators” available at Presbyterian hospital emergency departments who help connect patients who have non-emergency conditions with a primary care doctor. There is also a phone number on the back of Presbyterian insurance card that patients can call for help in finding a provider or getting an appointment, Burdick said.

Molina Chief Operations Officer Kim Hedrick said newly insured Medicaid members receive a welcome package that explains their coverage and allows them to choose a primary care provider or be assigned one. Members can call a “Care Coordination” number to get additional help. Their goal is to keep people out of the emergency room, Hedrick said.

United also offers care coordinators. Both Molina and United also do an assessment to identify health risks or specific needs of new members.