Topics: 2014 elections, Barack Obama, economy, Editor's Picks, Georgia, GOP, Governors, Labor Department, nathan deal, Truthers, unemployment rate, Video, Politics News

Georgia Republican Gov. Nathan Deal is facing what we might call a classic political problem. He’s mired in a toss-up reelection bid against Jason Carter, grandson of Jimmy. And his state now has the highest unemployment rate in the country. The probability of Jason Carter pointing out that Georgia has the highest unemployment rate in the country in verbal and televised attacks on Nathan Deal is quite high. This is not a good situation for Nathan Deal.

A high unemployment rate isn’t necessarily all it’s cracked up to be, of course, and it doesn’t reflect the clearest picture of an economy. Georgia may have an 8.1 percent unemployment rate, as calculated by the Labor Department, but a separate survey showed that “Georgia’s rate rose even as its employers added the fourth-most jobs in the nation last month, gaining 15,800.” As the AP explains, “The hiring and unemployment data can conflict because they come from two separate surveys. One is of households and the other survey covers businesses.” The difference could also be explained by fluctuating in the size of the labor force. Point is: there are legitimate ways for Deal to explain away the top-line figure, to an extent, should he so choose.

But Deal instead has chosen to react to the number in the most hilarious and conspiratorial way possible, with one of the choicest quotes of the cycle: States with Republican governors have high unemployment rates while states with Democratic governors have lower ones? The Obama administration must be cooking the books!

At a public event Thursday, Deal described an inexplicable “influence” on the unemployment rate in Republican-led states. “It’s ironic that in a year in which Republican governors are leading some of the states that are making the most progress, that they almost, without exception, are classified as having a bump in their unemployment rates,” he said in a clip circulated by the Democratic Governors Association. “Whereas states that are under Democrat governors’ control, they are all showing that their unemployment rate has dropped. And I don’t know how you account for that. Maybe there is some influence here that we don’t know about.” Asked to clarify the governor’s remarks, a Deal spokeswoman pointed out that the federal Bureau of Labor Statistics had in previous years reported high unemployment rates in July and August only to revise them downward the following year. “Given the increase in jobs we’ve seen this month, the BLS’ pattern of downward revision and the drop in unemployment claims, the number doesn’t make sense,” said the spokeswoman, Jennifer Talaber. “States with Republican governors across the country are also seeing spikes in their unemployment rates.”