Health Facts Ahem: Health insurers to spread word on enrollment; who's listening?

As health insurers plan advertising and marketing blitzes over the next six months to market their products on the fledgling federal health insurance exchange in Michigan, they face major challenges in reaching their target audiences.



Surveys have shown the overwhelming majority of Michigan's 1.2 million uninsured population is unaware that open enrollment begins Oct. 1 for the online health insurance exchange and that Medicaid eligibility will be expanded April 1.



Despite three years of news articles, public service messages and educational outreach on health insurance expansion, a poll by the Commonwealth Fund shows only 29 percent of young adults are aware of exchanges and open enrollment.



Michigan's exchange, the Michigan Health Insurance Marketplace, is where individuals can shop for private health insurance that could offer up to 30 percent discounts through federal subsidies based on income.



The tax credit subsidies will be offered for people with incomes up to 400 percent of the federal poverty level. This means individuals with up to $44,000 annual income or families of four that earn $92,000 a year can receive subsidies.



While health insurers plan to increase spending on marketing and advertising during open enrollment beyond a typical product launch, most insurers haven't finalized their strategies.



Questions: Will insurers advertise their products to customers as having higher value and lower cost than their competitors? Or will they simply tout their brand names, customer service and provider quality?



Spending plans



Marti Lolli, director of health reform with Grand Rapids-based Priority Health, said most advertising dollars will be spent after Oct. 1 to target the uninsured.



Like other health insurers, Priority Health has been working with community organizations like libraries the past year to help the public understand the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.



"We won't know what the rates are and how our plan looks against other plans until after Oct. 1," Lolli said. "We will advertise price if it is a selling feature. Regional factors play into it. You could be lower priced on one region or another. We will help explain prices after the subsidies."



Andy Hetzel, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan's vice president for corporate communications, said Blue Cross won't do much advertising before Oct. 1.



However, Hetzel said Detroit-based Blue Cross and Blue Care Network will spend twice as much over the next six months on advertising its exchange products as it typically does because of the lack of public information.



"We are dealing with hundreds of thousands of consumers who don't have an insurance relationship today; they are shopping on a marketplace that doesn't exist yet, to buy products they haven't seen and for prices they don't know," said Hetzel.



"Blue Cross has a strong brand, but not a big brand with the uninsured," he said.



Detroit-based Health Alliance Plan also has been building brand awareness in its advertising campaign for its exchange insurance products, said Donna Reid, HAP's vice president of marketing and communication strategies.



"Come Oct. 1, we will do consumer education that (tells people HAP is) on the exchange," said Reid, adding that HAP also hasn't decided whether to advertise its prices compared to competitors.



Reid said HAP plans to do the traditional mix of advertising in print, television, radio and direct mail. The messages will direct people to HAP's call center and website, www.chooseHAP.org.



"Surveys show that people want to talk with someone," Reid said. "We want to give them a great experience over the phone."



Blue Cross maintains a health reform website at www.bcbsm.com (click on the health reform button near the bottom of the page), and Priority Health has www.understandinghealthreform.com. Hetzel said Blue Cross plans to change its traditional advertising approach for the exchange.



"It is more retail-oriented," he said. "Some (insurers) are opening retail stores to market to individuals, not us. We are not advertising to companies that make decisions for (employees). It is more direct-response advertising."



Hetzel said direct-response advertising asks consumers to call a phone number for more information. "If you are interested in talking with us, return this card and we will reach out to you and schedule a meeting," he said.



HAP recently opened a retail store inside the Henry Ford OptimEyes Troy Super Vision Center in Troy to help people purchase health insurance and enroll in Medicaid.



Lansing-based Consumers Mutual Insurance of Michigan, a newly approved cooperative, is prohibited from advertising its exchange products until Jan. 1 when it begins to generate revenue, said David Eich, marketing and public relations officer.



However, it has developed educational fliers and a video about Medicaid and private insurance expansion with the Michigan Primary Care Association. The flyers and videos have been placed in the state's 32 federally qualified health centers.



Eich said the public also can learn about health care reform by visiting its simplyhealthee.com website.



SHOP for products



Most health insurers will offer a full range of insurance products on the exchange for individuals and with the Small Business Health Options Program, or SHOP exchange, said executives.





Kirk Roy, Blue Cross' vice president of health care reform, said Blue Cross also will help consumers avoid mistakes in enrollment by offering subsidy calculators to alert them if they could save money on the exchange rather than purchasing policies in the regular market.



Roy said Blue Cross and Blue Care Network will offer most insurance products on the exchange except for the platinum plan for individuals.



The insurance exchange will present consumers with four tiers of coverage options — platinum, gold, silver and bronze — that have different cost-sharing levels and benefits.



For example, while each plan must offer 10 essential benefits, a platinum plan could offer more benefits and less out-of-pocket costs than the least expensive bronze plan. But the platinum plan will cost more upfront.



Roy said Blue Cross research has shown that the most popular plan is expected to be the lower-cost bronze plan, which would require purchasers to pick up 40 percent of billed medical costs.



For example, a new Avalere Health survey of 12 state exchanges found the average monthly premium for a bronze plan is $274, compared with $336 for the silver plan. Tax credits could decrease the premium paid to as low as $100 per month.



However, experts warn that consumers could pay large out-of-pocket expenses with the bronze plan if they require extensive medical care.



Toni Frawley, HAP's director of product development, said HAP also plans to offer a wide variety of insurance products off and on the exchange.



Despite small employers clamoring for price information about exchange products as they make budgetary decisions, Frawley and the other insurance executives don't want to reveal their premiums for competitive reasons.



Jay Greene: (313) 446-0325, jgreene@crain.com. Twitter: @jaybgreene

Related Links