POLITICS

Democratic activist makes it a two candidate race thus far

By peter roper The pueblo chieftain

Daneya Esgar, the Democratic activist who usually helps other candidates, is making her own run for the House District 46 seat — an office also being sought by fellow Democrat Stephanie Garcia, the former Pueblo City Schools board member.

With a crowd of about 70 supporters, Esgar announced her campaign Tuesday at the United Steelworkers of America union hall. There were veteran union activists backing her, such as Pam DiFatta and Al Becco.

Esgar, 34, is a former television news producer who became an activist for the Colorado Progressive Coalition for a time. She sought to be appointed to City Council in 2012. She’s been active in supporting gay marriage and civil unions in Colorado.

Arguing that Pueblo is hurt by its high utility rates, Esgar said she wants to change how the three members of the Colorado Public Utility Commission are appointed.

“We need legislation that enables real people to set these rates — instead of a Public Utility Commission that is filled with representatives from corporate energy,” she said.

While Gov. John Hickenlooper recently said the state economy has revived, Esgar said that isn’t true for Pueblo — which still struggles with high unemployment, she said.

She said Pueblo schools need a better share of state education funds and she would oppose efforts to shrink the size or role of Colorado State University-Pueblo, her alma mater.

“Until we fight for real reform of how our schools are funded, we will never fix our education problems,” she said.

The Legislature was a battleground over gun legislation last session.

Esgar called herself a supporter of the Second Amendment of the Constitution.

“But I don’t think any of the gun legislation passed last year violates the (second) amendment,” she said.

Esgar and Garcia are contending for the House office because Leroy Garcia is challenging newly elected state Sen. George Rivera, R-Pueblo, for his 3rd District office.

Thus far, the two Democratic women are the only candidates to declare for the office.

proper@chieftain.com