Regrets on Obamacare? Sebelius has very few 'I think it was not only well worth it, but a battle worth fighting.'

During the worst days of the Obamacare rollout last year, Kathleen Sebelius kept her spirits up by thinking about … Medicare.

As the Obamacare website was crashing and conservative interest groups were shining the spotlight on canceled health plans, the embattled Health and Human Services secretary flashed back to the fierce battles over the creation of Medicare in the 1960s, when the American Medical Association fought its passage and called it “socialized medicine.” Now, she says, when the AMA speaks out about Medicare, it’s when the doctors are trying to prevent their Medicare payments from being cut.

Story Continued Below

The lesson for future political leaders who might be thinking about the next ambitious social programs? Don’t shy away from them because of what happened with Obamacare, says Sebelius, who resigned at the end of the first enrollment season. Political battles don’t last — and no matter how loud the critics of Obamacare are now, their perspective will change, even if it takes years.

“I say go for it,” Sebelius, now a speaker and consultant, said in an interview with POLITICO. “I think change is very, very hard, and there is always a default position of, either do nothing or do something very small and get in and out of the battle as quickly as possible.”

( More from POLITICO's Lessons from Leaders)

“I think it was not only well worth it, but a battle worth fighting,” Sebelius said. “Millions and millions of people are the beneficiaries of this policy.”

The Affordable Care Act could easily be a chilling lesson for future political leaders: Don’t be too ambitious in creating a new social program, keep it incremental and safe, because government can’t handle anything this complicated. But Sebelius says there’s no reason for up-and-coming lawmakers and policymakers to lower their sights, with plenty of other difficult social challenges to take on — especially long-term care, a big policy headache in itself that the health care law wasn’t able to solve.

Yes, she knows how bad the rollout was, and she wishes it had gone smoothly from day one. Looking back on it, she would have had better coordination between the tech teams and the policy people, and she hopes the federal government finally updates its rules so it can get better contractors. But she still insists that she and other top administration officials didn’t get any clear warnings from the contractors that the website wasn’t ready — the kind that might have given them a reason to delay it.

And even though the website disaster is what everyone remembers, Sebelius says there was a whole series of other rapid-fire implementation actions that did go well — everything from putting early consumer protection provisions in place, including the popular coverage of young adults, to changes in payment incentives and the delivery of medical care.

“There were pieces of this puzzle being put in place along the way that were not insignificant in either money or impact, and actually got up and running in very short order,” Sebelius said.

( Also on POLITICO: Sebelius on Obamacare: Change the name)

There are plenty of Democrats who have had second thoughts about the Affordable Care Act — about the timing of the law’s passage, the decision to move ahead without Republican votes, the unqualified promises that everyone could keep their health care plans, and, of course, the competence of the launch. But for all of the political agony Sebelius went through — first during the bitter congressional debates that led to its passage, then during the botched rollout — she’s not much for second-guessing.

Sebelius does have ideas on what would help future political leaders launch programs that represent a complicated technological undertaking. She says the contracting process needs to be overhauled so the promising start-up gurus can be tapped, not just the same old companies that get the contracts mainly because they’ve worked with the federal government before. And she says the technology teams need to work directly with the officials who know the policy, something that didn’t happen enough before the enrollment launch last year.

But unlike Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.), Sebelius has no regrets about turning to health care reform right at the beginning of Barack Obama’s presidency. Schumer argues that the Democrats addressed the “wrong problem” by taking on health care reform in 2009 rather than keeping their focus on the recession. Sebelius, however, sticks to the view Obama and most Democratic leaders held at the time: If health care reform didn’t get done then, with a newly elected president and Democrats at the height of their power, it was never going to happen.

“I certainly would have much preferred a very smooth rollout and robust enrollment from day one. But I also feel very good about the fact that this president was able to get a law passed that 70 years of debate prior to him, of both Republican and Democratic presidents, had failed to do,” Sebelius said.

And unlike Joseph Califano, the former Lyndon B. Johnson adviser who has questioned the decision to move ahead without buy-in from the Republicans, Sebelius doesn’t think it was a mistake to launch a program on Obamacare’s scale once it became clear that Republicans wouldn’t support it. That decision set the stage for years of fights and repeal efforts that are still going on today, nearly five years after its passage — unlike Medicare, which was passed with Republican votes and became accepted by the public far more quickly.

In Sebelius’ view, Democrats did try to get Republicans on board when the bill was being negotiated. Then-Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus tried for months, she said, and she and other administration officials visited with Republicans on the Hill many times. “But I think at the end of the day, he knew that this was a moment in time, and if it did not happen at this moment, there was no guarantee it would ever happen,” she said. “And it was one of the things that he felt very strongly about, very personally about, and also had promised the American public that he would do.”

“You hear echoes of that debate in immigration. Would people like a bipartisan, comprehensive approach to immigration? You bet,” Sebelius said. But “the only way to move forward is really executive authority right now, because there isn’t a bipartisan approach.”