I am really surprised that there hasn't been more public outrage at the actions of Colorado Parks and Wildlife in tagging and relocating five bears and killing one bear in Boulder in a week. They have quietly changed their policy of tagging and relocating only "nuisance" bears to tagging and relocating virtually all bears that they feel they can "safely" relocated. Except, of course, when they tranquilize a bear and it falls into a ditch and drowns, which occurred last Sunday. Impossible to predict what will be a safe relocation.

The tagging and relocation of bears may sound fairly benign until you consider that the second time the bear comes into town, the bear is subject to being killed by CPW. They have a one-strike policy. And most bears return (or get run over by cars attempting to get back.)

I have volunteered for CPW for 12 years helping to keep bears and people safe (and separate) when bears wander into Boulder. My goal was to prevent the bear being labelled as a "nuisance" and relocated and/or killed. But now that the nuisance standard is no longer the determining factor in whether the bears are relocated, I cannot support or advocate for the CPW policies. I still have the utmost respect for the individual CPW officers I have worked with, but the agency appears to be driven by fear of liability or concerns about their image to the detriment of our wild neighbors.

Advertisement

The bears that come into our community are not predatory. I think of them as "berry bears". Of course, accidents are always possible and we need to be careful around these omnivores, as we would be around unknown dogs, coyotes, raccoons, etc. We (and I personally) have devoted tremendous resources to educating the Boulder community about living with bears.

I feel that we can co-exist with the bears that come into our town, especially with the volunteer monitoring system in place. And I am appalled at the actions the CPW has taken and the toll it has taken on our bears

Beverly Gholson lives in Boulder.