Republican presidential hopeful Dr. Ben Carson returned to his home state of Michigan on Wednesday, Dec. 9, as part of his "We The People" campaign across the Midwest.

Carson, a Detroit native, visited Ann Arbor and Ypsilanti for the better part of the day, making scheduled stops at the University of Michigan, where he graduated in 1977, a private fundraising luncheon at the Ann Arbor Marriott Ypsilanti at Eagle Crest, and a town hall rally in the Convocation Center atrium at Eastern Michigan University.

The highlight of Carson's trip was his new model for health care, which called for the repeal of Obamacare, privatizing and pushing back the age for Medicare eligibility age to 70 from the current age of 65, a change that has been highly controversial when Republicans floated it in the past.

Ben Carson Talks Trump, Health Care, Policing In America

Here are five highlights from Carson's daylong trip to Washtenaw County:

Carson's visit to the U-M Medical School

Ben Carson started his trip to the region with a visit to the University of Michigan School of Medicine, where he was a student in the late 1970s. Carson wanted to see his old stomping grounds and explore the new facilities and how much the school had changed in the four decades since he left.

He met with James Woolliscroft, the dean of the U-M Medical School, as well as several other U-M officials and students. The event was closed to the media, per a request from the university, campaign officials said.

During his address at EMU, Carson recalled how his first-year counselor saw his first-year test scores and advised him against becoming a doctor.

Years later, after many successful decades as a neurosurgeon, Carson said he returned to speak at U-M's graduation ceremony. He joked that he went looking for that adviser so he could tell him he shouldn't be a counselor.

Carson's Health Care Plan

It's no secret that Ben Carson doesn't like Obamacare. The main talking point of his address to the 400-person crowd in the EMU Convocation Center was about health care reform. Carson unveiled his new plan to start a tax-sheltered Health Empowerment Account.

Such accounts, Carson explained, would give people the power to work directly with health care providers for the vast majority of problems they have, giving them the ability to cut a lot of what he called bureaucracy and waste.

"We spend, in this country, twice as much per capita on health care than many other countries in the world, and we have terrible access problems. This is meant to really get rid of that. These empowerment accounts will be funded by the same dollars we use to fund everything today," he said.

"It's not going to cost more than what we're doing now. It's probably going to end up being, over the course of a 10-year period, somewhere between $2 trillion and $4 trillion in savings. But the actual numbers are going to be very hard to come up with because a lot of other people have to be involved in this.

"You can't, like a monarchy, just declare it. You're going to have to work with Congress. You're going to have to work with people with a lot of different opinions, but the concept is what's important. The concept, I defy anybody to deny that it works."

The tax-sheltered accounts would be paired with high-deductible major medical insurance. Routine costs could be covered from the accounts, which would build balances over time. It's a concept that has been popular with Republicans since the George W. Bush years.

Carson also would gradually increase the Medicare eligibility age to 70 from the current age of 65, a change that has been highly controversial when Republicans floated it in the past.

Medicare would be restructured, providing beneficiaries with a fixed payment for a private insurance plan of their choice. Democrats deride that as a "voucher" system that would shift costs to retirees. But under Carson's plan, Medicare beneficiaries also would be able to participate in the health accounts.

Medicare subsidies would not be based upon income, and Congress ultimately would approve the specifics.

Carson's plan for Medicaid, the federal-state program for low-income people, involves the federal government providing states with "fixed-dollar support," which the states must use to pay private insurance premiums and set up health accounts for beneficiaries.

Carson on Donald Trump, Hillary Clinton, GOP candidates

Carson made one point certain: He didn't want to build his campaign by tearing down other candidates. While he made that statement early in his message to his supporters Wednesday afternoon, he did take a swipe at his Democratic counterparts Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton.

Carson said the two have the wrong idea about what causes the wealth gap in America. He mentioned Americans today can't afford to take a percentage of their salary and put it into an interest-bearing account with hopes of retiring comfortably, since interest-bearing accounts simply don't exist for poor or middle-class citizens.

"The only people that can make any money are the people who have risk-tolerance and who can put money in the stock market. That tends to be more well-to-do people. So what happens? The income gap grows. That's what's causing the income gap," he said.

"Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton will tell you it's because of the evil rich people, and if we just take their money and redistribute it, everything will be OK. But that's not what it is. It's these asinine policies that are undermining the financial security of our future."

Carson also weighed in on Donald Trump, his outspoken party opponent who is jockeying for the Republican nomination.

In recent days, Trump said it was his speeches that caused Carson to fall a couple of points in the polls.

"I don't know (if Trump is responsible for me going down in the polls). It could've had something to do with it. But the fact of the matter is, as I've said before, it's a marathon, not a sprint," Carson said.

"As time goes on and people are actually able to hear what I'm talking about, as opposed to what people say I'm talking about, I think it will make a difference."

When asked if he would support the Republican candidate for president if he did not get the nod from the party, Carson said, "I will always stand behind who the people choose. It's not about me; it's not about (Donald) Trump. It's not about anybody but the people and their choice, and, of course, we would stand behind them."

Carson on the Muslim community in America

Trump said he wants to ban all Muslims from traveling to the United States in the wake of the San Bernardino shootings earlier this month, where 14 people were killed.

Carson didn't indicate whether he agreed with Trump's opinion, but he said he wanted "moderate Muslims" to help identify other "radicalized Muslims" to help prevent terrorist attacks in the future.

"I would say to the Muslim community, particularly the moderate Muslims, please concentrate on how you can help to identify radicalized individuals so that you put yourself squarely on the side of the American populace so that people aren't really wondering which side that you're on," he said.

"I've had an opportunity over the years to work with wonderful people from the Muslim community, and they're some of the greatest people that I've ever had a chance to work with. I want the rest of America to feel that way, too. We have to fight the tendency to react out of fear and emotion in this kind of situation."

Carson's fundraiser luncheon

Carson's campaign team would not release details about the number of tickets sold or the number of people at his luncheon at the Ann Arbor Marriott Ypsilanti at Eagle Crest.

Tickets for the event ranged from $250 per seat to $2,700 a seat, and the event was held in a ballroom that seats about 400. However, there were fewer than 100 cars in the hotel's parking lot at the start of the luncheon.

According to campaign finance reports, Carson has raised more than $38 million to date during his campaign. Comparatively, Clinton has raised more than $97 million, while Trump has raised about $6 million and Sanders has raised about $41 million.

Jeremy Allen is the higher education reporter for The Ann Arbor News. Follow him on twitter at @JeremyAllenA2. Contact him at 810-247-4625 or jallen42@mlive.com.