Updated, 11:30 a.m.

As NPR’s David Folkenflik noted on Twitter on Monday, it’s been quite a few days for strong reaction against a couple of major New York Times stories.

One was the objections by the Amazon spokesman Jay Carney, published on Medium, to last summer’s much-discussed exposé of working conditions at Amazon. Those objections were quickly countered by The Times’s executive editor, Dean Baquet, also on Medium, a blogging site.

Much commentary from elsewhere ensued, though whether it added anything definitive to the disagreement is doubtful. Amazon still objects to the article’s characterizations and details. The Times stands by it proudly. I had my say on it last summer and won’t add to it here, except to say that seeing the executive editor respond to criticism on Medium and also on Facebook was a first, and an effective one. (He told me Tuesday that The Times’s response to Mr. Carney’s “bill of particulars” was nearly complete after weeks of research, which explained how quickly it was posted Monday.)

Is the back-and-forth now complete? If there’s more from Amazon, of substance, “we might respond publicly again,” Mr. Baquet said.

Less heavily reported on, but more interesting to me, is the disagreement about Jonathan Mahler’s New York Times Magazine cover story that raises questions about the circumstances involved in Osama bin Laden’s death.

The Huffington Post’s Michael Calderone does a very thorough job of laying out the conflict over this story — with prominent national security reporters in Washington, including some in The Times’s own Washington bureau, voicing objections. (A Times columnist, Joe Nocera, came down on the magazine’s side.)

Among those who have written sharply critical stories about the piece are the author Mark Bowden, who wrote in Vanity Fair, Greg Miller of The Washington Post and Peter Bergen of CNN. Mr. Bergen, the author of “Manhunt: The Ten-Year Search for Bin Laden — From 9/11 to Abbottabad,” called the magazine story “bizarre,” and argued that “the key sources and witnesses are in agreement about the main points of the narrative.” He called Seymour Hersh’s reporting that calls that narrative into question “a farrago of nonsense” that contradicts common sense.

The critics say that it is inaccurate and is misleading to suggest that the story line on how Bin Laden died is still up in the air, or that it should be; in fact, it is mostly settled history, based on exhaustive reporting. Many in The Times’s Washington bureau felt the same way, with the added frustration of knowing that the magazine story came from their own organization.

Eric Schmitt, a national security reporter in The Times’s Washington bureau, said he agrees with the points made in the three critical pieces mentioned here. He added: “This article has struck a nerve among national security and foreign policy reporters at The New York Times, and elsewhere, like few I’ve seen in my three-plus decades at the paper.”

In addition, a reader, Jim O’Donnell of Tempe, Ariz., wrote to me in agreement with the critics, including a reference to Mr. Hersh: “That is the strangest article I’ve ever read in The Times, an extreme case of the story that asserts a wholly indefensible proposition by covering the heck out of a marginalized figure who is asserting the proposition.”

Mr. Baquet said he reassured Washington reporters and editors in a conference call on Monday that he did not see Mr. Mahler’s magazine piece as an attack on their reporting in any way.

Critics of the story “are reading it wrong. This was not a national security investigative story,” Mr. Baquet said. Nor was it a critique of The Times’s own coverage. “It was a media story,” he said, and, seen that way, “a very good one.”

Mr. Mahler told me that the response he has received from the general readership has been very positive and that “the vast majority understand that this was a media-process story about how history gets written.”

Essentially, Mr. Baquet said, “this is a story that’s been told from so many perspectives that it’s hard for Americans to get straight what happened.” Mr. Baquet included in those perspectives not only Mr. Hersh’s against-the-grain reporting for The London Review of Books but also the film “Zero Dark Thirty,” which he characterized as “full of inaccuracies.” (The Times’s own veteran foreign correspondent, Carlotta Gall, added another facet in a piece she wrote for the magazine last spring, agreeing with one important element of Mr. Hersh’s reporting on this subject.)

But, Mr. Baquet said, although Times Washington reporters were consulted, “they should have been consulted more.” A remaining issue, he said, is something of a paradox: that The Times Magazine both needs to remain independent of The Times’s newsroom in its editorial approach but also to consult with the newsroom when appropriate.

The latter didn’t happen enough here, Mr. Baquet said, but he plans to take steps to make sure that it does in the future. That deeper consultation might have made clearer which aspects of this recent history truly are still up in the air — and that a great deal is indeed well settled.