New Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner Program expects to eventually see 15 patients per month

Nine months ago, a Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner program opened inside Boulder Community Health. It was the county's first such facility since its last one shuttered in 2002, and its debut meant that victims would no longer be forced to travel to Loveland or Denver just to be examined.

The program has worked out thus far, advocates, nurses and prosecutors say — about 45 patients have been treated since March, with 30 agreeing to work with police — but they also agree that significant work remains to continue encouraging victims to seek out the service, and to foster greater sensitivity in the world of law enforcement.

Sexual assault victims are highly unlikely in general to report their attacks; studies say that only about 10 percent ever go to police, and that only a fraction of cases make it to court. Thus, the return of SANE to the area was notable because a local program promised increased reporting and, ultimately, prosecution in cases that may never have surfaced otherwise.

While roughly six people per month have sought SANE examinations in Boulder this year, the program's coordinator, Elyse Diewald, said she expects that average to climb to 15 eventually.

"Success for us really is one patient at a time, with everyone that comes in the door receiving the very best care," Diewald added. "But we do know there are more than six every month, people we aren't seeing."

Advertisement

Colorado laws have made it easier for patients to enter a SANE facility - there are 20 in the state - and work with police, or not, as they choose. One can even remain anonymous. Officers also now wait two days to interview people who report being sexually assaulted, since trauma very often can cloud a victim's statements in the immediate aftermath.

But for a slew of familiar reasons, mostly centered on feelings of shame, the vast majority still never makes it to an exam room.

"There's a lot of guilt involved," said Tanu Singh, a Longmont woman who was raped and sought a SANE exam in Loveland prior to the program's re-opening in Boulder County. "It's very common for survivors to feel it was their fault, somehow."

Singh was hesitant to report her assault. She didn't want to be asked why she'd been drinking the night of her attack, or be challenged to convince anyone — police and friends, much less a judge — of her story's validity.

"I was scared for so many reasons," Singh said. "It would have been very easy for me to just hide away and not do anything about it."

The detective assigned to her case didn't ask any "why" questions. Singh was told she had every right to be drinking, and every right to feel entitled to safety in her own home. That kind of experience isn't nearly common enough, according to University of Colorado Police Chief Melissa Zak.

"I don't think that when an officer interviews a victim of any type of crime, that the officer is thinking that they're blaming the person," Zak said. "But what the officer may not realize is that the communication style we generally train officers to have on a daily basis has an unintended consequence of derailing the victim, them blaming themselves."

Janine D' Annibelle, director of the Broomfield and Boulder County group Moving to End Sexual Assault, believes the best way to get people to come forward, locally and in general, is to mold a system that makes those people feel safe doing so.

"There's no advertising we can do that's going to take the place of a great interaction with a law enforcement officer who responds to that first call," D'Annibelle said.

Gosia Pastusiak, a Moving to End Sexual Assault coordinator who supervises the organization's volunteer victim advocates, gave local law enforcement high praise, noting increasingly "trauma-informed and victim-centered" police training designed to give prospective SANE patients space to make informed decisions about how to move forward.

But the task of educating victims on available resources and cops on proper protocol continues.

"The key is communication," Pastusiak said. "Whenever we can speak to someone and give them their options, and we tell them they can have this exam done literally right down the road, it doesn't seem like such an impossible task any more."

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness