Photo

MOUNT LAUREL, N.J. — The foremost rule at a Chris Christie Town Hall is inviolate and oft-repeated: Do not, under any circumstances, shout out questions unless called upon.

To avoid any confusion, Governor Christie loudly explains this at the start of every meeting.

But enforcement of that stricture was severely tested on Thursday, at meeting No. 113, as six hecklers waged a campaign of interruption against a governor who has little patience for disobedience.

It was a rare and well-organized breach of protocol, intended to draw attention to Mr. Christie’s emboldened liberal detractors and rattle the governor in what is supposed to be his comfort zone: the folksy, freewheeling sessions he holds with constituents in gymnasiums across the state.

At first, Mr. Christie, a Republican, tried to ignore the disruptions, looking away and fielding questions despite the cacophony of shouting. But his tolerance quickly ran out.

“Either sit down and keep quiet or get out,” he told the first young man who stood up and tried to talk over him. “Either one. We’re done with you.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The crowd loudly booed the demonstrator, making it impossible to hear him. Eventually, police officers escorted the man out of the room.

Soon enough, Kailee Whiting rose in her seat, shouting out a question about the lane closings near the George Washington Bridge.

Was she supposed to take him at his word that he knew nothing about the scheme, she asked? She, too, was drowned out by waves of boos, then was walked out of the room by police officials.

“Chris Christie never would have called on me,” she said afterward.

And so it went for much of the forum here in Burlington County, near Philadelphia.

Photo

Many of the hecklers were college students affiliated with the New Jersey Working Families Alliance, a left-leaning organization. Members of the group said that since the bridge scandal erupted, they had tired of watching Mr. Christie hold town-hall-style meetings during the workday in Republican-leaning communities where, in their eyes, skeptics are scarce. The group’s argument, in essence, is that the protesters provided a dose of balance. It promised to keep up the tactics.

“We are not letting him sweep everything under the rug,” said Analilia Mejia, the alliance’s executive director. “We plan to use every opportunity to point out that people are tired of business as usual.”

A disappointed-sounding Mr. Christie said protesters had not just violated basic rules of civility but also set back democratic dialogue. “When people just stand up and yell and scream and divide, then it shuts down debate and discussion,” he told the audience here.

He assured the crowd that he was eager to hear from friends as well as foes.

“I call on people randomly as they raise their hand,” he said. “If I call on one of those people and they want to yell at me, fine, yell at me. That’s fine.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“But don’t take away from everybody else, for your own partisan, personal purposes, the ability for your question” — he pointed to the audience — “to be heard. That’s not what this is about.”

Some of Mr. Christie’s critics, who arrived prepared to grill him over the pace of recovery from Hurricane Sandy and his support for fracking, followed his advice, quietly sitting through the forum. Near the end of the session, a group of about eight people held up colorful signs that read “Don’t Frack Our Water,” but they did not interrupt Mr. Christie.

Despite the heckling, Mr. Christie managed to field a variety of more routine questions, about the state’s commitment to treating those with Alzheimer’s disease, the health of the state’s pension system and his rationale for opposing the Affordable Care Act.

He frequently earned loud applause as he described plans to defend New Jersey taxpayers against what he has long described as the free-spending tendencies of the State Legislature, run by Democrats.

Most members of the audience seemed both startled and embarrassed by the periodic outbursts.

William Brockner, a truck driver whom Mr. Christie called on, said later that he could barely restrain himself from lashing out at the protesters. “I asked a state cop if I could go over there and slap them upside the head,” he said in an interview. His request, he said, was denied.

“I am a truck driver — I know how to be rude,” he added. “But you have to follow the rules.”