Broncos fans — and one Colts fan — watch the playoffs game Sunday at Sports Station in Loveland. Broncos fans expressed a lot of confidence early in the game, only to have their hopes dashed. ( Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

People were hopeful and excited at the start of the playoff game on Sunday with the Denver Broncos against the Indianapolis Colts.

But the lone Colts fan in blue at the Sports Station on Sunday afternoon ended up with the most to cheer. Yvonne Frazier wore her blue jersey with a lucky horseshoe necklace, Colts purse and Colts cup. Something paid off for her, as the Broncos lost in the AFC playoff game with a final score of 24-13.

At the start of the game, Kevin Boynton wore a jersey with a faded No. 7 on it (for John Elway), which he has had for 15 years.

"Oh, we're going to win. Of course we're going to win, it's the Broncos," he said. He sat with his brother, Jason Boynton at the Sports Station. Their prediction was that the Broncos would win 42-28.

The brothers didn't miss watching a game this season and counted it as "brother time" on Sundays while their significant others found other ways to occupy their time.

It was the first time the brothers watched a game at the Sports Station and they liked the atmosphere and giant screen on the wall.

Colts fan Frazier sat with her Broncos fan friends at a large table and good-naturedly took their ribbing. Her friend, Carolyn Dilley, showed off earrings of John Elway, which Dilley's mother wore to the 1977 Super Bowl. Her mom died a year ago so Dilley wore the earrings in memory and for good luck.

Dilley predicted that the score would be 18-14 for the Broncos while Carolyn's husband, Darin Dilley, said it would be around 48-32.

Advertisement

"You're out of your mind," Frazier said.

Matt Hein made his wife, Kim Hein, switch jerseys with him before the game because they were wearing the same jerseys they wore during last year's Super Bowl where the Broncos lost.

"And she wanted to wear a certain hat today and I said, 'You're not wearing that hat,'" Hein said. "I told her to put it away. She doesn't have to burn it or anything but she has to put it away this year. That's just how it works."

Perhaps these fans will have to try a different "lucky" strategy next time as the Broncos lost the chance to move on in the playoffs.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/jessicabenes.