Tax season is typically a very stressful time for many people, and this year some changes could add to that stress. The Income Tax Preparation Program was sponsored by United Way and held at Meridian Community College Saturday afternoon. The program is geared at taking away some of the stress, by providing free tax preparation.

"We have certified volunteers that have gone through hours of training and they are certified by the IRS as tax preparers," United Way Representative Stephanie Womack said. "They are able to answer your questions and guide you through the process of tax preparation."

Unlike in years past, this year you are required to file your health plan on your tax returns or you will be penalized. A penalty that is either 1% of your household income or $95 per person, whichever is higher. There is some hope for those who don't have insurance.

"An exemption can be applied for," Womack said. "If you go to healthcare.gov and go to the exemption section of that, you can try to see if you are eligible for that exemption. They give you the information and you bring it to us and we apply it to your tax forms."

For tax filer Robyn Williams, she says the process has been an easy one and the exemption doesn't take long.

"I had to get it because if I didn't get it, it would penalize me on my taxes," Williams said. "That's why I was demanding and trying my best to get it."

And to obtain the information to file isn't hard.

"This year, if you purchase from the Federal Marketplace, you will receive a 1095," Womack said. "If you have employee sponsored health coverage, that will be reflected on your W-2 form."

The United way says they are offering this program free of charge to help tax filers better save money.

If you would like to take part in the free tax program, you can visit the RSVP office in Acme Plaza. The offices are opened Monday through Wednesday from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m.. Appointments are mandatory and to schedule one, you can call 601-482-0512. To be eligible for this free program, you must make less that $52,000 per year and you should bring your photo ID, Social Security cards for all household members, along with any tax or expense forms.