This image released by Disney shows a teenage Elsa the Snow Queen, voiced by Maia Mitchell, in a scene from the animated feature "Frozen." The movie's popularity has spilled over into demand for "Frozen"-related merchandise, trips and visits with "Frozen" characters at Disney parks. (AP Photo/Disney) ORG XMIT: NYET314 (Photo: AP)

When the kids are home from school and the roads are impassible, few things entertain bored children as well as a good movie. Our list of editor's and reporter's picks for family movies to pop in your DVD player or order up On Demand during snow days is growing with every storm.

Frozen

Grown-ups may have had their fill of Else belting out "Let it go" in her palace of ice, but as most moms and dads know, our children still love to sing along to this 2014 Disney classic. So when you're snowed in, pop in the earbuds with your favorite audio book if you must, and "Let it go" while your little princesses (and princes) have a blast. The cold never bothered them anyway.

Happy Feet

Happy Feet (Photo: Warner Bros.)





This cold-weather tale of a penguin that just wants to dance will warm your heart.

Elf

Christmas may have come and gone but it's never too late or early in the year for you and your older offspring to gather around for giggles with Buddy, a fish, er, elf-out-of-water in the big city.

The Harry Potter film series

Harry and his closest friends use intelligence, bravery, and compassion to overcome the series' many villains, and nearly each of the eight adventure films showcases wintry scenes of the Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry.

Bambi

With its winter scenes and frolicking characters slipping on frozen ponds, few family movies capture the magic of snow-filled woods like the 1942-classic story about a young deer coming of age.

Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring

For parents of pre-teens and teens, this first movie in the three-film epic adventure nears its end with the heroes and their band of helpers fighting through a blizzard on the snowy Mount Caradhras. There's plenty of adventure and battle to keep nearly everyone entertained.

The Tigger Movie

For the youngest audience cohort, this gentler tale stars Winnie-the-Pooh's bouncing friend Tigger as he searches for his family. Beautiful fall landscapes give way to a wintery climax where Pooh and friends search for Tigger in a dark snow storm.

Disney's Beauty and the Beast

The 1991 musical animated story takes the classic love story and infuses it with Disney's memorable songs. The love story between the two title characters evolves in a castle surrounded by snow.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1C4nvwD