By of the

Ben Henken of Milwaukee was at his first professional soccer match in Paris during the terrorist attacks that killed more than 120 people.

Henken, 21, is a junior at Northwestern University majoring in economics and political science. Currently he's studying abroad, living in Paris.

He and a longtime friend from Milwaukee, Collin Gruener, were at the soccer match inside the national stadium of France, north of Paris, when loud explosions were heard about 15 minutes into the match between France and Germany.

Henken's parents, Rob and Barrie Henken, said the two students were not injured. But obviously, they were shaken by the attacks.

"They're still living this," Rob Henken said Sunday as French police hunted for one of the attackers who got away.

Ben "was as shaken as anyone would be to have ISIS come so close," Rob said.

As people poured out of the stadium in a panic, Henken and Gruener were separated in the crowd. It was a tense situation until they reconnected about 45 minutes later.

Henken has an apartment in the Latin Quarter of Paris, about a mile from where some of the attacks took place.

Gruener is a student at University of Wisconsin-Madison, studying abroad and living in Britain. He was visiting Henken over the weekend when the attacks occurred.

After the attacks, the two remained inside for about 48 hours, with the exception of one short walk to a grocery store, Rob Henken said.

It took some time, but eventually the families were able to communicate with their sons.

Gruener's mother, Diane Gruener, reached Collin first and ran down the street to the Henkens' home to talk with Rob and Barrie.

Barrie said she was grateful their sons weren't injured.

On Sunday, the two college students were watching the Green Bay Packers game.

Reached through their parents, the two students declined to comment for this story.

"I just Skyped with Ben, and he did go out and about today a bit — took the Metro and walked around a bit with friends," Rob Henken said Sunday afternoon.

Gruener planned to return to Britain after the Packers game.

"We are just very relieved" that he wasn't hurt, Gruener's mother said. "He doesn't want to make a big deal out of it."

More than 30 students from Wisconsin, on study-abroad adventures to Paris and elsewhere in France, connected with their universities back home to confirm they were safe.