Player to embed in JSonline stories

By of the

When your ex-girlfriend gives you a bench, there's really only one option, right? Tie it to the top of your car.

That's exactly what Richard Nelson did last March. But the 56-year-old Milwaukee native didn't stop there.

"I found a bunch of stuffed animals on the side of the road, so I kept it going," he said.

The original bench is hardly visible anymore, due to the dozens of furry toys covering it, all strapped to the roof and trunk of his 1987 Honda Accord, using a combination of rope and bungee cords.

It's a spectacle that's hard to miss as Nelson travels around town from his home on North Ave.

The traveling art object is his main mode of transportation as he makes ends meet as an independent landscaper.

Nelson lives with a couple of roommates, including one suffering from brain damage for whom Nelson cares. The 50-year-old woman was hit by a drunken driver while walking in front of their home six years ago.

He figures there are some 200 pounds of animals and trinkets loaded on top of his car.

"Yeah, I really am crazy," explains Nelson. But he justifies the crazy. "There's different levels of creative craziness."

His level is pretty innocent, he said, and isn't doing anybody any harm. In fact, he thinks the display does a lot of good.

"If people are depressed, it breaks up their depression for a second. It's doing way more good than bad."

Children, in particular, get a kick out of it. "Some kids say, 'Are you in the circus parade?' "

After a drive down Brady St., Nelson stopped in front of The Philly Way restaurant, where Ned Hoff of Milwaukee noticed the vehicle while eating outside the restaurant on the patio dining area.

"I don't know, it just looks like he may be having some fun," Hoff commented. "He's entitled to do whatever he wants with his car."

And at a 7-Eleven parking lot on North Ave. near Nelson's house, a man backing out of his parking spot popped his head out of the window and commented, "It looks like stuff from State Fair."

The display certainly is not immune to thievery.

"People take stuff a lot more than they leave stuff," says Nelson, who takes it in stride. "I kind of get a kick out of it. I say, well, somebody wanted that animal bad enough, you know. I can find another one. It's no big deal."

It's a wonder he has never been pulled over. But, apparently, there is nothing illegal about his eccentric extension. One recent evening, he said, he was sitting in Estabrook Park when a Shorewood police officer shined his spotlight on his get-up.

"He just said, 'What is that?' "

Nelson responded, "I'm just kind of goofy."

The officer just laughed and said, "OK."

If you've yet to spot the display, time is of the essence. "The winter's gonna knock me out," Nelson said. "And economics, too. It's harder on gas mileage."

But when pressed just how long he'd leave the collection up on his car, Nelson was a little unsure.

"I'm gonna take it down before the big snows come," he said. Then he paused.

"I believe I am. It's hard to predict your own self sometimes, you know?"