Sydney Siege survivor Julie Taylor has paid a touching tribute to her colleague and friend Katrina Dawson by naming her newborn after the late barrister.

Ms Taylor, who was 19 weeks pregnant at the time of the siege at Martin Place's Lindt Cafe, has named her baby daughter Emily Katrina, 7News reported.

The new mum gave birth about two weeks ago and will give evidence - along with the other surviving hostages - during the inquest into the December attack, which begins on Monday.

Scroll down for video

Katrina Dawson, 38, was a mother-of-two and was inside Lindt cafe with Julie Taylor who was 19 weeks at the time

'Katrina Dawson was the most wonderful person I have ever met. She was my closest friend, a role model and confidant,' Ms Taylor said.

Ms Dawson, 38, was killed by stray pieces of bullets when officers dramatically descended onto the scene after they heard gunshots.

The second fatal victim of the siege, Tori Johnson, was made to kneel by gunman Man Haron Monis before the 34-year-old was shot in the back of the head in an execution style.

Counsel assisting the inquiry, Jeremy Gormly SC, has told an earlier directions hearing the inquest will build a comprehensive picture of what happened during the siege, including contributing factors and the aftermath.

Ms Taylor (centre) was one of the surviving hostages and has named her newborn daughter after Ms Dawson

The tributes outside Lindt cafe in Sydney's Martin Place. The cafe re-opened after the December siege in March

Mr Johnson and Ms Dawson were the two lives lost during the siege, which began when Monis entered the cafe on the morning of December 15, 2014, and took 18 people hostage.

Monis was killed when police stormed the cafe in the early hours of December 16 after he shot Mr Johnson.

Sydney siege victim Tori Johnson was one of two people, along with Ms Dawson, who died

The inquiry will examine several issues, including the deaths of the victims and Monis, what was known of Monis as a security risk, why he was on bail despite facing charges of being an accessory to murder, and how the siege was managed by police.

It will be held at a hearing room in the Sydney CBD instead of the Coroner's Court in Glebe because of the number of participants and high media attention.

Mr Gormly said in January that hostages had been interviewed and, despite the difficulties of testifying, were expected to be called.

'They are our eyes and ears and memory of what happened during those hours inside the Lindt Cafe,' he said.

The inquest will also consider whether the siege was an act of terrorism and the implications it has for citizens going about their daily lives.

The evidence will include extensive audio recorded during the siege, CCTV and video footage, and social media and telephone records.

Monday marks the start of a two-week session, and more hearings will follow throughout the year.

The inquest follows a joint Commonwealth-NSW review which reported in February.