Advertisement

Really Big Coloring Books, Inc. made news last year when its coloring book about Republican Senator Ted Cruz, Ted Cruz To the Future, became an Amazon bestseller. At least when it came to the coloring book category.

The book claims to offer "a non-partisan, fact-driven view of how Texas Sen. Rafael Edward 'Ted' Cruz became a U.S. senator and details, through his quotes and public information, his ideas for what he believes will help America grow." The book is apparently suitable "for children of all ages as well as parents, teachers and educators and may be used in the classroom as a tool to promote discussion on issues relevant to the subject matter."

If you are wondering what kind of "fact-driven" information is included in the book, consider the following snippet, where it states Cruz's filibuster against the Affordable Care Act "was so important because millions of citizens believe Obama Care is worse than any war. At least American soldiers have weapons with which to defend themselves."

If that somehow wasn't enough Ted Cruz for you, fear not. Really Big Coloring Books has just released a new, eight-page supplement to the original book titled Ted Cruz Saves America, and it comes complete with Cruz flying through the air like Superman.

Yes, this is real. So real it even comes with this "so bad you can't believe it's not fake" trailer for the new book.

Publisher Wayne Bell says in a press release the book came back with next content due to customer demand, who also says Cruz "is a man who millions of American citizens consider a real life true to heart super hero for children to look up to."

And so do the customer reviews, for that matter. Like this one, which states "So what if Ted Cruz says America is a Christian nation! It is mostly true. We are not all like the Buddhist, Hindu, Sikh or Islamic or the Atheist religion of a no-God. We are more Christian than anything. Get it over it and you do what you want."

Ted Cruz saves America indeed.

Photo: Really Big Coloring Books, Inc.

© 2016 Tech Times, All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.