Emergency room visits at several area hospitals can take on average at least three hours, significantly longer than state and national averages, a Sunday Times analysis found.

Patients at Geisinger Wyoming Valley in Plains Township and Geisinger Community Medical Center in Scranton spend the longest time in emergency departments, three hours, 39 minutes and four hours, 23 minutes, respectively, the newspaper found. The average time spent in emergency departments before leaving the hospital is two hours, 26 minutes statewide and two hours, 22 minutes nationwide, according to data collected between July 1, 2014 and June 31, 2015 and released Wednesday by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS).

“We know it’s an issue in Northeastern Pennsylvania,” said Ronald S. Strony, M.D., northeast regional director of the emergency medicine service line for Geisinger’s northeast division. “But it’s also a state and national issue. It’s the hot topic of emergency medicine.”

Compared with hospitals in more populated communities, emergency room visits at rural hospitals in Northeastern Pennsylvania are dramatically quicker, the newspaper found.

For example, of nine hospitals in Lackawanna, Luzerne, Susquehanna, Wayne and Wyoming counties, emergency room patients at Barnes-Kasson County Hospital in Susquehanna Depot were treated and left the hospital the fastest, on average in one hour, 19 minutes. Patients in Tunkhannock’s Tyler Memorial Hospital emergency room left second-fastest, on average in one hour, 26 minutes.

CMS also measures how long emergency room patients wait to see a health care professional — a physician, a physician’s assistant, a nurse practitioner or a nurse midwife for pregnant women.

Hospital employees who first greet patients use national guidelines to determine who gets priority based on the severity of their injury or ailments, said Michael Consuelos, M.D., senior vice president of clinical integration with the Hospital and Healthsystem Association of Pennsylvania (HAP). Those evidence-based protocols mean a patient having a heart attack may be seen before patients with sprained ankles and earaches.

“If you’re acutely sick, you’re going to get in and get seen almost immediately,” Strony said.

Patients nationally and statewide waited about 25 minutes, on average, before their first contact with a health care professional.

Emergency room patients waited the longest at Geisinger Wyoming Valley in Plains Township — 54 minutes, more than double the state and national average. At Moses Taylor Hospital in Scranton, they waited 42 minutes and at Regional Hospital of Scranton, 46 minutes.

Three area hospitals were below the national and state average: Barnes-Kasson, 15 minutes; Tyler Memorial at 11 minutes; and Wayne Memorial Hospital in Honesdale, 24 minutes.

“We are very proud that we are below the state average, 24 minutes, when it comes to having patients seen by a health care professional,” said Wayne Memorial’s emergency department Medical Director Patrick Pugliese, M.D.

Wayne Memorial has made efficiency-minded improvements, he said, such as hiring an emergency room scribe to help keep patients’ electronic health records.

“It is an ongoing process and an issue that is never far from our minds,” he said.

Wait times varied for hospitals in Pennsylvania’s largest cities. Jefferson Regional Medical Center, UPMC Mercy Hospital and Magee Women’s Hospital, all in Pittsburgh, came in with shorter-than-average times in most areas despite higher patient volume.

In Philadelphia, on the other hand, Pennsylvania Hospital, Thomas Jefferson University Hospital and Penn Presbyterian Medical Center all had significantly longer wait times.

“Truth be told, emergency departments for decades have been looking at these types of measurements to improve patient flow,” Consuelos said.

In search of the most expedient care, and depending on the severity of their medical needs, people could choose a hospital farther away if they believe they’ll get faster care — and health systems know that.

Commonwealth Health, which operates Moses Taylor, Regional Hospital, Tyler Memorial and Wilkes-Barre General, posts bright green billboards pledging patients will wait 30 minutes or less before being seen.

Some digital billboards on area highways update the actual emergency room wait time for patients.

Despite the pledge, patient volumes in emergency departments are rising, and strains on hospital staff and space availability mean they can’t meet that pledge.

“While many patients are initially seen by a clinical professional within 30 minutes of their arrival, during some peak times when the number of patients and/or trauma situations exceeds the number of providers or beds, some patients are not initially seen within 30 minutes of their noted arrival,” said Commonwealth vice president of marketing Annmarie Poslock in a prepared statement. Wilkes-Barre General’s emergency department volume grew by 15 percent in 2015, she said.

Timeliness is important, but quality can’t be compromised, Poslock said.

“It is not our objective now, nor will it ever be, to rush patients through the emergency department,” she said.

Despite provisions in the Affordable Care Act to lighten emergency room crowding, they remain the first stop for 30 to 50 percent of patients who later get admitted, Consuelos said.

“I think it’s too early to say that the Affordable Care Act has failed in that way,” he said.

Medicare and Medicaid copays for emergency room visits are going up to encourage patients to visit clinics or their regular doctors for care where the copay is less, he said.

People have been slow to adopt alternatives like a 24-hour clinic, where they’ll probably pay and wait less, or their primary care doctor. The typical emergency department model has consistency that people have come to expect — it’s staffed, stocked and open all night and, under federal law, it has to let everyone in, Strony said.

“We’re the only place in medicine where no one can be turned away,” he said. “It’s an unfunded mandate, so we don’t even have to make people pay.”

joconnell@timesshamrock.com, @jon_oc