If any members of Congress are looking for compromise instead of confrontation, the August Kaiser Health Tracking Poll offers a sure winner. Seventy-two percent of poll respondents said prescription drug prices are "unreasonable." What's more, 83 percent favor the federal government doing something about it that is eminently reasonable: They want the feds to be able to negotiate with pharmaceutical companies to get lower prices on medications for people on Medicare.

Congress banned such negotiations in 2003 when it created the Medicare Part D program. The drug industry lobby has shut down attempts to lift the ban. When President Barack Obama this year sought to end the ban, Republicans who control both houses of Congress responded that they favor letting market forces tamp down costs — an approach that 51 percent of poll respondents said they thought would be the most effective.

Indeed, many respondents also favored creating competition by allowing Americans to buy drugs from Canada. But ramping up competition doesn't rule out allowing negotiation also. And, of course, negotiation by a powerful consumer — in this case the federal government — ought to be considered part of "market forces."

The Kaiser poll demonstrates that letting Medicare negotiate drug prices is popular not just with Obamacare devotees. While there were roughly four out of 10 respondents on each side of the Obamacare pro-con, more than eight out of 10 favor ending the negotiation ban, and more than seven in 10 think it has a good chance to be effective.

There's something else politicians should note about the poll. Thirty percent self-identified as Democrats, 25 percent as Republicans and 30 percent as independents. The rise of independents continues. And the only way that either "liberals" (25 percent of respondents) or "conservatives" (37 percent) could pick up a majority would be by wooing a sufficient number of moderates (33 percent).

This is still more proof of the importance of independents and moderates — and smart politicians will pay attention. Of course, today's politicians have been able to ignore the middle because of the kind of gerrymandering that now — because of the Florida Legislature's utter failure — will force the courts to draw new districts. Another way to undo the system's built-in extremism is found in the proposal to open Florida primaries to all voters.

But that's in the future. Court-drawn districts and proposed primary reform won't have a direct effect on what Congress — which is taking its usual summer break — does when it returns next month. Predictions are that Republicans and Democrats are prepping for a major budget fight. Absent an agreement, the government could shut down when the new fiscal year starts Oct. 1.

Democrats — backed by a veto threat from Obama — say they won't go for a GOP budget that increases defense spending while slashing domestic programs. Many Republicans, meanwhile, are spoiling for a confrontation over funding for Planned Parenthood. There's already talk that, a little later this year, Congress and the president could yet again play a game of chicken over raising the federal debt limit.

Threats to shut down the government or default were out of place even before the current stock market turmoil. If anything could have a worse effect on the global economy than China, it would be a self-destructive Congress.

The perfect balm, in the middle of this turmoil, would be for Congress to behave responsibly by searching out at least a few areas for compromise and progress. Health care, which has been so needlessly rancorous, would be a good place to start. And within that niche, allowing Medicare to negotiate lower drug prices is a perfect first step.

It would lower the overall cost of health care, it would make prescriptions available to people who need them, and it would — even if just in a small way — start to heal the critical wounds inflicted on bipartisanship.