Buy Photo Team Mustang Sally members Sally Rubino and her husband Mike of Spring Lake Heights, begin the walk. Thousands of walkers participate in Walk MS, presented by BAYADA Home Health Care, in Lake Como. This walk is one of many that took place throughout New Jersey over the weekend to raise money to create a world free of multiple sclerosis. Lake Como, NJ Saturday, April 19, 2015 Doug Hood/Staff Photographer @dhoodhood (Photo: Gannett)Buy Photo

Behrman Park was a sea of orange Sunday morning as walkers gathered for the annual 3.1-mile walk past the lake to the boardwalk and back to Bar Anticipation to raise money for awareness and to fund research projects that will find a cure for Multiple Sclerosis (MS).

Michele Cordasco, of Lacey, and 40 of her closest friends and relatives gathered at Behrman Park Sunday morning in honor of her son, Michael Fitzgibbon, who was diagnosed with MS three years ago at the age of 32.

"How did he find out he had it? He was diagnosed with optical neuritis, which happens to be a very telling sign that it is MS," Cordasco said. Fitzgibbon lives in Clifton.

"He had blurry and double vision and couldn't see colors," added Barbara Gambelli, Cordasco's sister and Fitzgibbon's aunt, who also lives in Lacey.

Fitzgibbon, whose initial symptoms went away after treatment, was at the walk with Team Fitz, which holds the distinction of being the top fundraising team at the Sunday walk. The team raised $15,116, Cordasco said.

Although they were not among the top five fundraising teams, Bob Holton, captain of Team Family Feat, brought 30 family members and friends to the walk, raising about $3,000.

The team was created in 1997, when Holton's son, Sean Holton, was diagnosed with MS. The younger Holton, of Old Bridge, died in January 2007 at the age of 40.

The team also paid tribute to another family member who had MS and died - Jim "Butch" Taylor of Bayonne, who is the brother of Sean's mother, Carol Holton. Other family members are also fighting the disease.

"It's a terrible, terrible disease. I don't want the young kids in our family to ever have to go through this," Carol Holton said.

Last year, the 2,100 walkers in the Lake Como Walk raised a record $380,000 for MS services and programs and to support nation MS research, said Liz Shaw, coordinator of teams and special events for the National MS Society NJ Metro chapter.

The National Multiple Sclerosis Society invested $50.6 million to advance more than 380 research projects around the world to stop MS in its tracks, restore what has been lost, and end MS forever in 2014, according to a news release provided at the walk.

Buy Photo Walkers make their way along the boardwalk in Spring Lake. Thousands of walkers participate in Walk MS, presented by BAYADA Home Health Care, in Lake Como. This walk is one of many that took place throughout New Jersey over the weekend to raise money to create a world free of multiple sclerosis. Lake Como, NJ Saturday, April 19, 2015 Doug Hood/Staff Photographer @dhoodhood (Photo: Gannett)

MS, an unpredictable, often disabling disease of the central nervous system, interrupts the flow of information within the brain and between the brain and the body. Symptoms range from numbness and tingling to blindness and paralysis. Most people with MS are diagnosed between the ages of 20 and 50, with at least two to three times more women than men being diagnosed with the disease.

The Lake Como Walk, presented by BAYADA Home Health Care, is one of 12 walks that took place Saturday and Sunday, said Shaw. On Saturday, walks were held in Seaside Park and at Thompson Park in Middletown. On Sunday, a walk was also held at Monmouth Battlefield State Park in Manalapan, Shaw said.

About 60 volunteers also helped out at the Sunday race and about a dozen members of Boy Scout Troop 333 of Wall were there to hand out bananas, apples and water bottles to the walkers.

"We've been involved for the past 11 or 12 years and they receive service hours for their help," said Scoutmaster Ken Bachman, adding that they left a weekend campout at Six Flags' Great Adventure in Jackson early in order to be at the walk.

Chris Conover, 17, of Neptune, said this is the eighth year he has volunteered at the walk.

"My aunt has had MS for the past six years and it's hard for her to get out of the house now so I feel that being here is for a good cause," he said.

The mission of the National MS Society is to end the devastating effects of MS. Through its home office and 50-state network of chapters, the society funds MS research, offers services to people with MS, provides professional education, and advances MS advocacy efforts.

Buy Photo Sandy Nesterwitz of Toms River walks for her husband Mike who suffers from MS along the boardwalk in Spring Lake. Thousands of walkers participate in Walk MS, presented by BAYADA Home Health Care, in Lake Como. This walk is one of many that took place throughout New Jersey over the weekend to raise money to create a world free of multiple sclerosis. Lake Como, NJ Saturday, April 19, 2015 Doug Hood/Staff Photographer @dhoodhood (Photo: Gannett)

Studies show that early and ongoing treatment with an FDA-approved therapy can reduce future disease activity and improve quality of life for many people with multiple sclerosis. For more information, visit www.nationalMSsociety.org/NJM to learn about ways to help manage multiple sclerosis and about current research that may one day lead to a cure.

The New Jersey Metro Chapter is committed to helping the more than 10,000 people living with multiple sclerosis in Bergen, Essex, Hudson, Hunterdon, Mercer, Middlesex, Monmouth, Morris, Ocean, Passaic, Somerset, Sussex, Union and Warren counties.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1G8d22X