Ohio politicians have a tool not available in most states to silence their opponents. Complain to the state's Ministry of Truth, formally known as the Ohio Elections Commission, and let the morass of bureaucratic red tape delay and subvert free and open debate.

The process goes something like this: (1) file a complaint with the elections commission claiming your opponent made a factually inaccurate statement in one of their ads or publications; (2) get free publicity for the complaint; (3) force your opponent to hire a lawyer and prepare to defend themselves; (4) make them apprehensive to re-air the ad or further distribute the publication for fear of inviting more investigations; and (5) drop your charge after the election, so that your opponent cannot even go to court to protest the hardship that your claim caused.

As Ohio Attorney General Michael DeWine noted, this law allows the candidate to "to gain a campaign advantage without ever having to prove the falsity of a statement." As a result, the law is a detriment to the truthful, fair, and democratic political discourse the law is purportedly intended to protect.

In the recent unanimous Supreme Court decision, Susan B. Anthony List v. Driehaus, the court expressed deep skepticism about this type of political gamesmanship and ruled that a lower court erred in refusing to even consider whether the law is unconstitutional. The law, quite simply, puts bureaucrats (whose salaries are controlled by incumbents) in a position of declaring the validity of ads run against their bosses in the General Assembly or in the governor's mansion. The court case was about the right of individuals to defend themselves from efforts to silence their speech.

But the reason these abusive campaign tactics occur in the first place is because the law requires that regulators accomplish an almost impossible task – arbitrating truth from falsehood in some of our nation's oldest and most divisive political debates. What chance is there that a bureaucrat can get it right?

Even the so-called "experts" at determining political truths often fail.

In 2012, PolitiFact, a site whose sole purpose is to reveal factual inaccuracies made by politicians, rated President Barack Obama's claim that, "If you're one of the more than 250 million Americans who already have health insurance, you will keep your health insurance," as Half True. In 2013, an almost identical claim received PolitiFact's award for "Lie of the year." Was the president's statement false? If the question had been brought before the Ohio Elections Commission in 2012, how would it have ruled? Would the commission have changed its ruling a year later?

In SBA List, the statement the commission was in the process of investigating was whether an Ohio congressman had voted for "taxpayer-funded abortion" when he voted for the Affordable Care Act. This is a controversial topic with significant political and philosophic implications. There are heated debates over where all of the $1.3 trillion spent by the federal government as a result of the health care law is supposed to be spent, and then, where it is actually spent (even the cost of the law itself is debatable). There are moral and scientific arguments with regard to abortion issues. And there are experts on both sides of the argument who deeply disagree.

In short, this is exactly the kind of topic that should be openly debated in an election season. It is a question for the voters to think about, discuss and voice their opinions on. It is not a question where the "right" answer should be decided by lawyers and unelected bureaucrats with the power to fine and potentially jail anyone who is found to be "lying."

One can understand why incumbents would like to shut down opposition opinion, but Ohioans are worse off when the freedom to criticize our elected officials is subject to a truth trial should anyone complain to the Ohio Elections Commission.

The real solution to false political ads doesn't require an Ohio Ministry of Truth. It requires what our democracy has always had – a diverse group of interests that push back against statements they believe to be false without any government intervention.

This is why our country has investigative journalists that discover falsehoods and inform the public; satirists, like Jon Stewart, who mock those telling political whoppers; political opposition that present their own facts in the court of public opinion and not a court of law; and voters who have the ability to evaluate for themselves the truthiness of what they see or hear in a political ad.

Supporters of Ohio's law criminalizing false statements in political campaigns like to ask, "Is there a first amendment right to lie?" This is the wrong question. When considering whether Ohio's false statement law is beneficial to Ohioans and political discourse, the real question to ask is, "Should the government be in charge of deciding what qualifies as true?"

Scott Blackburn is a research fellow at the Center for Competitive Politics in Virginia and an Ohio native.