Caleb Lively Ledbetter, son of Dr. and Mrs. Dale Ledbetter of Columbia, has been named a semi-finalist for a National Merit Scholarship.

The National Merit Scholarship Program honors individual students who demonstrate exceptional academic ability and potential for success in rigorous college studies. From a pool of about 16,000 semifinalists, 90 percent will advance to the finalist level of competition and more than half of those finalists will win a National Merit Scholarship, earning the Merit Scholar title.

Caleb has been a student at Zion Christian Academy for 13 years and is an active member of numerous clubs and associations. He is a member of the Fellowship of Christian Athletes and the philosophy club, as well as having played clarinet in the concert band for the past seven years.

He has played football for the ZCA Eagles for six years and is now a team captain for varsity football this year.

Caleb is an active member of First Baptist Church in Columbia and recently traveled with the FBC youth group on a mission trip to the United Kingdom. In 2011, he also went on a rebuilding mission trip to Haiti with his father, following the earthquake there.

“We are very proud of Caleb for the honor he has received,” said Don Wahlman, ZCA headmaster. “His achievement emulates the high standard of academic achievement we desire at ZCA.”

Caleb will graduate with the class of 2014 and has plans to attend college, though his choice is not yet determined. With this recent accomplishment, however, he is certainly assured of acceptance at many prestigious universities.

◆◆◆

Shelby Christina Goodgine, a 2013 graduate of Columbia Central High School, completed seven weeks of training at Great Lake Naval Station in Great Lakes, Ill., on Aug. 23.

Shelby is the daughter of Kate (Donavon) Bray of Columbia and David (Lorie) Goodgine of Paris, Tenn. She is the granddaughter of Mike (Jeri) Goodgine of Mt. Pleasant and Mike (Pat)

Cahill of Doraville, Ga. Her great-grandparents are Jean Childrey and the late Robert Childrey, Jean Demastus and the late Douglas Demastus, all of Columbia.

Shelby is currently attending A School at the Naval Air Station in Pensacola, Fla.

◆◆◆

Charlie Stoltz, a student at Freed-Hardeman University in Henderson, Tenn., has been named to The Ambassadors, an a cappella singing ensemble at the university. Stoltz is a sophomore accounting major from Columbia.

An FHU tradition, The Ambassadors perform spiritual songs at churches, youth rallies and Christian schools throughout the year. Seven students were selected by audition to be members of the 2013-14 group.

◆◆◆

Two local residents have enrolled at the University of Evansville, joining an entering class of 543 students who represent 28 states and 20 countries.

The students are:

◆ Christian Bulla of Spring Hill, majoring in Theatre

◆ Kendall Reasons of Spring Hill, majoring in Theatre Education

“For more than 150 years, the University of Evansville has been committed to providing a personal and meaningful educational experience,” said UE President Thomas A. Kazee. “Our small, close-knit community will give these students the opportunity to make an impact in college and beyond while flourishing under guidance from talented faculty. It’s a pleasure to welcome them to the University of Evansville.”

The University of Evansville is a private, liberal arts-based university in Evansville, Ind., with a full-time undergraduate enrollment of about 2,300. UE’s diverse student body represents 41 states and 54 countries.

◆◆◆

Two local students have been named members of the Helen Hardin Honors Program at the University of Memphis. They are:

◆ John Tyler Delk of Columbia, a graduate of Santa Fe High School.

◆ Austin Winfree of Spring Hill, a graduate of Brentwood High School.

For academically ambitious and talented students, the Helen Hardin Honors Program combines the best of a small liberal arts school with the wide-ranging opportunities of a large, nationally recognized research university. With 2,105 students participating, the Honors Program, now entering its 40th year, is the largest honors program in the state of Tennessee.