Topics: 2016 Elections, GOP 2016, Hillary Clinton, Jeb Bush, Marco Rubio, Rand Paul, Scott Walker, Ted Cruz, Elections News, Politics News

There was a time when the well-worn “clown car” description of the Republican presidential primary field wasn’t so on-the-nose. But as of right now, not even a few months into the process, it’s impossible to avoid daily news items in which one GOP candidate or another is self-immolating with ludicrous remarks or unforced errors. Frankly, it’d be really fun to observe if it weren’t for a nagging sense of danger. We’ll circle back to that.

Meanwhile, Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., on Friday contributed a fantastic example of the politically deficient nature of the current batch of hacks and frauds running for president on the GOP side. Speaking about the political hot potato of Iraq, Rubio described how he, as president, would approach continued U.S. involvement there: “It’s not nation-building. We are assisting them in building their nation.” Yes, assisting in the building of a nation is distinct from nation-building, according to Rubio.

Clearly, inside the Rubio campaign (for president!), this is totally acceptable. To everyone else, however, it sounds like the Sphinx character from the 1999 Ben Stiller superhero movie “Mystery Men.” As the wise sage of the superhero team, the Sphinx spoke in seemingly profound chunks of wisdom, but he’d merely reverse the first half of each maxim to construct the second half. For example: “He who questions training only trains himself at asking questions”; “When you doubt your powers, you give power to your doubts”; and, “When you care what is outside, what is inside cares for you.” Adding: “It’s not nation-building. We are assisting them in building their nation.”

The Iraq issue, which has had 12 years to percolate in the minds of all candidates everywhere and on both sides of the aisle, has completely flummoxed the Republicans. They don’t know how the hell to answer questions about the invasion. Actually, I take that back. Remarkably, the generally gaffe-prone Rick Perry, of all people, delivered the most concise and coherent answer of the batch on Friday, saying flatly on MSNBC that knowing what he knows now, he wouldn’t have invaded. But whether it’s Jeb Bush, Rubio or even Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., who said recently that the Republicans are responsible for ISIS but then reversed himself on the “Hannity” show, the issue is utterly stupefying. Carly Fiorina was asked about Iraq by MSNBC’s Andrea Mitchell last week, and instead of answering, Fiorina pivoted to Hillary Clinton, saying that the Democratic front-runner hadn’t been asked nor had she commented on Iraq. Well, Clinton had, in fact, been asked, and she responded with aplomb — many days earlier. It was kind of a big deal.

What else? Regarding Rand Paul, his campaign was a mess right out of the box. He was caught using stock photos instead of actual people who his campaign insisted had provided endorsements. His website store included “Rand Paul Flip Flops” for sale. The education issue page on his campaign site misspelled the word “education” (it touted Paul’s “eductation” policies). He bristled and barked at the “Today” show’s Savannah Guthrie. And his official campaign announcement video was blocked by YouTube for copyright infringement.

As for Mike Huckabee, it’s a safe bet that just about everything he says is either a gaffe or a shockingly horrendous anecdote. While talking about rights for transgender citizens, for example, Huckabee joked that he would’ve pretended to be transgender in high school just to infiltrate the girls’ showers. Who knew Huckabee was such a perv?

Elsewhere, Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, thought it’d be classy to joke about Vice President Joe Biden — while Biden was burying his son Beau Biden. Said Cruz: “Joe Biden… You know what the nice thing is? You don’t even need a punch line. I promise you it works. At the next party you’re at, just walk up to someone and say, ‘Vice President Joe Biden,’ and just close your mouth. They will crack up laughing.”