TV doesn’t have to cost that much, even if you’re on a serious budget. This post is part of a Denver Post series on TV options today — from new and existing companies. The stories may be updated over time. Read the series at dpo.st/tvtoday or “Cable TV, satellite, streaming: See your options, lower your bill”



Customer: No, seriously, I’m really on a budget

With the rise of new TV services, we thought it was darn well time to take a look at what plans work best for different customers. This is part of an ongoing series to help readers figure out if these real-life TV plans from local TV providers and online video services might better fit your lifestyle.

Get free TV for free: For TV service, start with a good HDTV antenna to receive local broadcast channels. The one-time purchase means no monthly bills. Check for available channels in your city at the Consumer Electronics Association site at antennaweb.org.

CenturyLink’s Internet Basics plan , both which cost $9.95 a month. CenturyLink offers 1.5 mbps speeds, while Comcast offers up to 5 mbps.

Low-income consumers might qualify Comcast’s Internet Essentials or

Shave hardware, services:Look through your bill for additional fees. Do you really need cable phone service, especially if you also pay for mobile?

And why rent a modem? Over time, it might be cheaper to buy one. Comcast, for example, charges $10 a month for modem rental. But Arris makes a Motorola-branded modem that works with Comcast and is $70. It doesn’t work with Comcast’s phone service.

Free full-episode TV shows are scattered around the web if you visit the channel’s sites, though again, you might be limited to a computer screen. ITunes, Amazon and other sites sell single episodes and might offer the latest episode free.

Hulu is a great resource, but the free version doesn’t work with streaming boxes. However, if you buy a screen-mirroring device like the $35 Google Chromecast, you can view the video playing on a computer or mobile device to your TV.

Read the series → Cable TV, satellite, streaming: See your options, lower your bill

View RSS feed



Visit the Denver Post special page on consumer TV options: Visit the Denver Post special page on consumer TV options: dpo.st/tvtoday