Loveland election deals with fracking, county will handle party primary votes on June 24

Loveland City Clerk Terry Andrews, left, and Larimer County Clerk and Recorder Angela Myers pose together Friday at Loveland City Hall while holding envelopes representative of the ones that will be used for the upcoming elections. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

City of Loveland and Larimer County clerks met Friday to finalize details in both upcoming elections.

Two ballots and envelopes, one from the city of Loveland and one from Larimer County, will both be sent out to eligible voters at the beginning of June and are due back by June 24, election day.

The blue envelope is for the registered voters in Loveland city limits and contains a ballot addressing the issue of a moratorium on hydraulic fracturing. It will be sent out Tuesday. Those blue Loveland envelopes must be returned to Loveland City Hall, 500 E. Third St.

The white envelope contains the primary ballot for Larimer County. It will be sent out June 2 to registered Republicans, Democrats and American Constitution Party members. Unaffiliated voters will not receive a primary ballot. Larimer County ballots, in the white envelopes, must be returned to drop locations listed at votelarimer.org.

Both ballots are due June 24, but they cannot be returned to the same location or in one envelope. If the ballots are returned in the same envelope, neither vote will be counted.

Both ballots can be returned by mail, but they will only be counted if they are received by 7 p.m. June 24.

Advertisement

"We have no leeway where that's concerned," Loveland City Clerk Terry Andrews said. "They must be in our office by 7 o'clock."

If the ballots are left in the wrong drop boxes, the clerks said they will work to get them to the right place, but there is no guarantee they will be collected in time.

"The faster they vote, the fewer calls they will have from people interested in any of the campaigns because they don't call people who have already voted," Larimer County clerk and recorder Angela Myers said.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Cassa Niedringhaus at 970-635-3651 or at news@reporter-herald.com.