The threat of a government shutdown has deeply divided congressional Republicans over whether to strip Planned Parenthood of all taxpayer funding by using must-pass budget legislation. And at Wednesday night’s GOP presidential debate, there was equal division among the candidates on the issue.

Some – most notably Texas Sen. Ted Cruz in the prime-time debate and Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal in the undercard – vigorously supported the strategy to tie Planned Parenthood to funding the government. Others – Sen. Lindsey Graham in the early debate and Ohio Gov. John Kasich in the main event – cautioned against doing so.

Cruz has been one of the leading Republicans in Congress vowing to oppose any legislation to keep the government running if it includes money for Planned Parenthood. The issue took shape over the summer, when an anti-abortion group began releasing covert videos of Planned Parenthood officials discussing the sale of fetal tissue for research, possibly for profit, which would be illegal. (The women’s health organization insists it did not violate the law and that the videos were misleadingly edited.) With the release of each new video, the calls for Congress to strip Planned Parenthood of the nearly $500 million it receives in federal funding have grown louder.

“Republican leadership in both houses has begun this discussion by preemptively surrendering to Barack Obama and saying, ‘We'll give in because Obama threatens a veto,’” Cruz said during the debate. “You know, Obama's committed to his principles. His liberal principles, he will fight for them. He says, ‘I will veto any budget that doesn't fund Planned Parenthood,’ and Republicans surrender. We need to stop surrendering and start standing for our principles.”

Kasich, who was first asked about the issue, disagreed with Cruz’s strategy. He supports defunding Planned Parenthood, but said there are better ways to do it, including by empowering governors to tackle the issue in their states.

“When it comes to closing down the federal government, you’ve got to be very careful about that,” Kasich said. “When we shut the government down – if we have a chance at success and it's a great principle, yes. [But] the president of the United States is not going to sign this, and all we're going to do is shut the government down, and then … the American people are going shake their heads and say, ‘What's the story with these Republicans?’”

The debate essentially mirrored the arguments recently expressed within the Republican conference in Congress. Some conservative GOP members have sided with Cruz, accusing leadership of being unwilling to wage difficult fights. Those leaders, on the other hand, have argued that the strategy won’t work, it will distract from the pro-life issue at hand and, ultimately, Republicans will be blamed.

The other governors on the debate stage used the topic as a chance to tout their pro-life backgrounds. Wisconsin’s Scott Walker said he defunded Planned Parenthood in his state early in his tenure; former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush said he did the same; and New Jersey’s Chris Christie said he had vetoed funding for the organization eight times as governor.

Carly Fiorina, deemed by many observers to be the clear winner of the debate, lined up on the side of Cruz and the hard-liners in the House.

“This is about the character of our nation, and if we will not stand up and force President Obama to veto this bill, shame on us,” Fiorina said.

The issue also played out in the earlier debate featuring the four candidates polling below the threshold set by CNN. Jindal accused Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell of having “waved the white flag.”

“If we can't defund Planned Parenthood now, if we can't stand for innocent human life after these barbaric videos, it is time to be done with the Republican Party,” Jindal said.

Graham, who supports stripping the organization of federal funding but strongly opposes any shutdown showdowns, hit back. He said he is “tired of telling people things they want to hear that I know we can’t do.” The South Carolina senator argued the best way to defund the group is to elect a Republican president in 2016 – an argument McConnell has made – and said shutting down the government would hurt those chances.

“Bobby, you were in the Congress, and all I can tell you, to everybody here, if you want to repeal Obamacare, get a new president,” Graham said. “If you want to defund Planned Parenthood, elect a pro-life president, because that's the only way.”