OAKLAND (CBS SF) – Presidential candidate and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton visited Oakland Friday and spoke of a need to build support in what she called a “make-or-break election.”

In a gym at La Escuelita Elementary School packed with hundreds of her supporters, Hillary reiterated her vision for the presidency and

constantly went on the attack against presidential frontrunner Donald Trump.

Hillary rarely directly spoke of her competitor in the June 7 California Democratic primary, Sen. Bernie Sanders – preferring to keep her

rhetoric focused on Trump by implying a need to unite against him.

“When I think about what’s at stake … even if I weren’t running for president, I would be doing everything I could to make sure the

presumptive nominee in the Republican Party never gets near the White House,” Hillary said.

Hillary spent some of her speech highlighting the work of some local politicians, such as Sen. Barbara Boxer, who accompanied Hillary to the stage at about 4:15 p.m. Friday.

Boxer, who was hosting a private fundraiser for Hillary with Sen. Dianne Feinstein later in the day, said Oakland was full of support for

Hillary.

“You’re going to have to search hard to see any votes for what’s his name … he’ll wish he was back in Trump Tower,” Boxer said.

In speaking of Boxer later, Hillary said she’d be “be calling her a lot” for her expertise if she were to be elected president.

Hillary also mentioned Oakland Mayor Libby Schaaf, who had made a speech shortly before Hillary took the stage.

Schaaf, like Boxer, shied away from attacking Sanders in her speech but did say the country needed “not just a leader that has great and

beautiful ideas but has the grit … and the know-how to get them done.”

The only time Hillary brought up Sanders, whose supporters gathered in small numbers outside the venue and chanted the senator’s name to those exiting after the event concluded, was to attack his goal for eliminating higher education costs after touting her plan.

“My esteemed opponent has a plan for what he says will be free (college),” Hillary said. “If you read the fine print … it’s free for

everyone, even billionaires.” She also claimed that she was the “only candidate on either side who (promised to) not raise middle class taxes, period.”

She mentioned that the next president should “follow the example of California” and raise the federal minimum wage, though she did not specify whether it should match the state’s minimum wage of $15, effective 2023, as Sanders has argued.

On a variety of issues, Hillary tied her own vision for the presidency to that of President Barack Obama.

“We have to finish the work the president started on the Affordable Care Act,” Hillary said to a resounding cheer, before the jeers came when she added, “Trump says he’s going repeal it.”

“And they can’t tell you what they’d replace it with because it’s something you wouldn’t like to hear,” she added.

She said she was proud of Obama’s economic record, but admitted, “we have to go further.” She mentioned high-paying jobs, investments in

infrastructure and women’s issues as areas that need improvement. And she took every opportunity to contrast her own vision with

that of Trump’s.

“He doesn’t think much of equal pay for women, because of course he doesn’t think much of women,” she said.

Stressing disparities in foreign policy ideas between her and Trump, Hillary said the country was facing a “make-or-break election” in

choosing the next Commander in Chief.

“Some of what I’m hearing from Trump is quite concerning,” she said, referencing discussions about allowing countries have nuclear weapons.

“He talks about it as if it’s some real estate deal.”

She winded down her speech with a series of vows that were met with roaring applause, such as battling money in politics and the gun lobby.

After leaving the venue, Hillary was scheduled to attend two sold-out fundraisers in San Francisco before continuing on the campaign

trail.

Now it can be told: @HillaryClinton makes surprise stop at her NorCal office in #Oakland to thank volunteers pic.twitter.com/8LXbrXUtWn — Doug Sovern (@SovernNation) May 6, 2016

Friday’s visit to the Bay Area is the continuation of a California campaign swing for Clinton. On Thursday, the frontrunner spoke in East Los Angeles, where she took swipes at Republican frontrunner Donald Trump and his stances on immigration.

Several protesters heckled Clinton during her Southern California appearance, while 100 people protested outside on a variety of issues.

• ALSO READ: Central Valley School Vandalized With Pro-Trump Graffiti On Cinco De Mayo

As of Friday, Clinton had 2,205 delegates and superdelegates, according to The Associated Press. Meanwhile, Sen. Bernie Sanders has 1,401 delegates and superdelegates.

Despite an uphill climb for the Democratic nomination, Sanders has pledged additional staff in California and plans to make appearances in Sacramento and Stockton next week.