The American Israel Public Affairs Committee, or AIPAC, is putting its financial muscle behind a new advertising campaign in opposition to a nuclear accord with Iran.

The pro-Israel lobbying group will throw its weight behind Citizens For A Nuclear Free Iran, a new 501(c)4 nonprofit that will begin airing an ad campaign this week. The group says the ad campaign will be a multimillion-dollar buy and will run both nationally and in selected local markets.

The ads will argue that the nuclear deal negotiated between six countries and Iran will ultimately make the world less safe. The group’s first ad campaign emphasizes that Iran is able to keep its nuclear sites, has long violated international agreements and highlights its support for international terrorism.

“Our audience is bipartisan, but Democrats should be especially concerned because the deal increase the chances of war, will spur a nuclear arms race and reward an Iran with a horrific human rights record,” said Patrick Dorton, a spokesman for Citizens For A Nuclear Free Iran.

AIPAC, along with other independent donors will provide financial commitments to the new group — which by law does not have to reveal the sources of its funding.

President Barack Obama has made the case that the alternative to the nuclear deal — which eases economic sanctions in exchange for sharply curtailing Iran’s nuclear activities — is a military conflict or the status quo. Critics believe that the deal could spark an arms race and further destabilize the region.

Congress has less than two months to review the deal and pass legislation that would unwind it. Mr. Obama has vowed to veto such an effort, setting up a showdown in Congress over the implementation of the accord. Mr. Obama will need to keep Democratic support to sustain his veto, which would require a two-thirds vote from each house of Congress to override.

Citizens For A Nuclear Free Iran has enlisted several high profile Democrats in its efforts, including former Sens. Mary Landrieu, Mark Begich, Evan Bayh and Joe Lieberman. All will serve on the group’s advisory committee.

The advocacy group J Street — which describes itself as both pro-Israel and pro-peace — is launching a similar ad campaign in support of the deal.

“This deal makes the United States, Israel and the entire world safer, and it would be highly irresponsible for Congress to reject it,” said J Street President Jeremy Ben-Ami in a statement this week. “J Street wants Congress to know that, despite some loud opposition to the deal coming from Jewish organizational leaders, our polling suggests that a clear majority of Jewish Americans agrees with us and backs the deal.”

The dueling ad campaigns are both expected to be multimillion dollar efforts, though neither group would give an exact figure.

More

Senate Democrats Key to Iran Deal

The Physicist Answering Lawmakers’ Questions on Deal