Jennifer Lawrence’s Hunger Games character, Katniss Everdeen, is a heroine to many all over the world, and people are joining forces by the thousands to voice this opinion.

Earlier this month, MTV announced their MTV Movie Awards nominees, including their nominees for “Best Hero” — and not one of the contenders is female. Not impressed with the lack of female representation, a woman named Sophie Azran started an online petition to get Katniss Everdeen on the all male list that includes Iron Man, Clark Kent aka Superman, Bilbo Baggins, John Cale and Thor.

“Young women already have too few female heroes represented in film and television,” Azran writes. “We’re constantly shown by the entertainment industry that men are brave, powerful, or successful, while women are often given supporting roles and weak characters.”

Of the 18,500 signatures, many people are commenting on why Katniss should be the hero, and Azran told The Hollywood Reporter that these comments mean a lot to her.

“If you’re only going to have one heroic category, then Katniss should absolutely be included. I’d also be down with a ‘Best Heroine’ category as well. Either of these are valid options,” says petition signer Danielle St. John from Texas.

Amanda Hayes from Ohio doesn’t understand how anyone from this world could fail to see Katniss as the hero.

Nicole Kline from Mississippi agrees with Hayes. “Hero’s can be girls just as much as they can be guys. Katniss Everdeen is the Mockingjay, and she is a Hero. She leads the revolution and she deserves to be on this list with all these other fictional heroes.”

Tausha Ostrander from Colorado wrote, “Women and girls need to see that they have the power to be leaders. The media must step up to the task by showing that women can be heroes too! We are just as capable as men, and recognition of that fact is essential!”

Just as long as it’s not Miley. According to Deborah Bateman from Alabama, she would rather her daughters have a role model like Katniss over Miley any day.

Being only 1,500 signatures away from the current goal of 20,000, the petition is making waves. Signatures are not only coming in from all over the United States, but from all over the world. People from places such as the United Kingdom, Mexico, Europe, Afghanistan, Israel, South Africa and Thailand all want to see Katniss represented as the hero.