Substance abuse treatment funding would be reduced by 20 percent under Gov. Rauner’s budget proposal – a cut his administration says is necessary because of the state’s dire financial picture but a move critics say could cost Illinois more money in the long run.

State funding for addiction treatment programs is projected to be about $124 million in fiscal year 2015; Rauner’s budget proposal for fiscal year 2016 would cut that to about $99 million.

That kind of cut could hurt an already underserved lower-income population, said Sara Moscato Howe, CEO of the Springfield-based Illinois Alcoholism and Drug Dependence Association, a trade group that represents community-based addiction and mental health treatment providers.

“You’ve got an alarming heroin epidemic right now, [and] prescription drug overdoses,” she said. “It makes no sense why you would not prioritize funding these services.”

If Rauner’s budget proposal is passed, about 7,800 fewer people across the state will be able to access substance abuse care, according to the Illinois Alcoholism and Drug Dependence Association.

Numbers surrounding Gov. Rauner's proposed budget

Howe said treatment programs that receive state funds can be a “safety net” for lower-income people with substance problems.

“They won’t have anywhere else to go that will take them,” she said. “That’s why it’s really the safety net.”

An emailed statement from Rauner spokeswoman Catherine Kelly said the state’s fiscal situation necessitates funding cuts.

“Due to years of out-of-control spending and irresponsible budgeting, Governor Rauner was faced with a $6 billion deficit and had to make some difficult choices,” according to a statement Rauner spokeswoman Catherine Kelly emailed RedEye. “His budget prioritizes funding to the most vulnerable.”

You can't do more with less. You do less with less. — Joel Johnson, president of the Human Resources Development Institute, which provides mental health and drug addiction treatment.

But drug-dependency specialists argue that their population is extremely vulnerable, and that funding cuts under Rauner as well as former Gov. Pat Quinn target their clients because they are relatively disenfranchised.

Joel Johnson, president of the Human Resources Development Institute, which provides mental health and drug addiction treatment, said he knows the state is in dire budget straits, but said cutting treatment for addicts isn’t the answer.

“Can the state continue to operate in debt? The answer is no,” he said. “But in the same regard, where are you going to make these cuts? … I think that we serve a population of poor, lower socioeconomic levels and otherwise disenfranchised ... [who] “The people that we serve are oftentimes the last ones people think about.”

And no matter how much funding the state allocates, addicts will still have problems, said Johnson, whose organization.

“This isn’t rocket science,” he said. “You can cut the money in one place … but it doesn’t make the need go away.”

State funding cuts are nothing new to advocates of addiction treatment programs.

“It’s ‘Groundhog Day’ over here,” Howe said. “We really are dealing with the same situation that we have for the last eight years now.”

Johnson said if the new funding cuts go through, it will mean reducing his organization’s capacity to provide outpatient treatment as well as residential treatment.

“You can’t do more with less,” he said. “You do less with less.”

Howe said that’s exactly what’s happened over the past few years of funding cuts.

“As we’ve been cut, we’ve seen the capacity in our system shrink, [and] you’re going to continue to see that,” she said.

Howe argued that cutting treatment for funding may actually cost the state more money in the long run, since addicts who aren’t helped might end up in jails and emergency rooms—which can be more expensive than treatment.

“It’s not as if by wiping those dollars out, the state doesn’t have to pay for it,” she said. “They do. They’ll just have to pay for them 10, 15 times fold.”

Kelly said that many people who need treatment for addictions are covered under the Affordable Care Act, a claim Johnson didn’t dispute—but he said many of his clients have “essentially managed care insurance” such as Medicaid, rather than private insurance via the Affordable Care Act.

Advocates and lawmakers have time to haggle before a budget is passed; Howe said she plans to keep in contact with legislators and Rauner’s staff.

“We are hopeful that the end budget will not be as devastating, and we also recognize that we’re working with a new administration,” she said. “Hopefully moving forward, if we’ve done our job, we’ve also educated the governor’s staff on why it’s important not to let the cuts happen.”

mcrepeau@redeyechicago.com | @crepeau

You can find our coverage online and in print every Wednesday this year. As ever, we'd like to hear your feedback. If you want us to consider sharing your stories related to addiction in our publication, please send them to redeye@redeyechicago.com with “Addiction” in the subject line.

Want more? Discuss this article and others on RedEye's Facebook page.