Ironic isn’t it, how something about beauty can become ugly? Unfortunately, this is what can happen when race is an issue.

For example, take the Miss Amarillo Latina pageant, which was recently held at the Globe-News Center for the Performing Arts. Vaneza Avila wears the crown of Miss Amarillo Latina 2014, while Mitzy Gonzalez was named Miss Teen Amarillo Latina 2014.

Congratulations to both.

What does not deserve congratulations — much less recognition, but here it goes anyway — is the response by some to pageants defined by demographics such as race, heritage or nationality.

The skin color/heritage of online respondents to this pageant might have been different, but there were similarities — the same, tired cliches.

“Where is the whites-only pageant?”

“This pageant is racist.”

“Only a racist would criticize this pageant.”

We’d share more responses, but these suffice — and the examples are typical.

It seems everyone is racist, no matter the opinion expressed.

Having never been a contestant in a beauty pageant (for obvious reasons) does not preclude us from making the following statement: These pageants — no matter the race, ethnicity or heritage of the participants — are meant to focus on beauty and talent, and not meant to create obstacles in a community.

Speaking of community, here is an idea that might help as far as understanding, if not acceptance.

Perhaps the idea is too simple, but that is the beauty of it, speaking of pageants.

Amarillo is a prime location for restaurants — all different kinds. Amarillo residents love to dine out, and have many choices. Off the top of our head, we know of at least eight restaurants in Amarillo (and there are more than eight) that feature menus with an international flavor — not just hamburgers and french fries.

There are Asian restaurants, Italian restaurants and Mexican restaurants, to name a few.

Are these restaurants racist in nature? Of course not.

Yes, but there’s a difference, some might say. Pageants limiting participants to race, heritage or nationality are exclusionary — and therefore racist.

Are they? Or are these pageants a celebration and recognition of different cultures/groups?

These pageants are not promoting one group of people over another any more than a restaurant.

These pageants recognize the talent and beauty of a specific group, and are not meant to belittle similar traits among other groups.

This is what some are not getting, and it isn’t pretty.