Want to turn your iPhone into a vibrator? No worries, there’s a free app for that: “iVibe Massager Lite.” However, while the user reviews may seem promising, with a 3.5 out of 5-star average, customers are bribing to have the app deleted from their purchase history.

The reviews appear to be from fearful teens who don’t want their parents (whose credit cards are likely attached to their iTunes accounts) seeing what they’ve downloaded. Here are some of the best reviews from the iTunes Store:

“I gave u 5 stars please remove I had a cramp In my back and I don’t want my parents to think the wrong way please please please please please please please please” “Omg I gave you 5 stars please remove from my purchased list I had any idea that this was a sex toy! I was looking for an actual massager!!!!!” “My friend bought it for me saying ‘you might need it’ but I don’t want it and I don’t want my parents thinking I’m doing things so PLEASE!!remove it off my purchased list!!” “I let my bestie use my phone and she downloaded bad apps please remove from my purchased list thanks” “My friends took my phone and downloaded this. I don’t want to get in trouble Please remove from my purchase list" “I thought this was for something completely different...”

In the last reviewer’s defense, from the title of the app, it does come off as simply a massager. But, quickly after reading the description, you realize it’s much more than that. “You can even use it in personal areas to spice up your life ;),” reads the iTunes app description.

“Because you cary [sic] your phone everywhere you go, you need not to worry about someone accidentally finding your personal pleasure secret. After all, its just a phone. Right? Right. ;),” the iVibe Massager official website reads.

Despite the 5-star ratings the reviewers have promised, the seller of the app (Robot Mouse, LLC) doesn’t have the ability to edit purchase history. In reponse to all the fearful reviewers, this message was posted on iTunes by Robot Mouse, LLC, “ATTENTION! If you wish to remove this app from your purchase list, please contact apple support. We have nothing to do with your purchase list and therefore CANNOT remove anything.”

To learn more about the app, check out the official iVibe Massager promotional video: