Marc Nemer, a former chief executive officer with New York-based Cole Real Estate Investments Inc., and his wife, Emily, a former wealth management specialist who recently had roles with YogiVitality and ZOG Digital, recently launched Ganesh Capital LLC, a venture capital firm based in Boulder.

The Nemers say they fell in love with Boulder from a lifestyle standpoint, noting they are active in the outdoors and in yoga.

After helping to take Cole Real Estate Investments public and assisting in the $11.2 billion sale of the firm to American Realty Capital Properties, Marc Nemer said he and Emily wanted to create a business that worked closely with entrepreneurs and startups. Boulder, they said, had a successful track record in that arena.

The couple spoke briefly with the Daily Camera last week about their investment plans.

The following has been edited for clarity and length.

1.) What did you both learn from your past roles that you plan to apply to Ganesh?

Marc: Prior to being at Cole, I was doing (mergers and acquisitions) and securities work at two major law firms: Skadden, (Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP) and Latham & Watkins. A big part of what I was doing there was on taking companies public (including) startups and businesses that were raising capital — including venture capital — and growing and trying to go public. So I like working with startup businesses. I didn't really like being a corporate attorney, which is why I went to a business role (with Cole).

Advertisement

(Cole) was a small company to start with and we built it into one of the largest companies of its kind, and I found it very satisfying to see a business vision come to life. ... Helping grow businesses as a business attorney and then actually building and growing one directly over the past many years, I think I've seen it from a lot of different angles.

Emily: For me, I found a lot of inspiration from entrepreneurship coming from a very corporate job.

I aspired to start my own business, which I have done, and now Marc and I are venturing into Ganesh Capital as we both have such a huge passion for entrepreneurs, helping them start and grow their businesses locally and beyond.

Marc: We found that we were spending a lot of our own personal time thinking about new business ideas ourselves. ... We were interested in a lot of different businesses and thinking about what would work and ultimately decided that we'd like to help many different businesses get up and running rather than just build one business ourselves.

3.) What will be Ganesh's investment approach?

Marc: We're looking for businesses that, in some way, will improve the world we live in — and that can be through an innovation or a grand new idea — businesses that have some element of social consciousness or impact.

We're not going to limit ourselves to a particular sector initially because we want to remain flexible.

We're also not raising third-party capital. We're investing directly on behalf of our own business — ourselves and a few private investors. We think that's going to allow us to be a lot more flexible in the types of companies we invest in as well as the terms.

... We don't have any of those limitations (such as time horizons, return requirements, etc.), which we think is going to give us a competitive advantage and also give us a lot of freedom and flexibility.

What we're looking for is a strong business idea, strong vision and passion, and something we can get behind personally.

4.) What is the size of Ganesh's fund and the planned investments?

Marc: The business is very well-capitalized. We're not dependent on having to raise third-party capital. We're open to making small investments to very early stage companies, (investments) as small as $50,000 ... and up to investments as large as $5 million.

One of the things you'll see us do early on is partner with other (venture capital) firms and funds and angel investors. We think there is a real opportunity to co-invest. We have significant contacts outside Boulder as well as (locally).

If we find great business ideas and great entrepreneurs to invest in, you might see us bring co-investment partners to invest with us. We're going to be actively networking within the (venture capital) and angel communities.

5.) Are you disclosing the amount of capital backing Ganesh?

Marc: No, primarily because it's not a typical fund. Some of the (venture capital) funds will launch Fund No. 1, Fund No. 2, which have a finite capital amount.

In our case, we're not raising third-party capital. It's not a finite fund. It really depends on how many great opportunities we find and where we find them.

No, we're not disclosing the total amount we'll be investing because there is no total amount here at the outset.

... We want to develop a very diversified portfolio. We're looking to make a large number of investments (in Boulder and across the United States).

— Alicia Wallace