“If you like your health care plan, you can keep your health care plan.”

Every American remembers hearing this empty promise. I bet you can even hear the inflection of the president’s voice as you read that line.

Or how about our president telling us how much money his new health care law would save us? If not, let’s refresh our memory:

[[{“type”:”media”,”view_mode”:”media_large”,”fid”:”95612″,”attributes”:{“alt”:””,”class”:”media-image”,”typeof”:”foaf:Image”}}]]

I couldn’t even watch the whole thing. After a while, you just get sick of the lies.

So here’s a new question for President Obama: “Where’s my $2,500?”

The impacts of Obamacare are still developing, but the results are not looking good so far. A county-by-county study by Forbes and the Manhattan Institute reports that the average cost for individuals went up by 49 percent, rather than going down. The people whose rates go up most are those who are young, healthy, and/or male.

The study asked, “Does the Affordable Care Act live up to its name? Does it make health insurance less expensive?” You can read the detailed numbers yourself, but the answer, in 80-90 percent of U.S. counties, is a big fat no.

Further, a measure that was meant to force uninsured people to sign up for plans will instead hit a million low-income Americans with a penalty for not doing so. That’s costing them more, and they still don’t have affordable health care. (It’s also producing more income for the federal government.)

Despite all the promises, and all the “results” promoted by the media and Obamacare supporters, the law is still unpopular. And it has benefitted far fewer than it was supposed to help.

It’s time to get rid of bureaucrats who will say anything to get our votes and don’t care about the consequences of their actions. It’s time to return the government to what the Founding Fathers intended: a true representation of the people that leaves personal decisions over things like health care up to them.

Abraham Lincoln said it well:

The legitimate object of government is to do for a community of people whatever they need to have done but cannot do at all, or cannot so well do, for themselves—in their separate, and individual capacities. In all that the people can individually do as well for themselves, government ought not to interfere.

Because when it does interfere, it just makes a big mess.

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.