Growing up in foster care, some children and teens don't get the kind of medical attention they need, while some may have suffered from abuse and neglect and have lingering health problems, advocates said.

One provision of the Affordable Care Act could help foster youth get medical attention they need after they are emancipated from the system at age 21.

Children Now has launched a campaign to spread the word that all former foster youth living in California are eligible for Medi-Cal health coverage until age 26. Previously coverage ended for them at 21 when they left the system.

The www.coveredtil26.org website is designed for youth to learn about the new requirements and how they can apply.

Youth who are involved in the foster care system tend to have higher health care needs due to child abuse and neglect experienced in early childhood, said Fatima Morales, Children Now policy and outreach associate. "Generally, their health care needs tend to be higher than their peers."

In Vallejo, Cynthia Grady of New Beginnings, an organization which helps young adults after they "age out" of foster care, said the new federal provisions are beneficial.

Some of her clients have asthma, bronchitis, dental and vision issues that they haven't been able to get treated because they no longer qualify for Medi-Cal, Grady said.

To help spread the word about the new foster care health coverage, New Beginnings is hosting an informational session 4-7 p.m. Saturday, March 22 at 1020 Colusa St. in Vallejo.

Young adults will be encouraged to hang out, enjoy some food and fun activities while also learn about the health coverage and other resources available to them.

After they turn 21, foster care youth will not automatically qualify for the Medi-Cal extension but will need to apply for it, Grady and others said.

Solano County Health and Human Services Director Ann Edwards said the health care extension will cost taxpayers more in Medi-Cal subsidies but it will save money over the long run by helping young adults stay healthy.

"It's a very good thing for kids in that transition period. It's even hard for kids when they have families and other resources. It's particularly difficult for foster youth who don't have family to fall back on," Edwards said.

Edwards said her department will also be doing some outreach to help get the word out to former foster youth who have aged out of the system that they are eligible for Medi-Cal.

Exact figures on the numbers of young adults who will be impacted by the new requirements were not available.

Morales said California has an estimated 26,000 former foster youth between the ages of 21 and 26 who may qualify for Medi-Cal as a result of the extension of coverage to age 26.

Each year in the state between 2,700 and 5,000 youth are emancipated or "age out" of the system when they turned 21, according to Children Now.

Former foster youth qualify for the Medi-Cal coverage until age 26 if they were in foster care in any state at age 18 or older, are younger than age 26, and live in California now.

For more details go to http://www.coveredtil26.org/.

Contact staff writer Sarah Rohrs at srohrs@timesheraldonline.com or (707) 553-6832. Follow her on Twitter @SarahVTH.