Surging needs for medical care for newborns and mental health care among the poor are the driving forces behind the latest expansion of Hamilton Health Center.

The Harrisburg-based clinic hopes to open new space devoted to those needs in about a year. It’s leaders on Wednesday launched the community phase of the effort to raise the $7 million needed to create the space.

In doing so, CEO Jeannine Peterson announced the effort is already close to the goal, thanks to the success of the corporate phase. Several local corporations and foundations have quietly contributed $6 million since March. These include the Donald B. and Dorothy L. Stabler Foundation, which will donate $3 million; Capital BlueCross, which will donate $1 million along with $500,000 in in-kind services; and Highmark Blue Shield, which will give $1.5 million.

The final step involves raising $1 million from the general public. Information about how to donate can be obtained by following this link.



The new space will be added at Hamilton’s main location on South 17th Street in Harrisburg’s Allison Hill neighborhood. A former state printing operation, it opened last year following $17 million in renovations. Prior to that, Hamilton services were scattered over numerous locations.

Hamilton is a federally-funded health center serving people with lower incomes. The need for its services has been surging for years. According to Peterson, it provided 72,000 patient visits in 2012 and about 85,000 so far this year. Those figures are expected to rise to about 130,000 in 2015, she said.

Peterson said much of the expected growth results from the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, and its promise of greatly expanding the number of people with health insurance.

In stressing the need for the new space, Peterson said there’s a “severe shortage” of local doctors accepting newborns covered by Medicaid, the government health insurance program for the poor.

“It’s not acceptable that the health system is not prepared to care for all newborns, regardless of their insurance status. We can do better than this and Hamilton can fill this critical gap, but we need more space to serve the community better,” Peterson said.

According to Peterson, more than half of Hamilton clients are covered by Medicaid or by Medicare, which is the government health care program for seniors. About 30 percent have no health insurance, she said.

Peterson further described an intense shortage of services for people with mental health needs, saying clients in need of a psychiatrist are referred to outside providers and sometimes must wait six months for an appointment.

Hamilton is intended as a “medical mall” providing the full range of health care needs from medical care to dental care to programs aimed at helping families and promoting community wellness. It houses lab and imaging services and a pharmacy. Peterson stressed that Hamilton clients come from several counties surrounding Harrisburg.

“Hamilton Health Center is a national-level model, not only in its approach to public health, but for how a project like this can be boldly envisioned and boldly supported by all segments of a community,” said William Lehr, the former Capital BlueCross executive and the chair of the Hamilton fund-raising campaign.

Hamilton also meets the medical needs of a large population of people who have AIDS or are HIV-positive.

Dr. Arthur Williams, an HIV specialist who heads Hamilton’s adult medicine program, said many HIV clients and others who use Hamilton have intense mental health needs. He noted their poor outlook regarding themselves affects what they eat and what substances they consume. Access to mental health services is critical to their health, he said.

He also noted that Hamilton provides an array of services intended to strengthen families struggling against poverty. The new space will include areas for community programs. It will also provide more administrative space.



About 230 people work for Hamilton Health.

Note: this story was updated to include a link to information about donating.