There's a national shortage of affordable housing, and the largest bank based in Cleveland aims to fix that here and across the country.



Making KeyBank a national player in the affordable housing market is a top priority for Robert Likes, who was appointed the national manager of Key's community development lending and investment platform in May. He previously led the bank's Northwest income property group.



The bank has designated the business as one of its top revenue drivers in the next three years with plans to extend financing for affordable housing projects from a dozen states to all 50.



It's an auspicious goal for any regional bank, especially for an already big player in the space.



But considering factors like a national shortage of affordable housing, growing costs of construction and a widening margin between rental rates and stagnant individual incomes, Likes expects that demand for affordable housing projects will continue to surge.



Key already is among the largest servicers in the country for affordable housing projects.



The bank has an existing portfolio north of $2 billion, encompassing about 100,000 units in its current footprint. It issued around $400 million in debt and equity financing last year alone and has about $1 billion in tax credits amassed.



The overall goal, Likes said, is to double the size of the business in terms of production and revenue in three years.



“That includes adding substantial new clients, lending a lot more, investing a lot more in our current 12 footprint states and also on a national basis as we onboard and grow new client relationships,” Likes said.



“It's a lofty target for us.”



Likes said data show that nationwide demand for affordable housing is around 12 million units — so the opportunity is there.





Catalytic impact

But that doesn't mean the process is simple.“I think the constraints come in that these projects are tough to build because they require substantial equity to reduce the cost of the project so it has low debt so savings can be passed on to the renters,” Likes added.Kicking up the business means being increasingly “proactive versus reactive,” Likes said.That comes by identifying projects early on to offer financing, be that for new construction, preserving existing properties or acquiring others. Historically, the bank had focused almost entirely on new construction.Some newly hired personnel will lead the charge on finding investments across the country. Since May, the bank already has hired 10 national relationship managers just for that task. Their existing counterparts from New York to Washington state, Likes said, will be asked “to do more.”“It's a continuation of what we're already doing well,” he said, “but we have a strong focus on becoming even better.”

A focus on affordable housing is as good for the company's image as it is for margins and the communities that benefit — including Key's hometown.



According to national nonprofit Enterprise Community Partners Inc., which uses its own dollars to finance these kinds of projects, the people most in need of affordable housing aren't just the extremely impoverished.



Those also in need include the housing insecure, which applies to a household spending more than 50% of its income on rent. In Cuyahoga County, that comprises about 30% of the population.



“These people are severely cost burdened when it comes to housing costs,” said Mark McDermott, a Cleveland-based vice president and Ohio market leader for Enterprise.



“This is a situation that needs to be addressed.”





According to data from Enterprise, Cuyahoga County had more than 2,100 homeless people last year, while about 20% of families in poverty and 65,000 HUD-defined low-income renters put more than 50% of their income toward rent.One local example of a development Key has financed recently resembling projects the bank is looking for across the country includes the Westerly Apartments, a complex for seniors in Lakewood.Key footed a $9.2 million construction loan for the apartment complex, with Cleveland Housing Network Inc. as the developer and Lakewood Senior Citizens Inc. as the owner.Another includes A Place For Us Housing LLC, a Cleveland apartment building designed for the senior LGBT community, which will be owned and managed by The NRP Group.For that, Key contributed a $7.2 million construction loan and a 9% low-income housing tax credit equity investment.Those projects financed through low-income housing tax credits are also smart investments overall. Since that program was started in the mid-1980s, those related projects have outperformed all other real estate classes and feature about a 0.5% foreclosure rate over nearly 30 years, Likes said.So efforts like Key's in the affordable housing space not only make good business sense and help meet Community Reinvestment Act requirements, they inherently spur positive effects on people and neighborhoods as they spur projects to fruition that might not otherwise draw investors.After all, when the private market gets involved, “it gives confidence” to other investors,” McDermott said.That's why the initiative by Key means so much to the groups pushing for affordable housing.“This isn't just a problem we can solve with more public funds, more subsidies,” McDermott said.“We need to be able to leverage and have good private capital coming to the table to make these projects work.“Banks like Key are doing this and proving it works.”