La Grange trustees weigh food and drink tax

"We're kind of coming to a … critical point, so that we need to investigate new things that will help us fund operations," Trustee Mark Langan said.

La Grange Village Board trustees on Monday weighed a proposal to tax food and drinks against other ways to close a projected budget shortfall next year.

A 1 percent tax on food and drink served at "places of eating," if passed, would raise around $350,000 in the year following its adoption, Village Finance Director Lou Cipparrone told the board. Prepared food — not groceries — would be taxed, according to the proposal.

Cipparrone pitched the tax as a way to prop village operations with money from outside the community. He estimated two-thirds of the tax would be paid by nonresidents.

Some trustees questioned why the village should raise taxes on food and drink instead of raising the general sales tax. The village receives 1.25 percent of the sales tax the state collects in La Grange, Cipparrone said. If the village raised the tax another .5 percent, the tax would draw $450,000, he said.

Raising the local sales tax would require voter approval in the form of a referendum, while the restaurant tax would not, Cipparrone said.

Phil Palmer, who owns La Grange restaurant Palmer Place with his brother, said he favored the general increase over the restaurant tax. Palmer told the board the restaurant tax could add more uncertainty in 2014, a year that is already uncertain due to new Affordable Care Act requirements.

"To put a 1 percent sales tax (in place) is kind of a cherry on a sundae," Palmer told the board.

Steven Jasinski, the president of the La Grange Business Association, suggested the village develop a clearer idea of where exactly the new money would go. Restaurant owners might be more receptive to a tax if they see a designated amount will go toward things like economic development and capital improvements, Jasinski said.

Trustees said they would direct staff to gather input from businesses.

Village staff proposed the restaurant tax as a replacement for a utility rate increase that had been in the budget for next year, after trustees expressed reservations about the rate increase, Cipparrone said.

The village now faces a $200,000 shortfall for the 2014-15 budget year, according to a memo Cipparrone and Village Manager Robert Pilipiszyn sent to the board. The restaurant tax would more than fill it, leaving some extra funds for capital expenses, economic development and other village functions, Cipparrone said.

At the same meeting in which they discussed the restaurant tax, the board passed a 2.97 percent property tax increase — a tax village officials have said will help cover operating costs. The owner of a $350,000 home in La Grange will pay about $16 more for the increase, along with another $4 for a library levy increase.