By: Vincent Schilling

Since achieving official recognition in Virginia in 2010, the Nottoway Indian Tribe has continued to gain community recognition. This past weekend in Surry County, Chief Lynette Allston said her tribe’s once humble pow wow is growing by leaps and bounds.

“Saturday’s Grand Entry was absolutely unbelievable,” says Allston. “We had at least 150 dancers lined up and ready to go. Our vendors were swamped and our tribal booth was busy with guests and children doing crafts.

“It was an amazing day in which we truly celebrated a sense of coming together. It was so good having people in harmony, as opposed to noticing the differences. When we have our pow wow, we as a people think of the unity we all share, and not the things that tear us apart.”

One attendee, Virginie Sommet, who was visiting from France and recently became an American citizen, says she was enamored with the pow wow.,“It was great to see this pow wow,” she said. “As I have just become an American citizen, it is nice to see the origins of America, which has such a sad history of Native American genocide. Today was a very spiritual and deep day for me. I also loved the element of respecting nature and the sense of empowering native culture present here.”

Kim Kelly a dancer at the pow wow simply said, “I loved it so much. But that is like saying you love your own birthday party.”

Chief Allston has also spoken about the healing nature of her tribes event, which takes place on their ancestral lands of Surry County, Virginia. Allston says her pow wow had been called the “water pow wow” the first year because so many participants and people in the stands were crying.

Paige Archer (Meherrin) said that after a healing drum song was performed for her at the Nottoway pow wow, her cancer disappeared. “They said at first I only had a few months to live, but it has been two years. They call me their miracle patient.”

“What I saw was simply beautiful,” said pow wow goer Lynetta Barrow. “The people were welcoming and the drumming was powerful.”