Lower Burrell business owners talk shop with Rothfus during tour

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Lower Burrell entrepreneurs on Tuesday told U.S. Rep. Keith Rothfus business is good, but they're keeping a wary eye on changes to minimum wage, interest rates and other factors.

“That's my worst nightmare,” Glen's Frozen Custard owner Glen “Rob” Wilson said of the movement to increase the minimum wage. “If it goes to $15, I don't know what to do.

“If you vote on anything, vote against raising the minimum wage,” Wilson implored Rothfus, R-Sewickley, who joined Lower Burrell Mayor Rich Callender, retired mayor Don Kinosz and City Clerk Kelly Cook for a tour of city businesses.

In addition to the newly expanded Glen's Frozen Custard and GC Grill, the group stopped at Community Supermarket in Hillcrest Shopping Center, Hillcrest Distributing and Watson Real Estate.

Callender said the tour was planned to give Rothfus a taste — literally in terms of Glen's custard — of the business climate in Lower Burrell.

Representatives of all four businesses said they're doing well but are keeping an eye on how state and federal policies may affect them.

“We have no complaints,” said George Thimons, co-owner of the Community Supermarket grocery store for the past 25 years.

Thimons said the health insurance requirements under the federal Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, didn't impact their business because they already offered health benefits to their 90 employees, including part-timers.

However, Thimons said that they provide insurance should be taken into consideration when raising the minimum wage is discussed.

“I think it would put a lot of people out of business,” Thimons said.

Rothfus advocated for the market determining wages — such as when workers are in demand or when employers want to reward reliable employees.

Rothfus said he'd like to see the earned income tax credit program, which benefits low- to moderate-income people, made “more robust” as a possible alternative to raising the minimum wage.

Watson Real Estate, run by the father-and-son team both named Jim Watson, was the other longtime Lower Burrell business Rothfus visited.

The younger Jim Watson said the regional real estate market wasn't hit as hard as other parts of the country when the housing bubble burst in 2008.

The elder Jim Watson said their business is doing well, but he worries about the future if the historically low federal interest rate, which impacts mortgages, continues to increase.

Watson and Kinosz told Rothfus about the Westmoreland County land bank in which they're involved, which aims to redevelop blighted properties such as the largely vacant Burrell Plaza on Leechburg Road.

The former home of J.C. Penney and Montgomery Ward department stores was the one dim spot on the otherwise sunny tour.

Glen's wasn't the only new business Rothfus visited: Hillcrest Distributing is under new ownership and recently was remodeled.

Warehouse manager Sean Robertson and worker Aaron Carter explained how their business took advantage of changes to the state liquor code last year that allows distributors to sell 12-packs of beer.

“They did a beautiful job of expanding this,” said Kinosz, who noted people often overlook that Lower Burrell is home to about 600 businesses.

Liz Hayes is a Tribune-Review staff writer. She can be reached at lhayes@tribweb.com or 724-226-4680.