By Justin Sarachik , Christian Post Reporter

Nintendo is having a very good day as the company released two highly anticipated gems to their gaming faithful; new handheld console, the 2DS, and game, Pokemon X and Y.

(PHOTO: Nintendo)

(PHOTO: Youtube screenshot)

Free Sign Up Newsletter!

The 2DS is essentially a non 3D version of the 3DS. It also comes with a much more affordable price tag, $129.99, rather than the $170 for its counterpart, and $200, for the 3DS XL.

"Launching a cheaper, non-3D, non-hinged product plugs the gap left in Nintendo's portfolio created by the decline of its original DS platform," said Harding-Rolls, of IHS Electronics to NBC News. "It is also critical that any new product is able to play 3DS games, and with this broadening of the market, Nintendo will hope that third-party publishers make more commitment to the 3DS/2DS platform moving forward."

The 2DS also is not a conventional handheld, it has more of a tablet design to it, and yet stays small and sleek. Rather than also throw a host of 2DS game its way, the console will just play 3DS without the 3D, and also original DS games.

"The system features a distinctive fixed, slate-type form factor ... Nintendo 2DS maintains many of the same hardware features as Nintendo 3DS: dual screens, game-play controls and touch-screen features. The system also has backward compatibility with the existing library of more than 2,000 Nintendo DS games, as well as access to wireless connectivity features like multiplayer online game play, fun Nintendo Video content and great digitally delivered games in the Nintendo eShop," Nintendo said in a statement.

2DS will come in either black and blue or white and red. Included with the system will be 4GB memory card, an AC adaptor that is good for all 3DS models as well, and a color matching carry case.

The game simultaneously launched with Pokemon X and Y, which was a great move that will allow gamers to grab a two for one if interested. It also gives die hard Pokemon fans who do not own the more expensive 3DS, and option to get the game with a cheaper console.