If Jordan Lyles got any good news Thursday, one day after breaking his hand in a contact play at home plate in the Rockies blowout loss to Arizona, it didn’t feel very good.

Lyles confirmed with a medical specialist that he suffered a fracture of the middle metacarpal on his left hand, on the glove side. It’s not a clean break, he said.

And even though Lyles, a right-handed pitcher, can continue to throw during his recovery, he’s headed to the disabled list.

Left-handed reliever Boone Logan also joined Lyles on the disabled list Thursday because of left-elbow inflammation.

Logan underwent an MRI that showed no structural damage. He had been pitching through pain in recent appearances. Logan had surgery in October for a bone chip and a bone spur on his left elbow. It forced him into a late start in spring training.

The Rockies gave Logan three-year, $16.6 million free-agent deal in the offseason.

Lyles doesn’t know how much time he will miss, but didn’t sound optimistic.

“I’m gonna be out,” Lyles said.

“I guess ask Walt. Whatever he wants to say,” Lyles said of his manager, Walt Weiss. “I don’t know a timetable.”

Lyles said he will likely not need surgery.

“He’s gonna be out for a few weeks — we don’t know exactly how long that is right now,” Weiss said. “But it’s one of those things where he’ll have to be re-evaluated every week or so. And go from there.”

Weiss said he does not think Lyles will move to the 60-day DL. Rockies trainer Keith Dugger said that Lyles will need either a cast or a hard-splint, but only after the swelling goes down in his hand.

The Rockies on Thursday called up reliever Chris Martin from Triple-A Colorado Springs to take Lyles’ roster spot, and Franklin Morales, who was an option to replace Lyles in the starting rotation, is for now staying in the bullpen.

Without Logan in the mix, the Rockies will face Arizona on Thursday with a 24-man roster.

“We’ve got some options to take Jordan’s spot,” Weiss said. “We haven’t made that decision yet. I’m not gonna throw them out there right now. But we’ve got a couple, three options.”

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke