A federal appeals court on Tuesday affirmed Barclays Capital Inc.’s right to several billions of dollars of assets in a dispute that arose in connection with its purchase of Lehman Brothers’ brokerage after Lehman’s 2008 collapse.

Bloomberg

The Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals said that while “ambiguities and loose ends were inevitable” in the speedy sale of Lehman’s brokerage in September 2008, documents associated with the deal entitle Barclays to the disputed assets.

The ruling won’t affect payments that the brokerage’s customers and creditors have already received, although it could affect future payouts. The trustee winding down Lehman’s brokerage, James W. Giddens, has held funds in reserve in the event he didn’t prevail in the battle with Barclays.

“We are studying the decision closely,” Mr. Giddens said Tuesday in a statement. “Our focus remains on winding-down the estate, making distributions from the general estate as promptly as possible and protecting claimants’ interests and due process rights.”

A Barclays representative wasn’t immediately available to comment.

Lehman, once a major investment bank, collapsed into bankruptcy protection on Sept. 15, 2008, and its brokerage, while legally barred from filing for bankruptcy, also entered wind-down proceedings. The day after the bankruptcy filing, Lehman and Barclays struck a deal regarding the brokerage’s sale, which a bankruptcy judge quickly approved, allowing the sale to close on Sept. 22.

According to U.S. Circuit Judge Ralph K. Winter, who wrote the appeals court opinion for a three-judge panel, the “scramble” to close the deal produced a dispute over two major asset groups: about $1.9 billion in securities and about $4 billion held to secure the brokerage’s exchange-traded derivatives.

Court papers show the bankruptcy court held a 34-day trial on the dispute, after which it concluded that the Lehman brokerage was entitled to the approximately $4 billion in so-called margin assets but that Barclays should get the $1.9 billion in so-called clearance box assets.

Both sides appealed, and the district court ruled that Barclays was entitled to both groups of assets. Mr. Giddens appealed to the Second Circuit, which affirmed the district court’s ruling.

The appeals court didn’t take up a dispute between Mr. Giddens and Barclays over another group of assets, money in customer reserve accounts, which the two sides have since settled. Court papers filed last year show that Mr. Giddens agreed to pay Barclays $769 million in customer reserve account assets once all the claims of the brokerage’s customers have been paid in full (or money has been reserved to pay them in full).

As of July 30, Mr. Giddens said he has distributed more than $105 billion to 111,000 former brokerage customers. He has begun distributing another $240 million to secured creditors and those holding priority claims, mostly former employees, and he recently secured bankruptcy-court approval to begin making the first set of payments to general unsecured creditors.

More than $3 billion is available for such a creditor distribution, the trustee said at the end of July, though it isn’t currently known exactly how much of that he will pay out. He has said he expects to begin making payments in early September.