Q: I’ve read that sitting is bad for my health, but I don’t see how I can sit less. I have an hour commute and then I’m at my desk for six hours. In the evening, I sit down for dinner, watch a bit of TV and read. I do get to the gym at least three times a week for an hour. Does that make up for all my sitting? — Allie G., Indianapolis

A: You may think you’re sitting pretty if you work out three to five days a week; after all, that’s what we keep telling you to aim for, along with taking 10,000 steps a day.

(That’s the goal because 80 percent of the health benefits you’ll get from regular physical activity come from going that distance, along with some cardio and resistance workouts.) But getting all the benefits from that physical activity also requires that you stand up for yourself. A new study published in the Annals of Internal Medicine says that even if you get regular exercise, sitting for prolonged periods of time increases your risk for cardiovascular disease by 14 percent, cancer by 13 percent and diabetes by an astounding 91 percent. And if you don’t get regular exercise and also sit for prolonged times, your risk for premature death goes up 40 percent. Folks who sit for more than eight to nine hours a day are at highest risk.

Here are a few solutions to the health traps that come with a modern lifestyle:

■ When you’re at work, stand up for 1-2 minutes every 30 minutes. That increases circulation and cuts the risk of insulin resistance that sitting initiates.

■ Use a standing desk (or put your computer on books) and work standing up.

■ Reduce your on-the-butt time at home. Get up every 30 minutes or at every commercial break and walk for two minutes.

Your goal: Two to three hours LESS “sit time” daily.

■ Get good walking shoes so that your feet feel comfortable with your new standup routine. And make sure your posture is good — shoulders down and back, neck straight and pelvis slightly tucked.

Now you’re standing pretty!

Q: Several of my friends and I are really into cooking, and we want to learn about new foods and experiment with healthier choices. But it’s harder than we thought to get us all together to taste each other’s recipes.

Any suggestions? — Kay W. Santa Fe, New Mexico

A: We have a great idea for you: Get your pals together for a potluck dinner club.

Host the first one yourself, and then the others can take turns hosting after that.

Here’s how it works: Assign each member a dish or course: Appetizers, entrees, side dishes, desserts.

Discuss serving sizes — limit the chicken or fish proteins to 6 ounce servings; provide 1 cup of grains per person; limit starchy veggies to 1/2 cup with other veggies and fruits pretty much unlimited. Fun twist: Everybody makes a dish that’s red or seasoned with three herbs. Then, everyone agrees to eliminate the Five Food Felons from the menu: That’s all added sugars and syrups, any grain that isn’t 100 percent whole and most saturated and all trans fats.

When you avoid the Five Food Felons, you’ll avoid stimulating production of the “I’m still hungry” hormone called ghrelin.

And when you prepare meals with walnuts, avocados, olives and olive oil, plus fruits and vegetables, and protein-rich foods like salmon, anchovies and ocean trout, you’ll stimulate the “I feel full” hormone called leptin.

None of your club members will ever go home hungry.

Your Potluck Club will show everyone that friendly get-togethers don’t have to include unhealthful foods like chicken wings and fried mozzarella. And when you don’t feel sluggish from eating lousy food, you’ll actually have more fun with your friends and family.

Dr. Mehmet Oz is host of “The Dr. Oz Show,” and Dr. Mike Roizen is chief medical officer at the Cleveland Clinic Wellness Institute. Submit your health questions at www.doctoroz.com.