Liana Barrientos, center, appears in the Bronx Supreme Court in New York City on Friday. Eduardo Munoz/Reuters

A 39-year-old woman who married 10 men since 1999 – at one point married to eight at the same time – was indicted Friday in Bronx criminal court on felony fraud charges.

Bronx prosecutors say Liana Barrientos lied on the application and license for her tenth marriage, in the Bronx in March 2010, saying it was her first and only marriage. In fact, she was still married to at least four of the men, prosecutors said.

Ms. Barrientos pleaded not guilty Friday to two first-degree charges of offering false instruments for filing. In court, prosecutors said the men paid Ms. Barrientos so that through the marriages they could gain legal immigration status in the U.S.

All of the grooms were foreign nationals, including seven from countries “red-flagged” by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security: Egypt, Pakistan, Turkey, Georgia and Mali. Six of the men filed for legal permanent resident status using their marriage to Ms. Barrientos; two were approved, and another was deported to Pakistan in 2006 after an investigation found he made threatening statements toward the U.S., prosecutors said.

The case was brought to the Bronx District Attorney’s Office by homeland security department investigators, officials said. A spokesman for DHS said officials can deport somebody who is found to have obtained benefits through a false marriage.

Ms. Barrientos pleaded not guilty Friday to two first-degree charges of offering false instruments for filing. In court, prosecutors said the men paid Ms. Barrientos so that through the marriages they could gain legal immigration status in the U.S.

Between November 1999 and August 2002, Ms. Barrientos married nine men in nine different New York state municipalities, Bronx prosecutors said.

Some marriages took place within days of each other: on Valentine’s Day 2002, Ms. Barrientos was married in Hempstead; on March 1, 2002, she was married in Ramapo; on March 14 2002, she was married in Huntington.

She used her real name each time, along with her real social security number and other personal identification, according to the complaint.

In April 2002, she got her first divorce – from her first husband, an Egyptian national whom she married in 1999 and who filed for permanent residency in 2000. By then, Ms. Barrientos was married to six people.

In 2010, she married the tenth man, in the Bronx, where she told the county clerk’s office that it was her first and only marriage, according to the complaint.

She was divorced from husbands two, five, seven, and nine between 2004 and 2007. She is currently married to men from Bangladesh, Georgia, Pakistan and Mali, prosecutors said. Authorities said she is “possibly divorced” from husband number six, a Czech man she married in March 2002.

Ms. Barrientos and her attorney, Chris Wright, couldn’t be immediately reached for comment Friday.