ATCHISON — Congressional candidate Margie Wakefield's walking tour of aviator Amelia Earhart's hometown elicited a campaign pitch to three women installing colorful glass art to low concrete walls in an industrial stretch of the downtown beneath a bridge.

Her conversation with mortar-dabbled Patty Boldridge, Christy Harris and Deborah Geiger opened with dismay for the nation's inadequate public funding of the arts and of the partisan combat dominating the nation's political epicenter.

“If you’re not free to practice creativity, you’ll suffer,” said Geiger, executive director of the Atchison Art Association.

Boldridge, who said the art project was a public-private partnership, nodded approval and urged government leaders and community members to collaborate on advancement of art education.

“Art is the gateway to innovation,” she said.

The encounter fell into the wheelhouse of Wakefield’s campaign to unseat U.S. Rep. Lynn Jenkins, a Topeka Republican who defeated a Democratic incumbent in 2008 to earn a seat in Congress.

Wakefield, a Lawrence attorney, is conducting a grassroots, modest-budget campaign that has emphasized personal contact with potential voters.

She has been rolling through the 2nd District, which stretches from Nebraska to Oklahoma and includes Topeka and Lawrence.

It is not uncommon to see her on the road in a vehicle pulling a trailer displaying a massive Wakefield sign.

“People are so receptive to you,” she said. “They're interested, engaged and they want new leadership.”

Wakefield told the women in Atchison that political conversations in Washington, D.C., had to be overhauled through election of candidates dedicated to working with allies and rivals on policy reform.

“Everyone says this partisan blame-gaming has got to stop,” she said.

While Wakefield worked the district in northeast Kansas, incumbent Jenkins was hundreds of miles away grappling in Washington with a federal budget extension and a measure endorsing President Barack Obama’s plan to arm and train moderate Syrians to counter an emerging terrorist threat. Jenkins said in a news release the House was moving ahead with legislation, despite inaction on dozens of other bills by the U.S. Senate.

“The American people deserve a government that works,” she said. “The president and the Senate are banking on inaction and blame carrying the day. The House is moving forward, but we need willing negotiating partners.”

In interviews and a flurry of emails, the Wakefield and Jenkins campaigns agreed to an exchange of questions posed to their opponent.

To Wakefield: Do you support construction of the Keystone Pipeline and how do you support cap-and-trade measures passed by the House in 2009?

“The Keystone Pipeline is already build through Kansas,” Wakefield said, "so passing it will not be creating any new jobs in Kansas, contrary to my opponent's rhetoric. We just need to make certain that there is adequate oversight in order to avoid breaks and, in the event that leaks occur, that we have an effective, planned response to disasters."

“Cap and trade is a pretty old idea to help promote renewable energy that is going nowhere in Congress,” she said. “The more effective direction now is providing incentives for renewable energy like the production tax credit that has proven effective in creating thousands of new, high-wage wind energy jobs in Kansas.”

To Jenkins: Who are the “ladies” you referenced who believe gender pay equity is condescending?

“I strongly support equal pay for equal work, and I’m proud to live in a country where it's illegal to discriminate in the workplace,” Jenkins said. “There is still discrimination and where it exists, we need to stop it. However, I don’t support dividing America for political gain.

“The focus should be on ways to create equal opportunities, better paying jobs, more freedom and the ability to choose your own doctor and health care plan so that all Americans — regardless of gender — can succeed."

To Wakefield: Have you ever taken it upon yourself to write your member of Congress? If so, what did you write her about?

“I don't remember when I've written my member of Congress or about what, but I probably have,” Wakefield said.

To Jenkins: Why do you and Republican colleagues in the House pass mountains of partisan legislation that has no chance of passing the Senate?

“Of the over 350 House-passed bills that are awaiting action in the Senate, 98 percent of them passed with bipartisan support, 50 percent passed with no opposition, 70 percent passed with more than two-third support and over 55 of bills were actually introduced by House Democrats,” Jenkins said.

“It takes a pretty out-of-touch partisan liberal to look at those facts and claim the House is the body that is being partisan. The facts would suggest the House is doing its job and the Senate is not.”

To Wakefield: Do you support or oppose the current funding formula for the Affordable Care Act?

“This is a strange question as the ACA has many funding streams,” Wakefield said.