Topics: From the Wires, News

SAO PAULO (AP) — Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff faced the biggest challenge yet of her young and turbulent second term, as hundreds of thousands of protesters took to streets in more than 150 cities to demand her impeachment and an end to corruption.

The Sunday protests, organized by right-leaning groups on social media and held across the continent-sized nation, had none of the violence seen in massive anti-government demonstrations that hit the country in 2013 and lingered into the following year.

They add to the mounting pressure on Rousseff, who is facing both political and economic crises as Brazil’s economy stalls and dozens of top political figures are investigated in a kickback scheme at state-run oil company Petrobras, which prosecutors label as the largest graft scheme yet uncovered in the country.

The biggest protest was seen in Sao Paulo, where some 210,000 people gathered on a main avenue, according to the polling and statistics firm Datafolha. Large gatherings were also seen in the capital Brasilia, Rio de Janeiro and the southern city of Porto Alegre.

Rousseff didn’t appear in public, but government ministers held a nationally televised press conference in which they said they would introduce anti-corruption measures in Congress, action the president promised during her campaign for re-election in October.

“We are here to express our indignation with the government-sponsored corruption and thieving, and to demand Dilma’s impeachment,” said Andre Menezes, 35, protesting on Avenida Paulista in Sao Paulo.

“She may have not been directly involved in the corruption at Petrobras, but she certainly knew about it, and for me that makes her just as guilty and justifies her ouster,” he added.

In Rio, police estimated 15,000 people marched along the golden sands of Copacabana beach, where they waved Brazilian flags and many openly called for a military coup to dissolve the government.

In contrast to the widespread violence seen during Brazil’s 2013 protests, on Sunday the only conflict reported was police using tear gas and stun grenades to disperse a small group of protesters in Brasilia who authorities said were trying to enter the Congress. In Sao Paulo, police arrested about 20 young men who were carrying powerful fireworks and brass knuckles.

Justice Minister Jose Eduardo Cardozo defended the government, emphasizing Rousseff’s record as a leftist guerrilla who stood up to Brazil’s 1964-85 military regime — and who was jailed for three years and brutally tortured because of it.