It is unlikely that Vitter will go along with this approach. Dems offer Vitter an Obamacare vote

Senate Democrats have made an offer for Sen. David Vitter: You can have a vote on your health care amendment, but you have to live with the outcome.

The idea is to get the issue out of the way once and for all, so Vitter doesn’t continuously push for a vote on virtually every bill that comes to the floor, according to several people familiar with the matter. The Vitter plan — which would kill federal dollars to help pay for lawmakers’ and their aides’Obamacare coverage — has become a major sticking point as the Louisiana Republican has demanded a vote.

Story Continued Below

It’s unlikely that Vitter would go along with this approach, and senior Democratic aides didn’t think it would come up for a vote during the debate over the Employment Non-Discrimination Act, a gay-rights bill the Senate is poised to take up this week.

A Vitter aide said the senator will not agree to the request from Senate Democrats that he not bring up his amendment again during this Congress.

The Vitter plan has become so politically charged that it emerged as a chief demand by House Republicans during the 16-day government shutdown, but the GOP eventually relented. Now, Democrats say, they’re willing to move on: Vote it down so they can move on to other business.

But Vitter first would have to agree not to keep pushing his proposal for votes on other bills that will come up.

“I don’t know if he’s insisting on offering it over and over again,” Illinois Sen. Dick Durbin, the second-ranking Senate Democrat, said Monday. “But I think the vote will be decisive enough that he’ll understand he’ll never get 60 votes for it this Congress.”

Vitter has led a tireless crusade to secure a vote on his amendment, which would get rid of the employer contributions for health care received by lawmakers and congressional aides. He has characterized it as an unfair subsidy afforded to members and staff.

Democrats have been long irked at Vitter over his insistence for a vote on his amendment. Vitter’s demand held up progress on a bipartisan energy efficiency bill in September, and frustrated Democrats drafted a measure that would ban health care contributions for lawmakers if there is “probable cause” they ever solicited prostitutes — a reference to the 2007 “D.C. Madam” scandal linked to Vitter.

In turn, Vitter slapped allegations of an ethics violations against Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) and Sen. Barbara Boxer (D-Calif.), accusing Democrats of improperly pressuring senators on his proposal. But the Senate Select Committee on Ethics quickly dismissed that complaint. Vitter has since issued a revised complaint.

Republicans are pushing the Vitter plan, believing it would put Democrats in a tough political spot of supporting federal contributions to pay for their own health care coverage. On Monday, Durbin said he wasn’t concerned about the political implications of voting on Vitter’s proposal, which the Louisiana Republican has used to try to stoke populist anger against Obamacare.

Durbin argued that the federal health care contributions are no different than those received for employees of private companies; if the subsidies were stripped, Hill employees could be forced to pay thousands of dollars more in their health care costs.

“Most people are on record, but I don’t view it as a risk. I view it as this is easy to explain,” Durbin said. “What he is trying to do is to somehow characterize an employer’s contribution to health insurance as a federal subsidy. Sen. Vitter himself receives that federal subsidy today on the Federal Employee Health Benefit program. He doesn’t have a leg to stand on.”