That rising tide that lifts all boats? It may be a thing of the past. Time now to batten down the hatches. The days of low interest rates appear numbered. A stronger dollar is pinching U.S. exports. Growth is becoming scarcer. And as that happens, history says good stock pickers outperform. That already appears to be happening with $2.3 billion Columbia Mid Cap Growth Fund .

The fund gained 13.69% for investors in the 12 months going into Tuesday. That topped 76% of its midcap growth peers tracked by Morningstar Inc.

The fund’s 8.23% gain so far this year beat 83% of its direct rivals, an improvement in relative performance. Those mutual funds averaged a 6.09% gain. The S&P 500 was up 1.91%.

The fund is managed by George Myers, Brian Neigut, James King and William Chamberlain.

The fund has been driven by names like Skyworks Solutions (SWKS). The maker of amplifiers that boost signals from cell towers to mobile communications devices is up 41% so far this year.

On Tuesday it bounced off its 50-day moving average, and was trading just below its 102.87 flat-base entry. The stock’s latest base is a welcome pattern because it had soared for months without creating a good new buy area.

Skyworks’ chips are in the iPhone 6. And it’s a likely beneficiary of the emergence of the Internet of Things.

Healthy Diagnosis

The fund boosted its stake in Centene (CNC) in February and April. The provider of managed health care services is up 41% this year. It benefits from ObamaCare’s Medicaid expansion and support for state health exchanges.

The firm reported first-quarter earnings per share of 52 cents, up 79%. Sales rose 48% to $5.13 billion. Both numbers topped analysts’ expectations. And the company raised its full-year revenue outlook.

The stock sold off in late April, interrupting the rally off its 10-week line that began in February. It is up 18% since the last day of April.

The fund also boosted its stake in Avago Technologies (AVGO) in April. The chipmaker is up 38% this year.

Its EPS growth has accelerated for seven straight quarters.

Avago is buying rival chipmaker Broadcom (BRCM). Broadcom makes radio chips for cellphones and other consumer devices, as well as chips for networking gear. Its lineup should complement Avago’s more industrial and component-level products.

The fund boosted its stake in Tableau Software (DATA) in February and April. The stock is up 34% this year. It’s now extended past its 99.39 buy point in its more recent basing pattern.

Tableau has been climbing into new-high territory since early last month. The developer of database analytics software’s EPS soared 110% and 900% in the past two quarters, though analysts see EPS falling 23% this year before climbing 68% in 2016.

Yet another name in which the fund has increased its position is Alaska Air Group (ALK). The fund added shares in February.

The airline has added routes, and it benefits from low fuel costs. But the stock got pounded Monday and Tuesday amid reports from American (AAL) and Southwest (LUV) suggesting that airlines are losing pricing power. Alaska Air bounced off its 200-day moving average.