The Right Opinion Subsidizing Iran's Nuclear Program

Subsidizing Iran’s Nuclear Program

Late last week, the Obama administration quietly announced that it was going to purchase heavy water from Iran. Heavy water can be used to produce nuclear weapons, and the Obama administration is buying it from Iran at the same time that the regime is in the process of developing its missile arsenal.

The nuclear deal requires Iran to dispose of its heavy water. Fine. So dispose of it. Why do we have to pay for it?

Once again, the Obama administration is going out of its way to accommodate the Iranians, while the mullahs in Tehran are doing everything they can to frustrate and insult us. Many now believe we are directly subsidizing Iran’s nuclear program.

That has led to widespread anger on Capitol Hill. But there is not enough anger to convince Senate Democrat Leader Harry Reid to allow a vote on the issue.

Sen. Tom Cotton of Arkansas proposed an amendment to the Department of Energy appropriations bill that would prohibit the administration from spending any money to purchase Iranian heavy water.

But rather than go on the record for or against Sen. Cotton’s amendment to prevent the United States from directly subsidizing Iran’s nuclear program with heavy water purchases, Harry Reid and Senate Democrats are filibustering the entire energy bill.

By the way, after shutting down the important business of government, the Senate nevertheless found the time to pass a resolution by Senators Al Franken (D-MN) and Amy Klobuchar (D-MN) honoring deceased pop icon Prince. And Washington wonders why so many Americans are angry!

Not to be outdone, the White House’s response to Senator Cotton’s amendment was dismissive and disrespectful. Press Secretary Josh Earnest said [Wednesday], “Sen. Cotton is certainly no expert when it comes to heavy water. I’m confident that he couldn’t differentiate heavy water from sparkling water.”

Earnest should be fired. Sen. Cotton is a Harvard educated lawyer who volunteered to serve in the Army. He declined an automatic commission as a captain in the Judge Advocate General’s Corps, eventually earning that rank by serving two tours of duty in Iraq and Afghanistan with the 101st Airborne Division.

But I won’t hold my breath waiting for Earnest to be disciplined. This administration’s contempt for the military is well-established.

Targeting Target

The corporate leaders of Target have fully embraced the radical left-wing agenda. Recently, the chain became the first national retailer to announce that anyone could use whatever bathroom or changing facility they choose.

If you’re man and you want to try out the ladies' fitting room, then Target is the place for you.

Needless to say, the American people have a lot of choices in the free market, and many are taking their business elsewhere. Our friends at AFA launched a boycott and nearly one million Americans have signed up.

Others are going into Target stores and confronting local managers about this nonsense. Pastors are speaking up, too.

I know of one pastor who told his congregation that they have a chance to demonstrate their commitment to their values. It won’t require them to risk execution or even persecution, like our fellow believers in the Middle East. All they have to do is stop shopping at Target.

Bad News For Obamacare

Six years after Obamacare became law, the American people still have not embraced Barack Obama’s signature initiative.

According to the Pew Research Center, 54% of Americans disapprove of Obamacare, while 44% approve. And those numbers are likely to get worse.

UnitedHealthCare, one of the nation’s largest insurance providers, announced recently that it is abandoning most Obamacare exchanges because it is losing money. Simply put, the government’s healthcare scheme is unsustainable. Hundreds of thousands of Americans are going to lose their coverage as a result.

Meanwhile, the Associated Press warns that Obamacare premiums for 2017 are expected to skyrocket. It seems that the Affordable Care Act isn’t so affordable after all.