A crowd of about 200 gathered with anticipation to hear fellow Republicans and Texas Gov. Greg Abbott speak at the Kaufman County Republican fundraiser on Saturday night.

The governor told the crowd gathered at Terrell Bible Church that Texas is a model for America. He voiced his strong stance against the Supreme Court ruling on marriage equality as well as his desire to repeal every word of The Affordable Care Act — commonly referred to Obamacare.

“Our United States (Supreme Court) assaulted that freedom of religion this last week in it’s ruling on marriage,” Abbott said. “…Marriage is nowhere to be found in the U.S. Constitution and because of that, throughout time, the United States Supreme Court has never ruled in a way where the federal government controls states’ definition of marriage until now.”

Abbott said while conservative Republicans may have lost that case, they will not give up fighting for their religious beliefs.

“The first thing I did yesterday morning (Friday morning) was issue an executive order from the governor’s office to all state employees and all state agencies making two points crystal clear,” Abbott said. “One, no state employees can be discriminated against because of their closely held religious beliefs about marriage being between one man and one woman.”

“Second point is that no entity doing business with the State of Texas, whether you’re an individual, a person, a group, an organization or corporation can be discriminated against because of your closely held religious belief that marriage is a union between one man and one woman,” he said.

Abbott also said he helped in passing the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, patterned after the Federal Religious Freedom Act, protecting those who held religious beliefs different from the government’s stance on key issues. He also highlighted the passing the new open-carry gun law during the recently ended Texas Legislative session, as well as maintaining a conservative form of government both in budget and policy.

“Let me just close with this. It is a fact … America needs Texas,” Abbott said. “Texas is the pathway for the future of this country. And Texas needs Kaufman County.”

Organizers of the fundraiser said dozens of attendees were able to participate in a silent auction and enjoy barbecue while connecting with one another on multiple topics.

Kaufman County GOP secretary, precinct and finance chairman Lori Cook said that the turnout surpassed her expectations.

“It’s better than I expected,” said Cook. “I asked the Lord to just bless our efforts and he has exceedingly and abundantly done that.”

Cook said funds raised will go for administrative uses, renting locations for special programs, candidate forums and paying the bills. She said the party does not endorse candidates for primary elections and that while the event was held at a local church it was not a church related event.

Tim Spillman, who is running for sheriff for Kaufman County, also had a chance to be among other conservative leaders and politicians in support of the fundraiser. Spillman has been involved with the Kaufman County Republicans for nearly three years.

“This is probably the biggest event that I can remember we’ve had…It’s going to be interesting with what’s going on to hear what he (Abbott) has to say,” Spillman said.

The program started with an invocation by Ronnie Oldfield, Kaufman County treasurer, followed by dinner and later a pledge to the United States flag by State Sen. Bob Hall.

The pledge to the Texas flag was performed by State Rep. Stuart Spitzer and the song “Texas, our Texas” was led by Bo Graham. Terrell Mayor Hal Richards welcomed special guests and John Cook recognized veterans and elected officials.

Remarks and special recognition were given by Jimmy Weaver, chairman of the Kaufman County Republican Party. Texas U.S. Rep. Jeb Hensarling also gave remarks before introducing Abbott.