Media Advisory: Register to Attend ACR 2016—the Crossroads of Radiology

Complimentary Media Registration Offered for American College of Radiology Annual Meeting May 15–19 in Washington, DC: Interview Thought Leaders and Explore Trends and Hot Topics in the Specialty

Add to Favorites

Contact Information Available for logged-in reporters only

Newswise — At ACR 2016—The Crossroads of Radiology, health, science and medical reporters gain free access to medical imaging and radiation oncology leaders to develop articles on crucial issues, including future trends in health care, timely cancer screening and the need to deliver patient-centered care.

WHO:

Thousands of radiology professionals (diagnostic radiologists, interventional radiologists, nuclear medicine doctors, radiation oncologists, medical physicists, technologists, nurses, radiology practice managers) will attend the American College of Radiology annual meeting.

WHAT:

Abstracts, showing the best thinking from young physicians, radiation oncologists, economists, medical physicists and residents, are presented, covering topics like using 3-D printing, improving care for stroke victims, working collaboratively on care teams to improve patient care, affecting meaningful diversity in radiology and providing safer imaging for seniors and children.

Special events include Capitol Hill Day, with exclusive meetings scheduled May 18 for members to bring the “Voice of Radiology” to elected officials, and the May 14–15 Journal of the American College of Radiology (JACR) Hackathon to reinvent medical journal access. The exhibit hall is open May 16 and 17.

More than 100 concurrent and general sessions focus on clinical research; clinical education; advocacy, economics and health policy; quality and safety; informatics and innovations; and more.

Speakers: Ezekiel J. (Zeke) Emanuel, MD, PhD, an architect of the Affordable Care Act and a leading practitioner shaping the future of health care, delivers the May 15 keynote address. Andy DeLaO (aka @CancerGeek), who has an extensive background in cancer services, designing health care experiences and connecting patient communities, presents the May 17 Moreton Lecture.

WHEN, WHERE:

ACR 2016 will be held May 15–19 at the Washington Marriott Wardman Park Hotel in Washington, DC. Make hotel reservations to receive the ACR 2016 rate.

FREE MEDIA REGISTRATION:

To receive complimentary media registration—and or related news releases, please contact Shawn Farley at 703-648-8936, Maryann Verrillo at 703-390-9822 or email PR@acr.org. Additional information may be found in the ACR 2016 program schedule.

FOLLOW:

Follow ACR on Twitter (#ACR2016) with @RadiologyACR and Facebook for news and updates.



About the American College of Radiology

The American College of Radiology (ACR), founded in 1924, is a professional medical society dedicated to serving patients and society by empowering radiology professionals to advance the practice, science and professions of radiological care.



Reporters: follow Looking for a different expert? Reporters can submit an

Expert Query. follow @Expert_Pitch to receive instant updates via TwitterLooking for a different expert? Reporters can submit an Promote your organization’s experts with Expert Pitch

Comment/Share