Dr. Paul Broun, the Watkinsville physician and former three-term Georgia Republican congressman, went back to his medical practice in the wake of his GOP primary defeat in last year’s race for the U.S. Senate seat vacated by Georgia senior Sen. Saxby Chambliss, but his name has resurfaced in political news in recent days, and he’s not ruling out another run at public office.

“I’m not going away,” Broun said in a Thursday interview on his leading role in working against the possible election of Rep. Kevin McCarthy, R-California, as speaker of the House of Representatives when that body’s GOP leadership elections are held next week. Broun is among the sponsors of FireMcCarthy.com, an effort which also includes a number of political

action committees including the Constitutional Rights PAC, with which Broun says he’s been working recently.

McCarthy, seen as a leading contender to replace Rep. John Boehner, R-Ohio, who recently resigned from the speaker’s post, has raised the ire of many congressional Republicans and conservatives across the country in recent days. In comments to Fox News, McCarthy suggested the investigation by the GOP-dominated House into a 2012 terrorist attack on a U.S. consulate in Benghazi, Libya, that left four Americans dead was politically motivated. Hillary Clinton, a contender for the Democratic presidential nomination, was secretary of state at the time of the Benghazi attacks.

“Everybody thought Hillary Clinton was unbeatable, right?” McCarthy told Fox News commentator Sean Hannity. “But we put together a Benghazi special committee, a select committee. What are her numbers today? Her numbers are dropping. Why? Because she’s untrustable. But no one would have known any of that had happened had we not fought.”

Broun’s concerns about House leadership — and Senate leadership, for that matter — are broader than the immediate concern about McCarthy suggesting the House was pursuing the Benghazi probe simply to hurt Clinton’s chances of winning her party’s presidential nomination.

“

We need to have substantial legislation,” Broun said, “to repeal Obamacare, to get rid of the Obama amnesty [for undocumented immigrants], and we’ve got to stop the Iran treaty,” an agreement that conservatives say will not keep Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon at some point in the future.

“I believe we need a clean sweep of leadership in the House and the Senate.”

Sounding a broader theme Thursday, Broun returned to what had been a cornerstone of his political campaigns, a belief in a strict interpretation of the U.S. Constitution.

“

Both political parties are responsible” for the country’s drift away from constitutional governance, Broun said, adding that America has “got to return to a policy of individual responsibility and accountability.”

Broun, whose bedrock conservative Christian faith has figured prominently in his public life, said Thursday his continuing interest in the political scene is now informed by a biblical verse, as he recited the third verse of Psalm 11, which reads, “If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?”

Broun added he believes he has “a calling to restore the foundational principles of this country.” Asked if that meant he might consider another run at public office, Broun said he would “prayerfully consider” any opportunities the might come his way to again run for office.

Broun was elected to Congress in a special 2007 election necessitated by the death of incumbent Republican Charlie Norwood. He subsequently won three terms in the House, but left the political scene after his effort to win one of Georgia’s U.S. Senate seats came up short last year amid a crowded GOP field.

Also in Thursday’s interview, Broun commented briefly on the recent decision by a consultant who worked in two of his re-election campaigns to plead guilty in federal court to making false statements in connection with an Office of Congressional Ethics investigation into Broun’s use of taxpayer funds for his congressional office.

Brett O’Donnell, a well-known debate coach with Alexandria, Va.-based O’Donnell & Associates Strategic Communications, initially told the OCE he didn’t do campaign work for Broun, but a plea agreement filed in federal court notes that O’Donnell “falsely told OCE that he hid not believe he had to perform work for [Broun’s} campaigns” in order to ensure the continuation of his other work with Broun’s office.

An OCE report concluded Broun “may have violated House rules and federal law” in using his office allowance to pay a campaign consultant, but the House Ethics Committee took no action on the report, and when Broun left Congress, he moved beyond the reach of any of that body’s ethics sanctions.

It’s not clear why O’Donnell became the subject of a U.S. Justice Department investigation, marking the first time an OCE probe moved into the federal court system.

“Mr. O’Donnell is a friend,” Broun said, “I don’t know why he made the plea

.”

Broun went on to say that if he should become the subject of any federal probe regarding use of his congressional office funds, he is confident he would be exonerated of any wrongdoing.