As I shared in our two prior articles [http://www.examiner.com/article/health-insurance-1095-forms-and-federal-income-tax-1; http://www.examiner.com/article/affordable-care-the-1095a-and-tax-season] I prepare income tax returns for folks between January and April. One of the consistently time consuming aspects of tax return preparation this year involved the reporting of health insurance coverage, as required by law.

Licensed through Creative Commons

Despite the fact that the “Affordable Care Act” (ACA) was signed into law in March of 2010, and U.S. tax payers have had six years to expect and prepare for the “change” that is inevitable whenever something new is mandated by the federal government – the overriding truth about taxpayers and the “ACA” continues to be confusion.

This should be no surprise, since the original 2010 legislation took up over 2,500 pages… and then the various agencies that became involved with one or more aspects of the ACA created fully 109 “final regulations” … directing how the ACA Law was to be implemented. Those regulations alone consumed over 10,500 pages in the Federal Register (the compendium of officially published government agency rules, proposed rules, and public notices). That means that all of the details involved with the ACA required wading through 13,000 pages of dry legal language. I’d describe that as mind numbing!

No wonder taxpayers were confounded and confused! Whenever I asked if they received a 1095 Form from the government, 95% responded: “A what form?... I don’t think so!” At that point I had to take their time to explain, as simply as possible, what a 1095 Form is…. something the Department of Health & Human Services and the IRS both neglected to do in a remotely effective way!

In fact, the IRS was so late in putting together the final specifications for the 1095 B and 1095 C forms that thousands upon thousands of health insurers and employers were not able to incorporate all those specs into their own tax forms for distribution to beneficiaries and employees! As a result, the IRS had to extend the deadline for the distribution of the 1095 B and C forms from January 31 to March 31. No wonder folks didn’t recognize the term “1095”!!!

The biggest area of ongoing confusion about health insurance related tax matters centered upon the process required of each applicant for (ACA Plan) coverage to estimate his or her income for the following year! According to data compiled by H&R Block halfway through tax season, about 60% of all taxpayers who enrolled for a plan through a state or federal marketplace under-estimated their income and therefore were charged a lower premium than they should have paid (since premiums are calculated on a sliding scale (based on income)).

The consequence of this error in estimating income was that these taxpayers were required to pay the difference between the premium they actually paid during the year and the premium they should have paid!!

The average amount of that unpaid premium was $579! Because that amount was added on page 2 of their tax return in an area that also includes “Other Taxes” … each of those taxpayers became very frustrated. In fact, most of them vented their anger at me – at which point I recommended that they complain to their representatives in Congress!

[To be fair, the “penalty” for underpayment of coverage premium during 2015 had a “corollary”. Those plan enrollees who overestimated income during 2015 received a “credit”, which increased their refund or decreased the tax liability they owed. However, only 37% of taxpayers covered by an ACA Plan received such a credit!]

The other major cause of frustration and anger about the ACA Law was the “Personal Responsibility Payment”. Although almost every tax client who did not have health coverage during one or more months of 2015 did expect to be assessed a penalty – they were caught short by the amount of the penalty. On average, taxpayers who went without coverage during 2015 paid a penalty of $383… more than double the penalty from 2014!! Those folks were frustrated and angry as well!

That being said, the details of this change in penalty for 2015 coverage year was public well over one year ago. The ACA regulations called for an penalty increase from 1% of Modified Adjusted Gross Income (MAGI) to 2% of MAGI…. or from $95 per adult to $325 per adult (whichever is greater).

However the simple reality is that the IRS did an extremely poor job of communicating that important fact to taxpayers throughout the country!

One final metric will illuminate how extremely difficult taxpayers find the task of accurately estimating their income during the following year (a central requirement of anyone who enrolls in the ACA Plan):

Only 3% of taxpayers who were covered by an ACA Plan in 2015 got their estimate close enough to not impact her or his tax return! Amazing!