ISELIN, N.J.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Indegene, a leader in global healthcare solutions for life sciences companies, payers and providers, today announced it has acquired SmartCare®, a population health analytics platform from Connecticut-based Vantage Point, Inc. This acquisition further strengthens Indegene’s ATOM (analytics, technology, operations and medical) offering which is designed to support U.S. companies in navigating changes associated with the Affordable Care Act.

“U.S. healthcare organizations are facing unprecedented pressures to improve outcomes and address changing reimbursement models,” said Dr. Rajesh Nair, president at Indegene. “Our technology infrastructure and full portfolio of risk, quality and clinical solutions, including analytics and engagement services offered through SmartCare®, are geared to provide healthcare organizations with sustainable business advantages supporting this new direction.”

SmartCare® allows decision makers the ability to monitor clinical, operational, and financial metrics with ease, accuracy and speed. The solution merges various data types including EHR, clinical and claims data, survey level medical record and outcome data, membership and eligibility files, drug prescriptions and lab tests into a single integrated database offering decision makers a significant competitive edge.

“The U.S. healthcare economy is on the cusp of a significant transformation. Stakeholders across the value chain are more engaged than ever before and this bears testimony to the role of analytics and technology,” said Lawrence S. Borok, CEO and president at Vantage Pont, Inc. “We are happy to ally with Indegene in bringing about this transformation in population health analytics and patient care in this market.”

“This acquisition supports our goal to achieve 100% Y-o-Y growth for the next 3 to 5 years, which also includes supporting more healthcare organizations such as ACOs, IDNs, payers and health systems,” said Manish Gupta, CEO at Indegene. “To date SmartCare® has been deployed across more than 3 million patients and processes more than 20 million claims each year and we are excited to continue to further expand the impact by integrating with our existing solutions.”

About Indegene:

Indegene enables global healthcare organizations to address complex challenges by seamlessly integrating analytics, technology, operations and medical expertise and drives better health and business outcomes. Indegene’s IP based solutions help clients drive revenues and productivity by making giant leaps in digital transformation, customer engagement, health reform, healthcare cost reduction, and health outcomes improvement.

Indegene works with Fortune 500 global customers including life science organizations, health plans and provider organizations. Indegene’s Lifesciences practice delivers Medical and Commercial solutions to global pharmaceutical, biotech and device customers. Indegene’s Healthcare practice delivers next generation solutions for payers and providers across end-to-end Risk Adjustment, HEDIS/STARS improvement, Population Health Management and Member/Provider Engagement solutions.

About Vantage Point Inc.

Vantage Point was formed to focus on data mining consulting and technology by Lawrence S Borok, an expert in relational database and analytics. SmartCare® was expressly designed to execute complex, user-defined queries against very large healthcare datasets with very fast retrieval performance. This was something believed to be impossible, especially with an intuitive user interface for non-technical users. Over the past few years, SmartCare has been deployed across multiple Payers, IPAs and Hospital systems.

For more information, please visit www.indegene.com and www.indegenehealthcare.com.