The fundamental changes to the American healthcare system are creating opportunities for one of AIM’s newest companies.

Constellation Healthcare Technologies is an RCM, or a revenue cycle management company.

What it does for the 3,500 doctors on its books is bill and collect monies owed by government, insurers and patients as well as providing practice management and purchasing services.

US healthcare: Constellation bills and collect monies owed to doctors by government, insurers and patients as well as providing practice management and purchasing services

The plethora of rule changes enacted by Obamacare (or the Affordable Care Act to give it its proper name), have created huge upheaval for physicians, complicating the rules on payment while forcing down remuneration.

For the barely profitable small firms carrying out mission-critical billing operations, Obamacare layers on a financially onerous level of bureaucracy that is often the final straw.

For companies of scale such as Constellation it creates a perfect storm – or at the very least a great backdrop against which to consolidate a highly fragmented market.

Constellation, led by serial entrepreneur Paul Parmar, raised £9.6million from its December IPO, which it will use, together with debt, on acquisitions.

‘The introduction of more new rules and cuts to reimbursement costs are changes a small, mom and pop billing company cannot keep up with,’ said Parmar.

‘They don’t have the infrastructure to stay on top of this; they don’t have the money to stay on top of it.’

Healthcare reforms: The plethora of rule changes enacted by the Affordable Care Act by Barack Obama have created huge upheaval for physicians, complicating the rules on payment while forcing down remuneration

As well as having scale, Constellation has developed a sophisticated platform that keeps abreast of all the changes to regulations and the way they affect billing.

So, if an expensive course of treatment requires a battery of tests before it is approved for the patient, Constellation will know this.

If it doesn’t have this information, then it only flunks the test once – the records are automatically updated to reflect the new billing regime.

All of this confusion has a very real effect on the physicians now caught up in the new bureaucracy.

A bill rejected by the insurer on the first pass can take up to 60 days to pay rather than the usual 30 days – that is a lot of stress on an individual physician if denials occur on multiple occasions.

Constellation at a Glance AIM ticker: CHT Value: £74million Listed at: 135p Current price: 130p

Industry-wide denial rates are running at 20-25 per cent, while the efficiency of the Constellation system is such they are currently around 8 per cent - or, turning that around, 92 per cent of its bills are paid on time and in full.

‘We have the money to invest and the infrastructure to keep ahead of the curve,’ said Parmar.

‘We stay on top of the rules. If we miss one we have an institutionalised system in place that is system-wide. We never screw up twice and our system is able to save 30 days of lag.

‘We send about 200-300,000 claims a day. So we need to know all the rules.’

Now the beauty of the Constellation billing platform is that it is scalable, which means thousands more medics can be added at negligible costs.

And this is where Parmar’s buy-and-build strategy comes into play. The entrepreneur stresses this isn’t a traditional roll-up; it is simply about acquiring new customers.

Earn-outs are fixed over two years so that the vendor manages the relationship and thus the clients are maintained. And it is simply a migration of doctors from the existing platform to Constellation’s more tech-driven set-up.

It is certainly not about putting together culturally diverse operations and managing change – so the risks of any one deal failing are low, Parmar said.

‘A lot of investors will say they don’t like buy-and-build strategies, having had their fingers burnt before,’ the Constellation CEO added.

‘I’m buying customers and relationships, not a business. I’m moving them to my platform. So, there is no integration, just a transition.

‘We look at how strong the client relationships are and we don’t pay 100 per cent upfront.

‘If we buy a company, the owner must be willing to take at least a one to two year earn out. That allows us to protect the relationship with the clients. We want them to be our spokesman.’

'Economies of the scale that come with rapid growth should help push operating margins to the ‘high 40s [per cent]’ from the ‘high 30s’, the CEO said.

Critical mass for Parmar’s Constellation would be to increase the number of clients using its platform from around 3,500 currently to 25,000, which would be transformational.

But it would still only give it a small slice of the market. There are over a million physicians in the US, while the size of the medical billing market is put at almost $60billion a year.

Getting to 25,000 clients is just phase-one; there are then huge cross-selling opportunities too.

‘This isn’t just about revenue cycle management. We can sell insurance, software, HR, payroll and make them [clients] incredibly sticky and quadruple revenues,’ said Parmar.

‘A good parallel to what we are doing is Capita, which outsourced for publicly held firms and grew from an eight million pound market cap when Rodney Aldridge brought it to market to seven billion-plus market cap when he left.