ENLARGE Blueberry Dessert Tamales Armando Rafael for The Wall Street Journal, Food Styling by Heather Meldrom, Prop Styling by Stephanie Hanes

Blueberry Dessert Tamales

Active time: 1 hour Total Time: 2 hours Makes: 16-18 tamales

Banana leaves can be found at Asian or Hispanic markets. These tamales can also be rolled in corn shucks that have been soaked in warm water until pliable.

½ pound frozen banana leaves, thawed, rinsed and patted dry

¾ cup butter

2 cups granulated sugar

1 tablespoon ground cinnamon

3 cups fresh blueberries

½ cup golden raisins

4 cups Maseca instant corn masa flour

2 tablespoons baking powder

3 cups warm water, plus more as needed

Whipped heavy cream, lightly sweetened with sugar, or vanilla ice cream, for serving

1. Turn on broiler. Cut away stems and thick edges of banana leaves, then cut into about 20 (8-by-10-inch) rectangles.

2. Make berry mixture: In a medium saucepan over medium heat, melt ¼ cup butter, then stir in 1 cup sugar, cinnamon, blueberries and raisins. Cook, stirring occasionally, until ingredients have melded but berries still hold some of their shape, 8-10 minutes. Set berry mixture aside and let cool.

3. Make masa dough: In a large bowl, thoroughly blend masa flour, baking powder and remaining sugar with a wooden spoon. Melt remaining butter and add to mixture along with 3 cups water. Knead with your hands to make a soft dough, adding a little more water if it feels too stiff. Add berry mixture and knead into dough.

Related Delta Hot Tamales Are Hotter Than Ever

4. Assemble tamales: Using tongs, hold one banana leaf rectangle directly over an open flame or hot burner for about 10 seconds on each side or until it turns bright green. (Don't let leaf heat any longer or it will become brittle.) Place leaf, smooth side up, on work surface. Place a generous ⅓ cup of dough in center of each leaf and flatten to a thickness of about ¼ inch. Repeat with remaining banana leaves and filling.

5. To fold tamales, fold the long sides of the leaf to enclose dough, overlapping edges to make a snug package. Then fold the ends over on the seam side and rest the tamale on top of the folded ends so that its weight holds the package together.

6. Cook tamales: Set a steamer basket in a large, lidded pot and fill bottom of pot with just enough water to come nearly to bottom of steamer without touching it. Line bottom of basket with leftover banana leaves. Arrange tamales horizontally in basket in layers. Cover pot, bring water to a boil, then reduce heat and simmer 50 minutes. Remove from heat and let tamales rest 5 minutes. To serve, set tamale packets on plates, unwrap and top with a dollop of whipped cream or a scoop of ice cream.

—Adapted from chef Eddie Hernandez of Taqueria del Sol

ENLARGE Corn, Poblano and Cheese Tamales Armando Rafael for The Wall Street Journal, Food Styling by Heather Meldrom, Prop Styling by Stephanie Hanes

Corn, Poblano and Cheese Tamales

You can find the banana leaves used to wrap these tamales at Asian or Latin American markets.

Active Time: 1 hour Total Time: 2 hours Makes: 12 to 14 tamales

½ pound frozen banana leaves, thawed, rinsed and patted dry

4 to 6 poblano chilies

12 ounces mild white cheese (such as Chihuahua or Monterey Jack), cut into 3-inch sticks about ½ inch wide and thick

1 tablespoon butter

2 cups fresh corn kernels

3 cups Maseca instant corn masa flour

1 tablespoon salt

¾ cups melted lard

3 cups warm water, plus more as needed

1 cup Mexican crema, or sour cream thinned with a little milk

1. Turn on broiler. Cut away stems and thick edges of banana leaves, then cut into 16 (8-by-10-inch) rectangles. Reserve remaining banana leaves.

2. Roast peppers: Place chilies under broiler and roast, turning occasionally, until skin is blackened, about 5-8 minutes. Transfer chilies to a paper bag and close bag to allow chilies to steam. When chilies are cool enough to handle, remove stems, peel away skin and remove core, seeds and ribs. Cut peppers into ½-inch-wide strips. Set aside.

3. Sauté corn: Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat. Add corn kernels and sauté until tender, 3-5 minutes. Set aside.

4. Make masa dough: In a mixing bowl, combine masa flour and salt. Add melted lard and 3 cups warm water. Knead with your hands until a smooth dough forms. Add more water as needed. Dough should reach consistency of mashed potatoes.

5. Assemble tamales: Using tongs, hold one banana leaf rectangle directly over a stove burner set to high until the leaf turns bright green, about 10 seconds per side. (Don't heat leaf longer or it will become brittle.) Place leaf, smooth side up, on work surface. Place a generous ⅓ cup dough in center of each leaf and flatten to a thickness of ¼ inch. Place 2 sticks of cheese in center of dough, then add 2 chili strips and 2 tablespoons corn. Repeat with remaining banana leaves.

6. Fold tamales: Fold long sides of leaf to enclose filling in dough. (Sides of leaf will overlap to make a snug package.) Then fold ends over on seam side and rest tamale on top of folded ends so that its weight holds the package together.

7. Cook tamales: Set a steamer basket in a large, lidded pot and fill bottom of pot with just enough water to come nearly to bottom of steamer without touching it. Line bottom of basket with leftover banana leaves. Arrange tamales in basket in layers, then cover with remaining banana leaves. Cover pot, bring water to a boil, then reduce heat and simmer 50 minutes. Remove from heat and let tamales rest 5 minutes. To serve, set tamale packets on plates, unwrap and drizzle with crema.

—Adapted from Eddie Hernandez of Taqueria del Sol