TRENTON — When Jennifer Velez was nominated to run the state Department of Human Services — responsible for programs serving one in six New Jersey residents — she called it her "dream job."

In that post, she oversaw the largest state agency, serving the disabled, elderly and poor.

And as Velez prepared to leave that position last week after eight years — serving longer than anyone in state history — she agreed it was "the honor of my life to be here."

But there was one day, she conceded, where the dream job felt more like a nightmare.

It was the 2011 hearing on the department's decision to close the Vineland Developmental Center, a state institution for women with developmental disabilities.



For a state long-criticized by national disability advocates for "warehousing" its citizens with mental illness and developmental disabilities, deciding to close Vineland showed a commitment to change course. But residents' relatives who attended the May 17, 2011 meeting were so angry that a handful of people rushed Velez and pushed a member of her staff when the women attempted to move to the rear of the room, according to numerous press accounts.



"People thought we were leaving," she said. "One guy pointed in my face and screamed that I was a sell-out. But for the intervention of the Human Services Police, I would have been assaulted. I was scared that day."



However, some of her most rewarding days followed from that "painful" episode, Velez said in an exclusive interview with NJ Advance Media. Velez left her job Friday to take an executive position at Barnabas Health, the largest hospital network in the state.



She said one of her fondest memories was a Friday night last March, when a member of her senior staff notified her that the number of people living in state developmental centers had dipped below 2,000 for the first time ever.

"I said we should take this moment and celebrate that," she said.



A task force created by the governor and legislature ordered the department in 2012 close the developmental centers in Woodbridge and Totowa. Like Vineland, which the task force decided should remain open largely to prevent job losses in impoverished Cumberland County, families and state union leaders fought these closure plans. But both centers shut their doors last year.

As of last month, there were 1,687 people in the five remaining developmental centers, Velez's spokeswoman Pam Ronan said.



Velez spoke of a woman named Myrna who was among the 25 percent of Woodbridge Developmental Center residents who were willing and able to move into a group home.



"These are people who have their own bedrooms now," she said. "When they want to eat, the can open their own refrigerator...Their lives are totally different. It's awesome."



Velez considers her "legacy" achievements to be leading the state's shift toward more integration into the community for disabled citizens, as well as expanding the Medicaid program to cover an additional 300,000 under the Affordable Care Act.



"I think we have improved the lives of people with disabilities tremendously," Velez, a 49-year-old married mother of two children said in a telephone interview. "We have changed the landscape of health care in New Jersey."



"The obligation is to move things ahead," she added. "If there is not a lot of change and advancement happening, then we are not doing our jobs."



Even among people who opposed the department's policies, Velez's earnestness and willingness to put in long hours won her wide respect. They noted that she sometimes mentioned her personal experience as a public assistance client growing up in a trailer park in Moonachie, but didn't over-emphasize it.

Velez departs as some aspects of her signature achievements are incomplete, and others are still generating controversy.



As people flocked to apply for Medicaid, thousands of applications piled up behind a deficient computer system. In November, the department pulled the plug on a $108 million state and federally funded, seven-year contract with Hewlett-Packard to create a software program that would simplify the process of applying for a number of social service programs, including Medicaid.



Velez said one of the key problems with the massive project was keeping pace with rapidly evolving technology.



Hewlett-Packard walked away with $66 million, 70 percent of it paid for by the federal government, according to the department.

Meanwhile, a consultant analyzing the company's work will recommend how the department should move ahead, she confirmed. "There was a tremendous amount of work completed," she added.



In keeping with the federal government's and the Christie administration's push toward integration for people with developmental disabilities, the state recently proposed a draft "transition plan" that would dictate where thousands of people live and work by 2019.



The plan says Medicaid would only pay for supervised apartments, or for group homes serve no more than four people, or six under certain circumstances. Medicaid would also pay for daily work and recreational programs that spend three-quarters of the day outside facilities for disabled people and in the community.



A public hearing on the plan a week ago drew many angry parents who accused the department of trying a one-size fits-all approach to their children who may regress, if not get hurt, in a less-structure environment.



Velez said all of the criticisms will be taken into account when a final draft is shared with the federal government. But she said there are a group home families who want more freedom and choice for their loved ones but haven't made themselves publicly heard.



As she informed her senior staff members of her resignation last week, Velez said she reminded them that change is painful but the principles driving them are worth the effort.



"Things will always be controversial, but when we go to bed at night we know we are doing right by people," Velez said. "The decisions are so complicated, but we have the people who can parse through the issues. With this phenomenal team, we have been able to improve the lives of the people who are served by this department."

Susan K. Livio may be reached at slivio@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @SusanKLivio. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.