First-time buyers hit six-year high and mortgage defaults plummet as property prices soar again

The average value of a home has risen by 5.4 per cent to £170,231

The market saw 26,100 first-time buyers take out mortgages in July

This was a 45 per cent increase compared to the same month last year

Meanwhile, the value of mortgages being written off has fallen dramatically

Both factors provide more evidence the economy is finally on the mend



House prices are rising at their fastest rate for three years, fuelled by an increase in the number of first-time buyers and a sharp fall in homeowners defaulting on their mortgages.

The latest figures from the Halifax's monthly house price index showed there was a 5.4 per cent increase in the average value of a home, from £160,292 to £170,231 compared with the same period last year.

And figures from LSL Property Services showed 26,100 first-time buyers entered the market in July, a 45 per cent increase when compared with the same month in 2012, making it the highest number for six years.

Contagious: Experts say an increase in house prices could spread to other parts of the economy

Director at LSL David Newnes told the Daily Telegraph: 'Mortgages are much more affordable for first-time buyers compared with last year, which has opened the door to thousands of would-be buyers who were shut out of the market.

'Economic confidence is returning, nudging many more buyers in the direction of property and nudging lenders to offer more loans to buyers with smaller deposits.

'The uptick in confidence, beneficial to both parties, is contagious.'

The number of borrowers who have been unable to keep up with their mortgage repayments has declined by 40 per cent since the peak of the economic crisis in 2009.

And analysis of Bank of England data by accountant UHY Hacker Young found the value of mortgages written off for the year ending in March was £543million, compared with £902million five years ago.

The two factors are combining to create a cyclical affect, with banks and societies increasingly willing to lend at the current low interest rates to first-time buyers.

The news comes just days after Britain's forecast for economic growth was increased from 0.8 per cent to 1.5 per cent for the year.

Price boom: The average house value has tipped over the £170k mark according to Halifax

Halifax housing economist Martin Ellis said economic improvement and Government schemes such as Funding for Lending, which made £80billion available so banks could pass it on to their customers as loans, were helping to boost demand.

Mr Ellis said: 'Overall, house prices are expected to rise gradually over the remainder of the year.'

In a note of caution, he added activity was still being held back by the squeeze on household budgets.

Halifax's report follows similar findings from building society Nationwide last week that the housing market revival is gathering pace.

Lenders, surveyors, estate agents and property websites have all been reporting a strong pick-up in activity.



However, Bank of England governor Mark Carney recently addressed concerns that Government stimulus measures risk stoking another property bubble.

Concerns: Governor of the Bank of England Mark Carney said he would act to avoid another property bubble

He said the Bank was 'acutely aware' of the potential threats and said action would be taken to clamp down on mortgage lending if needed.

Matthew Pointon, property economist at consultancy Capital Economics, said the imbalance between demand and the supply of homes for sale was likely to subside gradually, reducing the upwards pressure on prices.

He added: 'A short-term imbalance between housing demand and the number of homes on the market is driving price increases.

'But the rise in wholesale interest rates seen over the past few weeks may soon start to feed through to mortgage rates, dampening demand.

'And Mark Carney's promise to use new tools to prevent a house price boom may help convince first-time buyers that they don't have to rush to buy a home now.



'At the same time, improved selling conditions should boost the number of homes for sale, taking some of the heat out of the market.'

Nicholas Ayre, managing director of homebuying agency Home Fusion, doesn’t believe a property bubble is imminent.

He said: 'Prices continue to rise but not as robustly as in the past few months, suggesting fears of a house price bubble are overstated.

‘A bubble implies that people are buying anything at any price and they aren't. Buyers are being selective and sellers who are set on a certain price with little regard to what the market thinks the property is worth are struggling to sell.’



Affordability fear: The house price-to-earnings ratio shows how property prices never fell back to their average affordability in the post credit crunch slump.