<p>DAVID YAMAMOTO/SPECIAL TO THE STAR</p><p>Rotarian Tony Falato (right), who needs a kidney, speaks with fellow Rotarian Rocky Rhodes, who volunteered to donate a kidney, during their breakfast meeting last week at Simi Valley’s Junkyard Cafe, which Falato owns.</p>

SHARE DAVID YAMAMOTO/SPECIAL TO THE STAR Rotarian Tony Falato, who needs a kidney, speaks with fellow Rotarian Rocky Rhodes, who volunteered to donate a kidney, during their breakfast meeting last week at Simi Valley’s Junkyard Cafe, which Falato owns. DAVID YAMAMOTO/SPECIAL TO THE STAR Rotarian Tony Falato (right), who needs a kidney transplant, speaks with fellow Rotarian Rocky Rhodes, who volunteered to donate a kidney, during their breakfast meeting last week at Simi Valley’s Junkyard Cafe, which Falato owns.

By Alicia Doyle

The motto of the Rotary Club ? "service above self" ? reached a new height recently when a Simi Valley Rotarian decided to donate his kidney to a fellow club member.

Rocky Rhodes and Tony Falato, both members of the Rotary Club of Simi Valley, are scheduled to undergo operations at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center on Jan. 19, when Rhodes will give one of his kidneys to Falato.

"The guy's a complete angel," said Falato, 51, who was diagnosed with Stage 4 renal failure in March. "He's an extraordinary person. I don't know how to repay him. How do you repay something like that?"

Rhodes said he didn't think twice when he heard about his fellow Rotarian's need for a kidney, having been inspired by his stepmother, who donated a kidney to a stranger at age 70.

"She is back to running again and no worse for the wear," said Rhodes, 49. "Knowing the recovery is pretty simple, it was not a big deal. I have two kidneys and I'm not 70, so I can do this."

Falato, who owns the Junkyard Café in Simi Valley, was the subject of a social media campaign launched by the Rotarians who call the man "the quiet philanthropist."

Called "Team Tony," the effort to find Falato a kidney was spearheaded by Falato's wife, Evelyn Locker, along with Rotarians May Culbertson, Terry Marvin, Michelle Neff-Hernandez and Deb Holler.

"They aggressively went to seek a kidney for me," Falato said. "It's amazing how beautiful these people are. It's just amazing how the community circled the wagon for me."

Rhodes met Falato about three years ago when he moved to Simi Valley and transferred his Rotary membership from Woodland Hills. When he learned Falato needed a kidney, he underwent blood testing to determine whether he was a match.

"We are not a blood match, which is sometimes a deal-stopper," Rhodes said. "But Cedars happens to be a group that's leading the nation in nonmatched donor transplants, so they know what to do to for Tony to get his body to accept a nondirect blood organ."

This type of transplant is only possible with a living donor, Falato said.

Rhodes, a married father of two, admits the idea of donating a kidney is "a little scary," but his stepmother's success alleviates his fear.

"It all goes back to Rotary; the people in Rotary are predisposed to service above self," Rhodes said. "I put a qualifier on that: I am willing to give a kidney, but I need to know the person I'm going to give it to is deserving ? not someone who made bad life choices that led to needing a kidney. I'm not big on giving up something that important for someone that's just going to destroy it."

After the transplant, Rhodes and Falato plan to spread the word about their success.

"If we can be an example to others ? that it was not that big of a deal ? they might become donors themselves," Rhodes said.

Added Falato: "I'm going to pay this back by taking this movement forward. My job and duty is to be an ambassador to educate people about renal failure and what it entails to get a kidney. I want to make someone feel the way Rocky made me feel."