Ben Carson, who is almost certainly running for president, was the featured speaker at the Louisiana Association of Business and Industry's annual meeting Tuesday afternoon.

"I am thinking very, very seriously about it," said Carson, when a member of the audience asked him if he was going to become a national candidate. "I feel like I have to at least make my voice heard because my voice in the voice of the people."

Carson, a retired pediatric neurosurgeon, is a popular figure in conservative circles, particularly with the tea party. He is polling well in Iowa when compared to most other would-be 2016 presidential candidates, including Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal.

The following is what you need to know about his appearance:

Carson hit several talking points that appeal to the business community.

Carson endorsed a flat tax, less regulation for the energy industry and repealing Obamacare, among other things. He also criticized President Barack Obama's recent proposal to offer community college for free.

"The money you earn is your money. It is not their money," said Carson, referring to the federal government.

Carson also spent a considerable amount of time telling his personal story -- going from being a poor child in inner city Detroit to becoming one of the country's leading surgeons at Johns Hopkins University. Much of his speech focused on how hard work and "out of the box thinking" leads to professional success.

Carson touched on social issues too in his speech.

While most of the speech was focused on economic issues, Carson did mention the touchy subject of gender identity as well as the role of faith in public life.

"My disclaimer is that I am not politically correct, so it is possible I could offend someone," he said.

Carson told a story of an elementary school that refused to identify children as boys and girls, for fear of upsetting a student confused about their gender identity. He then referred to such decisions as a "bunch of crap."

"It's very important that we bring God back in our society," Carson said later in the speech.

The biggest business organization in the state had a Jindal rival speak at their annual meeting this year.

LABI president Stephen Waguespack said they brought in Carson to speak because he is both popular and interesting.

The would-be presidential candidate also recently addressed the winter meeting of the Republican National Committee, though his speech apparently wasn't very well-received by the audience there.

Still, LABI, the most politically influential group in Louisiana, brought in Carson to speak at one of its most high-profile events, even though he and Jindal are likely to run against each other in the 2016 presidential race.

The Louisiana governor and Carson -- neither of whom are GOP establishment favorites -- will be trying to appeal to the same group of voters if they run. Carson tends to play well with the right wing of the Republican Party, the same constituency Jindal is trying to woo currently.

LABI isn't the only group to have Carson come to Louisiana in recent months. The Northshore Tea Party had Carson appear on behalf of Sen. Bill Cassidy at a rally during the Louisiana Senate race this past fall.

Carson has been embroiled in some scandals in recent weeks. Recently, he apologized for lifting material from other authors when putting together his 2012 book, "America the Beautiful."

. . . . . .



Julia O'Donoghue is a state politics reporter based in Baton Rouge. She can be reached at jodonoghue@nola.com or on Twitter at @jsodonoghue. Please consider following us on Facebook at NOLA.com and NOLA.com-Baton Rouge.