TWO American bulldogs accused of seriously injuring a north Queensland man have been saved from death row because they were defending their master.

Zane Brache’s dogs Boston and Lola were destined for destruction by Douglas Shire Council until he successfully appealed to the Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal.

Mr Brache was in a fist fight with Anthony Bartels when Boston and Lola attacked Mr Bartels on or near his Daintree property in September last year.

The tribunal heard the pair had a history of animosity and Mr Bartels had driven to Mr Brache’s property to confront him.

Tribunal member Peter Krebs found that during the fight Mr Bartels armed himself with a baseball bat, which he used to strike Mr Brache and his dogs.

“This was a violent confrontation with both Mr Bartels and Mr Brache striking each other during the course of the conflict,” Mr Krebs said.

Mr Brache denied his dogs attacked Mr Bartels and claimed the other man was injured when he fell on a star picket fence.

Mr Bartels claimed Mr Brache set the dogs on him and he only used the baseball bat after he was mauled.

Mr Krebs found Boston inflicted injuries to Mr Bartels’ back left shoulder and Lola was responsible for injuries to his right ear and throat.

The council seized both dogs and Mr Brache’s other American bulldog, Rascal, ordering their destruction but after an internal review Rascal was saved from death row.

Mr Krebs said Boston and Lola acted were acting in defence of their owner when they attacked Mr Bartels.

“Dogs ... like other animals, act on instinct and don’t have the capacity to make reasoned decisions in deciding to intervene or not when their owner is perceived to be in danger,’’ he said.

It was completely different to when a dog attacked someone in a public place without provocation, he said.

Mr Brache said yesterday he had lodged an appeal against the council’s dangerous dog declaration on all three dogs and is yet to get them back.

“They are family pets, they are not dangerous,’’ he said.

Mr Bartels said he was “livid’’ about the tribunal tribunal decision and still felt the dogs should be destroyed.

“I thought I was gone,” he said of the attack. “I’ve still got scars.”