Daniel Garza, founder of the Libre Initiative, speaks at St. Anthony High School in Milwaukee on Friday. Credit: Kristyna Wentz-Graff

By

Daniel Garza grew up as the son of Mexican immigrant farm workers in California's Central Valley picking crops and moving from one state to another. He and his siblings had to help in the field, so they often missed school and Garza dropped out.

The family was poor. They lived in a house no bigger than a tool shed without running water.

But his father worked hard and saved and eventually bought a motel, then more properties. He prospered and realized the American dream.

Garza received his GED, went to college, worked for a U.S. congressman and was elected to the city council in Toppenish, Wash. In 2001, he joined the administration of President George W. Bush and later moved to the White House as a staffer.

Today he's executive director of the Libre Initiative, and he's fashioned the lessons of his family's life and that of other immigrants into a message of free enterprise and limited government to empower the Hispanic community to thrive and prosper.

In Wisconsin, he works with Rachel Campos Duffy, an author, blogger, TV commentator and wife of U.S. Rep. Sean Duffy (R-Wausau). A Latina with her own immigrant story, she's the national spokeswoman for Libre.

Garza, Campos Duffy and Duffy were in Milwaukee on Friday and toured the St. Anthony elementary and high schools. The schools are the largest Catholic schools in the state and the largest in the Milwaukee Parental Choice Program.

The high school students viewed a video that tells the story of Garza's life, and then he spoke to an assembly of 450 students about the value of hard work, character and the free market.

Later, Garza spoke at La Casa de Esperanza's annual dinner in Waukesha.

The Libre Initiative has become what some see as a key player in Republican efforts to reach out to the country's growing Hispanic community that holds a key to the GOP's electoral future.

In an interview at St. Anthony High School, Garza stressed that Libre is a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization, not affiliated with a political party.

"Our message aligns more with Republicans because it's conservative and libertarian, and if Republicans benefit, so be it," he said.

Libre is now in eight states and is expanding to 10 states, he said.

Recent press reports said Libre received $3.8 million from Freedom Partners and the TC4 Trust, both affiliated with Republican donors Charles and David Koch.

Garza refused to discuss the organization's funding or donors, including the Koch brothers grant, which he said was made public in a news release.

Critical of health care law

While not affiliated with a candidate or a party, Garza and Libre have launched ads against two Democratic congressmen, U.S. Reps. Joe Garcia of Florida and Pete Gallego of Texas, because of their support for the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

He calls this part of an "accountability campaign" to show the downside of the health care law.

Garza also has written opinion pieces, including one that appeared in the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, about why he says the Affordable Care Act is too expensive and bad for Hispanics.

He said Libre is pointing out the flaws of the law and wants to give Latinos information for them to make up their own minds.

Immigration reform

On the issue of immigration, he said he supports the comprehensive bill passed by the U.S. Senate but would also favor a piecemeal approach.

"We have to allow employers to hire folks who are undocumented and not criminalize them, because the market demands the labor and we want our economy to grow," he said.

While Libre is reaching out to the Hispanic community, Garza said it is working with churches, chambers of commerce and others to provide services. In Tampa, Fla., it teamed up with a church to provide free tax preparation services. He said he hopes the organization can launch a GED program along with other services.

Garza believes Libre is growing because of its message and outreach.

"In the past Hispanics didn't reject the conservative message, there was an absence of a message," he said. "Conservatives ceded Hispanics to the left, unions, celebrities and the Democratic Party."

It's often said that President Ronald Reagan said, "Hispanics are conservative, but they just don't know it," Garza said.

"But conservatives never did a good job of getting the conservative message out to Hispanics," he said.

Now he and Libre intend to change that.