By Dennis Seid

Daily Journal

TUPELO – Richard McCarty is spending the new year with a new job: Figuring out what to do in retirement.

He has passed the reins as CEO of McCarty Architects, although he won’t be completely out of the picture. He’ll still drop by the office on West Main Street to check in occasionally.

“It’s a new chapter,” Richard said. “It’s been a long time coming. As we make this transition, the point is that there’s been a lot of planning and preparation involved … I think the foundation that was laid 32 years ago is solid. ”

McCarty Architects was founded in 1983 by Buddy McCarty.

“It’s a story about two brothers who weren’t the same age but always wanted to do something together,” Richard said. “Life’s circumstances didn’t align so that we could get our education at the same time. He started McCarty Architects a year after he started Construction Resources Inc. The year after he started the architectural firm, I came back after finishing architecture school.”

The firm “stayed small,” as he put it, with four or five architects doing mostly local projects in Tupelo and north Mississippi.

Then in 1988, North Mississippi Health Services tapped them to be its sole architect. Projects like the East Tower, South Expansion, Outpatient Cancer Treatment Center, West Bed Tower and Wellness Center have all been designed by McCarty Architects.

“We’ve had a long-term relationship with them, allowing us the opportunity to grow and hire talented architects from around the country,” McCarty said.

The baton has been passed to Kurt Shettles, whom Richard says “is poised to carry on and keep the company going and keep providing services to our clients.”

Shettles was hired as an intern at McCarty starting in 1994 and moved into one of three team leaders in the company.

Buddy retired in 2002 from the firm to pursue his love for photography. Richard bought the architecture firm and the construction company from his brother, and the two businesses operate under The McCarty Co. umbrella as separate entities – McCarty Architects and McCarty-King Construction.

“I’ve managed to keep them alive, hired more talented people and continued to grow,” Richard said with a smile. “We’ve expanded our market farther out to the rest of the state as well.”

Methodist Senior Service is another client of McCarty Architects. Together, they developed the innovative and award-winning Green Houses.

“That whole effort has helped change senior living, and it was some way for us to give back tot he community,” he said.

Other large clients include Itawamba Community College, Northeast Mississippi Community College, Mississippi State University and the University of Mississippi.

With scores of projects big and small through the years, Richard McCarty said no single project stands out. However, he did say the company does have a specific focus when it comes working on projects.

“At some point, we felt like our work contributed to the growth of the human spirit, whether it be education, healthcare or senior living, all of those were opportunities to touch people in a meaningful way,” he said.

McCarty’s personal favorite is his work on the Green House concept, which is designed to “de-institutionalize nursing home life” and concentrate on more home-like care and services. … it matters us to give back and contribute to people.”

Past and future

Even though Tupelo is McCarty’s hometown, he didn’t think he would come back to the city after finishing architecture school.

“When I came back and saw what Buddy started, I wanted to be part of that and be a part of the community where I grew up,” he said. “I have absolutely no regrets about that.

“My brother and I both grew up in a family business, and whatever that instilled in us, we wanted to foster our own company here.”

McCarty isn’t completely stepping away from the business. But he is slowing down his pace quite drastically.

He does have other hobbies to pursue, including a wood shop at his home and a sailboat on Chesapeake Bay.

And his transition to semi-retirement includes his continued employment at McCarty Architects.

“Hopefully Kurt won’t fire me,” he said. “I hope to provide some assistance whenever they need me, and certainly I’m interested in their continued success so anything I can help with that I want to be here.”

He also said the employees and clients are like family, and simply walking out the door is not an option.

And Shettles is as much as part of the family as anyone. Leaving the company in his hands was an easy decision.

He was quietly and gently groomed to eventually lead the company, McCarty said.

“We’re pleased about the future prospects of the company,” he said. “Our family name is on it, and we’re pleased Kurt is excited about taking on the company and leading it to the future. I know the people here have a great deal of confidence in what he’s doing.”

For his part, Shettles said it was a natural fit joining McCarty 21 years ago.

“At that time, the market was good for architects, and there were maybe 35 who graduated in my class,” he said. “Everyone could have been hired to work in Jackson for larger firms. In fact, all but five went to work in Jackson. There were jobs everywhere.

“But it felt like it would be meaningful to do my internship here. One of the reasons was the construction company, and I though I could get good experience through them as well. I told Richard I wanted to do my three-year internship here and then I wanted to look for some meaningful architecture when I was done. But I guess I didn’t really know what that meant other than it looked cool.”

Shettles grew up in Union County, and enjoyed coming back to the region and working on “meaningful” projects after all.

“Seeing how Richard and Buddy cared for and crafted the business around client service was something that was never taught to me. It was very appealing to me to find that here.”

That eagerness to do good work, together with his talent and intelligence made it easy for McCarty to tap Shettles two decades ago.

As for McCarty-King, the company will be led by Dan King, who bought a 49 percent stake a few years ago in what was McCarty Construction.

“I’ve worked with Buddy for the first 17 years or so of the company and the last 13 with Richard,” King said. “They’ve both been wonderful to work with them. We’ve worked together with a lot of clients over the years, and I look forward to what the future will bring.”

Shettles said there are no big changes in order.

“The model is there for how to do the business, how to take care of clients and ultimately give good architecture,” he said. “We’re in good shape. I think more in my mind is, ‘don’t mess this thing up.’ Stay who we are, stay grounded and take care of the clients … we have a great foundation from great leaders who started the company, and great people here that makes it easy to make me want to do this.”

dennis.seid@journalinc.com

Twitter: @dennisseid