If you bought health insurance last year through Obamacare, you may be pleasantly surprised at tax time to find out you have money coming to you.

But it's just as likely the surprise will go the other way: You might owe Uncle Sam some money if the government subsidy you received for buying insurance through the Affordable Care Act marketplace was too large based on your income. And if you skipped buying health insurance entirely, you probably will face a penalty. On average, those penalties this year are running $383 among H&R Block customers. That's an increase from $172 a year ago.

If this is confusing or unpleasant, don't decide to ignore the matter.

"You must file at tax time," said Thomas Noller, who overseas a volunteer AARP Tax-Aide program in the Chicago area. The volunteers help people prepare their tax returns, and Noller said he's finding most low- and moderate-income people need help with the details of the Affordable Care Act filings.

"It's complicated, but it's fair," he said.

Most taxpayers who have insurance through their job or are covered by Medicare or Medicaid don't face complexity. Eight in 10 taxpayers merely check a box on their tax return that states that they had health insurance all year, and they are done, said Debra Hammer of TurboTax. But those who didn't have health insurance from the common sources, or who didn't buy any on their own or through the health care law's marketplace will owe a penalty.

Under the Affordable Care Act, there's a penalty for not having health insurance, and it increases every year that people remain uninsured.

About 60 percent of H&R Block customers who got a subsidy when they bought health insurance through the Obamacare marketplace are ending up having to pay money back to the Internal Revenue Service when they do their tax return. On average the cost is $579 compared with $530 during the tax season last year, said H&R Block.

The subsidy is based on a person's income and family size. So if a person starts the year with a low income, but later gets a raise or new job, their original subsidy will be too generous and they will owe money to the government, Noller said. On the other hand, if their subsidy wasn't generous enough for their income, they can get money back. They will use Form 8962.

Many people are confused, Noller said, about how to handle a year in which they purchased insurance for only part of the year. Some moderate-income people buy the insurance for a while, then stop, and later start again, he said. They are required to have insurance all year long unless they meet hardship standards.

If incomes are too low to afford insurance available in a particular area of the country, people are relieved of the responsibility through an exemption. People don't have to devote more than 8.5 percent of their income to insurance, said Hammer. About 40 percent of people that didn't have insurance and paid a penalty last year may have been eligible for an exemption, she said. One of the most common exemptions relates to taxpayers' income. If single taxpayers have income of less than $10,300, they will be exempt from the tax penalty when they file their taxes, she said. For a married couple, the income threshold is $20,600.

There has been significant confusion around exemptions, she said. Last year, 300,000 taxpayers paid penalties for not having health insurance but should not have been penalized — often because their income was low enough to qualify for an exclusion, she said.

People with incomes of $62,000 or less can get free software such as TurboTax or H&R Block's program through IRS Free File. The software cuts through the confusion.

gmarksjarvis@tribpub.com

Twitter @gailmarksjarvis