This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

I ... the law Street Journal I hear the case ... yes I got it done and ready ... to see Alvin and ... the new health care a lot and even in teaching license and I think ... well this is basically a lot of extends insurance ... and will be tough for a great start as ... you've reported ... but ultimately the goal is to get more Americans into it ... that's the first ... it also said today's competitive market prices for consumers to clients ... and it's a step ... but it's it doesn't really address that he uses a job there were some severe spending cuts but a ... health care is very fragmented and are yet even in quality ... those are things that we need to move to Texas ... when you look at the way the new house allies Accenture think this is that I think on you see people getting her hair ... it's really not approve there it's really about people getting profits that doesn't guarantee access to care ... for those of the four appearance before ... or instead of its ... core workouts to live ... it's really it's it's it's essential that ... there are some ... innovations that are being funded by the law but that's a minor but this is really ... to get more people ... I teach me a ... black nine Act of eighteen he did that how how how I want to think of it ... what they ... would support the to move forward with ... a bit before that recognizes the need to drive the systems versus the Gospels ... to get better outcomes better though ... and also the butternut is how we deliver to her to use technology and knowledge ... someone ... to reduce costs appear ... in breach of their kids with liberal arts the constraints on so that ... there's things that can be done to open up a bit ... Liberty could be better for Americans and the U S investors withdrew ... defunded nearby ... that's the real problem with this thing ... and I mean how they get here ... so we're we're the first agree are the largest integrated practice medicine ... we have sixty thousand employees were in seven states we have a care network across the ... silver dollar ... the camera and you are often in to try to complain how your ideal of a different matter ... well this week is focused on the pace of the focus of Urstadt ... successor of it's it's ... so we want to keep them healthy so we have ... it said assistance for folks to Tulane ... our ... healthy living Center ... and the more they use that for exercise and relaxation the property being ... in ... control of mind body and spirit ... the Mauritius that the less they pay for it so it's just one example for the ... treatment of its workforce