Topics: Amish, Bergholz Barbers, Books, Editor's Picks, Hate Crimes, Nonfiction, Religion, Renegade Amish, The Amish, Entertainment News

For the dimwitted habitués of comments threads, it was the news item that launched a thousand lame puns. But the case of the Bergholz Barbers is funny only as long as it remains a sound bite. Donald B. Kraybill’s new book, “Renegade Amish: Beard Cutting, Hate Crimes and the Trial of the Bergholz Barbers,” digs deep into a story that, for all its seeming quaintness, has the power both to rock the underpinnings of hate crime legislation and to break the human heart.

Here are the basics: Over the course of the fall of 2011, five different assaults were perpetrated on nine members of the Amish community in northeastern Ohio. Acting in groups, the attackers forced their way into their victims’ homes, overpowered and restrained them and then forcibly shaved off the beards of the men and cut the hair of both men and women, typically to the scalp. Some were left cut and bleeding. In a few cases, the assailants took souvenir photos of their shorn victims.

The particular meaning of these attacks isn’t always apparent to outsiders. As the prosecution would argue when the perpetrators were tried for hate crimes the following year, in Amish culture, the untrimmed beards of men and the hair of both men and women are “sacred religious symbols.” Amish men who trim or cut their beards will be disciplined by their church and even excommunicated if they fail to repent. Hair cutting has been used by many societies to humiliate people — particularly women — from the “heretics” persecuted by the Catholic Church to Frenchwomen accused of sleeping with Nazi soldiers. But for the Amish it is a particularly shameful and degrading experience, since their beards and hair are central emblems of both their membership in their community and their faith. Many of the victims of these attacks became depressed afterward and refused to appear in public.

There is yet another painful twist to these assaults. The assailants were all members of a community in Bergholz, Ohio, who had broken away from the larger Amish world. Whether they could still be called “Amish” is a matter of much debate. Most Amish repudiate them, and some members of the group, which consists of less than 100 people (almost all related to each other), have also told outsiders that they’re not Amish. Before the trial in 2012, the group, which Kraybill characterizes as a “clan,” was under the iron control of its patriarch, Sam Mullet, who claims the Amish title of bishop. Among the victims targeted in the fall of 2011 were Amish leaders who had crossed Mullet; others were Bergholz defectors and/or estranged relatives of Bergholz members.

In the cruelest instance, an elderly couple was lured to Bergholz by the offer of a visit to their son (married to one of Mullet’s nine daughters) and the grandchildren they had not seen for several years. The grandfather was seriously ill and believed this would be his last chance. Their son promised the couple, who had heard of the other attacks, that they would be safe. However, at the end of the two-hour visit, the same teenage grandsons the old man had been so longing to see turned on him. They held him down as his own son hacked off his beard with a pair of scissors. Later that evening, the son turned up at a gathering at Mullet’s house, crowing that he’d bagged “a whole bushel of hair.” Two months later, his father was dead.

Only five years before the Bergholz attacks, an Amish community had humbled the world by extending their forgiveness to a non-Amish gunman who invaded a Pennsylvania schoolhouse and shot 10 little girls before killing himself. The violent and vengeful behavior of the Bergholz group seems impossible to reconcile with the popular image of the Amish as paragons of saintly forbearance and pacifism. That aspect of Amish love does have a presence in this story, however: several of the victims refused to press charges against their assailants and could only be persuaded to do so after authorities convinced them that it was the only way to prevent further, and perhaps more violent, attacks.

But as for Bergholz itself: What happened? Mullet’s vendetta against other Amish leaders in the region originated in two disputes. One was over the custody of two little girls whose father had left the clan but whose mother remained. But perhaps more important was the decision an assembly of ministers made to disregard Mullet’s authority to excommunicate members of his flock. In the Amish faith, the good of the community and the will of God take priority over individual desires, and excommunication is a drastic measure. It places the transgressor outside the community and forbids him from attending meetings, going to church or taking Holy Communion. It also prohibits other members from engaging in some (though not all) interactions with him; this is called shunning. Only by confessing and repenting their faults to the very same church leader who excommunicated them can banned Amish be restored to “full fellowship” in the Gmay, or congregation.

In the eyes of believers, this means that a bishop has the power to bar one of his flock from the faith and therefore from heaven, itself, until the member submits. As one bishop told Kraybill, excommunication is “death to the soul,” and a sanction not meant to be imposed lightly. The elders concluded that Mullet was using excommunication without warning, explanation or scriptural justification, as a tool to stifle dissent in his Gmay and to prevent members from leaving. The elders’ decision allowed banned Bergholz defectors to join other Gmays without having to confess their nonexistent sins to Mullet. And this deprived Mullet of one of his most potent tools in securing the obedience of his flock.

Although Bergholz didn’t meet all of the key criteria for a “cult” — defense attorneys sought to keep the word from even being mentioned during the trial — it’s remarkable how much Mullet’s MO resembles that of such paranoid charismatic leaders as Warren Jeffs of the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints and Jim Jones of the People’s Temple. No matter what ideology or theology these guys profess, they seem to end up looking an awful lot alike: some old goat who wants to boss everyone else around and have sex with as many young women as possible, whether they like it or not.