Thought you might find this interesting Submit

The Michigan Department of Community Health (MDCH) and CNSI today announced the launch of an interactive Medicaid mobile health app, myHealthButton (myHB), and online portal, myHealthPortal (myHP), designed to promote connectivity between patients and providers. These applications allow patients to access their medical information remotely in a real-time environment. CNSI partnered with the Bureau of Medicaid Operations within MDCH’s Medical Services Administration to design, build and develop this first-of-its-kind Medicaid technology.

Overview

The core objective of these frontline tools is to give the Michigan Medicaid population the resources needed to better manage their own health. Both myHB and myHP put health care benefits and services directly into the hands of members served by the MDCH. By using a connected infrastructure, health care companies are able to more efficiently gather and organize data in order to produce more informed decisions and diagnoses for patients along with better quality care.

These applications will give members access to a variety of important features, including digital images of their mihealth cards, provider search capabilities, and authorized diagnoses and provider listings for Children’s Special Health Care Service beneficiaries. Both applications are currently available for Apple and Android mobile devices through the App Store and Google Play, respectively.

“Meeting the demands of an ever-increasing technology-driven society is a top priority for state government,” said Department of Technology, Management and Budget Director David Behen. “This innovative approach to providing Michigan residents with easy access to their own personal information is a great example of utilizing technology to meet those needs,”

As the first applications available on the new MILogin system, myHB and myHP are supported by Michigan’s Department of Technology, Management and Budget. Due to this partnership, the platforms include some of the unique features the MILogin system has to offer, including software that ensures protected health information on the applications remains secure and confidential.

The myHP and myHB applications are available to current members enrolled with the Michigan Medicaid program, Children’s Special Healthcare Services program and/or the MiChild program.

CNSI and the state of Michigan have partnered together since 2006, when they successfully worked together to design and implement the Michigan Community Health Automated Medicaid Processing System (CHAMPS) for MDCH. In addition to managing the state’s Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS) operations and maintenance, CNSI also works with the state of Michigan on several other health care reform initiatives, including leading efforts to comply with the Affordable Care Act, ICD-10 implementation, Medicaid Compliance Program and supporting Michigan with its consumer engagement initiatives such as deploying its real-time MMIS monitoring tool HealthBeat.

“We are excited to provide our citizens with one-stop access to their health records through these innovative solutions,” said Nick Lyon, director of the MDCH. “As we work with our residents to promote better self-awareness and responsibility for their health status, these tools allow users to easily access and track important health measures right on their smartphones.”

Before accessing the myHB application through an Android or Apple phone, users must first create a user ID and password and subscribe online by visiting https://milogin.michigan.gov/. Questions regarding myHB and myHP should be directed to the Beneficiary Help Line at 800-642-3195 or MDCH-myHealthButton@michigan.gov.