Buy Photo Bonnie Smith, capital campaign project director for the new Planned Parenthood facility located on the corner of Choctow and McDowell streets in Asheville, stands in the doorway of the clinic. (Photo: William Woody / wwoody@citizen-times.com)Buy Photo

Planned Parenthood Asheville Health Center intends to quietly open doors to its new $2.9 million facility south of downtown Friday.

Focused on family planning and reproductive health, the nonprofit clinic also hopes to offer abortion care and services by March. It will likely be the only abortion provider in Western North Carolina.

"Access is primary," said Bonnie Smith, project director for the capital campaign. "Where we were before, some access was limited by our very size. We're going to be able to expand our services and be more accessible. That's really important for women and the populations we serve."

The health center's opening comes just one week before the 42nd anniversary of Roe v. Wade, the Supreme Court decision that legalized abortion in the United States.

Planned Parenthood bought the 5,860-square-foot building at the intersection of Choctaw and McDowell streets in April 2013, just over a year before the region's only abortion care provider, Femcare, closed.

POLL: Is Planned Parenthood's opening a good thing for Asheville?

When Femcare stopped performing abortions in June 2014, there was an urgency to get operations running soon, Smith said.

WNC women now must travel to Charlotte or across the state line to Greenville, South Carolina, to terminate their pregnancies.

"It's always tragic when a couple out of ignorance or lack of access does not prevent a pregnancy that is coming at the wrong time or under the wrong circumstance in their life," said Jill Preyer, a longtime donor and board member for Planned Parenthood, who spent her working life as a marriage and family therapist in Raleigh. She has since retired in Asheville.

"Having access to care preventing and planning pregnancies is probably one of the most important things that can happen to any individual," she added.

Better location, better services

Planned Parenthood's Asheville Heath Center's upgrade was a long time coming, Smith said. "Planned Parenthood has been in the Asheville area for 40 years and we've never had a permanent home," she added.

The nonprofit was operating a small clinic at 603 Biltmore Ave. The lease on that facility ends in February and operations at that site are now closed. The Biltmore facility did not offer abortion services and care.

Dreams of a new facility started in 2007 when the international nonprofit launched a capital campaign locally for a new space. The campaign was put on hold during the recession, but was reinvigorated in 2012.

To date, the agency has raised about $3 million in private donations for the project.

The location at 68 McDowell St. is attractive because of its proximity to the bus stop, the hospital and surrounding medical facilities, Smith said. The building was previously an OB-GYN clinic and its layout fit Planned Parenthood's needs. It is also not far from the former Biltmore site.

With warm, neutral colors, the new clinic looks just like any hospital or doctor's office setting. There are front and back entrances, a lobby, upgraded laboratories, new equipment and multiple exam rooms. The clinic is being built to North Carolina ambulatory surgical center standards.

The new building will allow the nonprofit to see more people. Waiting times will go down, health services will be more accessible and there will be better parking, Smith said.

"It's going to be so different for a patients when they come in here," she added. "We just want their care to be in nicer surroundings and have people actually say, 'Wow' when they walk in the door."

More than just an abortion provider

With nine health care centers across the state, four of which are certified abortion care providers, Planned Parenthood estimates it serves around 25,000 people in North Carolina each year.

In addition to abortion care services, it offers sexually transmitted infection testing and treatment, HIV/AIDS testing, family planning services, emergency contraception, cancer screenings, annual gynecological exams and transgender health services.

It provides care on a sliding scale for people without insurance. This includes young people, artists, students and hospitality workers — people who don't have coverage during a time of their life when they are sexually active, Smith said.

"We're an important provider of health care for them," she added. "We are their doctor."

In recent years, Planned Parenthood Asheville Health Center has not only seen an increase in men utilizing its testing and treatment services, but also in transgender patients seeking general health care.

Transgender services is an emerging component of Planned Parenthood's work, Smith said. In 2013, the nonprofit started providing hormone replacement therapy and transition counseling locally to just a few people in need, she added. Now, there are almost 60 patients enrolled in the program.

People are coming from all over for the service, even surrounding states, Smith added.

The clinic will also soon hire a new community educator to continue its health outreach at area universities to reduce unintended pregnancies and sexually transmitted infection.

Its health care navigator program is also helping patients understand the Affordable Care Act and get coverage.

"We never like to just focus on abortion because it's a very small percentage of what we do," Smith said.

An ongoing political fight

Though the organization planned no fanfare for its Friday opening, the move is significant.

Abortion care and service was one of the most divisive and contentious public health debates in North Carolina's 2014 legislative session. In a controversial move, anti-abortion language was inserted into a bill about motorcycle safety in the final days of the General Assembly.

More laws were passed regarding abortion care in the last two years in the state of North Carolina than have been passed in the last 40, said Suzanne Buckley, the executive director at NARAL Pro-Choice North Carolina last month.

The state announced proposed rule changes for abortion clinics in December in response to the new legislation. The changes included the right to annually inspect any licensed clinic and standards for building codes, record-keeping, nurse staffing qualifications, emergency procedures and post-operative care.

The state is taking public comment on those proposals through Jan. 30.

Rules for certification of abortion clinics have not been updated in nearly 20 years, the Department of Health and Human Services noted in a Nov. 14 fiscal impact analysis of the proposed regulations. The proposals strengthen regulations to assure quality of care, improve patient safety and privacy and provide accountability during and after abortion procedures without restricting access, the report noted.

Proposed regulations range from temperature and air supply standards to provisions requiring clinics to staff a 24-hour, post-operative patient call line and 10-year, record-keeping rules.

While generally supportive of the proposed regulations, abortion rights groups have argued that some of the new standards are unnecessary and costly.

Between capital expenses, increased inspection nursing staff time, constant phone triage and medical doctor contracts, the new rules could cost providers $120,000 in their first year and $93,300 annually in the following two years. The cost per clinic is around $7,500 and $5,800, respectively, DHHS reported in December.

Planned Parenthood Asheville Heath Center's capital campaign started in the $2 million range in 2007; it's now at $3.2 million, Smith said. Some of that increased cost is due to the new regulations.

"That's a staggering amount of money that could have gone for direct services," said Preyer. "It's a crazy political climate in which we operate, and it's a tragedy because every family — rich families, middle class and poor families — all need access to planning their reproductive lives."

Anti-abortion rights groups have questioned the state's rule-making and the involvement of abortion service providers in the process. Medical specialists, including abortion care providers, were part of the group that drafted the proposed regulations.

"We're not happy that they are going to be out there doing abortions in Asheville, but we feel like we're making progress in the state; we've had many laws being passed," said Barbara Holt, president of North Carolina Right to Life.

To mark the anniversary of Roe v. Wade, anti-abortion groups have planned the 16th annual Prayer Breakfast for Life and the Rally and March for Life Jan. 17 in Raleigh.

"Obviously we feel like it's a sad day whenever a Planned Parenthood facility opens and unborn babies are going to be killed and mothers are going to be hurt. We don't rejoice at it, but were not surprised.

"That is their business model to build and expand and hide the fact that they are the highest, single provider of abortions in the United States."

Planned Parenthood operates 700 reproductive and sexual health centers in the U.S. and boasts 7 million supporters in its 2012-13 annual report.

"That statement is misleading both because there's no other organization operating at a national level but also because Planned Parenthood's national office is not a health care provider," said Alison Kiser, senior director of communications at Planned Parenthood South Atlantic, of North Carolina Right to Life's argument.

"The health care our patients rely on every day is provided by local affiliates working in the communities we serve which are operated as separate organizations that meet the high standards of care set out by the Planned Parenthood Federation of America."

Since construction began, a small group of protesters have assembled across from the building site nearly every Wednesday.

"It's sad that Asheville will again be a place where children in the womb are killed," said local anti-abortion activist Meredith Hunt. "Gov. McCrory could have denied Planned Parenthood a license to destroy prenatal children, but he failed to have the courage. Pastors of churches who are supposed to exemplify loving their neighbors no longer seem to care. Most are afraid to speak in public."

Hunt has organized a local protest and vigil in response to the Roe v. Wade anniversary at 9 a.m. Jan. 24 near the new clinic.

"A few of us will continue in a ministry of presence on the sidewalk at the new Planned Parenthood killing site until it closes down, someday, like Femcare on Orange Street did," he said.

Throughout the country, clinics tend to open quietly, mostly for the safety and privacy of patients, said Smith, as she and the staff prepared for the opening.

"The protesters, you know, they are there, they have been there throughout the building process. We respect their rights as long as they are protesting within the laws provided.

"We respect their choice, and meanwhile, inside, we're just focusing on the work we do."

North Carolina's Department of Health and Human Services is accepting public comment through Jan. 30 on the proposed abortion rule changes. The proposed changes can be found at www.ncoah.com. Information about making public comment is available at www.ncdhhs.gov/dhsr/rules/ab2014.html.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1C6xsIw