Share This Story 6 Tweet Share Email

LANCASTER — Great things happen when we live united.

That is the tag line the United Way of Fairfield County is using for this year’s annual fundraising campaign that runs through December. This year’s goal is $1.675 million, with the 75 figure a salute to the local branch’s 75th anniversary in Fairfield County.

The local United Way traces its roots to 1926, 14 years before its official incorporation as a nonprofit agency in 1940. But executive director Sherry Orlando said the way it operates hasn’t changed much through the years, even if the first fundraising goal was $20,000.

“The beauty is that the organization that was created back in 1940 is very similar to what we do today,” she said. “Nothing much has changed. It really hasn’t. The only thing that’s changed is that we have more money, so we have more agencies that we’re providing funding to.”

Orlando, who has held her position since 1992, said the United Way of Fairfield County is a community system of caring with those who have resources helping those who don’t.

Fairfield County United Way-funded agencies The United Way of Fairfield County has been serving the area for 75 years. Here are the agencies and programs it helps fund today.

























































American Red Cross disaster services Prevents and alleviates human suffering in the face of emergency by mobilizing the power of volunteers and the generosity of donors.

Program

Disaster Relief Our response ensures we meet Fairfield County residents' most basic needs in the event of a disaster. In these events, shelter, food, health and mental health services are provided to help families and entire communities get back on their feet.

How the American Red Cross is changing lives in Fairfield County

In 2015, the American Red Cross provided 717 meals, clothing for 72 individuals, 164 nights of shelter among 69 individuals, transportation assistance to 33 individuals and $19,705 in direct financial assistance in response to 26 home fires and one building collapse.

American Red Cross military services Prevents and alleviates human suffering in the face of emergency by mobilizing the power of volunteers and the generosity of donors.

Program

Services to the Armed Forces Provides emergency communications, training, and support to access community resources to those in the armed forces.

How the American Red Cross is changing lives in Fairfield County

In 2015, the American Red Cross provided 47 emergency communications to military members and their families. Twenty-three of these messages related to the death of a service member's close relative and 22 were related to a severe injury or illness of a service member's close relative.

Big Brothers Big Sisters of Fairfield County Provides children facing adversity with strong, enduring, professionally supported one-on-one mentoring relationships that change their lives for the better.

Program

Mentoring services are delivered through two programs: Community Based Mentoring allows a volunteer and child to meet in the community and to experience new things together. School Based Mentoring allows a volunteer and a child to meet within the school setting.

How the Big Brothers Big Sisters is changing lives in Fairfield County

During the past year, 354 children were served by BBBS in Fairfield County. Two hundred seven children were community-based matches while 147 were school-based matches. Sixty percent of community based matches have been together for 12 months or longer, meaning children are in trusted relationships with adults on a long term basis.

Boy Scouts of America Prepares young people to make ethical and moral choices through outdoor activities, civic service and family development.

Program

Traditional Scouting provides young people ages 6-20 with opportunities for personal growth and development. In Scouting, youth participate in activities that teach positive values, life skills, fitness, academic readiness and leadership skills. Through the Scouting advancement program a young person achieves developmental assets that contribute to his or her success in school and life.

How the Boys Scouts are changing lives in Fairfield County

In 2015, almost 1,300 scouts were active members throughout Fairfield County. More than 80 percent of these scouts return to the program each year. During this time, more than 900 program advancements have taken place by scouts in Fairfield County.

By The Way Clinic Established for residents who are uninsured or under-insured. Provides medical exams, prescription assistance, outpatient testing and nursing follow-up for those who cannot afford conventional health care.

Program

Patients receive medical care where they are evaluated by the health care team (registered nurse and physician) for presenting medical conditions. Patients also receive assistance to pay for prescribed medications. Outpatient testing is also available, and all clients receive referrals to other agencies if necessary.

How By The Way Clinic is changing lives in Fairfield County

During 2015, care was provided to more than 290 clients, providing 942 prescriptions and 673 prescription assistance cards. By the Way also referred 54 clients to other providers in their network of physicians, hospitals, social service agencies and outreach services.

Canal Winchester Human Services Serves the Canal Winchester school district, Lithopolis and portions of the Bloom-Carroll school district with a wide variety of social services, including the Community Food Pantry.

Program

The choice pantry is offered to individuals and families within our service boundaries who are in need of food assistance, whether as an emergency situation, or as a continuing service on a regular basis.

The Feeding our Future initiative provides bags of food each week to students in the Bloom-Carroll and Canal Winchester school districts who are income eligible to participate in the free breakfast/free lunch programs of their respective schools. The weekly bags include one meal for each day the student is not in school to receive a free breakfast/free lunch.

How Canal Winchester Human Services is changing lives in Fairfield County

During 2015, CWHS served almost 12,000 meals to 819 people. In addition, 50 students at Canal Winchester and Bloom-Carroll schools received 3,264 meals throughout the school year.

Fairfield Center for Disabilities & Cerebral Palsy Serves and assists Fairfield County's disabled and elderly adults through accessible transportation, day care, social and recreational activities, ramp building and Americans with Disabilities Act compliance.

Programs

The Adult Day Program offers seniors recreation, socialization, guest speakers and offsite trips designed to challenge participants' minds and bodies.

The Transportation Program offers round-trip, door-to-door transportation to qualified county residents attending appointments.

How the Center for Disabilities is changing lives in Fairfield County

The Center for Disabilities served on average 40 clients during the days of service, 10 of which were United Way funded. More than 5,200 hours of service were provided to adult day clients.

FCdCP was also able to provide transportation to 334 clients taking more than 6,100 trips. Of those served, 334 clients were funded through United Way dollars, totaling 366 trips.

Lancaster-Fairfield Community Action Agency food pantry LFCAA seeks to enable low-income families and individuals to obtain the skill, knowledge and motivation to secure the opportunities needed to become fully self-sufficient.

Program

LFCAA provides a community food pantry which is available to any Fairfield County resident whose household income is at or below 200% of the federal poverty guidelines.

How Community Action is changing lives in Fairfield County

During the past year, LFCAA has provided 284,985 meals to families in need in Fairfield County. These meals were served to 4,273 households, more than half of which included children.

Community Action Agency/Rutherford House LFCAA seeks to enable low-income families and individuals to obtain the skill, knowledge and motivation to secure the opportunities needed to become fully self-sufficient.

Program

The Rutherford House Permanent Supportive Housing has developed 16 units of permanent supportive housing. The project provides housing solutions for homeless families with special needs, inclusive of a comprehensive range of onsite case management and supportive services to move families towards self-sufficiency.

How Community Action is changing lives in Fairfield County

LFCAA has provided 46 individuals residence at the Rutherford House, where they are receiving support for basic needs, individualized case management and being linked to public assistance for which they are eligible.

Community Action Adult Basic and Literacy Education LFCAA seeks to enable low-income families and individuals to obtain the skill, knowledge and motivation to secure the opportunities needed to become fully self-sufficient.

Program

The Adult Basic and Literacy Education (ABLE) program provides educational opportunities for adults who lack basic literary skills needed for effective citizenship, further education, and productive employment, as well as GED testing.

How the ABLE program is changing lives in Fairfield County

Robert began ABLE GED classes in October 2014. In his 50s, he wasn't your typical ABLE 22- to 26-year-old student. Without a high school diploma or GED, Robert held decent-paying jobs in the Columbus area and made enough money to support his family. Life was good until he was stricken with an inoperable brain tumor and forced to quit his job and survive on Social Security disability. Fast-forward several months; a miracle happened, and Robert was cancer free. With a renewed lease on life, Robert is conquering something that he has wanted to do for many years; obtain his GED and attend college to become a counselor. Since October 2014, Robert has been actively pursuing his GED at LFCAA while helping raise a young stepson.

Foundation Dinners The agency aspires to assist as many clients as possible to reintegrate as productive members of society.

Program

Foundation Dinners is first and foremost a soup kitchen providing meals to the homeless and underserved of Lancaster and Fairfield County. Because Foundation Dinners recognizes the value to the community of upgrading the status of the homeless to individuals, it also provides counseling to ascertain the client's work history, education, background, health, legal status and the resultant potential employability, employment credentials, targeted job searches, literacy tutoring, homeless resources and adult daytime shelter.

How Foundation Dinners is changing lives in Fairfield County

In 2015, it is expected that more than 50,000 meals will be served. Foundation Dinners is working with clients to find employment, as well as provide shelter to those who are homeless.

Girls Scouts of Ohio's Heartland Council Exists to meet the needs of every girl in a one of a kind, girl-centric and girl-driven environment. Here girls find courage to explore new adventures, confidence in their uniqueness, character to stand by their values, and create lifelong connections to peers and mentors.

Program

Girl Scouts is focused on building leadership and life skills in girls and young women. Girls are offered experiences that introduce girls to the great outdoors and provide fun, learning experiences such as horseback riding, hiking and GPS treasure hunting. The STEM program introduces girls to science, technology, engineering and math that are relevant to everyday life. The Power Up program sensitizes girls to relational aggression issues and empowers them to resist bullying and defend themselves and others.

How the Girl Scouts are changing lives in Fairfield County

In 2015, the Girl Scouts have more than 1,550 girls as members. Eighty-five percent of girls in the Power Up program said they have the skills to take responsibility and help someone who is being bullied. More than 70 percent report that Girl Scouts has helped them build positive values, healthy relationships, conflict resolution skills and problem-solving skills.

Harcum House Harcum House reduces trauma experienced by child victims of violent crime by providing an array of evidence-based, trauma-informed and multidisciplinary services.

Program

The Trauma Informed Care program offers trauma screening for allegedly abused children and their non-offending care givers. For those who meet the screening criteria, a brief, evidence-based, trauma-informed crisis intervention and psycho-educational program is offered.

How the Harcum House is changing lives in Fairfield County

The Harcum House saw 233 Fairfield County children for on-site services in 2015. In all, 197 were alleged victims of sexual abuse, 54 of physical abuse, 10 of extreme neglect, 27 witnessed violence and six were drug endangered. Ninety-six percent of children screened were positive for trauma.

Information & Referral - 211 Links people in need with the agency or service designed to alleviate their need but also alleviate duplication of services.

Program

2-1-1 provides "front door" case management services to individuals and families in need. This service is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Needs that are addressed on a daily basis are financial assistance, food insecurity, housing assistance (location, affordability, eviction assistance, homelessness, etc), mental health, counseling services, legal assistance, etc. It also serves clients that walk into the agency.

How Information & Referral is changing lives in Fairfield County

During 2015, Information & Referral answered 14,736 calls and made more than 17,600 referrals to service agencies. One hundred percent of food pantry referrals were based on client information and pantry requirements. Also, 100 percent of housing inquiries received at least one referral, or linkage of information from the housing specialist.

The Lighthouse Offers protective shelter, 24 hours a day, 365 days of the year for victims of domestic violence and their children.

Program

The Lighthouse serves victims of domestic violence and their children through the provision of protective shelter, meals and transportation. This ensures that victims and other family members at risk have access to services, are safe and are given the tools necessary to sustain long term safety. Those receiving protective shelter will benefit from an interruption in the cycle of violence for themselves and their children.

How the Lighthouse is changing lives in Fairfield County

During 2015, 220 individuals were provided 5,234 days of shelter and care. Of those, 121 were adults and 99 were children. Eighty-nine percent of those receiving shelter reported that they had an increased knowledge of community resources. Ninety-three percent of those receiving shelter reported that they were better able to plan for their continued safety and at a six month follow-up, 80 percent reported that they had not experienced repeat acts of violence.

Lutheran Social Services food pantry Provides basic needs and services that revitalize lives through innovative food pantries, homeless shelters, affordable senior housing and disaster recovery assistance.

Program

The LSS Fairfield County Food Pantry provides emergency food to eligible families in Fairfield County in need. Families may shop for shelf-stable items once monthly and return weekly for fresh produce and bread as needed. The pantry uses the Choice model, so families shop for their own food.

How Lutheran Social Services is changing lives in Fairfield County

A total of 13,669 food pantry visits took place where meals were given to more than 9,000 households, including more than 3,000 children in Fiscal Year 2015.

Lutheran Social Services emergency shelter Provides basic needs and services that revitalize lives through innovative food pantries, homeless shelters, affordable senior housing and disaster recovery assistance.

Program

Lutheran Social Services' Fairfield County Emergency Shelter serves single individuals who are homeless. The shelter is open 365 days a year, 24 hours a day. Arriving homeless adults are screened for eligibility and provided case management support to solve their homeless status. Supplemental programs, such as its Fairhaven Lawn Care social enterprise, help residents develop marketable skills and experience to secure employment in the community and become self-sufficient.

How Lutheran Social Services is changing lives in Fairfield County

During 2015, 225 homeless adults received shelter with a total of 7,139 nights of shelter provided along with 1,135 hours of case management.

Maywood Mission The Maywood Mission provides pre-school, latch-key, summer camp, transportation and three meals per child daily; educational needs and extra-curricular activities.

Program

Early childhood education and day care center-preschool and pre-kindergarten programs are provided to children 3-5 years old. The program is based on quality care with emphasis on kindergarten readiness skills. The program offers children and families the opportunity to learn all basic concepts needed to transition into kindergarten.

How Maywood Mission is changing lives in Fairfield County

During school year 2015, preschool services were provided to 119 Fairfield County children. One hundred percent of these children made improvements in their handwriting skills and 100 percent will enter kindergarten. Children are learning to appreciate all forms of art, develop musical skills, improve social skills, build knowledge and learn nutrition and other necessary skills to not only enter kindergarten but also be successful.

Mid-Ohio Psychological Services Mid-Ohio Psychological Services seeks to develop and implement unique and specialized supported services to meet clients' behavioral health needs and will seek to ensure that these services are accessible to all who need them.

Program

Therapeutic mentoring is a set of community-based clinical services provided to individuals who are having difficulties with social, communication, problem solving, conflict-resolution, and/or independent living skills. Therapeutic mentors are trained professionals who work with clients to develop and practice these skills in the community.

How Mid-Ohio Psychological Services is changing lives in Fairfield County

During 2014-15, 18 youth participants noted an increase in the quality of their relationship with parents and friends. These increases in outcomes may correlate with TMP interventions, such as skill implementation, role-playing and communication skill building, aimed at improving school functioning, communication and quality of relationships.

New Horizons Mental Health Services Improving the health and well-being of individuals, families and community, through quality mental health care and effective community partnerships.

Program

TeenScreen is a mental health education and screening program that is school-based and available to the general student population within eight school districts in Fairfield County. The TeenScreen screening process helps erode stigma, and allows the program to find students who have suicidal ideas that are unknown to anybody in their lives.

How New Horizons is changing lives in Fairfield County

In 2015, a total of 768 in eight Fairfield County school districts were screened, of which 181 tested positive for at-risk thoughts or youth depression. All of these students received same-day in school mental health assessment and parental consultation.

PCMA Pickerington Food Pantry Provides emergency food to needy residents living within the Pickerington school district boundaries.

Program

The beneficiaries of the PCMA Food Pantry of Pickerington's program are residents of the Pickerington school district who meet income eligibility requirements. Emergency food assistance (and other items, such as health supplies) is provided, once per calendar month, for all qualified individuals and families who present for food.

How PCMA is changing lives in Fairfield County

During the past year, PCMA Pickerington Food Pantry has served more than 1,450 individuals 7,084 meals. Additionally, 909 Thanksgiving baskets and 799 Christmas baskets were distributed to clients during the holidays and 250 Easter baskets for children under 12 were distributed at Easter.

Pickerington Schools - Project WISE Project WISE is an educational program designed to improve the organizational skills, study skills, self-confidence and motivation of at-risk junior high students struggling to maintain their grades.

Program

Students are identified as being at-risk due to below average to failing report card grades, or simply displaying struggles related to difficulties with organizational skills, study skills and self-esteem/motivation issues. Project WISE is targeted intervention implemented within a small-group setting on a daily basis, with daily incentives and increased communication between home and school.

How Project WISE is changing lives in Fairfield County

Seventy-seven of students participating students at Ridgeview Junior High School saw an increase in their mean grade averages from prior to entering the program (85.7 percent success rate for the entire year). Thirty-seven former WISE students were up for graduation this school year in the Pickerington School District. Of the 37, 35 graduated on time. This is a 94.5 percent success rate. These students were selected to participate in to WISE for being at risk for failing school.

Robert K Fox Family Y Camp Discovery The Robert K. Fox Family Y serves Lancaster and Fairfield County as well as surrounding counties by putting Christian principles into practice through programs that build health, body, mind and spirit for all.

Program

Camp Discovery: A summer program for children entering kindergarten through seventh grade. Camp Discovery provides a plethora of learning opportunities through various activities.

How Family Y is changing lives in Fairfield County

Fifty-five children attended Camp Discovery with the Family Y with the help of the United Way scholarship program. Sixty-five percent reported an increase in self-esteem and 70 percent attended at least five field trips.

Robert K Fox Family Y Preschool programs The Robert K. Fox Family Y serves Lancaster and Fairfield County as well as surrounding counties by putting Christian principles into practice through programs that build health, body, mind and spirit for all.

Program

Preschool: Programs available for ages 3-5, full day childcare for preschool-aged children and child care for school-aged children before and after school as well as full day care during holiday breaks and calamity days.

How Family Y is changing lives in Fairfield County

Over the past year, United Way funds have helped 53 children attend preschool at the Family Y. Sixty-seven percent of three-day class children have tested ready for kindergarten and 77 percent of five-day class children are ready.

Robert K Fox Family Y Wellness program The Robert K. Fox Family Y serves Lancaster and Fairfield County as well as surrounding counties by putting Christian principles into practice through programs that build health, body, mind and spirit for all.

Program

Wellness: A prorated membership fee for those individuals/families that qualify to become part of the membership family. By becoming part of the membership, they can utilize the services that will place them in a healthy environment and give them an opportunity to improve their physical and mental health.

How Family Y is changing lives in Fairfield County

More than 1,000 grants were awarded to individuals and families in order for them to become members of the Family Y. More than 85 percent of these individuals expressed feeling healthier and more than half were attending the Family Y to exercise two to three times per week.

Salvation Army The purpose of the Salvation Army is to help people by "doing the most good" as it strives to be good stewards with available resources.

Program

The Salvation Army Samaritan Center for Adult Care provides activities, social interaction and nursing services in a safe and nurturing environment for adults who need socialization, supervision and assistance during the day. The program also provides respite services to caregivers.

How the Salvation Army is changing lives in Fairfield County

The Salvation Army Samaritan Center provided care to 75 people over 5,300 days of care during the past year. This included 46 individuals that were served utilizing United Way funding. Seventy-five percent of individuals attended to allow caregiver relief, most of the time to work. More than 80 percent of individuals reported that the Samaritan Center delayed placement in a long-term facility, and allowed the individual to continue to live at home.

The Recovery Center The Recovery Center provides alcohol, drug addiction and mental health prevention, intervention and treatment programs to children, adolescents and adults in Fairfield County.

Program

The Recovery Center Prevention Services provides a variety of programs, including: Project Alert, Too Good for Drugs and Too Good for Drugs and Violence. They teach students to identify and resist pressures which lead to experimenting with drugs and work to prevent teenagers who are experimenting with drugs from becoming regular users.

How the Recovery Center is changing lives in Fairfield County

With all programs offered in local school districts, more than 80 percent of program participants maintained or increased knowledge of consequences of violence and drug use. According to the most recent Youth Behavior Survey, the study shows that frequent alcohol use (30 day) among twelfth graders has decreased from 21.1 percent in 2012 to 19.6 percent in 2014. Frequent marijuana use has also decreased in 2014, down to 14.29 percent from 16.4 percent in 2012. Frequent use of all tobacco products has decreased to an all-time low of 9.9 percent.

Wesley Ridge Adult Day Program Wesley Ridge is a continuing care retirement community that offers seniors a variety of lifestyle choices, including independent living, assisted living, dementia-specific care, skilled nursing care, short-term rehabilitation and adult day care.

Program

Wesley Ridge Adult Day Services provides daytime care for seniors and adults with disabilities in a therapeutic environment, supervised by a registered nurse and offering respite to caregivers. Clients can attend the program from two to five days a week and receive a mid-morning snack, a hot nutritious lunch and a mid-afternoon snack. A variety of activities are provided based on the interests of the clients attending the program.

How Wesley Ridge is changing lives in Fairfield County

During 2015, Wesley Ridge served a total of 39 clients, of which 11 received United Way funding. A total of 308 days of care were provided for United Way clients. All of the clients willingly participate in program activities and 97 percent of clients maintained ability to perform activities of daily living.

Dolly's Imagination Library The United Way and the Imagination Library are committed to improve early learning opportunities for all children up to 5 years old by sending new, age-appropriate books to their home, thus supporting early literacy, school readiness and life-long learning.

Program

To register for the program, a child must live in Fairfield County, must be under the age of 5, sign up using United Way's form and parents must commit to reading with their child. Books will be received monthly at the home and will continue until the child turns 5 or the family moves out of Fairfield County.

How Dolly's Imagination Library is changing lives in Fairfield County

United Way has sent more than 6,000 books to children in Fairfield County so far in 2015. More than 700 children are receiving an age-appropriate book each month and are on the path to kindergarten readiness.

United Way Free Tax Program United Way's Free Tax Program offers free tax filing assistance to help low- and moderate-income residents claim the Earned Income Tax Credit and maximize their refunds.

Program

United Way offers free tax preparation for low-to moderate-income families as well as individuals over the age of 60 in Fairfield County. The United Way of Fairfield County's goal is to increase education, awareness and claims of the Earned Income Tax Credit and provide free federal, state and school district tax returns.

How the Free Tax Program is changing lives in Fairfield County

During the 2015 tax season, United Way staff and volunteers prepared 1,646 tax returns for Fairfield County residents. More than $2.3 million was refunded to families. As part of refunds, clients claimed almost $1 million with the Earned Income Tax Credit. With the help of United Way and PNC Bank, many clients opened savings accounts for the first time and continue to save for emergencies.

SOURCE: United Way of Fairfield County Produced by Matthew Berry

“It’s a community campaign,” she said. “But more so, it’s a matter of looking at community needs. In terms of looking at community needs, the United Way looks at education, income and health. That’s what we do now.”

There are more than 20 local agencies and organizations the United Way helps, including Maywood Mission, The Recovery Center, the American Red Cross,

Lutheran Social Services, the Fairfield Center for Disabilities and Cerebral Palsy, and others.

Orlando said 87 percent of the money the United Way collects goes directly to the organizations it is helping.

Orlando said the United Way started as a way to help those less fortunate through contributions and grants.

“Basically, those individuals who had means thought that they would use their status to get others they knew to give money so that they could put it into a pool or a pot of money,” she said. “So when situations would arise and individuals would need help, or if there was an issue way back when, then they would use the money from this pot to fund those programs.”

A history lesson

The first vestiges of the United Way started with the Red Feather Campaign, in which people would go door to door asking for contributions.

That later became the Community Chest, which morphed into the United Appeal before becoming the United Way. In 1926, those the Community Chest helped included Maywood Mission, the Health League, the Boy Scouts and the YWCA.

J.W. Deffenbaugh and his son, W.C. Miller, were instrumental in founding the local United Way chapter.

Local attorney Jim Miller is the grandson of Deffenbaugh and the son of Miller. He said the the agency didn’t make its $75,000 fundraising goal when he came along in 1955.

But he said that changed five years later when John Gushman came to Anchor Hocking and got involved with United Way fundraising. He instituted employee contributions, which Miller said led to fundraising success.

Orlando said former Eagle-Gazette publisher R. Kenneth Kerr was the campaign chairman in 1940 and 1941. Cy Fulton, of Anchor Hocking, was the co-chairman in 1941. The football field at Lancaster High School is named after Fulton.

Through the years, some of the biggest names in local business have chaired, including Milton Taylor Sr. of Taylor Chevrolet, Ken Culver of Anchor Hocking, Stanley Banks of Diamond Power, Barry Walker of Trimmer Insurance, and many more.

“What’s amazing to me is how an organization with so much strength has continued through the years to use the same playbook,” Orlando said. “You’re utilizing individuals in the community that are respected, whether it be the mayor or company CEOs, to gather their friends to talk about what the community needs are and then how much money might be necessary to fund those needs, and then they go out and do it.”

The downtown campaign goal sign has been in place since at least 1941 when the Lancaster Community Chest used this sign to track donations.

(Photo: The United Way of Fairfield County)

By 1940, the United Way was helping the Boy Scouts, the YWCA and YMCA, the Lancaster Nursing Welfare Association, the Salvation Army and Maywood Mission. Two more groups were added in 1941, an agency for disabled children and adults and a milk fund, which Orlando said is similar to today’s free and reduced school lunch programs.

Though today’s organization is the same in many ways as in past generations, Orlando said, there are some differences.

“Today, we’re more of a community-impact organization,” she said, “meaning that we really need to look at how the dollars invested are producing outcomes. The old United Way would have funded a shelter for the homeless and looked at how many nights of shelter and how many individuals they provided shelter to.

“The United Way of today is more of, ‘OK, we have individuals at a homeless shelter. But what are we doing to help them gain independence? What are we doing in terms of helping them find employment so that they can find housing?’ And rather than counting the number of nights and number of people, we’re counting how many people are now in permanent housing because of that program. It’s more about a hand up than a hand-out.”

Testimonials

“No. 1, it’s very exciting that an agency has maintained its existence for so long as the United Way has,” said Rod Cook, executive director of the American Red Cross of East and South Central Ohio. “There is a misnomer that the Red Cross is a government agency, and it’s not. We rely solely on contributions from the community, especially the United Way.”

Red Cross Major Gift Officer Jeff Miller said the Red Cross contributes about $69,000 each year for the agency’s disaster and veterans services.

Maywood Mission Executive Director Tony Salvatori also is a United Way fan. The agency gives about $60,000 each year to the Maywood Mission day care center.

Ethan Zigler, left, and Tenley Oehrtman, right, play with PlayStix with child care provider Tina Botts at Maywood Mission in Lancaster. The mission has been supported by the United Way and its preceding organizations since at least 1924. The United Way’s support allows the mission to provide low-cost child care to families in Lancaster.

(Photo: Matthew Berry/Eagle-Gazette)

“Anybody goes there, they are going to get help and they make sure there’s no games when it goes to other folks’ money,” Salvatori said. “United Way is squared away here in Fairfield County, and I respect them for that. I really do. They’ve always been there and always been good to us.”

He said he loves the local United Way office.

“And it’s not just because I’m getting the money,” Salvatori said. “I love those people up there. They’re always helpful, they’re always on your side. They want you to succeed, but they want accountability. And there’s the two keys — they want to help and they want accountability.

“That’s what you have to have. People give good money and they want their money taken care of right. And this United Way does exactly that.”

The United Way of Fairfield County’s latest campaign officially kicks off Tuesday morning with a breakfast and Community Care Day.

jbarron@lancastereaglegazette.com

740-681-4340

Twitter: @JeffDBarron

Learn More

For more information on the United Way of Fairfield County and to participate in the the 2015 fundraiser, visit www.uwayfairfieldco.org.