Oklahoma City police are investigating after a video surfaced online showing a violent fight that reportedly took place at Capitol Hill High School.

According to police, several fights broke out at the school on Tuesday. A video of one of the fights was posted to social media and has since been shared on Facebook more than 700 times.

Police said multiple people were assaulted, including students and two or three teachers trying to break up the fight.

Police arrested a total of five juvenile suspects in connection to the incidents. A 16-year-old was arrested on a felony aggravated assault and battery complaint, after being caught on camera kicking the unconscious victim in the face while on the ground.

A second suspect was arrested on a misdemeanor charge of assault and battery, after being caught on camera knocking out the victim with one punch. A third juvenile suspect was arrested on a misdemeanor charge of assault and battery, for assaulting a coach/teacher.

Two juveniles, both 17 years old, were arrested on a felony charge of threatening an act of violence. One of them reportedly made verbal threats at a teacher with specific violent acts, and the other one made threats on his social media account against the school and teachers after going to the OKCPD Administration Building.

All of the suspects will be transported to the Juvenile Detention Center (Berryhouse) and booked in.

Police believe the incidents are gang-related. They are presenting charges to the District Attorney, and the juvenile suspects could be charged as adults.

#MORE: @okcpd have additional law enforcement at Capitol Hill HS today in response to fight caught on camera @NEWS9 pic.twitter.com/ALAwQwpRD4 — Justin Dougherty (@DoughertyNews9) January 13, 2016

News 9 reporter Justin Dougherty said there is an increased police presence at the school.

RIGHT NOW: @okcpd cars outside of Capitol Hill HS. Increased presence in response to fight caught on camera @NEWS9 pic.twitter.com/5CklwiTHXM — Justin Dougherty (@DoughertyNews9) January 13, 2016

Mark Myers, a spokesperson for the Oklahoma City Public Schools District (OKCPS,) released the following statement,

"We are aware of disturbing student altercations that were captured on video and posted to social media. The incident happened at Capitol Hill High School on Tuesday, January 12. Oklahoma City Public School administrators contacted law enforcement immediately, and we continue working with the Oklahoma City Police Department through this ongoing investigation. As a precaution police are providing additional security at the school today, and we have notified parents/guardians. The safety, and civility of our schools cannot be compromised, strict disciplinary action will be taken against all perpetrators."

News 9 and News9.com will keep you updated as more information becomes available.