Starting this week, thousands of low-income residents in California’s rural areas, including undocumented children and adults, will be able to access health care.



This is the result of a move by 35 counties in the County Medical Services Program (CMSP) to improve their safety net programs by expanding eligibility criteria. Nine other counties -- Alameda, Los Angeles, Riverside, Fresno, San Francisco, Santa Clara, Santa Cruz, San Mateo and Ventura -- already provided health care services beyond emergency care for undocumented immigrants.



On a press call last week, Health Access California’s executive director, Anthony Wright, said counties participating in the expansion include those north of the Bay Area to the Oregon border, many in the Sierra Nevada mountains and in the Central Valley. Several other counties are also considering coming on board.



Currently, 11 counties in California offer only emergency care for their undocumented populations: Placer, San Joaquin, Merced, Stanislaus, San Luis Obispo, Santa Barbara, Tulare, Kern, San Bernardino, Orange County and San Diego.



The expansion program is detailed in a new report released by Health Access California, titled, Profiles of Progress: California Counties Taking Steps to a More Inclusive and Smarter Safety Net.



“It’s not just expanding care to the undocumented; it’s providing a smarter safety net that offers a medical home focusing on primary preventive care,” Wright said.



The 35 counties will offer limited care that goes beyond emergency care by expanding their eligibility requirements. This includes raising the income level eligibility from 200 percent to 300 percent of the federal poverty level ($60,480 for a family of three). The counties will offer enrollees earning between 138 percent and 300 percent of the federal poverty level three doctor visits per year and up to $1,500 in pharmacy coverage, regardless of immigration status.



“Potentially, thousands of Californians will benefit,” Wright said, adding: “Our rural communities and our health system are stronger if more Californians have access to primary and preventive care.”



But undocumented immigrants earning below 138 percent of the federal poverty level ($20,160 for a family of three) will not be eligible for the counties’ expanded programs, Wright noted.



Asked why, he said, “Their answer is that their computer systems consider undocumented folks under 138 percent FPL [federal poverty level] as covered under emergency Medi-Cal.”



“But,” he added, “we all know that doesn’t provide primary/preventive care and isn’t really coverage.



The counties plan to evaluate their current expansion, he said, after which they will consider whether to extend the primary care benefit to those making below 138 percent of the federal poverty level.



The report cites the success of six counties that adjusted their safety net programs through pilot programs in recent years.



Contra Costa County Supervisor John Gioia said Contra Costa Cares, the one-year pilot program his county launched last December, has provided 3,000 residents access to health care. He said the program would be evaluated at the end of the year before funding is reauthorized.



Carmen, a patient at Gardner Family Health Network in San Jose, said she has finally been able to get comprehensive treatment for the diabetes she was diagnosed with a few years ago, thanks to her county’s safety net program, Santa Clara Primary Care Access Program (PCAP).



“It brings peace of mind to know that I will no longer have to seek care in emergency rooms,” Carmen said in Spanish through an interpreter.



The 2010 Affordable Care Act (ACA) cut California’s uninsured population by half, but it left its nearly 3 million undocumented residents uninsured. But the momentum generated by the ACA seems to have influenced counties to establish or improve their own safety net programs to cover those left out of the federal program.



It also motivated California lawmakers to introduce bills to cover the state’s “remaining uninsured.”



Sen. Ricardo Lara’s (D-Bell Gardens) Health For All Kids program, launched May 16, will allow about 185,000 of undocumented children under 19 from low-income families to enroll in full-scope Medi-Cal, California’s name for Medicaid. Other bills are currently being considered to provide coverage for the state’s undocumented adults.



Wright noted that good as the county programs are, they will only cover residents as long as they are in the county where they are enrolled. And not all counties have come on board to provide safety nets for their undocumented residents.



“People’s access to health care should not have to depend on what counties they live in,” he said.