Topics: From the Wires, News

NEW YORK (AP) — Mayor Bill de Blasio’s political vision — and his political travels — have increasingly reached far beyond the borders of New York City.

On the same day last week, he made an appearance on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe,” co-authored an op-ed for the Washington Post with U.S. Sen. Elizabeth Warren and was featured in a glowing Rolling Stone profile. This week, he’ll head to Washington to present a national liberal political agenda and then is on to California to give a pair of speeches.

And so far in 2015, he’s made as many trips to the Midwest — two — to lecture on income inequality as he has made official visits to the city’s borough of Staten Island.

It is commonplace for New York City mayors to become national figures, but some experts believe that de Blasio — not even 18 months into his first term — is risking being perceived as someone who has forgotten about his home. A poll last week showed that fewer than half of New Yorkers believe the city is moving in the right direction.

“He’s entering a path that can be dangerous for big-city mayors,” said Kenneth Sherrill, a retired political science professor at Hunter College. “It’s not unusual for a New York City mayor to be a national speaker for urban issues. But it is unusual for one to be so concerned about his national political party and its issues.”

De Blasio — whose staff insisted that his focus is New York — made little mention of a national focus during his campaign, instead promising to give a voice to those who felt forgotten during a gilded decade when the gap between the rich and the poor widened.

Since taking office, he’s argued he can do that by impacting the national political conversation.

“We’ve got to change the politics of this country to be able to serve our people and the issue of income inequality is even deeper,” de Blasio said last month. “Anyone who represents everyday people needs to be a part of this effort.”

De Blasio said that as he convened a gathering of national progressives at Gracie Mansion. They will meet again Tuesday in Washington where they will unveil a liberal platform that calls for the national adoption of some of de Blasio’s work at home, including paid sick leave and free universal pre-kindergarten. The group has said it wants to move political candidates — including Hillary Rodham Clinton, whom de Blasio has yet to endorse — to the left on many issues, namely the fight against income inequality.

De Blasio has delivered that same message across the country in recent weeks as he takes steps to become one of the nation’s loudest liberal voices. First came a trip to Nebraska and Iowa. Then, Wisconsin. And after his appearance at the U.S. Capitol, he’ll fly to California to deliver two more lectures.