While texting has become more readily available after a storm or hurricane has landed, don’t expect it to work all the time. Cell phone towers are often damaged and temporary cell sites on trucks may not be available in your area. Appoint a meeting location to meet just in case you get separated.

Depending on where you live, venting about your power outage via a tweet might get your electricity restored faster. A platform created by OMNETRIC, a joint venture of Siemens, the German engineering company, and Accenture, the Irish consulting firm, extrapolates public data from social media and combines it with real-time weather, GPS, photos and information from customers submitted via Facebook or Twitter. Working with San Diego startup DataCapable, the company implements the data to determine where the outages are, finds the closest repair truck and gives the team more visual information to assess the repair before they arrive.

“Utility repair crews often approach the scene without full knowledge of what may have caused the outage, what potential challenges or dangers may be present and what tools may best suit the necessary repairs,” said Wade Malcom, CEO of OMNETRIC Group North America, based in Minnetonka, Minn. “The technology gives utilities access to the time stamp, GPS coordinates and visual clues, providing a repair crew with a 360 view of field conditions.”

If the storm knocks out your power for days or weeks, a power inverter can come in handy by using your vehicle as a power source. They allow a car’s battery to run a variety of electronic devices, including phones, laptops and cameras, said Arthur Romero, an owner in the Houston area of seven Batteries Plus Bulbs, a Hartland, Wis.-based battery supply company.

“Be sure to purchase extra power inverters for your car,” he said. “They come in a range of sizes and power capacities, with a starting price of about $20. Get your vehicle battery tested to make sure it will work for you during a storm.”

Purchasing LED flashlights might be more economical, because they use the least of amount of power and some of these lanterns and flashlights can last up to 200 hours on one set of batteries, Romero said.

It may seem like a throwback to another decade, but a battery-powered, two-way or hand-crank radio can be extremely handy to give you weather updates and evacuation instructions. If all your electronic devices are out of power, the radios can give you other information such as the time and information such as road closures.

In the Aftermath of a Storm...