Milwaukee police investigate Sunday morning after a deadly shooting outside Comments Bar on W. Hampton Ave. Credit: David Paulsen

SHARE W. Hampton Ave. was closed Sunday morning between 51st and 54th streets while police investigated the double homicide. David Paulsen

By

Two people opened fire on each other outside a Milwaukee bar early Sunday, leaving both dead and capping a day already darkened by four afternoon shootings in the city and two others the night before.

The double homicide occurred outside Comments Bar, 5219 W. Hampton Ave., as the bar was closing, Milwaukee police said in a news release Sunday.

Around 2 a.m., two people bumped into each other and began arguing. They followed up by going to their cars, each grabbing a gun and meeting back in front of the bar to continue the argument, police said.

As the argument escalated, both drew the guns and fired, killing each other at the scene. Police said a third person, the brother of one of the shooters, was injured in the cross-fire but is expected to survive.

W. Hampton Ave. was closed between N. 51st and N. 54th streets while police spent the morning investigating.

Yellow crime-scene tape stretched across the streets and through the backyards of homes as investigators interviewed people. One investigator asked the clerk at a convenience store across the street if the store might have any surveillance video of the shooting, but the store's cameras hadn't been pointed in that direction.

WITI-TV quoted a woman, Shavon Martin, who said she was sister to one of the victims. She told the TV station she was "very upset" and described her brother as "a good man."

Police had not publicly identified any of the victims as of Sunday.

The deadly gunfire came after an outbreak of violence Saturday afternoon in which four shootings occurred within an hour and a half of one another, including one after a funeral.

■Around 2:20 p.m., a 22-year-old man was shot while arguing with someone during a basketball game at Lincoln Park along N. Green Bay Ave. The shooter fled, and the victim was taken to a hospital for treatment.

■Twenty minutes later, a driver fired at another car pulling out of a gas station in the 4000 block of N. 27th St. after the two cars almost hit each other. The shots wounded a 30-year-old Milwaukee man who was a passenger in the fired-upon car, and the gunman drove off.

■Just before 3 p.m., an argument between two family members after a funeral in the 7200 block of N. Teutonia Ave. resulted in more gunfire. A 32-year-old man was injured, and the suspect, 22, was arrested a short time later by Brown Deer police.

■And around 3:45 p.m., police said, a 19-year-old man was shot and wounded by people driving by in a vehicle as he was walking along the 3700 block of N. 23rd St.