A lot of fanciful claims surround Nevada’s history. In celebration of the Silver State’s anniversary, Fact Checker looks at three.

Hoover Dam deaths

During construction of the Hoover Dam in Southern Nevada, some workers fell into the concrete as it was poured but it was too difficult to pull them out and the concrete just kept being poured — or so some claim.

The federal Bureau of Reclamation dispels this myth on its website by pointing out that the concrete wasn’t poured all at once but in small sections that couldn’t have buried a worker. Excerpt:

“The dam was built in interlocking blocks. Each block was five feet high. The smallest blocks were about 25 feet by 25 feet square, and the largest blocks were about 25 feet by 60 feet. Concrete was delivered to each block in buckets, eight cubic yards at a time. After each bucket was delivered, five or six men called ‘puddlers’ would stamp and vibrate the concrete into place, packing it down to ensure there were no air pockets in it. Each time a bucket was emptied, the level of concrete would raise from two inches up to six inches, depending on the size of the block. With only a slight increase in the level at any one time, and the presence of several men watching the placement, it would have been virtually impossible for anyone to be buried in the concrete. So, there are no bodies buried in Hoover Dam.”

Some consider J.G. Tierney the Hoover Dam’s first death when, in 1922, he was doing a geological survey of the area and fell off a barge and drowned. His son, Patrick, was the last to die — 13 years to the day after his dad’s death — when he fell off the dam’s intake tower.

One claim that’s far less certain regarding the dam’s construction is the large number of workers classified as dying of “natural causes,” including 42 from pneumonia. According to Michael Hiltzik’s 2010 book “Colossus: Hoover Dam and the Making of the American Century”:

“Although pneumonia was by no means an uncommon medical complaint in Depression America, the concentration of so many cases among the tunnel workers strongly suggests that pneumonia, and to a lesser extent coronary problems, were proxies for gas poisoning. This was the universal assumption among Boulder City residents. ‘If you said they died of gasses in the tunnels, they were obligated to compensate you, to compensate the family,’ recalled the wife of one tunnel inspector. ‘So they’d say just “pneumonia,” and they’d get by with that. We never felt that was fair.’”

The Civil War

It’s been claimed that the 1859 discovery of gold and silver in the Comstock Lode prompted Nevada to be admitted as a state in order to finance Union forces during the Civil War.

Historian Guy Rocha calls this “perhaps our state’s No. 1 legend” and says in an article on the topic, “Anyone who has attended Nevada’s schools has heard the story from a teacher or read it in a textbook. It’s a wonderful tale, but nothing could be farther from the truth.”

The confusion probably arises from a combination of three things:

* The state’s Battle Born slogan comes from the fact that it was admitted to the Union during the Civil War.

* A 1962 episode of the TV show “Bonanza” — called “The War Comes to Washoe” — showed a constitutional convention in Carson City over whether Nevada would leave the Union and join the Confederacy as a state. The debate was actually over whether to remain a territory or to become a state.

* And probably most importantly, Nevada’s creation as a territory on March 2, 1861 was indeed prompted by a desire to have the state’s mineral riches help the Union and not the Confederacy.

Reno & 501 jeans

Who do you think invented the popular style of jeans with riveted pockets, such as Levi’s 501 jeans?

You’re probably wise enough to know that’s a loaded question and it isn’t the obvious answer of Levi Strauss. But you may not realize that riveted jeans were invented right here in Reno.

The story does indeed tangentially include a Bavarian Jew named Loeb Strauss, known as Levi, who emigrated to New York at age 18 in 1847. He eventually established a dry goods store in San Francisco with his two older brothers and sister Fanny.

The Jewish Virtual Library describes what happened next this way: “Strauss’s big break came in 1872, when he was approached by Jacob Davis, a Nevada tailor who had developed a new process for securing the seams of denim pants — which were already popular with miners, ranchers and farmers — by riveting them at the pockets and the base of the button fly. Davis could not afford the $81 needed to apply for a patent for his riveting process, so he asked Strauss if he would pay the fee and share the patent. Strauss brought Davis to San Francisco to oversee the pant manufacturing. The riveted jean quickly developed a reputation for durability and quality, and Levi Strauss and Company soon employed several hundred sewing workers.”

Davis was actually a German Jew whose original last name was Youphes. After coming to the United States in 1854, he opened a tailor shop in 1869 on Virginia Street in Reno.

In 1871, a woman came to Davis and asked him to make a sturdy pair of pants for her plus-sized husband. Davis testified in a patent infringement case a few years later:

“So when the pants were done — the rivets were lying on the table — the thought struck me to fasten the pockets with rivets. I had never thought of it before.”

Soon he was deluged with orders and realized he needed to get the process patented before somebody stole his idea. That’s when he contacted Strauss, who had been supplying the fabric for Davis’ pants.

(Tangent: Davis’ grandson Ben started the Ben Davis Clothing Co. It’s been based in San Francisco since 1935 and is a favorite among such rappers as Dr. Dre, Ice Cube and the Beastie Boys. At bendavis.com, you can read the text of the letter that Jacob Davis sent to Strauss asking for help to cover the cost of the riveting patent. (It says $68, not $81 as mentioned above.))

Rocha concludes in an entry in “The Mythical West: An Encyclopedia of Legend, Lore and Popular Culture”:

“The next time you look at your Levi 501 jeans, think of Jacob Davis and Reno, Nevada, where it all began in 1871.”