Six people were shot in the District over an eight-hour period stretching from Sunday night to early Monday, including one man killed in Northeast and three people injured in two separate robbery attempts in the Brightwood neighborhood in Northwest.

The fatal shooting occurred in the 500 block of 58th Street NE at 9 p.m. Sunday. Metropolitan Police Department officers responded to a report of a shooting and found two men suffering from gunshot wounds. Both men were taken to area hospitals, but 20-year-old Devonte Reed, of Lanham, Maryland, died from his injuries.

The injured man, 26-year-old Jamie Patterson, was charged with second-degree murder in Mr. Reed’s death. No further information about the nature of the shooting was available Monday.

The first of the Brightwood shootings occurred at 8 p.m. Sunday in the 5600 block of Georgia Avenue NW. A man was shot in the foot after he tried to fight off a robber, according to Capt. Brian Bray, who wrote an account of this incident and two others on the police department’s online Listserv.

The man told police he was walking through an alleyway when another man approached him and told him to give up his phone. The victim attempted to punch the robber, who pulled out a handgun and shot him.

The man was taken to a hospital for treatment, and the robber fled.

The second Brightwood robbery occurred at 3:15 a.m. Monday in the 900 block of Gallatin Street NW. Three people were standing outside of an apartment building when a man pointed a gun at them and demanded money, Capt. Bray said.

One of the victims handed over cash. Something startled the gunman, and he began firing at the victims, striking one in the hand and another in the leg. The victims’ injuries are not believed to be life-threatening.

The robber ran from the scene and got into a black sedan that fled. The car only made it a few blocks before it crashed into a fence and fire hydrant while trying to evade police.

The gunman and others inside the car escaped, but police found evidence in the stolen car they believe ties them to several other robberies in the area that night, Capt. Bray said.

It was unclear whether the robbery attempt in the 5600 block of Georgia Avenue was among those believed to be related.

In a separate incident, another man was shot in the arm around midnight in the 3600 block of Warder Street in NW near Petworth.

After initially refusing to cooperate with officers, the victim told police he was attending a party at a home on the block when a man “shot him from across the street while he was standing on the porch of a house,” Capt. Bray said.

The shooter fled the scene, and no arrests have been made.

The series of shootings follow two other homicides over the weekend.

Police said 29-year-old Anthony Andre Osgood was killed and a woman injured in a shooting in the 2300 block of Irving Street in Southeast early Saturday.

A Bowie man also was stabbed to death shortly after noon Friday in Northeast. Police identified the man as 24-year-old Stephon Demarrio Clark and said he was fatally stabbed near the intersection of 18th and H streets in Northeast.