Leading off today:

A pair of first-team all-state players from last winter's high school basketball season highlight the Suffolk County boys roster for next weekend's annual BCANY Summer Hoops Festival in the state's Southern Tier.

Rising seniors Jamel Allen of Class AA Brentwood and Charles Manning of state Class D champion Bridgehampton were New York State Sportswriters Association first-team picks, with Manning also being tabbed as player of the year in his class.

Rosters and schedules for the boys and girls tournaments July 31-Aug. 2 were posted this week on the Basketball Coaches Association of New York website. Games will be played in Johnson City schools buildings and Davis College.

The Buffalo/Western New York roster includes Jordan Nwora of Park School, a Class B first-teamer last season, and Rochester/Finger Lakes has Class A first-teamer Anthony Lamb from state finalist Greece Athena. Others from the first team set to play are Terrence Nichols of Class D New York Mills for the Central squad and Ty Jerome of Class AA Iona Prep for the Hudson Valley entry.

The Southern Tier girls will be represented by two first-team selections: Daniella Dean of Class A Maine-Endwell and Lexi Levy of Class B Binghamton Seton Catholic. Frankfort-Schuyler's Danielle Migliore (Class C) and Suffolk's Alexis Fotopolous of Hampton Bays (B) are the other first-teamers to make the cut. The Central New York team lists Class C player of the year Liz Millea of Cooperstown as an alternate.

Irondequoit appoints Colohan: Irondequoit, a 16-time Section 5 champion mired in a rapid downward spiral since Craig Whipple abruptly quit early in the 2013 season, has selected Terry Colohan as its boys lacrosse coach.

Colohan is a town resident connected to Irondequoit Youth Lacrosse for more than 11 years. He replaces Mark Lovett, who inherited the job when Whipple left over a disagreement with school administrators confronted by a small but vocal group of disgruntled parents.

"At this time, we need strong leadership someone with a no-nonsense approach," AD Anthony Lipani told the Democrat and Chronicle.

Guilty plea: Former Greece Olympia cheerleading coach Christina Jewell-Belluccio pleaded guilty Thursday to third-degree rape as a result of her sexual encounters with a 16-year-old male student, the Democrat and Chronicle reported.

Under the plea agreement, Jewell-Belluccio, 33, will serve eight work Sundays with the Monroe County Jail and will be on probation for 10 years. She will also be required to register as a sex offender. She resigned from her positions as coach -- she was selected Section 5 Class A coach of the year in 2014 -- and a teacher's aide in the district after being charged in May.

On a (much) lighter note: After weighty decisions in June about the Affordable Care Act and same-sex marriage, the United States Supreme Court could soon take a crack at a thorny high school sports dispute in New Jersey.

The North Bergen School District is still fuming over having its 2011 state championship overturned. The New Jersey Interscholastic Activities Association ruled North