Dan Monahan (right) helps Ivan Hernandez of Milwaukee sign up for Affordable Care Act insurance coverage last month at Centro Hispano High School in Milwaukee. The deadline is Feb. 15. Credit: Calvin Mattheis

By of the

Roughly two weeks remain to sign up for health insurance on the marketplace set up under the Affordable Care Act, and this year the penalty for not having coverage will have a bit more bite.

The minimum penalty will be $325, up from $95 for last year, and most people will face higher penalties.

The deadline to sign up for coverage is Feb. 15, and a slew of events are planned statewide to help people pick a health plan.

They include events on what is being billed as "Super Saturday" this week.

"This is the last big push to get as many people enrolled in coverage as possible," said Heather Dummer Combs, project manager for the Milwaukee Enrollment Network, a coalition of organizations.

More than 177,000 people in the state, including an estimated 27,000 people in Milwaukee County, had bought health plans sold on the marketplace or been automatically re-enrolled in a plan as of mid-January.

About 130,000 people in Wisconsin signed up for coverage last year.

Nationally, an estimated 9.6 million people had picked a plan or been automatically re-enrolled as of Jan. 21.

In all, 22 events are planned between now and Feb. 15 in Milwaukee County, Combs said.

People can get information on the events and organizations that are helping people sign up for coverage by calling 211, Combs said.

They also can contact an insurance agent or broker who is certified to help people shop for health plans. Thirty-seven agents and brokers in the Milwaukee area, for instance, are accepting referrals from the Milwaukee Enrollment Network.

Combs expects a burst of sign-ups — similar to last year — near the deadline.

"It is part of people's nature to wait to the last minute," she said. "There will be a flurry of activity. People are going to have to be patient."

This year's open-enrollment period has seen none of the chaos of the first year, but there have been glitches, such as incorrect information being given to insurance companies.

Todd Catlin, owner of Transition Health Benefits in Brookfield, said the open enrollment period needs to be lengthened.

"There is not enough time to ensure that everyone gets accurate information," Catlin said.

Most people who buy health insurance for themselves and their families — as opposed to getting coverage through an employer — can sign up for coverage only during the annual open-enrollment period.

People who don't have health insurance this year will face a penalty of $325 or 2% of income above the tax filing threshold of $10,150 for an individual and $20,300 for a married couple filing jointly.

The penalty for last year was $95 or 1% of income.

People don't get hit with the penalty until they file their taxes. That will the first time some people learn of the penalty.

That eventually will change.

"As with anything, it takes time to set in," said Danielle Coterel of Covering Kids & Families, one of the organizations involved in helping people sign up for coverage.

And more health plans are available in the Milwaukee area.

"Chances are pretty good that you can find a plan that's affordable — which is great news," Combs said.

Individuals and families with incomes below 400% of the federal poverty threshold — $46,680 for an individual and $95,400 for a family of four this year — who are not offered affordable health insurance from an employer are eligible for tax credits to subsidize the cost of the health plans.

About 90% of the people in Wisconsin who have signed up for coverage have been eligible for subsidies. And those who don't sign up for coverage will pay a penalty.