People Moves of the Week: MorrisAnderson, Duff & Phelps, Grant Thornton

MorrisAnderson hires restructuring specialist; Duff & Phelps gets a new managing director; Grant Thornton taps Greg Chin for Boston office

Capital One Financial Corp. (NYSE: COF) — The McLean, Virginia bank holding company hired Greg Steele as managing director. He will work within Capital One Securities Inc. and oversee growing the firm's real estate investment banking practice. Prior to joining Capital One, Steele was managing director of the real estate segment at BMO Capital Markets.

Duff & Phelps — Brian Sipes has joined the Dallas location of the New York investment bank as a managing director. He will specialize in transaction advisory services where he will advise both buyers and sellers on due diligence matters, as well as financial projections and post-closing purchase price disputes. Before Duff & Phelps, Sipes was with investment bank Houlihan Lokey.

Genstar Capital LLC — The San Francisco private equity firm named Daniel Bilot to the advisory board of portfolio company Palomar Insurance Holdings. In this role, he will be assist in evaluating business development opportunities and advise on property catastrophe analytics initiatives. Bilot, who is currently the CEO of Capital Risk Partners, was previously senior vice president at independent reinsurance brokerage firm Holborn Corp.

Gibson Dunn & Crutcher LLP — The law firm tapped Gregory Merz in Washington, D.C. office as of counsel. Formerly a managing director with Legg Mason and most recently a special regulatory counsel with Proskauer Rose, Merz will continue his regulatory and compliance practice at Gibson Dunn with a focus on the asset management industry.

Grant Thornton LLP — Greg Chin has joined the New York advisory firm as a managing director. He will work out of Grant Thornton's Boston branch. Most recently, Chin was a managing director within the transaction advisory services practice at Duff & Phelps Corp., where he was responsible for client and engagement and business development. Previously, he was a managing director in the transactions advisory services practice of FTI Consulting Inc., and a director at PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP.

MorrisAnderson & Associates Ltd. — Bruce Goldstein has jumped over to the Chicago consulting firm where he will advise companies on restructuring matters. Prior to joining MorrisAnderson, Goldstein held leadership positions at CBIZ, SALA Capital Corp. and PricewaterhouseCoopers LLC.

Pritzker Group Private Capital — The Chicago private equity firm has expanded the West Coast investment team with three new hires. Based in Los Angeles: are Michael Dal Bello, a former Blackstone managing director who joins the firm's health care investment team, as well as Ceron Rhee, a former vice president at TPG Capital in San Francisco; and associate Evan Earley, who joins from UBS Investment Bank, where he was an analyst.

Schulte Roth & Zabel LLP — Frank Steinherr has joined the New York firm as special counsel, focusing on private equity investments, as well as securities and capital markets transactions. Steinherr worked previously at law firm Paul Weiss Rifkind Wharton & Garrison LLP.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: