Republican presidential candidate Marco Rubio took free health insurance from Florida's taxpayers and a $10,000 subsidy from federal taxpayers for his family's Obamacare health plan yet he has a problem with Democrats trying to give away "free stuff."

The Florida senator and his GOP rival former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush have apparently learned nothing from failed Republican presidential candidate Mitt "47 percent" Romney.

In assessing last week's Democratic debate Rubio said, "It was basically a liberal versus liberal debate about who was going to give away the most free stuff: Free college education. Free college education for people illegally in this country. Free health care. Free everything."

The candidates discussed making college more affordable with free tuition, but that's just a small part of the cost of higher education. The various fees that colleges and universities charge along with room and board often far exceed tuition. As for undocumented immigrants, none of the candidates suggested they get a free college education. They supported giving undocumented immigrants in-state tuition, which some states already do. In-state tuition is less expensive than out-of-state tuition but it's hardly free.

Health care barely made the radar during the debate and there was no talk about making it free. Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said she'd like undocumented immigrants to be able to buy into the federal health care exchanges while former Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley would like to see them get the same Affordable Care Act subsidies as U.S. citizens.

Members of Congress must buy their health plans through the exchanges if they want coverage through the federal government that employs them. Some who have enrolled, however, have refused to accept their subsidies as a symbol of their opposition to the law. Rubio, a staunch Obamacare critic, is not one of them. As a Florida lawmaker his health plan was entirely subsidized by taxpayers.

Rubio said Democrats' "answer to every problem in America is a government program and a tax increase. That's all they prescribe, time and time again." Amazing how Republicans only detest the generosity of government when it comes to programs that help the poor and the shrinking middle class yet they have no problem with corporate welfare or privatizing public services to benefit their campaign donors.

Rubio, for example, is against raising the minimum wage but would subsidize low-paying jobs so the corporations that pay these meager wages can continue to rake in billions in profits.

"We should pursue reforms that encourage and reward work," he said. "This would allow an unemployed individual to take a job that pays, say, $18,000 a year – which on its own is not enough to make ends meet – but then receive a federal enhancement to make the job a more enticing alternative to collecting unemployment insurance."

The best way to reward work is with a livable wage. Rubio talks like the unemployed are deadbeats who'd rather collect unemployment than put in a day's work.

This is the same demeaning attitude Bush expressed toward black Americans at an event last month in South Carolina when asked how Republicans could woo black voters.

"Our message is one of hope and aspiration," he said. "It isn't one of division and 'Get in line, and we'll take care of you with free stuff.' "

So black people want to be taken care of with "free stuff?" They aren't concerned with the economy, education, social and criminal justice, the environment, health care or income inequality?

So much for a message of hope and aspiration.

Mitt Romney told his campaign donors that he lost to President Obama in 2012 because Obama gave "extraordinary financial gifts from the government" to blacks, Hispanics and young people.

"The Obama campaign was following the old playbook," he said, "of giving a lot of stuff to groups that they hoped they could get to vote for them."

Actually Romney lost because he wasn't able to connect with blacks, Hispanics and young people.

Rubio and Bush could see the same fate with their "free stuff" nonsense.

Rhonda Swan is a freelance journalist, life coach and former editor for The Republican.