Topics: Best Buy, Big Box Stores, Consumerism, credit, The Globalist, U.S. Economy, Technology News, Business News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on The Globalist

Best Buy used to feed the U.S. public’s big appetite for electronic gadgets. Now, there are far fewer customers in its stores. Why? The baby boomers have everything they need. Meanwhile, the young people and the growing Latino population do not have access to credit.

The saga of Best Buy points to a broader problem confronting the U.S. economic model.

It just took another dive, owing to weaker Christmas season sales than expected.

It wasn’t so long ago that big box stores were all the rage in the United States. They offered to fulfill every desire of a consumption-hungry public. Endless rows of the latest products were all available at rock-bottom prices, thanks to the merchandiser’s aggregated purchasing power in the market.

Fueled by a debt binge, U.S. consumers bought to their heart’s content, with little regard for what amount of money they really had in their pockets. Best Buy seemed like an incarnation of the brave new world, delivering on the American Dream of instant gratification of any and all material desires.

And so it was that all the latest stuff flew off the shelves. Successive generations of flat screen TVs, ever larger, lighter, cheaper, better. Same for digital cameras. And PCs. And laptops. Cell phones. Cooking ranges. Refrigerators. Washing machines.

“Cashiers” or credit card takers?

You get the drill. The range of products offered was vast, the stores full and the lines at the “cashier” (in reality, the credit card charge counter operator) were long.

So much for the past. If you go to a Best Buy these days, you get an odd sensation. One actually has personal space, lots of space. It used to be that massive amounts of people were hunkering down on the shopping floor.

Back then, it was also nearly impossible to get advice or ask a question of a sales clerk.

That is still a problem — even though it should be much easier now to hunt down a sales associate, since there are very few customers in the stores. The reason why this remains a frustrating problem is that, along with fewer customers, there are ever fewer sales associates on the shopping floor. That is a clear sign of the deep crisis the company is in.

A closer look at who is still frequenting the stores reveals that it is mostly young people and Latinos. Advertising hype notwithstanding, neither of those groups is known for its vast spending powers in the consumer electronics market.

The brave new American shopping world

This, then, is the brave new American shopping world: Those who are equipped with spending power are much more likely to frequent an Apple store when — and if — they still need something. But by and large, the baby boomers are simply shopped out. They have all the flat screen TVs, ovens, dishwashers, etc. etc. that they can imagine buying. With real product innovation slowing down in most product categories, there is little reason to buy.

Another factor is that consumer credit remains generally tight. No matter how much retail industry analysts in their cheery comments to the news media want to convince consumers otherwise, ample credit is available only to those who already have everything they need. And credit remains restricted for income groups that still have pent-up demand.

Best Buy’s problem is said to be one of management troubles and of high fixed costs. The first is true, but ultimately a convenient sideshow. The second is certainly a gruesome reality.