Members of the CCHS JROTC Raiders Platoon take part in the litter carry event Saturday during the Eco Park Eliminator V Challenge at Eco Park. ( Laura Ornelas / Special to the Daily Record )

Members of the CCHS JROTC Raiders Platoon look at a map during the orienteering competition Saturday during the Eco Park Eliminator V Challenge at Eco Park. (Laura Ornelas / Special to the Daily Record)

Being part of the Cañon City High School Raider team is not for the weak. Twelve CCHS Army Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps students, comprising of two teams of six individuals, embrace the challenge of the rigorous Eco Park Eliminator V Challenge.

SFC (Retired) Paul Vertrees and LTC (Retired) Andrew Ornelas led the competition Saturday at Eco Park. Vertrees said 19 teams competed in Saturday's event, teams from the Colorado Springs, Loveland and Denver areas, and even a group from Tombstone, Ariz.

Cadet Capt. Brianna Mueller, a CCHS junior, is the only female on CCHS' Raider team.

"I thought it would be fun to be on Raiders, so I tried out and I made it," she said. "I am having a lot of fun on the team with all the guys."

Members of the CCHS JROTC Raiders Platoon take part in the hummer pull event Saturday during the Eco Park Eliminator V Challenge at Eco Park. (Laura Ornelas / Special to the Daily Record)

But the guys don't cut her any slack just because she is a girl.

"I do all the same things they do," she said. "They don't treat me any different than anyone else."

Mueller said she is in the process of completing an application for the Naval Academy.

After an opening ceremony and briefing, students rotate through pull-ups, curl-ups and a litter carry. The litter carry involves four students transporting one student on a stretcher for a total of a quarter of a mile, while running.

"Orienteering is a sport that combines cross-country running with navigating with a map and a compass," Vertrees said. "They look at a map to figure out where the nine markers are, some are as far as a half a mile away."

Students punch their score card with a distinct punch pattern at each of the markers. The competition wraps up with a 5K trail race and then a timed Hummer pull.

Cadet Capt. Alex Knoedler has been in ROTC and a part of the Raiders team all four years of high school.

"I like the 5-K and the orienteering because the way our team trains, we are the best at it, we have won every year," he said.

SFC (Retired) Paul Vertrees distributes a map to CCHS JROTC students Saturday during the Eco Park Eliminator V Challenge at Eco Park. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

Knoedler also was the state champion for orienteering twice. He has been awarded a Type 1 Air Force ROTC scholarship that will pay full tuition at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

"The leadership on the Raiders team, the opportunities on the Raider team, in addition to opportunities in class and other clubs like Color Guard, definitely were helpful," he said.

Cadet Maj. Alex Skerjanec, a senior at CCHS, has participated in JROTC four years, and the Raiders Platoon for three years.

"To get on the Raider Platoon, you have to pass an Army Physical Fitness Test that is like the entrance exam for the Army," he said. "It's pretty impressive if you can pass it in high school."

SFC (Retired) Paul Vertrees and LTC (Retired) Andrew Ornelas talks to CCHS JROTC students Saturday during the Eco Park Eliminator V Challenge at Eco Park. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

Skerjanec said the test involves a two-mile run, two minutes of push-ups and two minutes of sit-ups.

"The percentiles are different depending on male and female," he said "The male run is two miles in 15 minutes and 56 seconds; you have to do 43 push-ups in two minutes and 53 sit-ups in two minutes."

Skerjanec said he recently learned that he has been awarded a U.S. Army three-year college scholarship. He is considering attending the University of Wyoming.

The Raiders train three times a week after school, and compete in other invitationals across the region and at a state meet. The team also practices orienteering on skis during the winter.

For more information, visit

Members of the CCHS JROTC Raiders Platoon take part in the Eco Park Eliminator V Challenge on Saturday at Eco Park. (Laura Ornelas / Special to the Daily Record)

http://canoncityschools.org/education/staff/staff.php?sectiondetailid=17972&" title="canoncityschools.org">http://canoncityschools.org/education/staff/staff.php?sectiondetailid=17972&

.