In a speech at the Human Rights Campaign Gala at the Sheraton Seattle Hotel on Saturday, Wentworth Miller, known for his role as Michael Scofield in the Fox television series Prison Break, confessed that he attempted suicide at the tender age of 15.

The Hollywood star admitted his first suicide attempt was because he struggled with being a gay teen.

"The first time I tried to kill myself I was 15. I waited until my family went away for the weekend and I was alone in the house and I swallowed a bottle of pills,” said Miller, reports E! News. “I don't remember what happened over the next couple days, but I'm pretty sure come Monday morning I was on a bus back to school pretending everything was fine. And when someone asked me if that was a cry for help, I say no, because I told no one."

Miller, 41, came out less than a month ago when he was received an invitation to be the guest of honor at the St. Petersburg International Film Festival, scheduled to be held in the middle of September. In a letter to Maria Averbakh, director of the St. Petersburg International Film Festival, the star kindly thanked her for the invitation but humbly declined.

"Thank you for your kind invitation. As someone who has enjoyed visiting Russia in the past and can also claim a degree of Russian ancestry, it would make me happy to say yes,” wrote the Prison Break star in the letter, posted on GLAAD's website. "However, as a gay man, I must decline. I am deeply troubled by the current attitude toward and treatment of gay men and women by the Russian government."

Miller has now dedicated himself to raising awareness about not only his own challenges, but also the challenges that many gay youth face.

"Growing up I was a target. Speaking the right way, standing the right way, holding your wrist the right way. Every day was a test and there were a thousand ways to fail," he said at the Human Rights Campaign Gala. The actor continued to talk about paying the price of trying to be someone you are not. “And when you failed the test, which was guaranteed, there was a price to pay. Emotional. Psychological. Physical. And like many of you, I paid that price. More than once."

Miller explained that he had many opportunities to publicly come out early in his career but he was too nervous because he felt he wasn’t ready. The actor did come out privately to family and friends, says E! News.