Bethlehem Lutheran Church staff members Nancy Tiff, Kristen Baltrum, Mark Peterson and Tonja Twito have lunch March 25 at The Roost, 526 Main St. The restaurant opened last month. ( Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer )

Longmont's downtown is in full renaissance mode and not showing any signs of slowing down. Businesses say they are seeing more foot traffic on the sidewalks than in years, and tax revenues are increasing almost on a monthly basis.

"I think this is a great time for downtown. I think the momentum has really taken off," said Kimberlee McKee, executive director of the Longmont Downtown Development Authority as she looked over a large map of the district in her office. "I think having a vision and having people get behind it and stick to it has really helped."

The numbers are impressive. Since 2010, net taxable sales in the downtown area have grown 32 percent from $34.5 million in 2010 to $50.8 million last year. Sales tax revenues have grown by more than 30 percent.

Despite the positive growth numbers, McKee still has a lot in the works with LDDA projects underway or in the planning stages.

"We'll be undergoing a multi-modal study this year looking at parking and transportation and how do we make downtown an appealing place for pedestrians, bicycles, public transit, for cars, everything," she said as she pointed to parking areas on the LDDA map. "We'll be extending our streetscape here, from Third to First, adding planters and benches."

The LDDA is primarily funded by tax increment financing (TIF). In a nutshell: 50 percent of property tax revenues generated above and beyond the base year level of 1995 are allocated to the organization.

Downtown Longmont tax collections Year Net Taxable Sales Total Tax Revenue 2014 $50,766,557 $1,669,672 2013 $46,511,994 $1,548,938 2012 $41,479,848 $1,394,472 2011 $39,215,911 $1,292,229 2010 $34,525,412 $1,136,297

The amount the LDDA spends varies significantly from year to year, depending on the projects in which it invests. For example, the LDDA is spending around $1.1 million in TIF financing on the entire alleyscape and breezeway projects. It is a joint partnership with the city and Longmont Power and Communications, which also are contributing funds.

The LDDA area runs from Longs Peak to First Avenue, with its eastern border being the alley between Kimbark and Emery streets, except south of Third, where the eastern boundary reaches out to Martin Street. To the west, the district extends to the alley between Terry and Pratt streets.

"We are starting to get a lot of foot traffic that we haven't seen in a while, a lot more foot traffic," McKee said. "So how do we make sure it's engaging, how do we make sure there is creativity at every turn? We've invested a lot in these alleys and breezeways, so how do we make sure when you walk by there's musicians or artists or other creative folks? We'll continue to focus on that with our partners.

"Hopefully once we get a lot of energy on Main Street people are going to start pushing out and exploring other areas of the district."

Local business owners are happy with the efforts of the LDDA and city leaders.

"I feel that downtown Longmont is a lot better off than five years ago, with the alleyway renovation on the east side complete," said Seth Miller, owner of Miller Music at 464 Main St. "We earned our Arts and Entertainment District designation, and it feels like we have less vacant spaces in the downtown area as a whole."

"I am excited about where we are now and where we are headed in the future. Kimberlee has done a great job," said Longmont Mayor Dennis Coombs, who co-owns the Pumphouse Brewery on Main Street.

Ernesto Guerrero paints a doorway at The Brew, 314 Main St. The Brew is scheduled to open April 10. (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

"I think we are turning the corner by having several great places to eat downtown. The Longs Peak Pub is a nice addition."

Downtown dining

Food has become big business in Longmont. The downtown area has 40 dining establishments and bars alone, according to the LDDA, and that number is growing.

At 314 Main Street, The Brew is currently finishing its construction and is set to open later this month. The Brew, which already has a location in Firestone, is a gourmet fast casual restaurant serving breakfast, lunch and dinner. Their offerings will include crêpes, sandwiches and salads. They will also offer a full espresso bar plus beer, wine and specialty cocktails.

The alley and its overhead power lines behind are seen the east alley, behind the Longmont Theatre Company, 513 Main St., in this January 2013 photo. (Lewis Geyer / Staff Writer)

On the same block, Samples Restaurant is in the works as well.

The new eatery to open at 370 Main St. is an independent establishment that will serve "tapas style" small plates, craft beers and wines. The most unique aspect of this business is its Sample Supports employment program, which will offer employment opportunities to persons with developmental disabilities.

Sample Supports was founded in 2010 by Carmen and Mark Sample to support people with developmental disabilities, including employment-focused services, and since then it has grown both in the number of clients served and in the range of services they offer. The restaurant is expected to open this summer.

"I have been hearing about the turnaround for a long time and am very excited to see the support the city is giving and the changes being made by new blood in downtown," Mark Sample said.

"Samples Restaurant will have 20 draft beer lines, eight draft wines and 10 specialty cocktails that will rotate constantly, making finding something to drink with our international small plates menu pretty exciting," he said. "We are focused on being a socially progressive company that employs adults with developmental disabilities, partnering with Sample Supports."

Samples is expected to open in May.

South Main Station

You need to cross Third Avenue heading south to find the big downtown project for 2015.

"This is a huge focus right now, Butterball — South Main Station, 332 units, a brewery, in phases," said McKee.

The old turkey plant site is now being called the South Main Station, centered around the First Avenue and Main Street intersection. The former Butterball plant will become four or five four-story buildings containing approximately 300 apartment units and 10,500 square feet of commercial space along Main Street.

Late last week, crews began taking down the west wall of the plant. It will be reduced to rubble and hauled away.

Wibby Brewing is planning to open a brewery and taproom at the 209 Emery St. property just east of where the plant was located.

"We moved forward with our location because of how much we believe in downtown Longmont," said Ted Risk, co-founder of Wibby Brewing.

"The excitement is only growing," Risk said. "I really think that this growth is due in large part to the collaborative efforts of the folks at the LDDA, the Longmont Area Economic Council, The Longmont Chamber of Commerce, Visit Longmont and the City of Longmont."

But downtown is more than food, with more 70 stores and shops and hundreds of other local business in the district.

"It's much more vibrant," said Ron Cheyney who has owned Ron's Printing Center on Main Street since the 1970s.

"Back then Main Street was the retail shopping area in town," he said.

He's been pleased with all the new businesses in the area.

"I've watched a lot of buildings change hands over the years," he added. "New people come along and fix things up."

Road ahead

There remains a list of items downtown that still needs work.

"I would like to see the colored concrete cross walks replaced with brick pavers," said Mayor Coombs. "I would also like to see the street lighting along Main Street replaced with LED lighting that has a 5,000 degree K color index."

Others point to the growing need for more parking, better signage, and finishing the Alleyscape program on the west side, which was delayed by the flood in 2013.

"We're still doing some investigation," McKee said in regard to the alley program. "We're looking at the east side (alley) and seeing how it's holding up two years later and what kind of things we're going to tweak. We're getting ready to go to bid in the next month to see for the west side where we are on that. Hopefully we'll see the first part of that start; not sure when, maybe in mid-summer. It'll go from Third Avenue to Sixth Avenue."

The LDDA is also exploring other designations for Longmont's downtown area.

"One of the things we're focusing on now, between Third and Fifth, is looking to submit an application to the state to have a National Registered Historic District," McKee said. "Being on the National Registered Historic District will bring a lot of acclaim and attention to the downtown and it also opens up for the property owners some incentives if they do want to bring their buildings back to the historic look and feel."

As for more parking, that's something the LDDA is always exploring.

"The more visually appealing we make it and the more comfortable you are, the more willing you are to walk a few blocks," McKee explained. "We do continue to look at parking as an issue, but we certainly hope we're making it a destination where walking a block or two is well worth where you are going."

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel