The mayor of Indio is planning to challenge Rep. Raul Ruiz for his Riverside County congressional seat in 2016.

Lupe Ramos Watson filed paperwork with the Federal Election Commssion last week to run in the 36th Congressional District, which covers the Coachella Valley, the Pass, Hemet and San Jacinto. Ruiz, D-Palm Desert, has represented the district since 2012, when he defeated veteran GOP Rep. Mary Bono.

An Indio native, Watson, a Republican, has been on Indio’s council since 2004. She owned a small business specializing in engineering and commercial planning and a real estate investment firm, according to her council campaign website.

In a videotaped interview posted on the Desert Sun’s website, Watson said she believes her message will resonate with voters.

“I believe that the voters know me, they trust me,” she said. “ … They’re tired of Washington antics. They’re tired of where we are as a country. And they’re ready for change.”

Watson’s remarks show her to be an unconventional Republican. In the video, she said the district needs immigration reform.

“Our district is highly reliant on not only that labor force for the agriculture community plus also for the tourism industry,” she said.

While she said more time should have been taken to make sure the Affordable Care Act was understood, Watson added: “I do believe at the end of the day, it’s a better system than what we had before.”

Watson caused a stir earlier this year, when she did away with the traditional invocation to start council meetings. She was quoted as saying she did not think the practice was appropriate for a government meeting.

The district’s voter registration leans ever-so-slightly to the GOP. Watson has been re-elected repeatedly in a city with more registered Democrats than Republicans.

Still, Watson told the Desert Sun she knows she faces an uphill battle in trying to unseat Ruiz, who defeated Republican Assemblyman Brian Nestande last year and had almost $688,000 in reserve campaign funds as of March 31.

Ruiz also could be helped by 2016 being a presidential election. Higher voter turnout in those elections tends to favor Democratic candidates.

The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee put Ruiz on a list of vulnerable Democrats in need of extra help while the National Republican Congressional Committee has targeted Ruiz for defeat in 2016.