Topics: Afghan Whigs, Greg Dulli, Jonathan Poneman, Music, SubPop, Twilight Singers, Entertainment News

Greg Dulli has a thing about cars. In his songs with the Afghan Whigs in the 1990s and with the Twilight Singers in the 2000s, the Cincinnati-born, New Orleans-based songwriter always has a ride waiting outside. “I’ll get the car, you get the match and gasoline,” he instructs a lover on the Whigs’ “Going to Town,” promising great conflagration. On the Singers’ “Follow You Down,” he sings, “Get the wheel, let’s go for a ride. If you’re trouble, then I’ll follow you down.” That car — presumably a sinister muscle car circa ’72, painted oil-slick black and with tinted windows, growling in idle — sometimes offers salvation, but more often it’s a vehicle to damnation.

It’s a powerful metaphor, simultaneously menacing and reassuring, and it’s the first thing that connects the Afghan Whigs’ first album in 16 years with that band’s revered catalog. The opening song — one of the heaviest in Dulli’s catalog — is called “Parked Outside,” while another, “Can Rova,” includes what might be a kind of mission statement for the singer/songwriter: “Start the car, check the mirror … We leave tonight, ain’t nuthin’ but the stripes.” Dulli is taking us for a ride, showing us around the seamy underworld he has created in his music. He might crash that car, he might open the door and kick us to the curb, he might even have the cops behind him, but he will never run out of gas.

An alt-soul auteur with a deep knowledge of pop and R&B history, Dulli plays the role of Virgil in his own Purgatory, ushering the listener through various levels of obsession, addiction, self-annihilation and insoluble ache. Yet, he’s never so self-absorbed as your typical confessional songwriter, not only because he filters his emotions through back-alley imagery — junkies, dealers, squares, thugs and the cars they drive to and from their crime scenes — but because you never know if he’s bemoaning that pain or savoring it. Or both.

In the 1990s, Dulli was out of place. Mainstream rock favored flannel shirts, long hair, intense self-absorption and classic rock filtered through a punk ethos. The Afghan Whigs, on the other hand, sported crisp suits, short hair and a sound built on rhythmic thrust. They understood that punk and R&B were imminently compatible, so made no bones about nodding to Isaac Hayes or Stevie Wonder, James Brown or Joe Tex rather than Neil Young, the Clash or the Who. They may have been lambasted for trying to “sound black,” but their albums — especially the epochal “Gentleman” and their swan song “1965” — are beholden to no particular scene and have aged remarkably well.

The Afghan Whigs disbanded in 2001, citing logistical problems and family obligations. Dulli formed the Twilight Singers, which boasted a loose membership; he was the only constant for 10 years and five studio albums. As with many classic alt-rock bands of the 1980s and 1990s — such as Mission of Burma, Dinosaur Jr, the Feelies, the dBs, among many others — the Afghan Whigs reconvened in 2011 for a handful of new dates, dusting off old tunes and recording two new covers. “Do to the Beast” arose from that tour, an immensely satisfying addition to Dulli’s incredible catalog. Salon spoke to him about the new album, the nature of performance and the act of reconnecting with his younger selves.

Was there a moment when you realized that you could get new music out of the Afghan Whigs reunion?

Those shows were a retrospective, so to speak. I just really enjoyed playing them. Other than doing the covers for that tour — the Queenie Lyons and Frank Ocean songs — we never talked, not one fucking time, about making a record. Not once. It wasn’t until that Usher gig [at South By Southwest 2013] that it clicked for me that I wanted to do another record. People don’t believe that.

What was it about that show that sparked that idea?

We had two days to make the show happen, so it reminded me of the old days when a bunch of people got into a room with a common goal. I talked to Usher about this, while it was happening. It’s almost like there’s a battle of the bands on Saturday and you’ve got Thursday and Friday to make a band. That was thrilling for me, just to get in a room with a bunch of people and make something happen. You have to get to know each other. You have to see what works and what doesn’t.

Usher’s guitar player appears on the album. You must have been impressed by him.

Johnny “Natural” Najera was just standing on the sidelines observing, and eventually I invited him to play. I couldn’t believe what an amazing player he was. I was stunned. So he got put in the band. That process reminded me of being a young guy again. I had other people playing on a lot of the Twilight Singers records, but they were mostly solitary. And I was excited by the band dynamic — putting that Usher show together — and wanted to explore that again.

Did you plan on releasing this album on Sub Pop [the Afghan Whigs’ original label]? It seems like you’ve come full circle.

This is my third record on Sub Pop since 2008 [following the Twilight Singers’ Dynamite Steps and a collaboration with Mark Lanegan called Gutter Twins]. They’re friends, keep in mind. The landscape of recording and touring and making music was so different in 1993 than it is right now. We had outgrown what we could do at Sub Pop at that time, so that’s why we moved to Elektra to do “Gentleman.” Nowadays, there’s not much disparity [between major labels and independent labels]. I’d much rather work on a label where I can call the president on his cellphone at midnight and ask him what he thinks of something. I don’t have to wait to talk to anybody. I’ve maintained a relationship with [founder] Jonathan Poneman and [executive vice president] Megan Jasper since 1989. They’ve always supported me, even in the years when I wasn’t on their label. They always come to my shows. They call me on my birthday. So it was a no-brainer.