Americans are about to be shaken even more by the hide tide of rate increases health insurers are seeking because of Obamacare. Millions more will soon find out they will be forced to pay a penalty because of the law.

“The rate requests are the first to reflect a full year of experience with the new insurance exchanges and federal guaranteed issue-community rating,” according to Jane Orient, M.D. writing for the American Association of Physicians and Surgeons (AAPS) this weekend. “In Oregon, claims exceeded revenue by more than $100 million.”

Citizens, troubled about their health providers and financial future, learned in February that the IRS were placing tens of thousands of tax refunds on hold due to another Obamacare caused delay. In January, the White House announced that 800,000 enrollees received the wrong IRS forms causing them to face more delays, and the headache of updating or amending their taxes with new forms.

Throughout 2015 patients are walking into their doctor's offices presenting new insurance policies, most with higher deductibles, and causing more chaos.

For decades the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP) presented themselves as a support group some seniors turned to for benefits tailored to them. In the past few years, hundreds of thousands of seniors have decided to cancel their AARP membership in favor of alternative organizations.

AARP blamed the weak economy, but the primary catalyst, or “last straw” for the massive drops in AARP membership numbers was their 2009 decision to support Obamacare. While AARP membership tumbled, millions of American seniors upset with President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act went elsewhere. AARP dropped from 40 million members to less than 37 million since 2008.

American physicians have reacted in the same fashion to the American Medical Association (AMA), which has also seen vast membership losses. Both organizations have benefited greatly from Obamacare.

AARP and AMA have now mutated into sponsors and profiteers of the Obama healthcare agenda. AARP has turned into an insurance company through its subsidiary company. AARP is now earning over half a billion dollars in payments from their Medicare supplemental plans, dental insurance and other products sold by third parties under their specific brand names. AMA now only represents just 14% of U.S. doctors, but profits heavily on being the keeper of government health payment coding.

“AAPS is completely funded by membership dues and contributions, so we answer to and advocate for our physician members and not big corporate donors or government funding sources,” stated AAPS Past President Lee D. Hieb, MD. “The AMA’s deal with HCFA (Obamacare) gave it a monopoly on the CPT codes, from which it derives at least $70 million in revenue annually. AAPS was one of the first to expose this conflict of interest.”

Bloomberg Business reported last week that 6.6 million people--about 10 percent more than the White House said—will be paying a penalty for not having health insurance. Although the Treasury Department indicated in January that millions of taxpayers will be paying a fine, Bloomberg that a portion of that figure “didn’t need to.” The National Taxpayer Advocate reported that 300,000 taxpayers overpaid by about $35 million too much. The majority of these were low income earners.

The insurance companies throughout the nations are seeking increases upwards of 20 to 40 percent or more, according to Robert Pear, who has analyzed the Affordable Care Act impact.

According to Dr. Hieb, AAPS, “has been fighting the good fight to preserve the practice of private medicine since 1943. When the Clinton health plan was proposed, we fought for open meetings. And when the details came to light, the plan was halted.”

Recently the AAPS helped establish various physician assemblies and has a pending lawsuit suit in the DC Federal District Court challenging the constitutionality of ObamaCare.

“The AAPS legal team defends doctors who have been mugged by Medicare, or railroaded by hospitals using sham peer review,” Dr. Hieb added. “We sued the Texas Medical Board in defense of physicians’ due process rights; this suit is now on appeal. We drafted legislation for reform of the Texas medical practice act and are fighting for its enactment.”

Jesse Ellis O’Brien of the Oregon State Public Interest Research Group said: “Rate increases will be bigger in 2016 than they have been for years and years and will have a profound effect on consumers here. Some may start wondering if insurance is affordable or if it’s worth the money,” Orient quoted Jesse Ellis O’Brien of the Oregon State Public Interest Research Group.