Fruitland Park bills itself as "The Friendly City," but an FBI report linking two police officers to the Ku Klux Klan was just the latest scandal to darken that happy image.

"The feeling I had when I first heard was, 'Oh, no, not again,'" said insurance consultant Ray Lewis as he stirred a plate of grits over breakfast with friends at the Fruitland Park Cafe, a small diner on U.S. Highway 441.

"Another black eye," he said.

Lewis, 58, has lived in Fruitland Park for 29 years and has raised three kids in this northern Lake County city. He's never had to worry about them walking to school or riding bikes from sunup to sundown in the summer.

But he also has witnessed a lifetime of municipal embarrassments in the past five years: a sex scandal that ousted the former city manager; a police chief forced to quit because he used a bogus degree to boost his pay; a cop who posed in Klan regalia; and lawsuits by ex-employees that have cost the city and its insurer more than $1 million.

"Every place in the world has its own set of jerks," Lewis said, defending the city whose mayor and public-works director also were investigated recently by the Florida Department of Law Enforcement. "Overall, this is still a pretty good little place to live and raise a family."

Scandals aside, Fruitland Park, population 4,078, may not be little much longer.

On the west edge of town, bulldozers are carving up the former Pine Ridge Dairy farm, shaping the late Bernice Jeffcoat's pastures into the next, and perhaps last, expansion of The Villages retirement community.

Plans call for 2,050 new homes, three community centers and 18 miles of streets on more than 900 acres annexed by the city in 2009. If each new home brings just two residents each, the population could double in two years.

The project, known as The Villages of Fruitland Park, will fatten the city's meager tax base and will likely turn U.S. 441 and County Road 466A into attractive commercial sites that rival those in Leesburg and The Villages, the communities flanking the city.

City leaders see new opportunities for the town, which does not have a grocery store or McDonald's within its borders. But not everyone in Fruitland Park is ready to embrace The Villages.

"We have a lot of current residents who don't want to see the city grow. They like the old, small, rural town they've always known," said Rick Ranize, 60, a former deputy sheriff who ran unsuccessfully for mayor in 2012 and is running for City Commission. "We're no longer going to be the cozy bedroom community they're used to."

City Manager Gary La Venia, hired six months ago to replace the 73-year-old former city manager ousted over dalliances with a janitor, shrugged off fears that The Villages will ultimately overwhelm the city and ruin its Mayberry character.

"Some people worry; I certainly understand. Change can be daunting. Change can be a little scary. But change oftentimes can be good," he said. "I don't think the city's going to lose its small-town charm. ... We do a lot of nice things here."

For instance, La Venia said, the city's recreation director, Michelle Yoder, helped Heritage Community Church organize a 5K "Love Run" in February that raised $4,000 for the church's food pantry. Other city staffers, including uniformed police and volunteer firefighters, donate time every year to keep watch on Halloween while hundreds of costumed trick-or-treaters weave through the Shiloh Street neighborhoods. The city's annual holiday party in December featured a city employee dressed up as Santa. He hoisted 400 kids onto his knee last year.

"I see all those things the city does, and I think that's the way it was 50 years ago in small towns all over America, and I'll bet that's how it still will be 10, 20 years from now in Fruitland Park," said Steve Fussell, 63, an Orlando transplant whose wife owns the Fruitland Park Cafe. "That says a lot more about this city than the FBI report about the police."

The report, summarized by FDLE, identified Deputy Police Chief David Borst and fellow Officer George Hunnewell as sworn members of the KKK, an accusation Borst denied when confronted by police Chief Terry Isaacs.

The source of the information was former Fruitland Park police Officer James Elkins, who was forced to resign in 2009 after a photograph surfaced of the ex-KKK Grand Dragon wearing a police uniform and ceremonial Klan garb.

Borst, who also served as fire chief, resigned but denied any Klan association, past or present. Hunnewell was fired by Isaacs, who cited documented problems with the officer's work performance. Hunnewell could not be reached for comment.

Isaacs said he has tried to change the culture of a department once known for speed traps on 441, the six-lane highway that splits the city. Ten of the 12 full-time officers he inherited three years ago left for better jobs or different careers.

He said Fruitland Park police officers, who earn $14.80 an hour, are among the worst compensated in Lake County. Their children qualify for free school lunches, said Isaacs, who made more as a Sumter County deputy than he earns as city police chief.

"Hopefully that will change as our tax base changes," he said.

Chris Bell, who has held office for 20 years, 10 as mayor, lives a few blocks from City Hall in a blue, three-story home on Berckman Street that he might turn into a bed-and-breakfast some day.

"Families all know each other," he said. "Me and my wife, we like to walk around the city. The nice part is our walk should take about 30 minutes, but it's not uncommon for us to be out an hour or more just because we stop and talk to people we know."

Fruitland Park has a small black population — the last census counted just 382 black residents. The city's 38 employees include two black department heads, Treasurer Tannette Gayle and City Clerk Esther Lewin-Coulson.

Fussell, who created a website to promote good things in Fruitland Park such as its library expansion, disputed the notion that the Republican-dominated city is racist. He insisted it would never tolerate the bigotry the Klan represents.

The church with the largest congregation in the city, for example, is racially diverse and annually funds a mission to Nicaragua, he said. The church group is in Central America this summer digging wells for drinking water.

"We get 150 customers in here every day, 300 on a really good day," said Fussell, who sports an Obama sticker on his pickup. "I've heard a lot of complaining about Obamacare, but I've never heard a disparaging word about people of color."