Fremont County Sheriff's Office blotter

Dec. 08

Hawkins Avenue in Penrose, deputies responded to a carbon monoxide. Atmos and Penrose fire took the scene.

South Ninth in Cañon City, 911 hang up, accidental dial.

D Path in Cotopaxi, reporting party reported money missing from his wallet after having visitors. Deputy will follow up.

Pennsylvania/Washington in Cañon City, vehicle vs. power pole accident.

Sherrill Place in Penrose, reporting party was concerned about her daughter not taking proper medication. Daughter was contacted and was OK.

M Street in Penrose, 911 Open Line, child playing with the phone.

Broadway in Penrose, reporting party flagged deputy down reference burglary and criminal mischief.

Colo. 115 in Penrose, deputy dispatched to check on a Florence officer who wasn't answering his radio. Officer was OK.

U.S. 50/Dozier, reporting party reported she was having problems with her 14-year-old daughter. Deputy contacted reporting party and answered some questions for her.

North Wilmont in Williamsburg, accidental 911 dial.

Colo. 115 MM 19 report of 20 Greyhound dogs running in and out of traffic. Dog owner was located and dogs were rounded up.

Grand Avenue in Cañon City, reporting party requested a welfare check on an elderly friend. Deputy made contact, party was OK.

Advertisement

East Main in Cañon City, reporting party reported that someone broke into her room and had taken some items.

West Main in Florence, deputy out with Florence PD on a 911 hang up.

East Main in Florence, assist to Florence PD on an open door at a business.

Kwik Stop 1 in Penrose, a Ford Taurus station wagon had been abandoned in the back lot of Kwik Stop. There are no plates on the vehicle but it checks clear, advised it has been here for several months.

Dec. 09

Fifth/I Street in Penrose, report of a puppy without food and water. Deputy checked the residence and the dogs were OK.

15th/Washington in Cañon City, reporting party reported a stolen vehicle involved in an accident. The vehicle wasn't stolen and CCPD investigated the crash.

Third/U.S. 50 in Cañon City, deputy stopped to assist a motorist with a flat tire.

Main Street in Rockvale, reporting party called to report a possible fraud involving a New York phone number and a man claiming to be law enforcement.

U.S. 50 MM 287 in Penrose, report of a party in a purple blanket sitting on the side of the road. Deputies did not locate anyone.

Dilley Ranch Road in Cañon City, reporting party reported hearing a car horn somewhere near the banks climbing area or campground area. Information was forwarded to the BLM.

FCSO in Cañon City, deputy out speaking with a party regarding a protection order.

Illinois in Penrose, report of an aggressive dog that roams the neighborhood. Deputy will attempt to contact the owner.

Broadway in Penrose, deputy out on follow up.

Cyanide Avenue in Florence, deputy responded to assist medical.

York/Reservoir Road in Cañon City, reporting party reported a male party had been looking in mailboxes. Suspect was contacted and warned. Deputy checked the mailboxes and there was no damage.

East Main Street in Florence deputy out on follow up.

FCSO in Cañon City, deputy contacted a party regarding a hit-and-run accident.

Rockrimmon Road in Williamsburg, reporting party reported someone entered her house and stole a Play Station.

Reservoir Road in Cañon City, deputy out to follow up on earlier call.

Pinion Avenue in Cañon City, deputy attempted to contact a party for CCPD.

U.S. 50/Dozier, reporting party reported items missing from her apartment.

FCSO, reporting party in the lobby to file a report on Craigslist fraud.

FCSO, deputy spoke with a party in the lobby.

FCSO, deputy out of vehicle on follow up.

L Street in Penrose, anonymous party reported that subjects at this location were fighting and possibly hitting each other. Deputies unable to locate.

Pathfinder Park in Florence, deputy out with a disabled vehicle waiting for a tow.

Chestnut/Elm in Cañon City, deputy out with a slide-off vehicle.

Gulch Road/Copper Gulch in Cotopaxi, reporting party reported he hit a llama and there was approximately $4,000 in damages to the vehicle.

Johnson in Florence, deputies assisted El Paso County Sheriff's Office in locating a suspect vehicle involved in a fatal hit-and-run accident on Colo. 115.

East Main Street in Florence, assist to Florence PD on a 911 misdial.

14th Trail in Cotopaxi, deputies out on a medical assist.

Dec. 10

Howard, reporting party reported his daughter's ex had made threats and requested deputy contact.

Gulch Road/Colo. 115 in Texas Creek, two separate accidents. Referred to CSP.

Cotopaxi, reporting party requested a welfare check on a friend. Deputy responded but nobody was home.

Rockrimmon in Williamsburg, deputy out on a theft follow up.

Fifth Street in Penrose, 911 Open Line, deputy responded and everything OK.

North in Penrose, 911 Open Line, deputy responded and everything OK.

Willow Street in Cañon City, report of a horse in the road. Deputy returned the horse to its pasture and secured the fence.

Macon Avenue in Cañon City, report of an upset party who made threats at the County Administration Building.

Penrose Area, CCPD received a call from an unknown woman who stated she needed help. Deputy did not have enough information to locate the party.

McKinley School in Cañon City, deputy responded and asked a parent to leave the school property.

Locust in Cañon City, victim notification of inmate release.

CR 28 in Cotopaxi, reporting party reported being scammed by two mechanics he found on Craigslist.

Grant Street in Penrose, reporting party requested a civil standby but the resident wasn't available.

Ponderosa in Cañon City, reporting party reported that an unknown male knocked on her door and tried to push his way into the residence. Reporting party fought the intruder off and he fled the area before deputies arrived. Suspect was described as tall, wearing a dark hoodie and jeans.

Elm/Willow in Cañon City, report of a vehicle that had been parked in the area for over a week. Deputy located the owner who was visiting a neighbor.

North 15th in Cañon City, reporting party reported his ex-wife had made threatening phone calls. Deputy advised the calls were not criminal and advised the reporting party to seek a protection order.

Colo. 115 MM 6.75 in Florence, vehicle/deer crash, minor injury to the driver.

U.S. 50/Colo. 67 in Penrose, deputy out checking a broken window on a vehicle.

Colo. 115 in Florence, report of a possible natural gas leak. Units responded but nothing was found.

Colo. 115/CR F45 in Penrose, report of several large trash bags in the road. Deputy responded and cleared the roadway.