NEW YORK & TINTON FALLS, N.J.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--MagnaCare, a healthcare services company, is pleased to announce that Steve Kokulak, senior vice president, Casualty Services, has authored the chapter addressing workers’ compensation for the newly released Self-Funding Health Benefit Plans published by International Foundation of Employee Benefit Plans’ (IFEBP). The book is available for purchase online and at the 61st Annual Employee Benefits Conference, Nov. 8 - 11, 2015, Hawaii Convention Center, Honolulu, Hawaii.

“Steve Kokulak is an accomplished professional and the entire company is honored by his participation in this industry-leading publication, especially at a time when self-funding is gaining popularity among small and mid-size companies,” says Joseph Berardo Jr., CEO, MagnaCare. “Steve joins some of the country’s top benefits experts who explore the pros and cons of self-funding, keeping readers abreast of the impact that the Affordable Care Act, cyber liability and security breaches have had on self-funding.”

Self-Funding Health Benefit Plans provides a comprehensive look at self-funded plans and offers plan sponsors, attorneys and other professionals practical guidance concerning plan design and administration. In-depth chapters cover a broad range of topics such as regulatory compliance and fiduciary responsibility, risk management and stop-loss coverage, accounting and audits, subrogation, cost containment, investment of cash reserves and workers’ compensation.

“Contributing to this book was a personal and professional distinction,” says Kokulak. “Our goal is to give administrators and advisors of pension or health and welfare funds the information and tools they need to properly support their plan strategies. The book and the conference serve as invaluable resources for every aspect of employee benefits.”

About MagnaCare

MagnaCare, a healthcare services company, is proactively reducing the cost of healthcare by offering self-insured options to employers in New Jersey and New York. For 25 years MagnaCare has provided services to self-insured employers and health and casualty payers, including commercial insurers, TPA’s, government entities, and labor markets. MagnaCare offers access to a broad provider network, predictive modeling analyses, member outreach programs and integrated solutions that include full plan management services. Visit www.magnacare.com, www.facebook.com/magnacare, www.linkedin.com/company/magnacare.