As President Obama’s term in office nears an end, more and more Americans are talking about what his legacy will be. In doing so we must contemplate the Affordable Care Act, the wars that he promised to end but really didn’t, the growth of the national debt and domestic spying by the federal government.

But here’s one more topic based on a number: 45.8 million.

That is how many Americans were on food stamps at the end of the fiscal year 2015, which concluded last Sept. 30.

We’re told that unemployment is going down. In fact, the national and state rates are about half of what they were at the height of the recession. We’re told that the economy is improving. But do Americans believe their prospects are getting better? Our presidential candidates all seem to say no.

According to federal data, about 28 million Americans received government assistance to buy food when Obama took office. As the recession deepened that number exploded. By 2010 it was 40 million — and has never dipped below that level since — and peaked at 47.6 million in 2013. The good news is that almost 2 million fewer people received food-buying assistance last year than in 2013.

To give community leaders around the state a taste of what that’s like the University of Florida’s holds “From Poverty to Promise” programs. It is designed to teach the better off what it’s like to be worse off, with limited financial resources, no job or a menial one, and a family facing multiple challenges, if not outright crises, including teen pregnancies and jailed relatives.

What they typically learn, according to a report on a recent “From Poverty to Promise” presentation in Polk County, is that frustration, anxiety and hopelessness rule plenty of people’s lives — every day.

Ensuring there was enough food on the table was part of the program, as were paying expenses for medical and transportation needs. We referenced food stamps earlier because that is a direct barometer of how healthy the economy is. Eating tops the list of priorities, and when people cannot do it out of their own pockets, they seek help.

Many critics want to think food stamps are a sham, that many recipients don’t need them or that the system is rife with fraud. In 2013 the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a nonpartisan think tank that explores how federal and state policies affect the poor, noted that the government found a fraud rate, in the form of overpayments or misdirected benefits, of less than 3 percent. And The Kaiser Family Foundation, a healthcare policy research group, notes that in Florida the average recipient reaps $129 a month in food stamps, about $4 above the national average.

It is worth noting that one in five Marion County households live below the federal poverty line, including 30 percent of its children. As the United Way’s ALICE report showed last year, 4 in 10 Marion households do not earn enough to meet basic monthly expenses.

Charity and government aid can help people in such situations. But to improve the conditions of the poor and the increasingly fragile middle class we need policies that revive the economy. And so it is important to listen to what the remaining presidential hopefuls are saying about how they’ll boost the economy — and they need to say more, because growth and jobs fosters everything else.