Ted Cruz is no squish. Sure, his face may be a bit squishy, but that’s no reason to squish-shame this total non-squish. Especially since Ted Cruz is, apparently, the arbiter of squish, which is one of the reasons you should vote for him in the primary, instead of some pansy squish like Mitt Romney.

.@TedCruz ribs @MittRomney for general squishiness: "I think in the third debate Romney actually walked over and kissed Obama on the lips." — Patrick Svitek (@PatrickSvitek) October 12, 2015

Cruz, who may or may not have walked over and kissed Donald Trump somewhere other than on the lips a few times during this presidential campaign, has made standing tall in the face of all things liberal central to his campaign’s narrative. Unlike the squishes in Congress who care about things like “cloture” and “vetoes,” Cruz knows that Republicans in the House and Senate can repeal Obamacare, defund Planned Parenthood and carve the Ten Commandments into every government building in the country with the right combination of “courage” and “leadership.” He knows that all our foreign policy really needs right now is for the president to call noted squishes Vladmir Putin and Ayatollah Khamenei on the phone and say “stop it,” and they will do whatever we want. And he most definitely knows that, beyond its politics, American culture needs to de-squish itself and stop condoning that which is squishy, including but not limited to abortion, secularism and men kissing on national television.

Lost in the homophobia of Cruz’s joke is the fact that it’s logic is also all wrong. Had Mitt Romney walked over to President Obama and open-mouth kissed him, it would undoubtedly be the most assertive thing anyone has ever done on a presidential campaign. More assertive than “I’m paying for this microphone.” More assertive than “Senator, you’re no Jack Kennedy.” More assertive than “We also have fewer horses and bayonets.”

Cruz later clarified that he took “some poetic license” with the joke. What a squish.