SHARE Star File photo Santa Paula Unified Superintendent Alfonso Gamino

By Claudia Boyd-Barrett

Almost 300 teachers in the Santa Paula Unified School District will get a 5 percent salary boost this school year, their second pay raise in a row since the Great Recession.

The district’s board unanimously approved the raise Wednesday, which adds to a 5 percent salary increase from last school year. Before that, the teachers had not received a pay raise since 2008 as the district tightened its belt during the economic downturn, Superintendent Alfonso Gamino said.

“The bottom line is, when finances were tough, our teachers came through. They understood, ‘You know what? There’s no money,’” Gamino said. “Because they helped us in these lean years, we felt that 5 percent was a reasonable number and we could afford it and we could maintain a healthy balance at the end of the year.”

The agreement approved Wednesday with the local teacher’s union also changes the structure of health plan contributions. Instead of everyone paying the same $253 a month toward their health care premium as they did last year, regardless of family size, contributions will now be tiered, said Assistant Superintendent Donna Rose. A single person will pay $125 a month, a family of two will pay $250 a month, and a larger family will pay $456 a month, she said.

Rose said changes to the health plan were necessary for the district to avoid paying the so-called “Cadillac tax” as prescribed by the Affordable Care Act. Beginning in 2018, the federal legislation subjects employers to a 40 percent tax if premiums for health care coverage exceed certain limits.

Altogether the salary increases are expected to cost $1.2 million, with a one-time cost of $351,864 for health and welfare benefits, according to a district report.

In line with the teachers’ raises, the board also approved a 5 percent pay raise for about 18 credentialed managerial staff, such as school principals and assistant principals. That will cost the district $148,000.

In addition, school board members approved a 5 percent raise in their monthly stipend, which amounts to an extra $12.60 a month. Board members will now receive $264.60 a month, effective Aug. 1.

“The board members do their job because they want to do their job, they’re not doing it for the pay,” said Gamino. “It’s a lot of time and commitment and effort.”

Gamino said the district is still negotiating a contract with its classified staff.

The superintendent noted that the district has also increased programs and services for students, adding new counselors, health workers, reading specialists and custodial staff.

Earlier this year the board approved a $62 million budget that includes about $10 million in extra state funding over the 2014 to 2015 school year.

Additional funds will be spent on new technology, teaching materials, staff training, support programs for students and parents, and to carry out several capital improvements projects.