- A shed fire spread to three Bradley Beach homes early Sunday morning and displaced two Beach Avenue families, police said (Photo: Amanda Oglesby)

BRADLEY BEACH - A shed fire spread to three Bradley Beach homes early Sunday morning and displaced two Beach Avenue families, police said.

The fire, which was reported at 5:10 a.m., started in a garage with an attached shed at the rear of 202 Fourth Ave., said Bradley Beach Police Capt. Stephen Fahnholz.

The garage, which abutted a home at the rear of 203 Fifth Ave., also caught fire and was soon engulfed.

The fire then spread to two adjacent Beach Avenue homes, Fahnholz said.

On Sunday morning, firefighters from Bradley Beach and Avon dug through the still smoldering rubble to extinguish the last of the embers.

The rear of the home at 203 Fifth Avenue was burned away and its roof partially collapsed.

One of the adjacent Beach Avenue homes, where fire melted its blue-gray vinyl siding, was uninhabitable, Fahnholz said. The neighboring Beach Avenue home was without power, but sustained no serious damage. Families in both homes were displaced on Sunday morning.

The Fifth Avenue home, which sustained the most serious damage, was vacant at the time of the fire, Fahnholz said.

- A shed fire spread to three Bradley Beach homes early Sunday morning and displaced two Beach Avenue families, police said (Photo: Amanda Oglesby)

No one was injured.

The fire is under investigation by the Bradley Beach Fire Marshal, Bradley Beach police detectives and the Monmouth County Fire Marshal.

Fire departments and first aiders from Neptune, Neptune City and Ocean Grove also assisted at the scene, along with the Monmouth County EMS Task Force.

Amanda Oglesby: 732-557-5701; aoglesby@GannettNJ.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1j1THZS