TULSA, OKLA. — A 10-point underdog, Colorado State appeared in good shape entering the fourth quarter Saturday night, holding a 10-point lead on host Tulsa.

Then, at the worst time, the Rams quit scoring.

With a Chapman Stadium crowd of 22,875 cheering on a Tulsa rally, the Golden Hurricane (1-1) completed a late comeback by pulling out a 30-27 victory over the Rams (0-2) on a 34-yard field goal by Carl Salazar with no time remaining.

“It hurts man,” CSU coach Jim McElwain said. “I like this team. I like who we are, what we’re about. But that doesn’t help Ram fans. The bottom line is, you have to win, and we’re 0-2. This was obviously a tough one to swallow.”

The game-winner was set up by a 45-yard run from senior Trey Watts to the CSU 20 with 19 seconds remaining. That play followed a lengthy delay when Tulsa wide receiver Keyarris Garrett had to be taken off the field by ambulance after suffering a leg injury.

Watts finished with 152 yards rushing on 22 attempt and also led Tulsa in receptions with eight.

“It is always tough to see someone go down like that, (Garrett) is one of my (team) brothers,” Watts said of his 45-yarder. “We just had to keep moving forward and rally. I didn’t want to go into overtime so I needed to help this team and make a play.”

Tulsa had pulled to within a touchdown on a 23-yard field goal by Salazar with 13:12 remaining. Then, with 7:01 to go, Tulsa pulled even at 27-27 when sophomore wideout Derek Patterson nabbed a 15-yard touchdown pass from Cody Green.

“We stalled as an offense,” CSU quarterback Garrett Grayson said about being shut out in the fourth quarter. “That’s not what we’re about.”

Grayson finished with just 12 completions in 29 pass attempts, for 108 yards and two touchdowns, with two interceptions.

“To not generate anything in the fourth quarter is disappointing,” McElwain said. “We had an opportunity to ice the game and didn’t take advantage of it. But I’m not going to pin this (loss) on Garrett. There were a lot of things that happened.”

Senior running back Chris Nwoke put the Rams up 27-17 by scoring on his third try from the 1-yard line with 50 seconds left in the third quarter. The bulk of the five-play, 52-yard Rams scoring drive came compliments of a 52-yard pass from Grayson to redshirt freshman receiver Jordon Vaden, who was tackled a yard shy of the goal line.

CSU got two first-half touchdown passes from Grayson and two field goals by Jared Roberts. The first-half touchdowns receptions were the first college scores by senior tight end Joe McKay and Vaden.

Both teams must have entered the stadium feeling a sense of urgency. CSU was coming off a 41-27 to Colorado in Denver. Tulsa, the 2012 Conference USA champion, was shocked 34-7 at Bowling Green in its season opener.

Next, Colorado State will host FCS program Cal Poly on Saturday at Hughes Stadium in the home opener. The Rams began Saturday’s game knowing they needed a victory over the Golden Hurricane to have an opportunity to take a winning record into the Sept. 21 game at No. 1 Alabama.

An interception by Colorado State sophomore safety Trent Matthews at the CSU 12-yard-line with 32 seconds left in the second quarter preserved a 20-14 Rams halftime lead.

Colorado State had to play short-handed. Not making the trip were running backs Donnell Alexander and wide receivers Joe Hans ley and Charles Lovett. Alexander (hand) and Hansley (ankle) were injured in the season opener against Colorado.

But CSU got some big plays from players who were unproven or unheralded, or both, including McKay, Vaden and sophomore defensive tackle Joe Kawulok, who recorded a sack to stop a Tulsa possession.

CSU got on the board first with a 2-yard pass from Grayson to McKay, capitalizing on a blocked punt by the Rams’ Danny Nwosu at the Tulsa 2. But Tulsa tied the game with 7:18 remaining in the first quarter.

Tulsa then took the lead for the first time after Golden Hurricane defensive back Michael Mudoh intercepted a Grayson pass and returned it 9 yards to the CSU 33. Tulsa needed five plays to go up 14-7, the short drive completed by Cody Green’s second touchdown pass, a 5-yard flip to Jordan James.

After Vaden’s second-quarter touchdown put CSU up 17-14, Tulsa wouldn’t lead again until the final play of the game.

“I was just proud of our guys staying around, making the plays we had to,” Tulsa coach Bill Blankenship said.

With a little help from Colorado State. Perhaps a lot of help.

Tom Kensler: tkensler@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tomkensler