LAS VEGAS — As the Rams walked off the field, hurting from a lopsided bowl defeat, they were mocked by Utah offensive lineman Marc Pouvave, who yelled at Colorado State players: “We kicked your (expletive) butt. I hope you had a good time in Vegas.”

The introduction of a new CSU coach cannot happen soon enough.

The work of making the Rams a prime-time player in major-college football is a much bigger project than building a $200 million stadium on the CSU campus.

This is not how a 10-victory season is supposed to end, with interim coach Dave Baldwin talking about termination papers for the Rams staff.

Getting trounced 45-10 in the Las Vegas Bowl was embarrassing enough. But this is what should be insulting for CSU: As the Rams were getting run over by Utah, the top-20 football program they want to grow up to be, there was Jim McElwain doing an interview on the ABC-TV broadcast, during a game he refused to coach after taking the Florida job.

Bolting for the Southeastern Conference? That was certainly an understandable move by McElwain.

But the insensitivity McElwain displayed by promoting himself during a nationally televised appearance by the Rams? That was a very bad look.

While Baldwin has not officially been eliminated to replace McElwain, there’s no way the Rams can elevate the 59-year-old offensive coordinator and build buzz for a program that desperately wants Denver alums by thousands to drive up the highway and watch CSU play in a new stadium.

After guiding the Rams to their best season since 2002, neither Baldwin nor any of the coaches left behind by McElwain can be sure they will even have a job in Fort Collins.

“It’s very uncertain. … But being in this profession as long as I’ve been in it, you understand that,” said Baldwin, who said each coach on the Colorado State staff has received a termination notice outlining dates and procedures that could send them looking for work elsewhere around the country.

Yes, it sounds harsh. The decisions in big-time football, however, are driven by dollars, not by sentimental hearts.

“Life is never fair,” Baldwin said. “And you deal with it.”

Not all the good feelings of an outstanding Colorado State season, which opened with a rousing victory against the CU Buffaloes and ended with sophomore receiver Rashard Higgins selected as a consensus All-American at wide receiver, got flushed in this bowl.

But the Rams can only hope what happens in Vegas stays in Vegas.

This was not the Power 5 argument that CSU wanted to make.

“I never in a million years saw this score happening,” quarterback Garrett Grayson said.

The main difference between teams that eat at college football’s big-boy table and the programs that fight for scraps are: 1) fan support and 2) speed.

Utah had too much of both for the Rams.

The morning flight I took from Denver to the game was packed with fans wearing CSU colors. The revelers poured vodka in their orange juice, toasted and drank the Kool-Aid: The Rams will build a stadium, dominate in league play and wait for an invitation from the Big 12 Conference to join the power elite.

Oops. Not so fast.

The speed and power that allowed the Utes of the Pac-12 to roll for 365 yards rushing against the Rams should have served as a wake-up call. But the sobering reality was the sight of Sam Boyd Stadium that was a sea of red. While CSU officials were proud about selling 3,900 tickets to the bowl game, fans of the Rams were outnumbered by red-clad Utah faithful by a ratio of at least 5:1.

McElwain is gone. Did he take the magic with him?

“Reality hits at some point. At any time. And it hit us,” Baldwin said.

When CSU plucked McElwain off the Alabama staff, the hire was made by former athletic director Jack Graham, a solid football man.

As the Rams seek a coach to take them to the next level, looking at highly regarded assistants such as Mike Bobo of Georgia, Tony Alford of Notre Dame and Pat Narduzzi of Michigan State, among others, it is a recruiting firm spearheading the search.

Good luck.

Mark Kiszla: mkiszla@denverpost.com or twitter.com/markkiszla