Hull City reporter Philip Buckingham says Stoke will find no refuge in the eye of the Tigers storm at the KC Stadium.

TODAY Hull City celebrate the life and times of Ebenezer Cobb Morley. To the uninitiated, Morley was a child of the city who grew up to become a founding father of the Football Association. He and seven others created the game we know today.

An appreciation of history feels good, doesn’t it? What’s not to like? Fathoming how we’ve meandered to the modern day brings a warm glow. More often than not, it is something to be cherished, to be celebrated.

Not so for Hull City, it seems. The irony of celebrating football’s history at the end of a week when it is being abandoned at the KC Stadium is excruciating.

News of owner Assem Allam formally spelling out his wish to become known as Hull Tigers to the FA emerged on Wednesday evening and duly picked at a scab that refuses to heal. Not for the first time in this unsavoury mess, today’s game against Stoke City has been completely overshadowed.

Regardless of your viewpoint, and it is worth pointing out there is not unanimous opposition from the terraces, it has been another sorry week for the club. City are the talk of football but for all the wrong reasons. Again. Pundits and observers in the national media have been withering in their potent condemnation.

So still this boulder keeps rolling down the hill. Turn your back on it for a month or two if you so wish (Steve Bruce will try) but the FA are now the only ones powerful enough to stop it.

If Allam gets his wish and the FA’s Council vote in favour of his proposal when they meet in April, supporters could be witnessing the beginning of the end for Hull City Association Football Club as we know it after 109 and a half years in existence. As few as 22 games could remain with the club in its current guise.

However, the traditionalists still have hope. A short statement from FA made it clear that no motion will be passed without seeing consultation with supporters. There are many unwilling to oppose Allam given all his good work during three years in charge but how many would actually prefer Hull Tigers to Hull City if given a straight choice? Polls currently running on this site suggest as few as one in 10 (the poll is available below and results will be published next week).

The FA have a big call to make in this the year of their 150th anniversary celebrations. The populist vote would surely be to reject all talk of Hull Tigers. There and then, the governing body could lap up those loyalty plaudits. In a world without black and white, however, there is little clarity ever found in grey.

Lest we forget, there is a rather important Premier League fixture in amongst the furore. A national audience will tune in to see two well-matched sides battling for a win that could take them up to 10th and City must look to take full advantage of the invitation.

Three of the last four games of 2013 will come at the KC and two wins from the sequence would see Bruce take his men to Anfield on New Year’s Day with 23 points from the first half of the season. And why not? As Liverpool discovered two weeks’ ago, even with the storm raging over the KC, it offers no refuge to visitors.

Prediction: Hull City 2 Stoke City 0.

Mobile users may prefer to fill in this basic version of the following poll.