A group of former employees are among those fighting to get paid in a bankruptcy lawsuit filed against the now-defunct Nicholas County Hospital.

The Nicholas County Hospital, which closed last spring, was among the rural hospitals that have a negative operating budget, according to a 2012 report by the Kentucky Hospital Association.

On Saturday, former nurses and staff of the Nicholas County Hospital waited outside the locked doors this morning for their employee records and more importantly some answers.

"I was one of the last three people to leave here that day and it was a sad day," Susan dance, a former employee of the Nicholas County Hospital, said.

It's been more than a year since that day. Former employees are still waiting for a clear answer on when, or if, they will see a pay check for their final days of work.

The group set up outside of the hospital on Saturday waiting on the attorney who is handling their bankruptcy case, planning to pass out their employee records and gave them the chance to ask question.

Attorney James Rogan explained that there is a hierarchy and employee wages claims are third in line for payment behind Acute Care Incorporated and the Internal Revenue Service. He said that employees claims are dependent on collection of accounts receivable and the pending lawsuit against the cabinet for health and family services involving medicaid reimbursement.

"Whether or not there will be sufficient money to pay the claims right now is up in the air," Rogan said. "If that lawsuit is successful there is a chance employees will be paid, if not it is doubtful they will be paid."

"That's fine and and okay but that's not what we had been told and understood never let go of that last shred of hope until you know it is completely gone but i think deep down in our hearts we didn't think that we'd ever see anything but it would have been nice if we did and it would also have been nice if they had just been upfront with us," Dance said.

Those who showed up on Saturday say they do feel like they finally got an answer and say this was probably the final chapter for them and the hospital.

Rogan says that lawsuit is currently in litigation and there is no estimate of when it could be final.