Railing against the system might sound great, until you try to actually replace it with a new one.

It’s hard to think of a recent policy proposal that would have a more profound effect on more New Jerseyans than the one Gov. Chris Christie has repeatedly made in recent weeks — yet which no one really seems to have noticed.

He wants to end federal flood insurance.

New Jersey is home to 243,649 property owners who get their flood insurance through the FEMA-run National Flood Insurance Program, a number expected to grow as maps are updated, widening the flood zones where banks require coverage.

Amid widespread complaints by Hurricane Sandy victims over lower-than-expected damage settlements, Christie has repeatedly — and in classic Christie fashion — said the federal government should stop selling flood insurance to them.

“FEMA is the new F-word,” he told a crowd at a Port Monmouth town hall meeting last month.

“The federal government has to get out of the flood insurance business,” he told a crowd in Berkeley Township two weeks later. “It’s no good at it.”

He’s got an excellent point.

And the crowds in Monmouth and Ocean counties — both heavily Republican areas devastated by Hurricane Sandy flooding — cheered wildly when he said it.

I, however, stood there slack-jawed in amazement.

This was a display of political cognitive dissonance rivaled only by the infamous South Carolinian who five years ago implored U.S. Rep. Robert Inglis, “Keep your government hands off my Medicare.”

See, the federal government is the only entity that offers flood insurance. Why? Because private companies long ago concluded the risk of insuring properties near the water was too high. Insuring houses built on filled-in salt marshes is something so illogical only the government can be called on to do it.

What those crowds might be cheering for, in the end, is their own move to the hills of Bergen County.

That retreat from the Shore, as environmentalists and libertarians have been telling us for years, might be the most sensible option.

But for middle- and working-class families and businesses — and the very character of the Jersey Shore and cities such as Hoboken and Jersey City — it would be devastating.

So what would Christie replace the NFIP with? So far, he’s not saying. His office did not return repeated phone calls after his town hall statements.

There are plenty of reasons folks would cheer NFIP’s demise. Environmentalists have argued for years that the program encourages building in areas that should never have been developed. Fiscal conservatives say inland taxpayers should not be subsidizing people who choose to live in areas likely to flood.

By all accounts, NFIP is in bad shape. Largely self-sustaining from its creation in 1969 through the mid 1990s, it has racked up $24 billion in debt in the wake of storms such as Hurricane Katrina and Sandy.

TWOFOLD PROBLEM

Walk through the streets of Sandy-ravaged areas of New Jersey and the most common complaint you hear is that flood insurance settlements almost never come close to covering the cost of rebuilding.

Scott Knowles, a history professor at Drexel University and author of “The Disaster Experts: Mastering Risk in Modern America” (University of Pennsylvania, 2013), said where the NFIP has fallen down is not in shortchanging victims after the storm — but by failing to keep them out of harm’s way in the first place.

The subsidized flood insurance rates were designed to be coupled with strict flood-plain management practices: towns limiting development and requiring buildings to be elevated; FEMA revising flood maps with the latest science; and the real estate industry being cutthroat about everyone being insured.

Due to FEMA budget shortfalls and pressure from the real estate and development industries, much of NFIP’s enforcement fell by the wayside, Knowles said. But the subsidies rolled on.

“It’s politically expedient to claim that it’s big government’s fault that Sandy relief hasn’t worked out,” Knowles said. “But it’s much more complicated than that.”

The most common idea floated by NFIP abolitionists is to open the flood market to private insurers.

GOING PRIVATE?

It’s nearly impossible to find an expert who believes that private flood insurance, lacking the NFIP’s subsidies, wouldn’t be far more expensive. A 100 percent private insurance market would transform the Jersey Shore into a place only the truly wealthy could afford.

“NFIP is really about covering the average Joe — lower- to middle-class property owners” said Nicholas Pinter, a geology professor at Southern Illinois University.

If Sandy victims feel like they’re being nickel-and-dimed by FEMA in their settlement, they’d likely find the going even tougher against a company that needs to turn a profit — and can’t turn to taxpayers when it runs into the red.

“I guess if I were to try and find some sympathy for the governor’s view,” Knowles said, “it’s that we do need to reform the program so that the premiums people pay reflect the actual risk.”

That, however, is precisely the last thing the cheering crowds in Monmouth and Ocean counties want.

On Friday, President Obama signed bipartisan legislation that scales back premium increases meant to stabilize the NFIP.

The bill, co-sponsored by Sen. Robert Menendez (D-N.J.), rolls back changes made in the 2012 Biggert-Waters Act that withdrew subsidies for homes built up to code but later found to be in flood-prone areas.

Menendez was spurred into action by grassroots groups such as Toms River-based Stop FEMA Now, which rode a wave of outrage by home­own­ers fearing that higher premiums under Biggert-Waters would drive them from their homes. What the home­own­ers who flocked to Stop FEMA Now really wanted, it seems, was to stop FEMA from halting their subsidies.

NO REAL SOLUTION

Yet, even now, after a massive victory that ensures the continuation of NFIP subsidies that will keep him in his home, Stop FEMA Now founder George Kosimos holds fast to Christie’s idea that the program should one day be wiped out forever.

From Kosimos’ front yard, in a lagoon community built on a filled-in former salt marsh, it’s hard to imagine private insurance agents doing anything but hitting the dead end, turning around and hightailing it out of there. Or at least requiring him to raise his house even higher than FEMA wanted him to raise it.

He points to other models he said make sense, such as the state-administered cooperative run by California for earthquake insurance.

Another option, Kosimos said, is for private insurers to step in and begin issuing policies, with the federal government as a “backstop” to bail them out with loans after disasters, as it did after the failure of insurance giant AIG in the 2008 crash.

“They’ll pay it back with interest like all those companies did,” he said of the AIG bailouts.

That hardly seems like an ideal solution.

Railing against the system might sound great, until you try to actually replace it with a new one. And, as Pinter said, if we want to build homes in places Mother Ocean thinks are hers, there will never be a perfect system.

“There is widespread frustration out there, but what I would suggest is it is largely misplaced,’’ the Southern Illinois professor said. “What people are dealing with is the frustration of dealing with flooding. These are limits imposed by nature.”

Brian Donohue is host/producer of Ledger Live, a Star-Ledger video blog at NJ.com/ledgerlive. He may be reached at (973) 392-1543 or bdonohue@starledger.com.