Erie High to start new AP Capstone program next school year

Erie High is planning to start the College Board's new advanced placement Capstone program in the fall, making Erie one of the first two schools in Colorado to offer students the option of earning a Capstone diploma.

The addition of the Capstone program is part of the school's overall effort to increase rigor and prepare students for college.

Both the St. Vrain Valley and Boulder Valley school districts have worked to increase access to advanced classes over the past decade. All the comprehensive high schools in both districts offer a slate of honors classes, mainly advanced placement. Many area high schools also offer specialty classes or programs.

"What we've tried to do is maintain a very high level of rigor and offer a focus where kids can pursue their passions and their interests," said St. Vrain Valley Superintendent Don Haddad.

The College Board launched the AP Capstone diploma program this school year, with 136 schools offering the program in 26 states and 11 countries. In the fall, Erie High and Littleton's Heritage High will debut the program in Colorado.

Capstone students take an AP seminar class as sophomores or juniors, followed by an AP research class. Students who earn scores of 3 or higher on the exams for those classes, as well as scoring 3 or higher on four other AP exams of their choosing, earn a Capstone diploma.

In the seminar class, students investigate real-world issues from multiple perspectives. In the research class, they conduct independent research and produce and defend an academic thesis.

'It will be really good for Erie High'

Sue Thomson, whose sophomore daughter Kami Thomson is a potential Erie High Capstone candidate, said the program matches her daughter's interests.

"She's a researcher," she said. "I think she would thrive in that kind of class because it's what she loves to do. It will be really good for Erie High."

Bard Keeler, senior director for the AP Capstone program, said the College Board's research found that the core set of skills that universities expect of their freshmen include dissecting an argument and conducting defensible research.

Skills students are taught include analyzing topics through multiple lenses, planning and conducting a study or investigation, proposing solutions to real-world problems and collaborating to solve problems.

"We give the students a solid set of common research skills that they could generalize across any discipline," Keeler said. "It's preparing them for their later academic career or professions."

Matt Bucher, who's in his second year as Erie High's principal, became interested in advanced placement as principal at Longs Peak Middle School, where he started a pre-AP focus. The school's program was so successful, the school is now a national pre-AP demonstration site.

When he heard about the AP Capstone program, he said, he saw it as a "great opportunity for our students. It's probably the most rigorous program that the College Board has developed."

Students will be required to apply to the program and demonstrate their willingness to take on a college-level workload in their junior and senior years. The school plans to start with 30 students in the fall, then double to 60 the next year.

Katy Humble raises her hand to answer a question in an advanced placement social studies class at Erie High School. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

The program will be led by Erie High English teacher Russ Fox.

"The biggest pull for me is that the Capstone isn't English only or science only or history only," he said. "It's really tempting to be able to teach an AP class that's an AP everything class. The skills the students will need the most are critical thinking and research."

He said he's already heard from interested parents and students and expects more students to apply than there's space for.

Keri Campbell, an Erie Elementary teacher and parent to an Erie High senior and sophomore, said she's glad to see the high school up the level of rigor for students who need more challenge.

About 15 years ago, Erie High didn't offer advanced placement classes. Now, the school is up to about a dozen.

Plus, she said, the AP Capstone program will help Erie compete with other schools in the area and provide continuity for students at Erie Middle School, which offers a pre-AP focus.

"We're on the right track," she said.

'Our big challenge is the hours in the day'

Three local high schools — Centaurus in Lafayette, Fairview in Boulder and Niwot High — offer the International Baccalaureate program.

Though less popular than advanced placement, with about 830 IB high schools compared to nearly 14,000 public high schools with advanced placement classes, IB is popular with students looking for a challenge. All three schools draw students from around the area through open enrollment.

Centaurus students also can enroll in a pre-engineering program with the opportunity to earn guaranteed admission to the University of Colorado's College of Engineering, while Boulder High is an advanced placement focus school with an AP diploma.

Boulder Valley Superintendent Bruce Messinger said the district's comprehensive high schools offer a broad menu of advanced classes.

"Our big challenge is the hours in the day, not the lack of opportunities," he said. "It's hard for students to get it all done and have the full high school experience."

But to open up opportunities for students at smaller schools like Nederland High or for students who may want a specific class not offered at their school, the district is investigating distance learning. That way, he said, a student at Nederland, for example, could virtually attend a class at Fairview.

"It's absolutely doable," he said.

In St. Vrain Valley, high school focus programs include STEM programs at Longmont's Skyline High and Frederick High that are similar to the Centaurus pre-engineering program.

Then there's a medical and bioscience program at Longmont High. Longmont High, like Boulder High, also offers an AP diploma option.

At Silver Creek High in Longmont, students can enroll in a four-year Leadership Academy.

And Mead High School, pending school board approval, is planning to start an energy academy in the fall.

Mead High Principal Steve Payne said a committee of teachers, local energy companies and Mead's mayor is developing an energy academy that will allow students to earn an energy certification. Students will learn about the oil and gas industry and solar, wind and hydroelectric biofuels.

The program will include Front Range Community College courses offered on campus and a capstone project through a mentorship with a professional at a local company. The goal is to better prepare students either for college or to go directly into the energy workforce.

"It's going to be an amazing program," Payne said. "It's really preparing kids for a variety of futures."

For the future, St. Vrain's Haddad said, the district is investigating IBM's Pathways in Technology Early College High Schools, or P-TECH. As of September, there were 27 P-TECH schools, all on the East Coast.

P-TECH schools combine high school and two years of community college, with students graduating with a no-cost associate degree in applied science, engineering or computers within six years. Mentors from IBM and other companies also work with the students.

The model, according to IBM, was designed to be easy to replicate and sustainable as part of a national effort to reform career and technical education.

"There are a whole host of opportunities as our district continues to grow," Haddad said.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa