BALTIMORE (AP) — A mix of mourning and civil rights protest took center stage Monday at a funeral attended by thousands paying tribute to a man who died after suffering a severe spinal injury in police custody.

Freddie Gray's death under mysterious circumstances is the latest touchstone amid the national debate over police use of force. Many who had never met him gathered in a Baltimore church to bid him farewell and press for more accountability among law enforcement.

Just hours later, at least seven officers were hurt in a violent confrontation with a large group of youths outside a shopping mall. Television footage showed officers in riot gear and dozens of people hurling bricks, rocks and other items. One officer was unresponsive and others had broken bones, and a police cruiser was destroyed, said Capt. Eric Kowalczyk.

Early in the service, the attorney representing Gray's family, Billy Murphy, received a standing ovation after calling on the six officers who arrested him to tell the public what happened.

"This is our moment to get at truth. This is our moment to get it right," Murphy said.

Gray died April 19, days after his encounter with police. The 2,500-capacity New Shiloh Baptist church was filled with mourners, many of whom filed past Gray's casket before the service began.

While the funeral was underway, police said in a news release that the department had received a "credible threat" that three notoriously violent gangs are now working together to "take out" law enforcement officers. Gray's death has heightened tensions between residents and the police, with protests at times turning violent.

Just hours after Gray's funeral, dozens of people sparred with police in riot gear outside a mall in northwest Baltimore. Some threw rocks and bricks at the officers, who were wearing helmets and face shields.

One man held his arms up as the police moved toward him, an action that has been repeated throughout the Gray rallies.

A small group of mourners started lining up about two hours ahead of Monday's funeral. As they began filing into the church, the white casket with Gray's body was opened, flanked by floral arrangements. A rope was placed in front of the casket to prevent people from getting too close. One person used a cellphone to take a photo of the body.