Ello, the little social networking site that could, just raised another $5 million from investors, bringing its total investment to $11 million. Not bad for a company that originated as a private social network among seven friends.

The new funds come from current investors Foundry Group, Techstars Ventures and FreshTracks Capital. The previous round — $5.5 million last fall — went toward hiring developers and adding several features to the site: drag and drop editing, drafts and full-screen browsing and navigation. Mobile apps for iOS and Android are set to release this spring.

“The money we’ve raised will be 100 percent used to let Ello continue to hire only the best people, and to let us take our time to grow and build Ello right, with the right features in the right order,” Paul Budnitz, Ello’s CEO, said in an e-mail.

Mark Solon, managing partner at Techstars Ventures, will also join the Ello board.

When Ello reached the nation’s radar last summer (even Tonight Show host Jimmy Fallon weighed in), its appeal was as the anti-Facebook. Ello’s team had no plans to track personal users or sell their data.

But the attention may have been too soon. The company was still in beta. Even as it started approving new users, the site was admittedly buggy. It was limited to computers. You couldn’t share someone else’s post that you liked. It was difficult to find friends. Bugs were fixed. Simple features were added, along with some complicated ones.

CodePen, for example, allows developers and hobbyists to write web apps and embed them right into their Ello posts. (“Justin [Gitlin, a front-end designer] added that on his own. We all walked in about a week ago and he’d added it and we all applauded,” Budnitz said.)

The Ello team has grown to 27 people, with about two-thirds located in metro Denver. Co-founders and head designers Todd Berger and Lucian Fohr are in Boulder. Other co-founders with software developer Mode Set are in Denver. Budnitz is in Vermont.

A recent hire includes Pete Sheinbaum, the former CEO of Daily Candy, as Ello’s chief operating officer.

“Our dev team are all senior developers. We purposely hire rule breakers who have their point of view and are free to express it in the things they make,” Budnitz said.

And for those wondering about if that $6 million is all used up, Budnitz elaborated.

“No, we didn’t use up all our money yet,” he said. “… We’ve been growing steadily and they (investors) offered us more money, and it was a good deal so we took it.”

Past stories on social activity:

View RSS feed