Way before there was a meme, there was a MEM. The Modern Environmental Movement, a revolution in consciousness, is now celebrated every year on April 22, Earth Day, MEM’s birthday.

Come join the party. The happy news is we’re all connected. What’s good for the Earth is good for you.

Earth Day 2016 marks 46 years of deep struggle and intermittent success when it comes to building “an environmental democracy” that protects the planet as a whole and each of us individually.

Granted, we have a disturbingly long way to go to protect and defend our air, water and food supplies, but back in 1970, environmental cleanup wasn’t even a concept.

“Environment was a word that appeared more often in spelling bees than the evening news,” the official Earth Day Network website, EarthDay.org, reminds us. “Air pollution was commonly accepted as the smell of prosperity.”

That was then. This is now. Now the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act, the Endangered Species Act are all law — constantly threatened but increasingly relevant — and climate change is front and center.

This Earth Day 2016, more than 50,000 partner organizations in 196 countries — around 1.1 billion people — will be doing things to recognize the importance of creating a healthy, sustainable environment. That makes it the largest secular holiday in the world, and the Earth Day worldwide action plan now includes greening deteriorated schools, creating green jobs and investment, combating the rising rates of asthma and cancer, increasing funding for public parks and recreation, even getting out the vote.

So how will you and your dear ones celebrate this growing movement? Here are some down-to-Earth Day ideasn:

Plant a tree. The EDN is calling for the planting of 7.8 billion trees by 2020, Earth Day’s 50th year. This is where the expression “not in my backyard” takes on new meaning. They suggest you plant four or five trees on your land, your neighbors’ land or at a nearby park or business. (Check out the EDN website for more.)

Start composting. More than a billion pounds of food are tossed into the garbage every year. You can make a difference by turning your food waste into healthy soil. Portion control is part of it. The Clean Plate Club wants you to take less on your plate and feel great when dinner’s over.

Be a biker. Ride to work, to school, to local stores. Not only are bikes easy on the environment; they are a great way to burn calories, build muscle and juice up your joints. It’s a win-spin situation!

Eat less red meat. It’s the cow farts, dear reader! The meat industry generates nearly one-fifth of the man-made greenhouse gas emissions worldwide. When meat consumption goes down, the health of the planet goes up, and your health improves, too, because most red meat is filled with nasty hormones and antibiotics.

Plant a garden. Fresh food is the best food. If you’re landless, find a community garden to play in. Get your kids to dig in, too. Research shows that getting kids involved in growing healthy food is a terrific way to get them involved in eating healthy food.

Love your lungs. Limit your intake of poisons, toxins and chemicals coming from household cleaners, paints and finishes, furniture and flooring, etc. Also, be sure to exercise regularly, breathe mindfully and learn to make the most of the oxygen you do have.

Buy local produce. When you shop at farmers markets and support local growers and breeders, you get a double whammy of benefit. You will eat healthier and reduce your carbon footprint.

Recycle your e-waste. This Earth Day, open every drawer and closet, collect all your old, unused electronic devices, and get rid of them (responsibly, of course).

Be the change you want to see. Our planet is in peril. Your health is at stake. Do what you can, because no one else can do it for