Duane Wilson knocks the ball away from Nebraska Omaha's Devin Patterson during the first half. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

The last time Marquette lost to a team from a non-major conference at home, Nebraska Omaha was competing in Division II.

In its fourth year as a member of Division I, Omaha pulled off its biggest upset, knocking off Marquette, 97-89, Saturday at the BMO Harris Bradley Center. It was the Golden Eagles' first loss to a non-major at home since being defeated by North Dakota State on Dec. 2, 2006.

Marquette's small lineup wasn't the problem against Omaha, which features similar size. The issue was two of the smallest players on the court — 5-foot-11 junior Devin Patterson and 6-foot-1 senior CJ Carter.

The duo of Mavericks guards gave the Golden Eagles fits all day, using their speed to put up 26 and 25 points, respectively.

"Patterson and Carter were terrific," Marquette head coach Steve Wojciechowski said. "We knew that coming into the game, and they were even better in person."

After a loss Tuesday to Ohio State, Wojciechowski made defense, especially transition defense, a priority in practice. Omaha is one of the fastest tempo teams in the country, but Wojciechowski said he was still surprised with how poorly his team performed considering the extra emphasis.

Patterson and Carter routinely beat Marquette's guards off the dribble to either get easy points in the paint or dish to shooters on the outside when the defense collapsed. They combined for 11 assists, with Patterson contributing eight to go along with his collegiate-high point total and led Omaha to 27 fast-break points.

"It's hard to fall back to half court because those guys are fast," Marquette senior guard Derrick Wilson said. "They have good guards that have high-major speed, and it's hard to stop that in the full court."

The Golden Eagles roster, while it is short on height, is full of versatile wing players. Wojciechowski has preached ball-hawking defense and getting in passing lanes, but he didn't see much of that Saturday.

"Yeah, I am surprised," Wojciechowski said. "We should have the ability to pressure the ball and contain it. We have to do a better job."

Marquette didn't do itself any favors, going 0 of 8 to start the game and falling behind, 12-2, less than four minutes into the game.

"It is always key, if we can start fast like that," Omaha coach Derrin Hansen said. "It at least puts a little shock in the other team. Because let's face it, we're probably not supposed to do that very often. Not only does it put a little shock in them, but it gives our guys confidence too."

The Golden Eagles battled back behind 23 points from Juan Anderson and a spark off the bench from Wilson, who had a collegiate-high 17 points, and ultimately took a two-point lead early in the second half.

That lead evaporated in 47 seconds and Marquette never led again. The Golden Eagles tied the game at 49, which was followed by a 7-0 Mavericks run, and tied it again, 66-66, before Omaha rattled off eight straight points.

"I thought our guys showed some grit to claw back in the game and even take the lead at some times, but we didn't play with poise or intelligence once we got the lead," Wojciechowski said. "We're a team that's got to fight like crazy together in order to beat anyone on our schedule."

Last season, Omaha lost by eight at Iowa, fell by three at UNLV and trailed Minnesota by four with 3 minutes to play in a 92-79 road loss. In their final year of being ineligible for the postseason after transferring to Division I, Omaha finally pulled out a road win against a high-major program, leaving Marquette shocked and searching for answers as the Golden Eagles kick off their stretch of five games in eight days.

"We've got to get back in the gym tomorrow," Wilson said. "We can't forget how we feel at this moment, but we also have another game Monday, and we have to be ready and come out a lot better and play a lot better than we did today."