It's here. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, or as you've probably heard it referred to, Obamacare.

Little has drawn as much attention or caused as much frustration. But, despite all the bickering about its merits or deficiencies, it is the law of the land regarding health insurance. And it comes with teeth.

Out with the old, in with the new.

Out: the era when Americans were simply advised to have insurance to avoid the financial difficulties associated with an unexpected medical issue.

In: mandatory health coverage and the PPACA's individual mandate, which imposes a new additional harm for the uninsured, a fine. With few exceptions, those who do not have approved coverage will suffer a tax penalty, or what proponents call a "shared responsibility fee."

Starting now, every legal resident will be required to obtain approved health insurance. If you do not, absent a qualified exemption, you may be penalized 1 percent of your annual income. The penalty increases to 2 percent in 2015 and 2.5 percent in 2016. In 2017 and beyond the penalty will be adjusted for cost of living.

Don't think you can stiff the government by not paying the penalty. The IRS is the collection agency. Penalties will be due and payable with your federal income tax return. Your 2014 penalty will be due April 15, 2015.

Arizonans are exempt if they have health care coverage through the military, Medicare or the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System (AHCCCS) — the state's implementation of Medicaid, which was recently expanded.

If you do not have health coverage through one of these plans, then the latest date to enroll in an approved plan is March 31.

To be clear, you must actually enroll in a plan, not just sign up for the site. If you miss the March 31, 2014, deadline you will not be able to enroll in a plan until Jan. 1, 2015; unless you have a qualifying event such as loss of coverage at work, a child born or adopted, or a marriage or divorce.

Even that date comes with a bit of a catch: to have coverage effective on April 1, you must enroll and pay your premium by March 15. If you sign up on March 16 or after, your coverage will begin May 1 and you'll owe 1/12 of the tax penalty for 2014.

How do you enroll in an approved plan?

If you qualify for either a tax credit or subsidy you can buy your Obamacare plans through healthcare.gov, which is the exchange serving Arizona. All available plans are provided by private insurance companies — and Pima County has some of the most affordable premiums in the country.

If you do not qualify for a tax credit or subsidy you can buy qualified plans outside the exchange from your local insurance agent (make sure they are approved to sell in the marketplace).

Or, with the less than pleasant rollout of healthcare.gov it's probably easier to go through an agent. Just be sure you use a reputable agent.

Agents can assist you in finding policies both on the exchange (including those with subsidies) and those outside it.

The policies your agent has available are all guaranteed issue, cover pre-existing conditions, include all 10 essential benefits, and come with the same pricing as policies you can buy online via the government site.

Additionally, your agent can help you with quotes, verify that your doctor accepts the insurance you are considering and help determine if you qualify for tax credits and deductible subsidies.

Quite possibly the most important benefit of consulting a licensed, reputable agent is the service provided to you after the fact. A good agent is there when you need help.

It is true the agent gets paid to provide this service, but the cost is the same for you. The money the agent gets is money the insurance company would have been paid anyway.

Finally, if you buy your insurance through your employer you need to know that your spouse and children do not qualify for credits or subsidies on the exchange, even if buying for them through your employer is expensive. Shopping outside your employer could cost less and still offer good benefits.

Avoid the tax penalty: sign up for a PPACA plan by March 31, either through the marketplace or your insurance agent. Getting signed up this week could save you the trouble of a penalty next year.

Jeff Ronstadt is president of Ronstadt Insurance, Inc. He has been working with businesses and families in Southern Arizona for over 20 years.



- 30 -