Lawmakers in the House will examine the effective of the federal government’s “no-fly” terrorist watch list following the threat of Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) members using western passports to enter the United States on commercial airline flights.

Lawmakers have said ISIS has thousands of members that have U.S. or European passports and could slip into America undetected.

The House Homeland Security Committee Transportation Subcommittee will hold a hearing Thursday afternoon about “safeguarding privacy and civil liberties while keeping our skies safe.”

ADVERTISEMENT

Subcommittee Chairman Richard Hudson (R-N.C.) said the hearing would allow lawmakers to focus on the role of the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) in prevent ISIS from attacking inside the U.S.

“The thousands of foreign fighters, including U.S. citizens, affiliated with terrorist groups like ISIS are a growing and serious threat to the security of U.S. aviation and the homeland,” Hudson said. “It is imperative that we accurately identify individuals who pose this threat.”

The no-fly list has been criticized by groups like the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), who have successfully argued in court that the federal government is not transparent enough about its watchlist selections. A federal court recently sided with the groups' claim that it is too hard for passengers to challenge their placement on the list.

Hudson defended the use of the no-fly list ahead of Thursday’s hearing, however.

“It is imperative that we accurately identify individuals who pose this threat,” he said. “The Terrorist Screening Center (TSC) maintains the U.S. Government’s consolidated Terrorist Watchlist, including the No Fly List, which helps agencies like TSA identify known or suspected terrorists and take the appropriate steps to prevent them from entering the country, boarding an airplane, or obtaining a visa.”

TSA Assistant Administrator Stephen Sadler, FBI Terrorist Screening Center Christopher Piehota and Government Accountability Office Homeland Security and Justice Acting Director Jennifer Grover are scheduled to testify before the panel.