At Los Angeles County General Hospital, there's a color-coded system used to describe how busy the emergency room is at a given moment. The best is Code Blue, when no one is waiting for care and the staff members can take a (usually brief) moment to catch their breath. The worst, "Code Black", which indicates an overwhelming backlog, provides the title of this candid documentary look at life in one of America's busiest ERs.

Other films have taken viewers inside the controlled chaos of a public hospital, most notably last year's "The Waiting Room," but "Code Black" bears the distinction of being directed by a doctor. Ryan McGarry, M.D. trained at L.A. General and worked on this film for five years while doing so.

McGarry's level of access results in some candid, even grueling footage of the hospital's "C Booth," a 20-by-25 foot section of the ER devoted to the most urgent cases. One interviewee says that more people have died in those square feet than any other in the country. Of course, more lives per square foot have been saved there as well.

When McGarry tries to broaden his scope, though, "Code Black" falters. The film opens with references to Obamacare, and complaints are aired throughout about the bureaucracy and paperwork that keep them from spending more time actually helping the sick and injured. The lack of funding for the hospital, required by mandate not to turn any patient away for lack of payment or insurance, is also raised.

These are significant, sadly familiar issues, for sure. But McGarry would have been better off focusing on the inherent human drama and the physical and emotional heroism of the healers he captures on film. Even better, he could have delved into some of the imperfections among them, instead of portraying every doctor as an unwavering, devoted servant of the public good. Neither nuance nor analysis are his goals, though, leaving "Code Black" as a worthy but uneven testament to those who work to save some of the many still excluded from a social safety net that never seems to expand fast enough.

***

"CODE BLACK"

Grade: B-

Rating: Not rated

Running time: 81 minutes

Playing at: Opens Friday, August 1 at Regal Fox Tower

Cast and crew: directed by Ryan McGarry

The lowdown: This documentary, directed by a doctor who trained at Los Angeles County General Hospital, goes inside the trauma center there to provide a look at the people who work there and the challenges they face in America's health care system.