Topics: From the Wires, News

NEW DELHI (AP) — President Barack Obama was so honored to be invited to India’s Republic Day celebration that he showed it.

After arriving at Rashtrapati Bhawan, the presidential palace, for an elaborate welcome ceremony, Obama clasped his hands in the traditional “namaste” greeting. During namaste, a person’s head is slightly bowed and the hands are pressed together, palms touching, fingers pointed skyward and thumbs touching the chest.

Namaste often is performed at the end of yoga practice.

Asked about being the chief guest at Monday’s celebration, Obama said: “It is a great honor. We are so grateful for the extraordinary hospitality.”

Obama’s wife, Michelle, accompanied him to India.

___

In between hours of meetings, Obama and Prime Minister Narendra Modi strolled through the neatly trimmed garden of Hyderabad House, the state guesthouse.

The two walked past ponds of lotus flowers before sitting down beneath a canopy for tea time. Modi poured.

Both sat with elbows on their knees, sipping from white cups. They appeared relaxed and smiled as they chatted and gestured.

While Americans love their coffee, Obama seems to have similar feelings about tea.

He’s often seen in public carrying the hot stuff in a paper travel cup embossed with the White House seal.

___

Obama also paid his respects at the site where India’s independence icon, Mahatma Gandhi, was cremated.

He walked in his socks, no shoes, to a walled courtyard at the Raj Ghat, and laid a large white wreath at the site. He also shoveled dirt and poured a pitcher of water around a sapling that was planted in his honor at the memorial, as has been done for U.S. presidents before him who have made the same visit.

Obama signed the guest book and quoted the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. in his inscription.

“What Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. said then remains true today — the spirit of Gandhi is very much alive in India today. And it remains a great gift to the world. May we always live in his spirit of love and peace — among all people and nations,” Obama wrote.

___

A senior member of India’s cabinet usually is on hand to greet visiting heads of state, such as Obama, when they arrive in India.

The foreign ministry had said that’s how it would go when Obama and his wife, Michelle, arrived at Palam Air Base, and it appeared that Power Minister Piyush Goyal would have the honor.