To buy, or not to buy?

Confidence booster?

Art Geigel hasn't made plans to buy health insurance — and he doesn't plan to look into it anytime soon.Health insurance is too expensive, in his view, and at the moment he's more concerned about getting his new social media company off the ground.So if the federal government asks him to pay a fine, so be it.He's one of many uninsured entrepreneurs who likely will continue on without coverage, even after the federal government starts fining people who don't have health insurance, according to small business experts who spoke withStarting March 31, the government will require most adults who make at least $10,000 to buy health insurance or pay a fine.The new rule — part of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare — will have a disproportionate impact on small business owners.Nationwide, 25% of entrepreneurs are uninsured, whereas only 10% of other workers have no health insurance, according to a survey conducted from January 2011 through September 2012 as part of the Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index.However, many of those uninsured entrepreneurs — whether they're plumbers, painters, consultants or computer programmers — won't buy coverage because the fines put in place as part of Obamacare are relatively low compared to the cost of insurance premiums, according to the experts who spoke withMany entrepreneurs who don't have insurance are young and single, so they don't think they need it. And some are in the process of building a company, so money is tight.Mr. Geigel, for instance, is in his early 30s and has no children. But he and his two co-founders do need to take care of their company, Kudoala. The startup in Shaker Heights is developing an online tool designed to give people a fun, easy way to recognize the achievements of their friends on Facebook and other social media sites.To Mr. Geigel, making sure the company succeeds takes priority over buying insurance.“As an entrepreneur I'm focused on more important things that demand my immediate time and attention,” he wrote in an email toAs it happens, Mr. Geigel is one of the few entrepreneurs affiliated with the Shaker LaunchHouse business incubator who is without health insurance, according to LaunchHouse partner Todd Goldstein. He estimates at least 90% of LaunchHouse entrepreneurs are insured.The incubator encourages entrepreneurs to get coverage, Mr. Goldstein said. If an entrepreneur isn't healthy, their business will suffer, too, he noted.Older entrepreneurs and those with pre-existing medical conditions will be more likely than their younger, healthier counterparts to sign up for insurance through Healthcare.gov, the federal health insurance marketplace set up as part of Obamacare, Mr. Goldstein said. He suspects a lot of uninsured entrepreneurs probably will take a “catch-me-if-you-can” mentality: They'll just wait and see if they end up with a fine.If you haven't bought insurance by March 31, you could pay a one-time fine equal to 1% of your income, or $95, whichever is greater. Next year, if you still don't have insurance, you could pay a higher fine equal to 2% of your income, or $325. In 2016, the fine will go up to 2.5%, or $695.In contrast, it costs an average of $328 per month for an individual to buy a mid-tier health plan through Healthcare.gov and other exchanges run by individual states, according to a federal report published in September.That rate is higher than what many people with a mid-tier plan will pay, however, because the federal government is subsidizing plans for buyers who make less than 400% of the federal poverty level. Any individual who makes up to $45,960 would receive a subsidy, and the cap goes up to $94,200 for a family of four.Scott Shane, an entrepreneurship professor at Case Western Reserve University, said the penalties and the subsidies won't be enough to convince most people — entrepreneurs included — to pay for coverage.“I think most of the people who didn't have insurance just won't have insurance,” Dr. Shane said.Tom Campanella agreed that the penalties won't create a strong incentive for entrepreneurs to buy health insurance. However, over time, most uninsured entrepreneurs will realize they need coverage, according to Mr. Campanella, associate professor and director of the health care MBA degree at Baldwin Wallace University.Mr. Campanella has been there himself, as he once worked as a consultant in the health care field while raising children. So his company, Campanella Consulting Inc., bought coverage through the Council of Smaller Enterprises, a small business advocacy group that among other things provides its members with group buying power.“I was married, and I had two younger kids, so health care coverage was critical,” he said.Gary Conlin, a health care adviser for COSE, said the new subsidies and penalties will be enough to push many uninsured entrepreneurs to get coverage. Many entrepreneurs, especially those who are in the process of starting a company, will qualify for at least some subsidies, given how high the income caps are, Mr. Conlin said.The Affordable Care Act also could lead to more entrepreneurship, Mr. Conlin noted. The law says insurance companies can't deny people coverage for pre-existing medical conditions. Thus, employees with medical problems will feel confident they can buy health insurance even if they leave their current jobs.“Maybe we'll see more people coming out and starting new businesses,” he said.Mr. Conlin and others interviewed for this story said entrepreneurs who are in the market for health insurance will look at plans on Healthcare.gov.Nicki Artese could become one of them. For 12 years, the 47-year-old has run Artese Communications out of her home in University Heights. She has had coverage through Medical Mutual of Ohio the whole time.This past summer, however, her monthly rate jumped to $388 from $299. Ms. Artese said she believes it's still a good rate for the coverage she receives, but she suspects it will go up again this summer, maybe because of all the expenses she has incurred since undergoing pelvic surgery about a year ago.If her rate climbs again, Ms. Artese will be checking out the plans available through Healthcare.gov.“I would be foolish not to,” she said.