Even if Chief Minister Andrew Barr wins Labor's fifth term in government next year, a new reality awaits for the ACT. Photo: Chris Pearce

Regardless of which party wins next year's ACT election, Canberrans will wake up on October 16, 2016 at the start of a thoroughly new government.

A year out from the poll, Liberal Opposition Leader Jeremy Hanson appears confident about his chances, while Chief Minister Andrew Barr is busy showing his priorities and style in the Assembly's top job.

Even if Mr Barr wins Labor's fifth term in government next year, a new reality awaits for the ACT. With his own mandate and the rare chance to overhaul his frontbench team, Mr Barr could shake off Katy Gallagher's shadow and see through his plans on tax reform, innovation and the rebranding of Canberra. It would be a re-elected government in name only – with a younger and more diverse backbench, a refreshed ministry and a renewed confidence for Mr Barr.

Advertisement

The most substantial change would come in the form of the ACT's first Liberal government since 2001. Jeremy Hanson would be a Canberra Liberals hero, having won a battle he is working hard to frame as a referendum on the government's light rail plans.

Mr Hanson wouldn't waste much time before tearing up the tram contracts, a move that will see huge compensation payouts to the private consortium eventually picked to build the line and implementation of a yet to be revealed public transport policy.

Apart from some opportunistic announcements designed to fill holes left by Labor, so far the Liberal opposition is staying all but completely clear of major policy moves. Why talk about your own policies when you can talk about light rail? It's a position that won't last much past the summer break, let alone until the campaign proper.

The biggest unknown remains how the five new electorates, each set to send five members to London Circuit, will play.

The Greens, led by Minister Shane Rattenbury, are preparing to try and win back seats lost last time and build their representation on the back of a solid term with a seat at the cabinet table. More than a few minor parties and independents look set to stand.

Be the result an emboldened Andrew Barr, victorious Jeremy Hanson or something else all together – a new government is coming.