Those who'd be quick to jeer a Federal judge's ruling supporting House Republicans in a fight with the president over funding a section of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act would do well to take a breath. A look at the bigger picture might well temper their criticisms.

True enough, President Barack Obama lost this round. And true enough, the health-care law, his signature domestic achievement, will suffer a serious setback unless the ruling is overturned on appeal.

But the question at hand was much larger than Obamacare. Or Obama himself. It was a matter of the fundamental separation of powers that stands at the heart of our constitutional system of government.

The details, in brief:

Congress refused to appropriate funds to reimburse insurers who offer discounted rates to very low income participants. But the White House went ahead and paid the insurers anyway.

And so the House sued.

When it did, back in 2014, there were plenty of folks who argued that the suit wouldn't stand a chance. But U.S. District Judge Rosemary Collyer, in a 38-page decision issued last week, slapped down the White House for overreaching.

This is exactly why even those who support the president and Obamacare should pause before condemning the ruling. Because the battle was about executive authority. And because their man won't always be president. Suppose, as terrible as it is to imagine, that a reality TV star were one day to be elected president. Suppose further that said entertainer began to wield his executive authority willy-nilly, effectively telling Congress to go take a hike whenever he felt like it.

In a nation of laws, such excesses are thankfully forbidden.

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act is the law of the land. And it's been upheld in the Supreme Court, in two landmark cases. But that doesn't mean that the White House can just go ahead and circumvent Congress and decide that the power of the purse rests with the executive, not the legislative, branch of the federal government.

It most decidedly does not.

If Congress doesn't appropriate funds, those funds aren't there to be spent.

Even those who strongly back Obamacare – as has this space from the first – should be able to see this plainly.