It’s budget season in Canada -- the time of year when economists emerge from their dens, shake the moss out of their hair, scratch a tree, note the length of their shadow and use it to predict that the economy will definitely grow this year unless conditions cause it to stall.

But their usefulness doesn’t end there; they also provide advice. British Columbia just brought down a balanced budget, which I naively believed was a good thing. I was wrong. The economists at the Centre for Policy Alternatives told us the government was placing too much emphasis on balancing the budget.

But the horrible news about B.C.’s balanced budget is nothing compared to the sad developments in Ottawa. After several years of deficits, a $620-billion debt and $29-billion a year in interest payments, the federal government is about to produce a surplus, which we’re told is the worst possible outcome.

In fact it has triggered a tidal wave of opposition. A staggering 70 economists have signed an actual statement under the name Economists Against Austerity denouncing the federal government for restraining spending. We don’t know why these economists were staggering, however we should not assume that they were performing economics while under the influence of alcohol or any other mind-altering substance.

To the contrary, they typically make very clear and logical arguments explaining how increasing spending will stimulate economic growth and job creation, increase prosperity and reduce inequality.

In turn government revenues will rise, enabling even more government help for struggling families, who will now live in affordable housing, in safe neighbourhoods, with good schools and affordable child care. Parks and green spaces will stretch out to the horizon. Squealing children will dance like flames across the grass and the happy sounds of backyard barbecues will float softly on the summer breeze. It is always summer in this place.

And yet, something about this doesn’t quite ring true. For instance our friends in Quebec have long been against austerity. They staked out that ground decades ago. They have the biggest, gaudiest, most awe-inspiring social programs imaginable. They have run a perpetual stimulus package. They should be a social-democratic paradise, but are they?

Their debt as a percentage of the economy sits at 50%, far and away the biggest, gaudiest and most awe-inspiring debt in the country. Their economy is barely growing, revenues have dried up, employment growth is weak, productivity is the pits, and they have some of the worst demographics in the country. After solemn promises that they would balance their budget this year, the government now admits they will run yet another deficit. Economic winter has set in and spring shows no sign of arriving.

But in the UK David Cameron became the poster child for austerity and hacked and slashed programs only to see economic growth and a job creation record that is the envy of Europe.

God knows my progressive economist friends are smart, but regular people are wise -- wise enough to know the old adage that if something is too good to be true, then it probably is.