Executives reported a bullish outlook for the rest of the year after robust second quarter revenue growth for middle market businesses, which include about 200,000 companies and make up about one-third of all U.S. jobs. This could bode well for overall growth of the U.S. economy, which contracted in the first quarter by the most in five years.

[READ: Long-Term Job Market Trends Paint a Gloomier Picture]

Firms reported full-year revenue growth of 6.6 percent in the second quarter and the rise was widespread among virtually all sectors, especially health care and manufacturing, according to a quarterly report released Wednesday from the National Center for Middle Market in collaboration with Ohio State University’s Fisher College of Business and GE Capital. First quarter U.S. gross domestic product weakness didn’t mar top-line middle market growth, which was 6.5 percent year-over-year.

“We may be an anomaly to the general economy but certainly, if big-ticket discretionary items are a reflection of consumer confidence, then things certainly look good from our perspective,” says Bob Wheeler, CEO of Airstream, which manufactures luxury recreational vehicles and is experiencing “a three-year run” from pent-up post-recession demand.

The U.S. middle market, which at $4.3 trillion, is bigger than the economy of Germany and includes companies with annual revenue of $10 million to $1 billion. Its top-line expansion in the second quarter outpaced that of S&P 500 companies, which was 3.4 percent in the second quarter after 0.5 percent the previous period.

Looking ahead, 47 percent of middle market firms plan to add workers in the coming year, up from 43 percent at the same period last year. They anticipate growth of 3.3 percent, up from 3.2 percent over the past 12 months. Sixty-three percent say they plan to increase capital investment.

“If you see top line growth at 6.6 percent, employment holding the line as much as possible and capital expenditure holding the line as much as possible, at a certain point, if you’re going to maintain that growth, you’ve got to open the purse strings either for capital investment or for human capital investment or both,” says Tom Stewart, executive director of the National Center for the Middle Market. “It seems to me like we’re reaching the point in some companies where it’s time to invest.”

[ALSO: State Employment Numbers Signal 'Fairly Robust' Growth]

The cost of health care is at the top of the list of concerns of middle market business leaders, followed by the ability to grow revenue and the cost of doing business.

Part of the reason for the weakness in first quarter GDP was weakness in exports, Stewart points out, and middle market firms tend not to export as much as larger companies.

“There is a gap and in general this is one of the areas where middle market companies underachieve in terms of their potential,” he says.

The report doesn’t gauge exporting performance, but Stewart says the Center is working with the Brookings Institution to generate data, which will be released this fall.