Related Coverage Texas children outweigh national average

AUSTIN (KXAN) — More than one-third of Texas children ages 2-18 are considered overweight or obese, and in Austin’s poorer neighborhoods the rate can be two-thirds of those kids. Obesity brings on secondary, serious illnesses at a much earlier stage of life. A yearlong local study, part of a $6-million federal grant, finds the greatest link to childhood obesity can be family income and the resulting lifestyle and food habits.

Dell Children’s Medical Center, the UT Health Science Center and other agencies put 400 children in a control group and another 400 in a tightly monitored and coordinated program of diet and exercise. “If you’re living in a poor part of town you tend to have less resources to purchase healthy foods,” Pediatrician Dr. Stephen Pont explained. “Your parks may not be as safe; It’s harder to get around; you have very busy lives. All those factors contribute to make it difficult to be healthy.”

This can lead to earlier high blood pressure, cholesterol, liver cirrhosis, sleep apnea and diabetes. “We have kids struggling now with conditions we used to only see in adults,” Pont said. “And a huge driver of that is if you’re at a healthy weight or not.”

Some parents, perhaps overweight themselves, are in denial and don’t see it in their kids. Not Juana Lopez. She knew her 13-year-old son Juan was a likely diabetic, and she was thrilled when he got into the program, “When I got the call I was so happy,” Juana said. “They helped me a lot with Juan. He was overweight, and so was I.”

In fact, mom and son joined together in better eating habits and running together. It was a bonding experience and they lost weight together. “She saw how much I struggled, Juan said of his mom. “I didn’t have a coach to keep me going, so she decided to step in. We ran together.”

After a year in the program, Juana adds, “I am very happy now, and I appreciate all the help they gave my son and my family. I am very proud of my son.”

Lilia Zavaleta saw her 7-year-old son Raul putting on weight. He had a big time sweet tooth. Over the year he came to love exercise and sports and even gave up those sweet treats. “That helped him eat better,” Lilia said. “He doesn’t want more candy, he eats fruits and vegetables.”

Juan Lopez says his new habits helped him not only lose weight, but gain strength and his diabetes threat is fading away. “Diabetes can kill you so I say eat well, work out, don’t just lay on the couch and eat chips,” he said with a smile.

The study results, which will be released this spring, are expected to show the importance of a well rounded plan for kids and that they stick to it. Mom and dad may find it also works for them.