Buy Photo Madison Young, 3, and her mother, Hollee, 20, enjoy ice cream at the WorldÕs Largest Ice Cream Party to benefit the WHAS Crusade for Children hosted by Chillers Microcreamery at the Big Four Bridge. June 07, 2014 (Photo: Maggie Huber, Special to The C-J)Buy Photo Story Highlights WHAS Crusade for Children, Inc. has raised money since 1954 to support local children

Firefighters have long been associated with the organization, holding black boots open for money

Chillers Microcreamery's ice cream social hoped to break world record for largest ice cream party

Without fail, Louisville's busiest fire station will get a call shortly after its firefighters finish setting up to take donations at a downtown intersection.

Orange safety cones placed in the road, leading toward firefighters with boots for WHAS Crusade for Children donations, will be put back on their truck, to be taken out again as soon as they can return.

"When June rolls around, we know it's Crusade time," Louisville Fire & Rescue Capt. Jeff Deem said.

The Crusade has raised money since 1954 to support the region's children. Its largest fundraiser — an annual telethon — takes place the first full weekend in June.

Firefighters have long been associated with the organization, and residents have come to expect them and the iconic black boots accepting donations.

Deem and Sgt. Scott Hoover take shifts raising money near the KFC Yum! Center, 4th Street Live and downtown hospitals. They see people search their cars, dumping change and whatever is attached to it — cigarette butts, gum — into the boots.

"We'll take it, as long as it supports the kids," Deem said.

Deem, Hoover and other members of Louisville's 2nd Battalion stayed out of traffic Saturday as they collected donations beneath the Big Four Bridge as part of Chillers Microcreamery's ice-cream social.

The local business hoped to break the world record for largest ice-cream party, with all proceeds going to the Crusade.

Chillers is a multi-generational family business that has supported Crusade in the past, district manager Derek Young said. As the company continues to grow, its owners wanted to take their support to the next level.

Derek and Trevor Young started planning Saturday's event a year in advance and said they were happy with the turnout. The exact number of attendees wasn't available, but about 700 tickets were sold in advance — raising about $3,500 before ice cream even entered the picture.

At the event, families could receive free ice cream and donate to firefighters waiting with open boots. They then sat in rows of white chairs while music played.

Shortly after 2 p.m., the audience posed for a photo, which will determine if Chillers broke the record — previously set with 784 people.

Jeffersonville resident Heather Henderson-Gilligan had her children, niece and nephew wear matching orange shirts so they could be spotted in the picture. She said she enjoyed the event and hopes it becomes an annual part of the Crusade.

Deem said people were generous this year, and Hoover's freezer bag full of cash proved it.

With the donations received the day of the event, Trevor Young estimated the event topped $5,000.

Reporter Bailey Loosemore can be reached at (502) 582-4646. Follow her on Twitter at @bloosemore.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1pnTyPg