To the Editor:

As a practicing obstetrician-gynecologist, I know that medical ethics require me to maximize health, prevent harm, respect autonomy and work for justice. It is deeply disturbing to read the stories outlined by Lynn M. Paltrow and Jeanne Flavin (“Pregnant, and No Civil Rights,” Op-Ed, Nov. 8), of women forced to undergo cesarean sections, or prosecuted for “attempted fetal homicide” after falling down a flight of stairs, or jailed for second-degree murder because of unexplained vaginal bleeding that turned out to be a miscarriage.

These stories and others demonstrate failure in all four of these moral areas.

Laws that criminalize pregnant women undermine their autonomy to make medical decisions that are right for them. They drive a wedge between patients and doctors and damage our ability to provide the best possible care.

These laws are harmful and dangerous to my patients’ health and are deeply unjust, particularly because it is most often minority women and those living in poverty who are subjected to this unconstitutional treatment.

No one should lose her ability to make medical decisions or the right to bodily integrity because she is pregnant. When a woman is pregnant, she does not become less of a person herself.

NANCY L. STANWOOD

New Haven, Nov. 11, 2014

The writer is board chairwoman of Physicians for Reproductive Health.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

To the Editor:

The report of women having forced cesarean sections shines light on the concept of patient autonomy and informed consent. Informed consent for a procedure requires that the patient understand the risks and benefits and consent to the procedure.

This fundamental ethics principle is universally accepted by doctors and is codified in the American Medical Association’s Code of Medical Ethics and in the federal regulations about the Affordable Care Act.

If doctors ignore this basic principle of shared decision-making, they become mere technicians working at the behest of third parties. Judges and courts do not make diagnoses or treat patients. Doctors should not treat patients in any nonemergency situation (including under a court order) in the absence of a valid informed consent.

HERBERT RAKATANSKY

Providence, R.I., Nov. 9, 2014

The writer is clinical professor emeritus of medicine at Brown University.

To the Editor:

All the case law discussed in the article is premised on the proposition that the state has a right to regulate pregnancy that trumps any right to privacy.

This is a two-edged sword, because the right to regulate gives the state a right to preserve a pregnancy but also to require the termination of a pregnancy.

It is best not to allow the state the right to meddle with reproduction but to leave the right to privacy intact.

NEAL F. DEVITT

Santa Fe, N.M., Nov. 9, 2014

The writer practices family medicine.