Heather Goldwater, a PR professional, recently told CNBC's "Closing Bell" how her $510-a-month health insurance plan was canceled by Cigna.

During the segment, CNBC aired a scary graphic that read: "May Double – After Obamacare" (video below).

Cigna promised to send Goldwater a letter with more health plan options, but has failed to do so.

“It’s almost November 1 and I have not heard a word, but they are canceling my policy at the end of the year, 2013, and I can’t get on a website that works,” said Goldwater. “They’re not giving me any information. They told me don’t do anything, you just stay back. That situation, I’m a little worried.”

Goldwater also appeared on a NBC News segment back on October:

“I’m completely overwhelmed with a six-month-old and a business,” said Goldwater. “The last thing I can do is spend hours poring over a website that isn’t working, trying to wrap my head around this entire health care overhaul.”

Goldwater said she supports the new law and is grateful for provisions helping folks like her with pre-existing conditions, but she worries she won’t be able to afford the new insurance, which is expected to cost more because it has more benefits. “I’m jealous of people who have really good health insurance,” she said. “It’s people like me who are stuck in the middle who are going to get screwed.”

However, there is much more information about this Obamacare "disaster story" not reported by CNBC or NBC News.

Mediaite.com reports that the Cigna letter, with health plan options, that Goldwater was supposed to get, has been delayed in five states, but will be mailed between November 10 and November 15.

Apparently, there are also several plans on the Obamacare exchange website that are cheaper than Goldwater's $510 per month and will include "essential services" such as maternity (Goldwater paid almost $16,000 out of pocket in 2013) and prescriptions.



“I definitely believe there should be healthcare reform and honestly, I’m glad the reform is happening,” Goldwater told Mediaite.com. "I’m not blaming the president because of this and of course there’s going to be problems in the beginning when you change. You have millions of Americans scrambling to one website… you should expect the thing to crash. It’s like everyone trying to get on one subway. It’s just not going to happen right away."

Sources: CrooksandLiars.com, Mediaite.com, NBC News