On February 25th, thousands of adjunct faculty across the nation staged a walk-out to raise awareness of the issues facing part-time professorship. Many adjunct professors are underpaid without benefits. In Georgia, the average part-time professor makes about $2100 per course, $600 less than the national average. Because of the Affordable Care Act, the University System of Georgia also put a cap on how many hours a teacher can teach. Mandy McGrew, an adjunct professor of American Studies at Kennesaw State University, and Chronicle of Higher Education reporter Peter Schmidt join host Celeste Headlee to talk about the experience of adjunct professors and what can be done to assist those who are battling homelessness and poverty.

Full Show

Today's Show Segments

We asked you about our "Georgia Playlist" series that highlights essential songs from artists with strong connections to Georgia. Here are your first thoughts.









Bibb County and its former education superintendent, Romain Dallemand, are currently locked in a legal struggle that will soon go to arbitration. Dallemand is claiming that the county breached the terms of his severance agreement after the county found some troubling spending patterns in a 2013 audit. Host Celeste Headlee talks with David Schick, education reporter for the Telegraph, about this ongoing legal situation.









The majority of college professors are classified as adjunct faculty, meaning that they have non-tenured, low paying positions that do not qualify for many university benefits. Host Celeste Headlee talks with Mandy McGrew, part-time instructor of American Studies at Kennesaw State University and Peter Schmidt, higher education reporter for The Chronicle, about the difficulties adjunct faculty members must overcome.

















In another edition of our “Unusual Classes” series, a Georgia State professor is foregoing the traditional literary figures and instead studying a contemporary lyricist, Kanye West. Host Celeste Headlee talks to GSU English Professor Scott Heath about his in-depth look at the controversial artist, and GSU student Johanna Baidya about her experiences in the class. Afterwards, Celeste sits down with freelance music journalist Christina Lee to discuss the musical stylings of Kanye West by breaking down some of his most popular songs.