Police blotter in Hunterdon, Somerset and Union counties. (Photo: ~File photo )

MONTGOMERY

POSSESSION, 10:03 a.m. Oct. 14. Police stopped Michael Dinkey, 51, of Clark, on Route 206 and Ludlow Avenue for not wearing his seat belt. During the stop, the front passenger, Miguel Rivera, 32, of Elizabeth, was seen trying to hide a small container that had marijuana, police said. Rivera was charged with possession of controlled dangerous substances under 50 grams. Dinkey was charged with failure to wear a seat belt, police said.

ACCIDENT AND CARELESS DRIVING, 6:50 p.m., Oct. 16. Police, Fire Co. 1 and EMS responded to the report of a motor vehicle accident on Route 601 at the intersection of Pleasant View Road. Arriving officers found a two-vehicle accident in the intersection with one of the vehicles involved in the crash, a 2013 Mercedes-Benz, had a fire in the engine compartment. The fire was extinguished by the first officers on scene, police said. A 2015 GMC Yukon, operated by Krishna C. Kolli, 31, of Levittown, Pennsylvania, made a left turn from Route 601 onto Pleasant View Road in front of the Mercedes-Benz, driven by Elizabeth A. Clemente, 59, of Skillman. Clemente had a complaint of pain to her knees from hitting the airbag underneath the steering column during the accident, police said. Kolli was charged with careless driving.

TOWN OF CLINTON

THEFT, 9:05 a.m. Oct. 18. Patrolman Jeffrey Ollerenshaw responded to the Holiday Inn on Route 173 for a report of a stolen cellphone. The victim, a 33-year-old Silver Spring, Maryland, woman said that her cellphone was stolen the previous evening. She said she was in the hotel bar, went to the restroom and when she returned, her phone was gone, police said. After a brief investigation, Ollerenshaw and Sgt. J. Cory Kubinak charged Joseph P. McKeever, 39, of Clinton, with theft.

TEWKSBURY

BURGLARY, between 6:30 p.m. Oct. 15 and 9 a.m. Oct. 16. Police responded to a burglary where the rear door of a commercial building was forced open and cash and power tools were taken for a total loss of $3,000.

BURGLARY, between 3 p.m. Oct. 16 and 1:30 p.m. Oct. 19. Police responded to a burglary where jewelry valued at $4,200 was taken from the master bedroom. There was no sign of forced entry, police said.

SUSPICIOUS INCIDENT, 8:05 p.m. Oct. 14. Police responded to a call about a suspicious incident. The victim said a man named Alfie Ufie signaled the victim to stop and inquired about purchasing the victim’s vehicle and inquired about other vehicles in the area. It is alleged that Ufie was arrested for numerous offenses involving scamming elderly people with car repairs, police said.

CLINTON TOWNSHIP

DEFIANT TRESPASSING AND UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF A CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCE, 7:25 a.m. Oct. 18. Patrolman Peter Schlesier responded to a Herman Thau Road residence for a report of an unknown man who walked up to the residence and entered the homeowner’s car, police said. Schlesier and Patrolman Sean Ross saw Cody Boppert, 24, of Brooklyn, New York, sitting in the passenger’s seat of the resident’s 2011 Subaru Outback. The homeowner said that he started his car and then re-entered his house. A short time later, he heard his engine revving and saw Boppert sitting in his car. Boppert was not wearing any shoes and allegedly told the resident that he (Boppert) had taken LSD, police said. The resident provided Boppert with flip-flops and then called the police. Boppert said he was from Albany and believed that he was in Middletown, police said. The High Bridge Rescue Squad responded and took Boppert to the Hunterdon Medical Center for treatment and/or evaluation, police said. Officers found that Boppert was in the area visiting a friend. He was charged with defiant trespass and being under the influence of a controlled dangerous substance.

OUTSTANDING WARRANTS, 10:55 a.m. Oct. 19. Sgt. Thomas DeRosa was checking the parking lot of the Fountain Motel when he approached several people who were acting suspiciously, police said. Randy Gabriel, 30, of Easton, Pennsylvania, was found to have $553 in outstanding warrants out of Phillipsburg. When he was unable to post bail, Gabriel was arrested and turned over to the Phillipsburg Police Department.

OUTSTANDING WARRENT, 6:05 p.m. Oct. 19. Patrolman Sean Ross responded to a township residence where he arrested John Searles, 19, of Clinton Township, for a $1,500 outstanding warrant that was issued by Clinton. When he was unable to post the necessary bail, Searles was sent to the Hunterdon County Jail.

Source: Central Jersey police departments

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1tX6Vf8