United States senators are expected to cast votes on very difficult issues. I did so recently when I voted against an amendment to eliminate federal funding for Planned Parenthood.

Since I became a public official, my actions and votes regarding abortion and contraception have been guided by two principles: I oppose abortion and I support family planning and contraception, because they reduce the number of unintended pregnancies and, therefore, the number of abortions.

Like most Americans, I was disturbed and offended by recent videos of Planned Parenthood employees discussing the use of fetal tissue. The individuals on these tapes should be fired for their callous attitudes and, if they broke the law, they should be prosecuted. Fortunately, Planned Parenthood does not distribute fetal tissue in Pennsylvania; it should not do so anywhere, under any circumstances. In 2007, I voted against federal funding for research involving embryonic stem cells derived from fetal tissue.

With regard to its funding, Planned Parenthood is subject to the Hyde amendment, which prohibits any organization from using federal dollars to pay for abortion. I support the Hyde amendment, have voted to attach it to every appropriations bill I have considered, and have introduced legislation to codify and make it permanent. Because of the Hyde amendment, any federal funds going to Planned Parenthood cannot be spent on abortions, but must go to the organization’s other activities.

Planned Parenthood facilities also provide many other basic health services, like cervical and breast cancer screening, as well as primary care and family planning. It is those services that would be curtailed by cutting off federal funding to Planned Parenthood. Reducing access to family planning and contraception could well lead to more unintended pregnancies, and thus more abortions, while cutting off funding for other services will harm women seeking care for reasons unrelated to pregnancy.

I must note that, while I support federal funding for family planning, I have worked and voted to protect the conscience rights of religiously affiliated institutions that oppose contraception and do not wish to offer it as part of their health care plans.

I have and will continue to vote to restrict and reduce the number of abortions in our country. In the fall, the Senate will consider an amendment to limit abortions after the 20th week of pregnancy. Assuming that this amendment includes the usual exceptions for rape, incest and life of the mother contained in legislation like the Hyde amendment, I will vote for it.

As part of the debate, I also will propose additional funding to enhance the pregnant women’s support programs that I authored as part of the Affordable Care Act. If we say we are opposed to abortion, we cannot turn our backs on pregnant women or on the children they choose to bring into this world. I challenge my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to give pregnant women real alternatives and real support when they face this most difficult decision.

Abortion and family planning always will be complicated and contentious issues for our country. I don’t expect everyone to agree with me on the path I have chosen for dealing with them. I do believe that my approach to these hard decisions has been consistent, careful and, ultimately, pro-life.