Government micromanaging health care, from Obamacare to the California Legislature, has raised blood pressure in San Clemente over the likely loss of its local emergency room. The controversy concerns Saddleback Memorial Medical Center San Clemente. According to the Register, owner MemorialCare Health System wants to replace it with “a $40 million comprehensive outpatient medical campus with advanced urgent care,” but no emergency room.

The change partly is in reaction to Obamacare and other legislation that puts more emphasis on urgent care outside hospital emergency rooms.

But voting 5-0 on Jan. 19, the City Council “took steps to rezone the 6.6-acre site” to require a hospital with an emergency room. The council diagnosed that the end of the local emergency room would leave “nearly a 40-mile gap between public ERs.”

This is a statewide problem. A 2014 study in the journal Health Affairs of 48 California emergency rooms that closed from 1999 to 2010 found “5 percent higher odds of inpatient mortality than admissions not occurring near a closure.”

But there’s a problem brought up by the hospital’s attorney: Government can’t order a private company to use its property a certain way. If use is restricted, taxpayers might have to pick up the tab for any loss in value under the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment, which demands “just compensation” when government takes private property, or restricts its use in certain ways.

This crisis was worsened earlier this month when the California Assembly and Senate health committees pulled the plug on legislation to allow a stand-alone emergency room in San Clemente. The bills were Assembly Bill 911, by Assemblyman Bill Brough, R-Dana Point; and Senate Bill 787, by state Sen. Patricia Bates, R-Laguna Niguel. In a statement, Sen. Bates said the rejection was “[t]he clearest indication yet that Sacramento has no plan to deal with the closing of emergency rooms in California” – not just San Clemente.

We believe the city of San Clemente should forget about mandating the use of the hospital’s property and instead work to convince the Legislature to pass something like AB911 or SB787.