Which? reveals the best double glazing companies Find out which UPVC windows installer comes top

6% of our members said that they don't trust double glazing companies

Looking for the best double glazing company? Our latest double glazing customer satisfaction survey pitted independent traders against nationwide companies such as Everest and Zenith to find out which are the most recommended by their customers.

As well as asking almost 3,000 members who'd had double glazing installed in the last five years to tell us what they thought of the installation process - from getting the quote, to after-sales service - we also asked about other aspects, such as why they decided to get double glazing in the first place and what influenced them to go with a certain installer.

Discover whether local firms or one of the big nationwide brands came out top for customer satisfaction, by viewing the full results of our double glazing satisfaction survey.

Buying double glazing

45% of respondents told us they found it difficult to find good advice when buying new windows and doors - so we asked the double glazing companies themselves for their insider tips for getting the best deal.

One said: 'Don’t use a company that only supplies a mobile phone number and not a landline. Only having a mobile number indicates that they don’t have a sound base - they must have staff on hand to handle any problems from day one.'

'Have as many windows as possible replaced at the same time,' said another, 'as this should reduce the cost.'

To see all of our double glazing installer tips - as well expert Which? advice on avoiding pushy sales tactics - read our guide on double glazing sales and quotes.

New windows to reduce energy prices

We also asked our members the reason why they had new windows installed. Almost a third said either to make their homes warmer or reduce energy costs.

But double glazing isn't the only way to slash your energy bills. From smart meters and energy monitors that allow you to carefully measure the amount of energy you're family is using, to generating your own energy through solar panels and wood burning stoves, we explain all you need to know about creating an energy saving home.

More on this...