WASHINGTON – Like a good driver, a good politician knows when to avoid a pothole. And Sen. Ted Cruz swerved clear of a deep one this afternoon.

At a speech to conservative activists at the Heritage Foundation, a member of the audience asked Cruz whether the Obama administration – by “releasing U.S. enemies from Gitmo and trying to put Gen. Petraeus in jail” – has justified the question “which side we’re on.”

David Petraeus, the former CIA director, is under investigation for leaking classified information to a mistress.

Cruz thought for a split second.

“This administration has a very difficult time differentiating good guys from bad guys,” he said, pivoting quickly to a set of allegations he’s more comfortable discussing – towit, that the Obama administration is too cozy with enemies such as Iran and too antagonistic with allies such as Israel.

Over the course of about an hour, the freshman senator ran through his critique of congressional Republicans who, in his view, are far too timid in standing up to the president and far too willing to abandon campaign pledges to repeal the Affordable Care Act.

Obamacare, he asserted, has wrought “devastation.” He called it a “train wreck” that has cost millions of Americans their jobs or access to doctors of their choice, and forced employers to roll back working hours.

Democrats were watching the speech, and were not amused.

The party’s press office noted that the rate of uninsured is near its all-time low. Health care costs are growing more slowing than ever. “Up to 129 million Americans with pre-existing conditions no longer have to worry about being denied health coverage” and the rate of young adults 19-25 without insurance has dropped from 30 percent to 21 percent since the ACA’s enactment in 2010.

“Nice try Senator Cruz, but unlike this new Republican Congress, the Affordable Care Act is helping people across the country — and it’s here to stay regardless of how many times Republicans try to dismantle it,” Democrats said.

Cruz, in his Heritage speech, ran through a 10-point policy agenda that includes shutting down the IRS. He would “padlock the building” and send all of the tax agency’s 110,000 employees to the U.S.-Mexico border.

“I say that somewhat tongue In cheek,” he said. But “if you swam across the Rio Grande and the first thing you saw was 110,000 IRS agents, you’d turn around and go home.”