Disciples Ministry vice president Wes Dunbar, left, and president Roger Ruhlow serve an evening meal of lasagna Dec. 30 at 137 Homeless Connection in downtown Loveland. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

In the 1 ½ months that Disciples Ministry beautified the inside of the 137 Homeless Connection building, 12 homeless men and women have found a job or a place to live.

"God's working in that building in amazing ways that we've never seen," said Roger Ruhlow, board president of Disciples Ministry, an outreach program of Foundations Church that provides Loveland's homeless people with emergency assistance and nutritional, emotional and spiritual support.

"Once we started that project, things started happening. Just a few people, one or two, had gotten off the street over the summer. And then boom ... people were coming to us saying they were getting jobs or places to live."

In October 2014, Ruhlow got a vision that the 137 Connection, a day shelter and resource center at 137 S. Lincoln Ave., needed to be cleaned up and refurbished with new flooring and paint. He knew that helping homeless people set goals would help them get out of their situations.

Ruhlow approached Loveland Carpet One about purchasing flooring materials, but the company decided to donate the materials instead.

He and the 12-member Disciples Ministry board received additional donations of two television sets (Best Buy and Mark and Judy Dean), two cabinets (Uncle Benny's Building Supplies), a washer and dryer (J.Day's Appliance & Mattress) and eight tables and chairs (Resurrection Fellowship and Foundations Church). Disciples Ministry paid for the paint and supplies.

Advertisement

"Once we started painting, everyone's attitude started to change," Ruhlow said. "The positive that's coming out of there, that's just God's grace. It's amazing to see what God's doing in that building, because everyone sees it and everyone can feel it."

Doing the work

Ruhlow encouraged clients of the shelter to do the work, some putting in as many as 100 hours and banking months of labor toward their requirement to volunteer four hours a week to stay in the winter night shelter.

They began working on Nov. 5 and finished by mid-December, turning the drab mustard-colored walls into a cheerier light gray with a dark-gray accent wall and replacing the old, worn carpet with vinyl plank flooring.

"It was amazing to watch them, because I did very little," Ruhlow said.

Cliff McLean, a homeless Loveland resident for many years, put in more than 90 hours on the project

"These are good people in the community to do this," McLean said about the donated materials. "That showed me they really cared. This stuff isn't cheap, none of it."

McLean said he learned how to install flooring from the project.

"It was a great opportunity to learn how to do something," he said. "This is about trying to get you up. These people try to get you going in the right direction to do something for yourself."

Loveland resident David Craig, homeless for nearly two years after a family medical emergency, donated 60 to 70 hours to help with the flooring and the painting.

"I wanted to give back," Craig said. "They helped me out so much with anything I needed when I was down and out."

Frank Lynch, homeless for eight years, also worked many hours on the project and is among the three who put in the most hours.

"I volunteer for whatever I can do," Lynch said. "I painted. I cleaned. I helped the staff if they needed it, just whatever. I feel like my life is devoted to God. God helps me help people."

The clients are saying the building looks cleaner and more inviting, said Doug Ashbaugh, homeless program manager for the 137 Connection.

"It's brighter. It's cheerier," Ashbaugh said. "It has more of an upbeat feel."

Serving meals

Disciples Ministry is involved in 137 Connection through serving evening meals there on Tuesdays and Thursdays and as of Dec. 1 took over managing the meal service for the night shelter, which rotates every week among 10 Loveland churches.

The ministry, operating on a $10,000 annual budget, will sub in if any of the churches are unable to serve the meal during their Sunday-to-Saturday rotation.

The ministry started the meal service in August 2011 when seven men from Celebrate Recovery at Crossroads Church wanted to bring a 12-step meeting to the homeless and serve them food.

They paid for the meals out of their own pockets and, as the program expanded, held fundraisers, such as a barbecue stand during the warmer months and online clothing sales, to generate the funding.

In 2012, the ministry got the backing of Foundations Church and became a nonprofit, finding the name for its work through prayer.

The ministry, which started with the meal service on Tuesdays, added Thursdays in early December to coordinate with the Lifetree Cafe spiritual movie program offered through Group Publishing.

Vivian Freeman, Disciples Ministry board director, is in charge of working with the churches to make sure the meals are scheduled.

"People need food to stay healthy," Freeman said. "I'm being fed, because I'm seeing other people being fed and being taken care of."

Board members serve meals, sometimes joined by guests or small groups, who will sometimes also do the cooking. Before serving the meals, the board thanks the clients for allowing the members to come into their home and serve them.

"The people that need the help, want the help, we really work with them," Ruhlow said. "We're imperfect people working in an imperfect world, ministering to imperfect people. We always tell them if God can change us, he can change anybody. If you give him a chance, see what he can do with your life. ... We tell everybody, we're going to give you a hot meal even if you don't want to hear what we've got."

Anyone interested in making a donation can contact Roger Ruhlow at 970-619-0579.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.