Democrats delivered an amazing debate that was everything the Republican Party can never be. Here are the 5 reasons to be glad that you watched the NBC Democratic debate.

Video:

1). The Democrats Immediately Mix It Up On Guns

Bernie Sanders was asked about his change in position to supporting immunity for the gun manufacturers. Sanders did a bit of a dodge as he defended his record on gun control and listed his (D-) rating with the NRA. Clinton responded by pointing to Sanders’ record of voting against the Brady Bill five times. Martin O’Malley had the best line when he said that he never met a self-respecting hunter who needed AR-15 to take down a deer.

The Sanders campaign responded by emailing reporters, this quote from when Hillary Clinton attacked President Obama during the 2008 campaign, “I disagree with Sen. Obama’s assertion that people in our country cling to guns and have certain attitudes about trade and immigration simply out of frustration. . . .

You know, my dad took me out behind the cottage that my grandfather built on a little lake called Lake Winola outside of Scranton and taught me how to shoot when I was a little girl. . . .

You know, some people now continue to teach their children and their grandchildren. It’s part of culture. It’s part of a way of life. People enjoy hunting and shooting because it’s an important part of who they are. Not because they are bitter.”

The Clinton campaign responded with a bullet point list of the Sanders record on gun control:

Sanders voted not once but five times against the Brady Bill.

· Sanders voted twice for what the head of the NRA called the most significant piece of pro-gun legislation in the last 20 years: giving gun manufacturers sweeping immunity for their actions.

· Sanders voted for an amendment to create the so-called “Charleston Loophole,” which allowed the Charleston shooter to get a gun before his background check was completed.

· Sanders voted to make it harder to crack down on gun dealers who break the law.

· Sanders voted to overturn a ban on guns on Amtrak trains.

· The NRA helped elect Bernie Sanders to the House in 1990.

The facts are that Clinton and Sanders have inconsistencies in their record on gun control.

2). Sanders and Clinton Have A Bitter Debate About Healthcare

Former Sec. of State Clinton’s argument is that the country should not tear up the Affordable Care Act and start over again with a new debate that would set the country back. Bernie Sanders argued that his Medicare for all plan would cover the 29 million people who still don’t have healthcare.

Sanders said what this debate is really about is whether “we have the guts to stand up to the health insurance industry and the pharmaceutical companies. Clinton pointed out that during the ACA debate Democrats could not get support for the public option. Clinton clearly has been shaped by her experience in the 1990s of trying to pass healthcare reform. The debate within the Democratic Party comes down to whether Democrats should stay on ACA path or take a shot at Medicare for all.

3). Clinton And Sanders Say No To Ground Forces To Combat ISIS

When Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders were asked if they saw any scenario where ground forces could be used to combat ISIS. Former Sec. Clinton said, “absolutely not.” Sanders blasted Republicans for not learning the lessons of Iraq, and he said that using ground forces to combat ISIS would lead to perpetual war and be a complete disaster. Sanders said that ISIS won’t be destroyed with American troops in perpetual warfare. Martin O’Malley said that he believed that President Obama was doing the right thing. O’Malley said that he appreciates that Democrats don’t use the term boot on the ground.

4). Hillary Clinton Rips Rick Snyder Over Contaminated Water In Michigan

When the candidates were offered a platform to talk about whatever they wanted, Hillary Clinton chose to talk about the scandal of the lead contaminated water in Flint, Michigan. Clinton said that a majority African-American population was drinking and bathing in lead-contaminated water, and the Republican governor acted like he did not care. Clinton was certain that the governor would have cared it was white kids in a Detroit suburb who were being poisoned with contaminated water.

Bernie Sanders called on Gov. Snyder to resign yesterday, but Hillary Clinton beat him to the punch at the debate.



5). Democrats Show Why Republicans Are Unfit To Govern

The Republican debates have all lacked what the Democratic debates have. The Democratic candidates disagree on how to get there, but they all agree on the big goals. Democrats have a real vision for the country. There isn’t a battle for the direction of the party happening on the Democratic side.

Any of three Democratic candidates would make a better president than any of the dozen Republicans running for the White House. Democrats demonstrated their competence and ability to govern during the NBC debate. Clinton, Sanders, and O’Malley have the policies that are missing on the Republican side. While Republicans fight the culture wars and rage against the nation’s changing demographics, Democrats are speaking to the real problems of ordinary Americans.

Viewers should be glad that they watched this debate. It should give them the motivation to elect the party’s nominee, no matter who that person is.