Saturday marked the beginning of open enrollment for New York State of Health, the health insurance exchange created by the Affordable Care Act.

So far, things are ... OK. Healthcare.gov, the federal government's website, did not implode as it did last yearr, but most experts, including the ones at the Congressional Budget Office and the federal Department of Health and Human Services, expect smaller numbers during the current enrollment period, which lasts until Feb. 15, than were seen during the open enrollment last year.

But New York, if state health officials are to be believed, could once again be a standout. Donna Frescatore, the executive director of the state's health exchange, predicted that an additional 350,000 people in New York will enroll in a private plan, only slightly below last year's figures.



To try to understand where the Affordable Care Act had the greatest impact and where it had room to improve, Capital took state data on sign-ups during the first year of Obamacare and broke down enrollees by ZIP code. The data is current as of Sept. 19, the most current data published in this form. The accompanying chart allows you to see how many enrollees there were in Medicaid, private health insurance plans (Q.H.P.) and Children's Health Plus for each ZIP code in the state. (An asterisk means fewer than 50 people enrolled.)

Click on the image above to go to the interactive map. The map shows the whole state by zip code. You can zoom in to see more of any area. Please allow a few moments for the map to load because it is a large data set.

The data shows that participation on the exchange was roughly proportionate with the population. Not surprisingly, people who lacked health insurance tended to be those with lower incomes.

Looking at Capital's map, you can see that in most ZIP codes above Interstate 84, twice as many people signed up for Medicaid as enrolled in a private health insurance plan.

Most of the ZIP codes on Long Island and in Westchester and Rockland are more evenly split between Medicaid and private health plans.

In New York, approximately 370,000 people signed up for a private insurance plan last year, and about three-quarters of those received federal subsidies to offset their premiums. An additional 528,000 signed up for Medicaid.

New York State health officials, using projections from the Urban Institute, estimated that after three years, 615,000 New Yorkers will be enrolled in private plans purchased through the exchange and 513,000 will have signed up in Medicaid, which would cut the state's uninsured rate in half by 2016.

The Urban Institute's projections severely underestimated the interest in Medicaid, but it isn't clear yet if they similarly underestimated the private insurance numbers.

“What we don't know is are 370,000 people going to sign up each year, or of that 615,000 people did the majority sign up in the first year and we will have lower rates of newcomers in the second two years,” Sara Rothstein, of the state health department, said earlier this month. “And I think there are a lot of arguments that could be made both ways.”