So it turns out the pollsters were wrong, the Republican leadership was wrong, the experts were wrong, the media was wrong. Everybody was wrong about Donald Trump, Republican candidate for president of the United States.

All the fancy-pants pundits missed the boiling anger and resentment driving Trump’s Republican primary voters. Economic woes, job insecurity, debts, taxes, foreign competition; life is so bad in America that any fool will do for president.

The crazy thing, beyond the essential madness that is a Trump candidacy, is that America won’t be safer with him as president, especially if he fulfills his many promises.

In fact President Trump could be the best thing ever for America’s enemies. By destabilizing a great and stable country, he will achieve changes the terrorists and dictators could only dream of.

Consider what he’s already done.

Trump has upended the Republican Party and humiliated its leadership.

Granted, the party that brought you Bush, Cheney, 15 years of war and a global economic collapse deserved shame and mortification, if not prison.

But if your goal is to undermine American democracy, then wrecking a Grand Old Party is useful. If you’re ISIS or Vladimir Putin and democracy is your enemy, Trump is your friend. He’s wrecking one of two legitimate American parties.

Trump will further undermine democracy by stifling free speech and the independent press by making libel suits easier to prosecute and by installing judges who agree with him.

Trump says he’ll encourage Japan and South Korea to acquire nuclear weapons, almost certainly setting off an arms race in Asia. That won’t make Americans safer.

Trump says he’ll use the U.S. military to impose America’s will on the world. He doesn’t realize that Washington’s been trying that for years, and failing.

President Trump will alienate America’s traditional partners by trying to impose his priorities on friends as well as enemies. Even the mighty U.S.A. needs friends and that’s no way to keep them.

Further, by withdrawing into Trump’s fearful isolation, the few allies America has in the Middle East and Southwest Asia could be driven into the arms of ISIS and its loathsome accomplices.

Then by fulfilling his promise to mistreat American Muslims, he’ll deliver propaganda ammunition to radical Islamists around the world. You can’t buy that kind of publicity. President Trump might turn out to be the best friend the terrorists ever had.

Trump’s promise to repudiate trade agreements will destabilize world markets and create vast economic uncertainty.

Unfortunately for Canada and other countries, America isn’t too big to fail. It’s just too big to fail alone.

Meanwhile Trump will sharpen racial tensions in the U.S., which are already acute. African Americans see him as the white man’s candidate and that’s never good.

No doubt there’s a big gap between what Trump promises and what he will do if elected. Republican primary voters believe he’ll keep his promises, making him unique among politicians. I’m not so sure.

The same people who think they’re insightful by making inane statements like “they’re all the same” (except Trump) will find out that global affairs are complicated and that mistakes have consequences.

Trump won’t keep a higher percentage of his promises than other presidents. But he might keep enough of them to provoke joy among the dark forces wishing harm upon the United States.

The New York Times reported, after extensively interviewing Trump, that his immediate priorities are to tighten up immigration and to intimidate corporations shifting jobs overseas.

Within 100 days of a Trump presidency, the promised wall with Mexico will be designed, an immigration ban on Muslims will be in place, an audit of the Federal Reserve will be started as well as a plan to repeal the Affordable Care Act or Obamacare.

By then, America’s global foes will be scheming to exploit opportunities the election has wrought and the creeping mass confusion of a superpower become suddenly vulnerable.

Dan Leger is a freelance journalist in Halifax.