— Allentown Mayor and U.S. Senate candidate Ed Pawlowski says he has concerns about the potential effects of a trade agreement the Obama administration is crafting with Japan and 10 other Pacific countries.

Pennsylvania workers would find themselves competing against lower-paid workers in Asia, and consumers would see more products imported from places with lower standards for health and safety, Pawlowski said of the pact.

"It really won't create any jobs, the way I see it, especially the Trans-Pacific Partnership, at least not here in the United States," Pawlowski said in a phone interview. "In fact, it will probably be much easier to send even more of our jobs overseas."

Pawlowski's stance puts him in line with the union groups he's been courting and most congressional Democrats, who have been skeptical of the developing trade agreements.

Pennsylvania Sen. Bob Casey and others argue that past agreements have led to job losses and lower wages for middle-class workers, particularly in the manufacturing sector. Casey has highlighted a report from the Economic Policy Institute, a progressive think tank, stating that Pennsylvania lost more than 40,000 jobs due to a trade deficit with Japan.

The Obama administration has attempted to sway Democrats to support the agreement, issuing an analysis from the U.S. trade representative tallying $18 billion in products exported annually by Pennsylvania businesses to Pacific countries involved in the trade talks. They argue that opportunities for exports would grow under the agreement.

The president asked Congress to authorize him to complete the trade negotiations in a streamlined fashion, in which federal legislators would get an up-or-down vote on the final deal.

If approved, the agreement's rules would apply to the U.S., Japan, Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam.

Another agreement, known as the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, is under negotiation with the European Union, but those talks are at an earlier stage.

Pawlowski said the U.S. will be at a "major disadvantage" unless the eventual agreements include provisions to better address the different standards for wages and other regulations.

"It's not to say that we shouldn't enter into these agreements, but we have to make sure that we're not putting our own workers at a competitive disadvantage," he said.

A spokeswoman for Joe Sestak, the only other Democrat in the Senate race, declined to comment Friday on his view of the Pacific trade pact.

Trade remains a salient issue among Democratic primary voters, where organized labor plays a significant role, said Chris Borick, a pollster and political scientist at Muhlenburg College. Borick said trade agreements tend to poll poorly, with voters typically viewing such deals as harmful to jobs.

In the general election, the eventual Democratic nominee will face off against a Republican incumbent who is in the unusual position of supporting a proposal from the Obama administration.

Sen. Pat Toomey, who has supported free trade efforts, says it's important for the United States to help set the rules for business in developing countries.

"The reality is, this trade agreement is going to knock down barriers to allow us to export more manufactured goods from Pennsylvania," Toomey said in a recent MSNBC interview. "It's definitely going to increase our ability to sell agricultural products overseas. It's going to help to protect the intellectual property of some of our terrifically dynamic companies like pharmaceuticals and medical device companies."

lolson@mcall.com

Twitter @LauraOlson

202-824-8216

Pawlowski on other federal issues

•Abortion: Describes himself as pro-life on a personal level, but says he would not limit funding for organizations like Planned Parenthood or use the issue as a litmus test for federal appointments.

•Gun control: More "common sense" gun regulations, such as closing loopholes on background checks, are needed at the federal level.

•Obamacare: Medical device tax is "not the most optimal way they could have gone" on funding parts of the health care law, but repeal will require finding a replacement funding source.

•Road and bridge funding: Wants to review other options before considering a hike to the gasoline tax. Those include closing corporate tax loopholes and offering incentives for public-private partnerships for road and bridge projects.

•ISIS response: The Obama Administration "has done the best that they can" in dealing with a complicated situation, he said.