Cruz connects at 'Basque Fry' The Texas senator’s anti-establishment message resonates in northern Nevada.

GARDNERVILLE, Nev. — Four Republican presidential hopefuls gathered Saturday at a picturesque Northern Nevada ranch and pounded anti-establishment themes, but it was Ted Cruz who gave the most convincing performance at the first annual Basque Fry.

He didn’t say anything new, but the Texas senator’s fiery and forceful denunciation of Washington and political elites from the back of a flatbed truck resonated with the crowd of about 1,500 conservatives — even on a day when Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, Dr. Ben Carson and former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina sounded similar notes.

Story Continued Below

“All of us are familiar with campaign conservatives. Candidates who talk a good game on the campaign trail and yet don’t walk the walk,” he said, as a few in the crowd shouted back, “McConnell.”

“I’ve heard of him,” Cruz responded, a winking reference to the GOP Senate majority leader whom Cruz recently referred to as a liar.

Cruz and the three other presidential candidates — former New York Gov. George Pataki was slated to speak, but did not appear — pitched their conservative credentials and grinned for selfies on Saturday against the dramatic backdrop of the Sierra Nevada mountains, where they wooed voters in the first state that will vote in the West.

The event, hosted by Nevada Attorney General Adam Laxalt, was designed to honor Laxalt’s Basque heritage and the shepherding traditions of the group, many of whom emigrated to and settled in northern Nevada.

“We wanted to bring as many candidates here, and let every day Republican voters from around the state meet everyone,” said Laxalt, who hasn’t yet endorsed a candidate. When asked whether he would, he said, “We’ll see.”

Carson, Walker and Fiorina also tapped into conservative grassroots resentment Saturday — a palpable sentiment here that also led much positive speculation about Donald Trump among the crowd.

“The political class has failed you,” said Fiorina to cheers, ticking off issues that “career politicians” hadn’t fixed in decades, like border security and the Department of Veterans Affairs.

Walker mocked Washington as “68 square miles surrounded by reality,” where, he said, “in the last few months, we’ve had it with Republican leaders in Washington,” he said, pointing to the GOP leadership’s failure to repeal Obamacare. “You don’t want to just be angry, you want to do something to fix it for future generations. If that’s what you want, I’m your candidate.”

Yet it was Cruz who drew the most energy from a crowd wilting in 93-degree sunshine. After his speech, he jumped off the front of the stage, and greeted voters. Dozens surged toward Cruz to snag a picture, even as Laxalt started to introduce the speaker who followed him, Walker.

Cruz and Walker both scheduled evening events for those who couldn’t get into the sold-out fry.

“Before the debate, I was leaning toward Scott Walker,” said Phil Perine, founder of the grassroots group Siena Conservatives and president of the Nevada Republican Men’s Club. “But [Cruz’s] performance put me in his camp.”

Interviews with event attendees suggested many were still making up their minds — they frequently named two or three candidates who’d they gladly see challenging a Democrat in the general election.

“There are maybe ten candidates, not just the ones who made the primetime debate, who I really like,” said Nancy Brisack, a retiree who volunteers with the Sierra Nevada Republican Women.

“Who am I going to vote for right now?” she said with a laugh, turning to her husband, Phil, who shrugged and said, “ask us again in a few months.”

But few of those interviewed seemed to embrace former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush. “I’m concerned he’s not conservative enough,” said Paul Corley, who owns the ranch that hosted the event. “In fact, a little more than concerned.”