Sioux Falls, SD

If you want to measure Sanford Health's impact on health care- it's all about the numbers.

36 hospitals. 8.500 births per year. 26,000 employees. 110,000 surgical procedures each year. 4.8 million annual clinic visits.



"I hope we make it look easy, but behind the scenes, this is hard work," Cindy Morrison, Executive VP of Marketing, said.

As a result, Sanford Health has been front and center. You can find it just about anywhere, from the newly-opened Sanford Pentagon, to places far beyond our region.

"If you look at the communities we're in, we're such a part of the fabric of the community. If you look at the business we're in, we're in... improving the human condition," Morrison said.

Which has been evident in the five years following T. Denny Sanford's $400-million gift. At the time, Sanford Health officials outlined four goals to put the money to good use.

The gift has helped Sanford reach the goal to expand research, by establishing The Center for Children's Health Research - Sanford's largest research center. The money also helps pay for 350 clinical trials in hospital and clinics across the nation and across the globe.

"People will say, well, why should a health system have a research institute? Why shouldn't that be the purview of universities only? The answer to that is we take care of patients, and so every research project we do is designed to somehow improve the patients we take care of at Sanford Health," Hoyme said.

Hoyme says every day; Sanford makes great strides in getting closer to its goal of finding better treatment, and ultimately a cure for juvenile diabetes. Known as the Sanford Project, the lead researcher has completed patient enrollment in the first clinical trial, testing a therapy aimed at regenerating insulin-producing cells in the pancreas.

Although the results haven't been published yet, I believe that you'll see that they'll show that the protocol that he's developed will lead to major improvement in the care of both children and adults with early onset, type-one diabetes," Hoyme said

That's not the only type of cutting-edge research in these labs. Researchers are also committed to accelerating breast cancer research, by looking at gene sequencing. By focusing on the DNA of a cancerous tumor, researchers hope to one day provide patients with individualized treatment.

"That's something new and unique that, you know, offers hope to women who otherwise wouldn't have had hope," Hoyme said.

If you measure that impact, you'll realize Sanford's growth goes way beyond the numbers.