If you’ve ever watched “Extreme Makeover: Home Edition,” you’re familiar with the renovation approach of just-knock-it-down-and-start-over.

If you haven’t watched it, here’s the gist of the show: A deserving family is chosen for a major home renovation — often involving accommodation for a family member’s special needs. A crew comes in to assess the house and, more often than not, decides it’s better to knock the small, dilapidated home down and start over rather than deal with the home’s huge flaws (structural integrity, mold, etc.).

I can’t help but think of that show as I read about this week’s conflicting court decisions on the health care law. With countless delays, crashes, adjustments, regulatory gymnastics, lawsuits and tweaks already making up the short history of the law, and now with the courts drawing opposite conclusions over some pretty fundamental elements, it seems to me that we are at a point where we need to admit that there are just too many problems. The law was not well written and the regulatory band-aids are not holding. Like a house that can’t be held together by patches, it would be so much easier to start over, to build a new law, than to fix the dilapidated one that we have.

[MORE: Cartoons about Congress]

Of course that won’t happen any time soon. The chances of the president calling Congressional leaders and saying “Guys, this isn’t going well. What do you say we start over?” are less than zero.

But I refuse to believe that we are stuck with this turkey of a law forever. This is America, and we can do better.

In my perfect world (I am a Republican), the health care law will be scrapped and replaced in 2017 — when we have a Republican president and Republican majorities in the U.S. House and Senate. Having control of both branches of government won’t be enough, mind you. The revolutionaries who are opposed to the health care law — most likely led by the small-business community — will have to be ready to make a slam-dunk case against it, and they’ll need to be ready for battle. They’ll need data and horror stories. They’ll need experts who will rail against the law, adorable children who are being hurt by it and kittens on YouTube who make fun of it. They’ll need an arsenal of pure public relations and government relations gold. This will take time to amass. Good thing we’ve got time.

Time will also bring with it wave after wave of the law’s inevitable failures. Instead of jumping on every single horror story, every single day between now and 2017, conservatives would do well to just ... wait ... for ... it. This thing is going to get worse. Be patient. And again, when it is time, be ready. A lot of deals were cut when this thing sailed through the capitol in 2010, and a lot of deals will have to be undone. Monied interests will need to be appeased, and/or enemies will need to be made. The good news is that there are people in Washington who regret the deals they made ... and who crave atonement for their sins.

[READ: Ready for Hillary? Is Hillary Ready?]

Ironically, I can see major change coming — again, if the revolutionaries are ready — even under a Hillary Clinton presidency. Mrs. Clinton doesn’t need to look out for Mr. Obama’s ego. I think we can be confident that she won’t give a hoot about the legacy of the first black president when history is making way for the legacies of the first female president. And who better to fix something like health care than a woman, a mother, a former first lady who tried to reform health care from the East Wing once up on a time herself?

And we know how she likes the ‘reset’ button.

I understand that talk about repealing Obamacare is enough to earn me the “crazy” label inside the beltway, but I prefer the term “optimist.” My advice to the health care revolutionaries: Come to 2017 ready for battle and committed to achieving the thing that we all know, deep down, we need, an "Extreme Makeover: Healthcare Edition."