The federal government will cut inpatient Medicare payments to Marin’s three hospitals this year due to their poor performance in several programs designed to improve patient care and cut medical costs.

Marin General will take the biggest hit, 1.67 percent, for its poor performance in a Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) program created to reduce the rate of illnesses and injuries that patients acquire while staying in hospitals. These include central-line bloodstream infections, catheter-associated urinary tract infections and eight types of injuries, including bed sores, falls and blood clots.

Hospitals were rated on a scale of 1 to 10, with 10 being the poorest score. Marin General received a rating of 8. All hospitals whose performance ranked in the bottom 25th percentile — with a score of 7 or higher — were penalized. Kaiser Permanente Medical Center in San Rafael received a score of 6.7 and Novato Community Hospital received a score of 3.9.

“There is room for improvement in the incidence of hospital acquired conditions regardless of the institution or hospital,” the CMS reported.

Dr. Joel Sklar, chief medical officer of Marin General Hospital, said, “In the period they measure, we had a cluster that we saw and had an action plan to deal with. It’s too bad we don’t get paid extra for the years we do great.”

Sklar said the “cluster” was a series of catheter-related infections in the intensive care unit.

“From my standpoint this is quite ironic,” Sklar said, noting that Marin General received high scores for clinical safety last year from two organizations that rate hospitals nationally: the Leapfrog Group and Healthgrades.

A total of 724 hospitals nationwide had their Medicare reimbursements trimmed due to their performance in the hospital-acquired conditions reduction program, which is estimated to reduce federal spending by $373 million in 2015.

Medicare revenue

In 2013, the most recent year for which numbers are available, Marin General reported net patient Medicare revenue of $54.6 million, and Novato Community reported $11.5 million. Medicare revenue data were not available on the state’s website for Kaiser Permanente Medical Center in San Rafael.

CMS will shave San Rafael Kaiser’s Medicare payments 1.24 percent due to the hospital’s lackluster performance in CMS’s hospital value-based purchasing program, which was authorized by the Affordable Care Act. Hospital mortality rates for several types of illness and patient satisfaction survey results are two of the criteria used to measure performance in this program.

Advertisement

Kaiser spokesman Joe Fragola said, “Our leadership in Northern California is actively reviewing the CMS data to better understand why some of our infection and patient injury rates were noted by CMS as higher than average.”

Fragola said the penalty is not reflective of Kaiser Permanente’s overall performance.

“For this year, Kaiser Permanente’s Medicare plan in California is rated with five stars, the highest designation available from the U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Kaiser Permanente has the only five-star plan in the state,” Fragola said.

Marin General’s reimbursement rate was cut another 0.45 percent due to its performance in the value-based purchasing program, while Novato Community was awarded a 0.20 percent bonus for good performance.

Sklar said Marin General has always done extremely well on the clinical portion of this program.

But, he said, “In the year they’re talking about, our patient satisfaction was below the 50th percentile, and they valued that metric much higher in that year than they did previously.”

Readmissions

CMS cut Novato Community’s reimbursement rate by 0.32 percent, for its low ranking in the government’s hospital readmissions reduction program, leaving Novato Community with a net reduction of just 0.12 percent.

“We are working really hard to prevent readmissions to the hospital,” said Mary Strebig, a Novato Community Hospital spokeswoman. “Through our joint replacement program, we are following our patients 90 days out, and we are working hard to prevent readmissions for patients who have serious chronic diseases.”

The final 0.22 percent of Marin General’s reimbursement reduction resulted due to its ranking in the readmissions reduction program.

CMS’s hospital readmissions reduction program looks at the readmission rates of patients who initially went into the hospital for one of five conditions: heart attack, heart failure, pneumonia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and hip/knee arthroplasty. A total of 2,638 hospitals nationwide were penalized in 2014.

“That one completely confuses me,” Sklar said, noting that Marin General was above the benchmark score in all five categories looked at.

Akin Demehin, associate director of policy for the American Hospital Association, said, “We are concerned that some existing pay-for-performance programs do not fairly assess hospital performance. For example, the readmission measures are not adjusted for issues such as poverty, which can affect a patient’s likelihood of being readmitted but are beyond a hospital’s control. “In addition, the hospital-acquired conditions program uses measures that do not accurately reflect hospital performance,” Demehin said. “We will continue to urge the government to adopt changes that improve the fairness and effectiveness of these programs.”