Hath not a villain eyes? Hath not a villain hands, organs, dimensions, senses, affections, passions? If you prick them, do they not bleed? If you tickle them, do they not laugh? If you take them out for Italian, do they not order the zuppa inglese?

Daredevil’s early episodes have already done a lot to humanize the superhero genre. The threats are real-world relatable, the fights are believably physical, the violence is appropriately traumatizing, and the good guys are all recognizable types who wouldn’t look out of place waiting on line at the Duane Reade. Episode Four, “In the Blood,” takes it one step further: It takes the ruthless criminals Daredevil’s been stalking through the streets of Hell’s Kitchen and shows their softer side. Everyone’s got one, right?

So we start with Vladimir and Anatoly Ranskahov, the Russian brothers whose organization has been target number one for “the man in black” so far this season. Pasty skin, copious tattoos, a specialty in human trafficking, a penchant for brutal executions, an almost masochistic pride in being able to endure the worst prisons and beatings on Earth: Simply by virtue of being alive, we’ve all been exposed to enough Russian mafia characters to have the stereotype down cold, kind of like how over the course of your lifetime you supposedly swallow like two dozen spiders in your sleep. (ED. NOTE—Whoops, guess I’m never sleeping again!)

But this ep begins by bucking the cliche and revealing something unexpected: These two monsters really care about each other! Okay, so they demonstrate their brotherly love by making shivs out of a dead man’s ribs in order to escape a Siberian hellhole and start a new life as gangsters in New York City together. But be honest: That’s still more loyalty than you probably showed over Thanksgiving dinner.

And more to the point, it provides an interesting, empathy-inducing wrinkle to two antagonists who’ve been central to the story so far, without excusing their awful behavior. No character has to be a stock character—every writer has the power to turn anyone in their story from a plot point to a person.

When Wilson Fisk rolls back into view, the episode goes even farther with its Villain Reclamation Project. All we know about this guy is that he’s a Kingpin of crime, sitting on a throne of bodies and billions while staying completely off the grid. You realize how odd and enjoyable it is that our first real exposure to him involves him awkwardly asking a woman out on a date, right?

As Fisk, Vincent D’Onofrio leans into his ogreish physique in a way he probably hasn’t since Private Pyle went Section Eight in Full Metal Jacket. But by introducing him to us via his night out with art-gallery owner Vanessa (played by the sort of preposterously sexy Ayelet Zurer), the show uses his bulk to make him look soft, even awkward. It’s the same endearing alchemy James Gandolfini employed as Tony Soprano, whose size made him simultaneously convincing as a big lug from the suburbs and a terrifying rageaholic.

Which is a side of Fisk we certainly get to see.

And that’s this episode’s criminal masterstroke. You know all that humanizing-the-villains stuff we just talked about? Well, one of those humanized villains is gonna rub the other one the wrong way by showing up to make peace when he’s on a first date, so that other humanized villain is gonna slam his head in the car door until it falls off.

Not the car door. The head.

“In the Blood” ingeniously juxtaposes Fisk’s gawky interest in Vanessa and Anatoly & Vladimir’s concern for each other with the most viciously violent stuff we’ve seen any of them do. When Fisk’s date goes south, he doesn’t go home and drown his sorrows in a Netflix binge the way the rest of us do: He beats a man to death. And the Russians are kidnapping and torturing Rosario Dawson’s nurse character Claire for info on Daredevil when they’re not reminiscing about the good old days in Moscow.

Which, incidentally, led to another fantastic fight-scene setpiece: DD tracks Claire to the cab company where she’s been taken, turns out the lights, and takes out the kidnappers one by one. There’s something really scary about this so-called hero, and his fighting technique reflects that: He doesn’t so much beat each goon as drag them off into the darkness, like the xenomorphs crawling out of the woodwork to slaughter the Colonial Marines in Aliens.

It’s a blast of an action sequence. And it leads to one of the episode’s two sexy nursing-your-wounded-friend-back-to-health sequences…

PLUS!

Thanks, Obamacare!

But Daredevil’s quest to rescue Claire — like the ongoing storyline in which Ben Urich and Karen Page work together to expose the power behind Union-Allied and its crimes — is also used as further leverage against the parallel storylines about Fisk and the Ranskahov brothers. The whole time we’re getting to know them, we’re watching our heroes work as hard as they can to stop them. Daredevil pulls no punches against these people, even as it brings us up close and personal with the people those punches are landing on. To borrow some imagery from the opening credits, this is a narrative balancing act not unlike the scales of justice. To fully appreciate the bad, you’ve got to understand the good, and vice versa.

PREVIOUSLY: ‘DAREDEVIL’ RECAP, EPISODE 1: JUSTICE IS BLIND (AND, NOT SO COINCIDENTALLY, SO IS DAREDEVIL)

‘DAREDEVIL’ RECAP, EPISODE 2: FIGHT NIGHT!

‘DAREDEVIL’ RECAP, EPISODE 3: (SUPER) POWER TO THE PEOPLE

Sean T. Collins (@theseantcollins) is a freelance writer who lives with Diet Coke and his daughter, not necessarily in that order, on Long Island.

Like what you see? Follow Decider on Facebook and Twitter to join the conversation, and sign up for our email newsletters to be the first to know about streaming movies and TV news!