SANTA CLARA -- Think you're doing your part to save water -- and that the problem is the guy with the lush lawn down the street, not to mention water-guzzling farms?

You're in good company.

On Saturday, local officials gathered to brainstorm how to kick water conservation into high gear -- and how to collectively tackle the blame-them-not-us mindset. The Santa Clara Valley Water District, which provides water to 13 water retailers, hopes agencies will help draft a unified battle plan to attack the drought.

"We really need people to step up and make some significant behavioral changes," Felicia Marcus, chairwoman of the State Water Resources Control Board, told about 100 members of city councils, school boards and other local bodies convened at the Santa Clara Convention Center. "We can't act too soon."

Spurred by the state's new get-tough conservation rules and Gov. Jerry Brown's order for 25 percent cuts in water use statewide, Silicon Valley's big water district has called for a 30 percent reduction. But a survey last month showed that while 80 percent of registered voters in the water district support those goals, 36 percent said they're already conserving and can't do more, while 44 percent said they could do a little more. The respondents overwhelmingly supported limits on landscaping in future developments, fining nonresidential water scofflaws and restricting potable water use by golf courses, cemeteries and local government.

But it will take a collective effort by the county's nearly 1.9 million people to not only meet water-saving goals, but also to keep Silicon Valley from literally sinking.

Advertisement

The valley's groundwater basin, managed since the 1930s, has remained stable despite population and business growth. In the past year, the water level declined 33 feet, or about one-quarter of its volume, said water district CEO Beau Goldie.

"We have to be able to replenish it," Goldie said. "It is the largest asset this county has."

The entire basin, not isolated spots, is dropping. Without conservation, subsidence will continue this year. Even with 20 percent conservation this year, the risk of serious subsidence is pushed back only a few years.

As the ground subsides, sewer and stormwater drains, whose systems rely on gravity, could collapse -- and more of the South Bay will be susceptible to flooding. Alviso sits at least 10 feet below sea level because of groundwater subsidence.

One of the goals of Saturday's conference was to spur and begin coordinating action on local building codes and ordinances, education and enforcement, and conservation in public facilities.

"Consistency will be important to effectiveness," Goldie said.

Brainstorming produced several ideas. Informing residents about how much water they use for what purposes would be helpful, said Stacey Brown, an engineer and a member of the Campbell Union High School District board.

Naresh Duggal, a Santa Clara County employee, suggested enabling residents to better harvest rainwater, as has been done in parts of India.

The good news, as Marcus pointed out, is that Santa Clara County already has one of the best-managed groundwater districts in the state.

The challenge is to tackle complacency, which Marcus said has no part in the face of the historic drought.

"The point of urban conservation is to protect urban resilience," Marcus said. And, she added, it's not about evening out the pain, or to point out unfairness.

"We want results," she said. "We want effective and rapid conservation now."

Contact Sharon Noguchi at 408-271-3775. Follow her at Twitter.com/noguchionk12.