Topics: Danny Vinik, Deferred deportation, executive action, GOP, Government shutdown, Greg Sargent, Josh Kraushaar, President Obama, Rep. Steve King, Sen. Ted Cruz, The Right, News, Politics News

Here’s the good news, I guess. Even wingnuts are promising they’ve given up on impeaching President Obama over his executive action deferring deportation. No less a zealot than Rep. Steve King is saying, “I don’t want to do the I-word, nobody wants to throw the nation into that kind of turmoil.” You’d think Obama’s move would be a big fat softball pitch to King – maybe a cantaloupe? – demanding he take a swing at impeachment, but so far, it’s not.

Still, King and others are insisting they can defund government, or at least the agencies tasked with implementing Obama’s move, and get away with it politically. That’s even after the House GOP Appropriations chairman, Rep. Hal Rodgers, reminded them that the agency in question, the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, is entirely self-funded, via the fees it charges, and thus could continue to process requests. “The appropriations process cannot be used to ‘defund’ the agency,” a committee statement said, according to Greg Sargent.

But conservatives continue to push the idea of passing riders to appropriations to defund certain agencies, or to fund only agencies they like, even though it’s clear the congressional GOP leadership wants no part of a government shutdown showdown this time around. Sen. Ted Cruz, for instance, sneering that “Obama is not a monarch” in Politico, says that if he vetoes a bill funding only certain parts of government, he will be blamed for the ensuing shutdown:

President Obama will no doubt threaten a shutdown—that seems to be the one card he repeatedly plays—but Congress can authorize funding for agencies of government one at a time. If the President is unwilling to accept funding for, say, the Department of Homeland Security without his being able to unilaterally defy the law, he alone will be responsible for the consequences.