Harrisburg, SD

It may look like a college commons area; students walking around, sitting at tables or hanging with friends but this is the upstairs pod at Harrisburg's High school.

"We pretty much trashed a 120 year old idea of how we deliver instruction," Harrisburg High School principal Kevin Lein said.

It's the only program of its kind in the country.

The freshmen have a Modular Scheduling, or MOD, where they go to 21 classes each day that are 20 minutes long.

They also participate in Mass Customized Learning, or MCL. This is where students learn at their own pace. They can go as fast or as slow as they want on a subject. Basically, the student customizes their learning.

"You get to work at your own pace and get stuff done. It's easier for me because for people like me who want to get stuff done, but for people who don't want to get stuff done don't hold you back. I like that," freshman McKenna Mathiesen said.

Just about eight weeks into the semester - some students seem to like the new system - but a few parents aren't so sure.

"Up until about a week ago my wife and I were not impressed with the program to be honest," said parent Craig Morris.

Craig Morris has a freshman at Harrisburg High School. One problem, Morris says, the grading is not straightforward. Students are graded on what they've accomplished and mastered, not A, B, or Cs.

"The downside to that it is hard for the students to know where they fall. Whether or not they are actually meeting their goals," Morris said.

Some students agree.

"I'd change the grading because I think sometimes it gets a little unfair and weird. We do work as hard as we can, most of us do, and I feel like sometimes the grades don't show that," Mathiesen said.

At first, Morris says, the school had issues getting the MOD/ MCL program going. Now, Morris says, the school addressed most of his concerns and it's getting better.

"We'll see overtime how that turns out. So far it seems to be working fairly well and students seem to be enjoying that piece of it. But yeah, way different than the way we grew up," Morris said.

For other parents of freshmen, they couldn't be happier with the unique program. They say it's preparing students for college at a young age.

"From the beginning, what Dr. Lein explained to us we were on board, my husband and I loved the idea of it," parent Kelly Buchanan said. "I love that we are preparing them for life and in addition to giving them their education."

Teaching the 14 and 15 year olds to be individuals, that is what principal Kevin Lein envisions.

"All of a sudden you're not holding my hand and leading me? You are telling me I get to do what I want? Kids could take advantage of that. I have seen this class break the mold and show adults that if we do trust them and do give them the freedom they will be accountable, they will be responsible, they have been terrific," Lein said.