Before I dive into this article, I’ll admit it now: I voted for Obama in the 2008 presidential election.

At the time, I believed he would a) get us out of Iraq and b) deliver universal healthcare. I - or I guess I should say we - got burned on both.

I won’t get into the problems we are facing in Iraq today. (We don’t have the time or column space.) But what the president delivered with his “Affordable Care Act” - better known as Obamacare - was not even in the vicinity of universal healthcare.

Universal healthcare is free healthcare coverage for all citizens. Obamacare is forced insurance buying with a lengthy list of requirements...

Especially for businesses.

And now, almost five years after Obamacare was signed into law, we are starting to see the consequences it is having on the job market.

The Great Shift

At the Democratic National Committee last Friday, Obama called 2014 a “breakthrough year for America.” He claimed the 3 million jobs added last year prove that the Democrat theory of spreading prosperity works.

But when we look at the data, that “spread of prosperity” is missing. In fact, it’s the exact opposite.

Let’s start by looking at figures from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).

Obamacare mandates that employers must provide full-time workers - those working more than 30 hours a week - with health insurance. Businesses that don’t will be subject to a fine.

Unfortunately, as the chart above shows, these regulations have only pushed more hours, and work, onto full-time managers. According to the BLS, discount and department stores have boosted managers’ ranks by 46% in less than two years. And they’ve nearly doubled their hours in the process.

So employers are squeezing more out of their salaried workers who don’t get overtime pay. Meanwhile nonsupervisors - who qualify for overtime pay - are losing hours.

Does that sound like a spread of prosperity?

This was one of the knocks on Obamacare from the get-go. And private enterprise once again has proven it will work around government mandates to help protect its bottom line.

As a result, the White House is now looking to overhaul overtime rules for the first time in a decade. The plan is to raise the current overtime pay threshold to $808 a week ($42,000 a year) for salaried workers (from $455 a week).

If that proposal goes through, don’t be surprised when employers lift some managers above the new pay threshold and let the rest go.

Or perhaps those who aren’t fired will be demoted to part-time work. I bet that will help boost morale.

Obamacare’s negative impact on the workforce doesn’t stop here, either.

More (Part-Time) Work for All!

New data spitting in the face of the “spread of prosperity” argument was recently put out by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. According to its report, between 2003 and 2007, general-service occupations - like fast-food workers and retailers - accounted for 2.5 million new full-time jobs.

But between 2010 and 2014, it only accounted for 1.3 million new full-time positions.

The U.S. Census Bureau found that the number of workers clocking 25 to 29 hours per week is up by half a million since the beginning of 2013. During that same period, the number of workers putting in 31 to 34 hours a week has fallen by around 250,000.

More part-time jobs and less full-time positions... that isn’t how I would define prosperity.

This $800,000 Technology Could Save Millions of Lives... Including Yours. Hospitals across the globe are now paying up to $800,000 for just ONE medical device. Why is it so valuable? Because it can actually detect what illness you may have before it even occurs. See why this technology could save your life

We shouldn’t be shocked that lower-wage workers are being affected most by Obamacare. They work in industries where the cost of healthcare coverage or penalties make up a larger percentage of compensation than it does in higher-wage industries.

The reality is: as long as it’s good for low-wage businesses’ bottom lines, they will continue to hire more part-time workers and fewer full-time workers.

Whatever it takes to sidestep the effect of the Affordable Care Act.

So Who Really Benefits?

While the fast-food and retail sectors have had to maneuver around Obamacare, one industry is already benefitting…

Insurance companies.

As you may recall, the original pitch for Obamacare made it seem like hospitals would benefit most. That made sense considering there would be less uninsured people walking through their doors.

The unfortunate reality is that, on average, the plans offered don’t pay as well as traditionally bought insurance. So hospitals are getting less bang for their buck in areas where uninsured walk-ins were low.

Insurance companies like Aetna (NYSE: AET), Cigna (NYSE: CI) and UnitedHealth (NYSE: UNH), on the other hand, are loving it. Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, they are pulling in more customers and paying out less to hospitals in the process.

Over the past five years, shares of the three companies have shot up 218%, 248% and 240%, respectively. In comparison, the S&P 500 has risen 86% during the same time frame.

If, like me, you’re disappointed with the Affordable Car Act, don’t just stand on the sidelines whining. Consider picking up some shares of healthcare insurance providers.

Crushing the market by more than 188% should help you get over the disappointment.

Good investing,

Ryan Fitzwater

Do you agree with Ryan? Let us know what you think in the comments.