U.S. Rep. Daniel Webster, with 34 years of experience as a lawmaker representing Central Florida, faces Democratic newcomer and former Navy serviceman Michael McKenna, who thinks Washington needs fresh energy, especially for military matters.

Webster, 65, a Republican from Winter Garden, served in the Florida House of Representatives and the Florida Senate for 28 years, including stints as House speaker and Senate president, before going to Congress in what is now District 10 in 2008.

McKenna, 34, a retired Navy chief petty officer and now a Walt Disney World security officer who lives in Davenport, said Webster has become too comfortable in elected office, lacking urgency to be effective for the district.

Webster emphasized experience in negotiating bills on both sides of the aisle in making sure Florida gets what it needs, as with the recent Water Resources Reform and Development Act, which provided money for expansion of seaports and other items.

"A good one-fourth of all of the projects that were done in the entire country were done for Florida," Webster said. "I don't even have a port in my district, and I was the lead Republican from Florida on the conference committee."

Michael McKenna Michael McKenna

Webster said he also used the bill to address some Florida-based environmental issues. He said the state's water management districts and the Everglades Foundation approached him about a new restoration-plan policy, which would have them take the lead, rather than the Army Corps of Engineers.

"That was a huge change. It's a pilot project. It's going to work," he said. "And they're going to be able to do these projects for a third of the cost."

Daniel Webster Daniel Webster

McKenna says Webster has done too little in Congress and is part of the gridlock that shut down the government in 2013 and led to more military cuts in the sequestration that followed. He said the hard work he put into his campaign — personally knocking on what he estimates as 56,000 doors — to defeat two better-known Democratic candidates in the primary and, with little money, to take on Webster, illustrates his energy.

District 10 includes most of Lake County and much of central Polk and western Orange counties.

"I, like many Americans, am just tired of the stalemates we have in Washington right now," he said.

"After doing 14 years in the service, I got tired of seeing Washington not be able to come up with money to keep sailors, soldiers, airmen, guardsmen and Marines in the service," he said. "So I left the service to go ahead and run for the United States Congress."

On many critical issues — notably economic development, jobs creation, debt reduction, immigration reform, the environment and cautious support of airstrikes in Syria — the two agree more than they disagree.

They take opposing views on minimum-wage increases, which Webster said the private sector should address and already is doing so on its own, while McKenna endorses a graduated federal increase; the Affordable Care Act, which Webster voted to repeal and McKenna supports; and gay rights, with Webster opposing same-sex marriage while McKenna lists it and anti-discrimination among his top priorities.

smpowers@tribpub.com or 407-420-5441