Under the Center for Medicare & Medicaid Innovation (Innovation Center), the government has been exploring alternative ways of paying for care that ensures effective care delivery while controlling costs.

Alvarnas

Joseph Alvarnas, MD, City of Hope, Duarte, California, will discuss one of those models, the Episodes of Care Payment Model, during a presentation at the American Society of Hematology (ASH) meeting in Orlando, Florida.

“For decades, healthcare costs and expenditures were rising in an uncontrolled and unsustainable way,” Alvarnas says. “Our annual national healthcare expenditures are $2.6 trillion. This is more than the gross domestic product of Russia, Brazil, Italy and Canada."

The Affordable Care Act, says Alvarnas, is attempting to control the rate of growth in healthcare spending while ensuring that healthcare dollars are spent in delivering effective care.

Alvarnas’ session “Measuring Episodes of Care and How to Turn Them into Payment” will take place December 6 at the ASH Practice Partnership Lunch. Here he shares more about the model, and what attendees who attend his session can expect to learn.

Managed Healthcare Executive (MHE): Can you please explain episodes of care in hematology?

Alvarnas: Episodes of care payment is a way of trying to realign payment for cancer care around a period of time rather than simply paying for each service in a separate and disconnected way. The idea is that by linking services around a period of time, physicians are more likely to be mindful of their clinical decisions and think more carefully about how the care that they deliver fits into the path of taking a patient from the time of diagnosis through completion of chemotherapy. The concept also tries to reign in healthcare costs by setting a fixed payment for that period of time, rather than providing a financial reward for providing quantitatively more services.

MHE: What are the biggest issues in hematology that payers are experiencing?

Alvarnas: The cost of care is rising rapidly. New, targeted therapeutic "wonder drugs" are changing patients’ lives for the better and helping more patients to survive. Unfortunately, the price of these drugs is growing at an astronomical and unsustainable pace. Many of these agents cost well over $90,000 per year. This results in an enormous burden to payers and severe economic consequences to patients. This latter concept is called "financial toxicity." The cost of many of these wonder drugs is causing patients to have to decide between food and clothing versus their anti-cancer drug. This is an untenable situation.

Costs are also escalating because healthcare technology continues to expand but they are not always used in the most effective way. Ensuring that physicians across the United States practice evidence-based cancer care is also a significant challenge to the system.

Next: What advice do you give payers to deal with these issues?