We should support Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX) for calling out on President Obama for overlooking the Commerce Clause and giving the federal government more authority due to the Affordable Care Act. But when Sen. Cruz comes out against states’ sovereignty by claiming that Obama and the Department of Justice are lawless by not enforcing federal drug laws, as they allow Colorado to enforce their own drug policies, we should hold Cruz accountable for simply ignoring the Constitution.

Sen. Cruz has been an eloquent defender of federalism in the past but has seemed somewhat clueless during his keynote address at the Texas Public Policy Foundation’s Policy Orientation last Friday.

According to the conservative senator, federal laws must be changed before the President can go ahead and say that Colorado has a right to enforce its own pot laws. That’s right:

A whole lot of folks now are talking about legalizing pot…. And you can make arguments on that issue. You can make reasonable arguments on that issue. The president earlier this past year announced the Department of Justice is going to stop prosecuting certain drug crimes. Didn’t change the law. You can go to Congress. You can get a conversation. You could get Democrats and Republicans who would say, “We ought to change our drug policy in some way,” and you could have a real conversation. You could have hearings. You could look at the problem. You could discuss commonsense changes that maybe should happen or shouldn’t happen. This president didn’t do that. He just said, “The laws say one thing”—and mind you, these are criminal laws; these are laws that say if you do X, Y, and Z, you will go to prison. The president announced, “No, you won’t.”

His remarks seem odd, especially if you examine his defense of federalism in past occasions. Sen. Cruz has been a remarkable advocate of the idea of states’ rights on issues such as same-sex marriage, the Affordable Care Act, and abortion, but once the conversation shifts to marijuana criminalization, he prefers to overlook the Tenth Amendment and allow the federal government to have its way, regardless of what the state of Colorado approved as its local policy.

Traditionally, the federal government leaves almost all petty marijuana cases to local law enforcement agencies. The Controlled Substances Act prohibits anybody from possessing any amount of marijuana, but by stating that the Obama administration should be enforcing the Controlled Substances Act in Colorado, Sen. Cruz ignores that previous administrations also decided to manage federal law enforcement resources by allowing states to take care of small pot-related matters while allowing federal agencies to only go for major cases.

When the administration decides to exercise prosecutorial discretion in the face of major shifts regarding state laws, it isn’t doing anything unconstitutional, quite the opposite.

This is the first time this administration actually allows states to decide their local marijuana policies. In 2011, Obama walked back on the DOJ’s 2009 decision of not making medical marijuana a priority for federal law enforcement by raiding several dispensaries and growers in California. As a matter of fact, President Obama outspent President Bush by $100 million by directly interfering with medical marijuana laws. According to Americans for Safe Access, Obama’s DEA carried out 270 medical marijuana raids, twelve raids more than the DEA carried under President George W. Bush.

When Sen. Cruz says he wants federal drug policies to change before allowing states to enforce their own laws, he’s creating a double standard that puts the sovereignty of the states at risk, which is precisely what he has been so eloquently against in the past year.

If that’s the kind of position he takes as the conservative, small government approach, he might as well lose the support he has earned after standing for states’ rights in the past so many times.