John Kasich in Iowa on Tuesday. Associated Press

DES MOINES, Iowa—John Kasich isn’t a partisan warrior—or at least that’s the strategy his campaign is going for.

While other Republican candidates were touting their conservative principles in speeches at the Iowa State Fair this week, Mr. Kasich, the governor of Ohio, took a different tack. As he took the stage Tuesday afternoon, he sought to distance himself from the Republican Party, characterizing himself as an “independent person” and bragging about his experience working with the Clinton administration in the late 1990s.

“I’m a Republican,” he told a crowd of fairgoers. “But the party has always been my vehicle, and never my master.”

He pointed to his bipartisan roots—“My father was a Democrat all his life”—and highlighted support he won in Ohio from traditionally liberal voters. “I got 26% of the African-American vote, 51% of union households, 60% of women,” he said of his re-election in 2014. Unlike his rivals, his speech was largely devoid of criticism of President Barack Obama.

In a crowded field of Republicans that includes many often-controversial voices, like that of frontrunner Donald Trump, Mr. Kasich is looking to cast himself as a voice of reason and empathy within the Republican Party. His desire to be a different kind of candidate than Mr. Trump, who is tapping into Americans’ anger and frustration, was evident on Tuesday. There’s “too much anger in America today, too much division,” he said.

It’s also in his interest to be seen as a candidate who can win the votes of minorities and women, particularly as Mr. Trump continues to run into trouble with both groups. Pollsters say the Republican Party needs to greatly expand its share of the non-white vote in 2016 to win the White House.

The observation that Mr. Kasich appears more moderate than many of his GOP rivals is not a rare one. In an interview with the governor aired on Sunday, CNN’s Dana Bash put it bluntly. “You sound like a Democrat sometimes,” she told him.

“I think Republicans allowed themselves to be put in a box,” Mr. Kasich responded. “To me, conservatism is giving everybody a chance to be able to successful. That’s the way Reagan was. I mean, that’s common sense.”

The extent of Mr. Kasich’s moderate beliefs is reflected in his record in Ohio, where he in many instances diverged from conservative orthodoxy. He bypassed the Republican-controlled legislature to expand Medicaid to provide health care to low-income adults. He also has backed the Common Core educational standards that many Republicans have criticized.

After supporting as a member of Congress an end to birthright citizenship—a subject that has gained traction in the GOP field in recent days following Mr. Trump’s pledge to repeal it as president—Mr. Kasich reversed his stance on the issue in a recent CNN interview. “I think we need to get over that. I’m not for it anymore,” he said. “Let these people who are born here be citizens and that’s the end of it. I don’t want to dwell on it.”

To be sure, Mr. Kasich has also avowed several conservative policies. Like Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, Mr. Kasich supported restricting the power of public-employee unions in Ohio, though he stood down after voters overturned his anti-collective-bargaining law.

Mr. Kasich earlier this year proposed reducing taxes in Ohio by $500 million, after reducing taxes by $3 billion during his first term. He also says he would repeal the Affordable Care Act, and he has appeared skeptical about climate change, calling it “some theory that’s not proven” in a recent interview with NBC.

Ohio Senate Minority Leader Joe Schiavioni penned an op-ed in USA Today on Tuesday criticizing the perception of Mr. Kasich as a moderate. “I can tell you my job would be a whole lot easier if John Kasich were actually a moderate,” he wrote.

Video

Jerry Seib: What John Kasich Brings to the 2016 Race