Art Cullen (Photo: Special to the Register)

U.S. Education Secretary Arne Duncan proposes free community college tuition, as the asscociate’s or vo-tech degree is the contemporary equivalent of the high school diploma for my generation (Class of 1975). That’s sparked a discussion in the national presidential race over whether community colleges should be free.

Essayist Richard Doak wrote in The Des Moines Sunday Register on Oct. 17 that Iowa needs to hook up its community colleges to its high schools, because the diploma just won’t cut it anymore.

Everyone should know it is already happening in Storm Lake.

Buy Photo Arne Duncan, the US secretary of education, along side President Obama, speaks to a crowd of students, parents and teachers about the cost of higher education on Monday, Sept. 14, 2015 at North High School in Des Moines. (Photo: Kelsey Kremer/The Register)

This year, about half of the Storm Lake High School Class of 2016 — some 80 students — are enrolled in the Storm Lake Charter School. This is where students as juniors may elect to delay their high school graduation for a year while they pursue a charter school education for one extra year. By doing so, they graduate from high school with a diploma and a two-year degree from Iowa Central Community College.

It is the only program like it in Iowa.

Trace it to the League of Schools started back in the early 1970s between Storm Lake Superintendent Mel Samuelson and Iowa Central’s Wally Burns. They set up “shop” classes out at the old Hayes School that smaller districts could not muster on their own. That program essentially grew into the Iowa Central Storm Lake satellite campus, a beehive of activity for young and older students alike.

Eight years ago, the charter school was launched as a way to keep immigrant students in school and to advance them to college. At the time, many immigrant students were not prepared for high school, much less college.

The approach allowed students to get the remedial instruction they needed in the basics, like English and math, while matriculating up through vocational or upper-level academic classes. Students who were at risk of dropping out because of a lack of basic skills stayed in school until they became proficient.

It started slowly, then grew to about 50 students per year. This year about 80 are enrolled, according to Dan Anderson, director of the ICCC Storm Lake Center.

Seventy-five percent of the students are children of immigrants; 55 percent are Latino.

But not all.

Anderson’s three sons all were charter school graduates. Taylor went on to Iowa State University, where he earned a double major in math and engineering thanks to the college credits he was able to knock off while in high school. Son Carsen played the same trick by racking up a double major in finance and accounting at the University of Northern Iowa. Third son Cole attends UNI.

“It saved two years of college for them,” Dan Anderson said. Instead of paying $20,000 to $30,000 to a university each of those two years, they were earning paychecks while their peers from elsewhere in high school were still hitting the books.

All the credits are accepted at Iowa Regents universities and most private Iowa colleges.

Local students have received Iowa Central degrees or certificates in welding, metal fabrication, electrical/mechanical, auto repair, nursing, medical/dental lab technician and graphic arts. Many also go on to Buena Vista or state universities to become teachers, accountants or to enter some other profession.

Most of the students go for a vo-tech certification. The charter school and Iowa Central supply a steady stream of tradesmen to a growing manufacturing base around Storm Lake. Many first-generation college students who are children of immigrants cling tightly to home. They like the fact that they can get all their academic and job skills right in Storm Lake through Iowa Central in combination with Buena Vista.

This is the model for Iowa.

The drop-out rate?

Two percent.

It works.

Art Cullen is the editor of the Storm Lake Times. Contact: times@stormlake.com

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1LSXbcS