New York City Fire Commissioner Salvatore Cassano, Mayor Bill de Blasio and FDNY Chief of Department Edward S. Kilduff at a June 4, event. Kevin Hagen for The Wall Street Journal

In one of the final acts of his 45-year career with the FDNY, Fire Commissioner Salvatore Cassano presided over a departmental promotion ceremony in Brooklyn on Thursday morning.

“Today is a day to reflect on everything you’ve done to get to this point,” Mr. Cassano said in a speech. “Look at those banners hanging up from the rafters. I’ve been a member of that family for the better part of my life.”

In May, Mayor Bill de Blasio appointed former FDNY Chief of Department Daniel Nigro to replace Mr. Cassano, a holdover from former Mayor Michael Bloomberg’s administration.

Mr. Cassano looked back at the most trying time in the FDNY’s recent memory: the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.

“Almost 13 years ago, we were tested like never before. On one unimaginable morning, we lost 343 of the bravest people ever to wear an FDNY uniform. In fact, any uniform. They were our mentors, our friends, and our families. So many remarkable leaders in our department were killed that day.”

As Mr. Cassano sat back down on the dais, he was received with a standing ovation. As the applause continued, he stood briefly, saluted, and sat again.

The two top promotions of the day were Thomas E. McKavanagh, who became Deputy Assistant Chief in charge of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, and James C. Hodgens, promoted to Deputy Assistant Chief in charge of the Fire Academy.

Also promoted were 18 new Battalion Chiefs, 40 Captains, and 64 Lieutenants. According to the FDNY, the newly promoted officers have 1,900 years of experience with the FDNY among them.

Speaking to the press afterward, Mr. Cassano said he is most proud of the rebuilding of the Department after the attacks.

“We sent our staff chiefs to management school because we were great at fighting fires, but we needed some of our management skills to be honed up, because now you have to rebuild from the bottom up,” he said.

“We are prepared for any event that we face,” Cassano said. “Hurricane Sandy was a devastating storm that hit every borough in the city, and the department stepped up.”

“This is the greatest job in the world,” Mr. Cassano said.

Cassano said he is pleased with the progress being made on racial diversity in the department, noting that 47% of the recently graduated class of probational officers are people of color.

In March, the city agreed to pay $98 million in back pay and benefits in a settlement to a long-running lawsuit that charged the Fire Department of New York discriminated against minority applicants.

“We’re diversifying,” Cassano said. “Eventually, when they get eligible to take an exam, that’s what our promotional classes will look like. It’s just going to take some time to get into the ranks. But we’re dedicated to it. I’ve led that fight.”