In excellent condition, historic Cliff Cottage remains standing along the road to Carter Lake after 110 years. Once a post office and stage stop, Cliff Cottage was built by Zachary Taylor and occupied by the Taylor family until 1897. ( Kenneth Jessen / For the Reporter-Herald )

Cliff Cottage is one of the most picturesque historic structures in this area and is a fine example of the stone mason's art.

Located on Pole Hill Road (leading to Pinewood Lake) surrounded by mature trees, Cliff Cottage was constructed by Zachary Taylor in 1885.

Born in 1851 in Illinois, Zachary Taylor was named after the late U.S. president.

Taylor was orphaned at an early age and ended up raised by a teamster's family. The teamster brought his family, including Taylor, across the vast prairie in 1860 settling along the St. Vrain River.

At the age of 17, the family gave Taylor a horse and saddle. It was time for him to strike out on his own, and he left for a job on a farm near the Big Thompson River.

Behind Cliff Cottage is the milk house later converted into a small home. (Kenneth Jessen / For the Reporter-Herald)

By 1870, he was working for pioneer Judge John E. Washburn near the old town of St. Louis southeast of Loveland. This was the beginning of a long friendship between these two men.

At 24, Taylor married Judge Washburn's daughter Winona. After saving for four years, the couple was able to purchase their own farm near St. Louis.

In 1885, the Taylors decided to leave the Big Thompson Valley and purchased 160 acres in the foothills. It was at this time that Cliff Cottage was constructed on the Pole Hill Road. Made from locally quarried stone, the building was finished just in time for the birth of their fourth child.

The Pole Hill road was the original route to Estes Park prior to the construction of the road up the Big Thompson Canyon years later.

Advertisement

The couple built a herd of registered Jersey dairy cows. They not only sold the dairy products but the cows as well along with Shropshire sheep and Scotch collie dogs.

In 1890, a small stone dairy house was constructed behind Cliff Cottage.

From 1889 to 1893, a post office called Winona operated at Cliff Cottage. Leading to quite a bit of confusion, a town called Winona was platted at St. Louis. The post office at this location was called Big Thompson. In summary, there was a post office named for Mrs. Winona Washburn Taylor and a town named for her, but the two were separated by eight miles.

During the Panic of 1893, the Taylors went bankrupt and moved to Sheridan, Wyo., with their five children.

By the time their sixth and last child was born in 1895, they were back again at Cliff Cottage, but this time as renters.

Just two years later, the Taylors left the beautiful setting of Cliff Cottage to work on a farm south of Fort Collins. Taylor ended up as a meat cutter at Fort Washakie, Wyo., before returning to Fort Collins fatally ill. He passed away in the Loveland hospital in 1899 at the age of only 48.

The oldest Taylor child, Everett, died in his 30s after working in Ecuador and Panama.

The next Taylor child, Nellie, became a teacher in Larimer County.

Estes Park Taylor became an entomologist, horticulturist and extension service director. He was also the editor and publisher of the Ag Leaders Digest.

The next two children, Laura and Luella, became teachers.

Clifford Curtis Taylor, born in 1895 at Cliff Cottage, was the last of the six children and worked as a teacher and in the Foreign Service. He was listed in "Who's Who in America."

The author is indebted to Clifford Taylor for the background information used in this article.

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years.