Action Points An investigational vaccine against nine disease-causing types of human papilloma virus was highly effective in preventing disease.

The nine-valent vaccine was noninferior to the widely available quadrivalent vaccine against shared HPV types, and was highly effective against the five nonshared HPV types compared with the quadrivalent vaccine.

A vaccine targeting nine cancer-causing strains of human papillomavirus (HPV) -- rather than two or four -- was highly effective in preventing disease, researchers reported.

The investigational vaccine contains four HPV strains associated with most malignancies -- those already in the currently licensed quadrivalent vaccine -- as well as five others also associated with the disease but not included in any vaccine, according to Elmar Joura, MD, of the Medical University of Vienna, in Austria, and colleagues.

In a randomized, controlled trial, the nine-valent vaccine was 96.7% effective in preventing high-grade cervical, vulvar, or vaginal disease associated with its five new HPV strains, Joura and colleagues reported in the New England Journal of Medicine.

And it was noninferior to the quadrivalent vaccine relative to the four strains the drugs share, the researchers found.

Both vaccines contain HPV strains 6, 11, 16, and 18, two of which -- 16 and 18 -- are thought to be responsible for 70% of cervical cancers.

The nine-valent vaccine, in addition to those four, also contains HPV types 31, 33, 45, 52, and 58, thought to be the agents underlying an additional 15% to 20% of cervical cancers.

The study is a "milestone" in expanding vaccine coverage of HPV strains related to malignancies, commented Anne Schuchat, MD, director of the CDC's National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases in Atlanta.

But the findings emphasize gaps that remain in other forms of "coverage," Schuchat said in an accompanying editorial.

Access to HPV vaccines under the Vaccines for Children program and the Affordable Care Act is now comprehensive "on paper," Schuchat argued, with limited availability remaining under some grandfathered insurance plans and in some rural areas.

Despite that, coverage of the targeted population remains low -- about 57% for the first dose, Schuchat noted. In other words, "four of 10 adolescent girls have not even begun HPV vaccination" in the U.S.

Possible reasons for the low coverage are the cost -- even if it is borne by private or public insurers -- and the difficulty of making three separate office visits.

"Vaccination of a much higher proportion of preteens is needed," she concluded. "Otherwise, decades from now oncologists will still be talking about HPV-associated cancers with thousands of new patients every year."

Because the quadrivalent vaccine is highly effective at preventing infection and disease associated with strains 6, 11, 16, and 18, a placebo-controlled trial was deemed unethical, Joura and colleagues reported.

But the same high efficacy meant that a standard head-to-head trial of the two vaccines comparing outcomes related to those four strains would have needed to be unfeasibly large, they noted.

So in 14,215 women ages 16 to 26, they conducted an noninferiority trial for outcomes related to the first four HPV types, and an efficacy trial looking at disease associated with the other five. The women were randomly assigned on a one-to-one basis, to get either the nine-valent or the quadrivalent vaccine.

The theory was that the investigational vaccine would be better at preventing disease associated with its extra five HPV types than the current vaccine, while being no worse than that vaccine in preventing disease linked with types 6, 11, 16, and 18.

Participants were given three shots, on day one and at months two and six, the researchers reported, while tissue swabs and Pap tests were conducted on day one and at months seven, 12, 18, 24, 30, 36, 42, 48, and 54.

As well as looking for all of the vaccine types, using polymerase chain reaction testing, the researchers also analyzed the samples for types 35, 39, 51, 59, and 59.

The primary efficacy hypothesis was that among women seronegative for the five new types through the vaccination period and given the nine-valent vaccine, and compared with the women given the quadrivalent vaccine, there would be a reduction in:

Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia

Adenocarcinoma in situ

Invasive cervical carcinoma

High-grade vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia

High-grade vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia

Vulvar cancer

Vaginal cancer associated with those types

The researchers hypothesized that, among women seronegative for the shared HPV types through the vaccination period, both vaccines would be associated with similar reductions in disease associated with those strains and would have similar immune responses and seroconversion rates.

The bottom line, Joura and colleagues reported, was that the rate of high-grade cervical, vulvar, or vaginal disease related to HPV-31, 33, 45, 52, and 58 was 0.1 per 1,000 person-years in the nine-valent vaccine group and 1.6 per 1,000 person-years in the quadrivalent vaccine group.

Also, for HPV types 6, 11, 16, and 18, noninferiority of immune responses and seroconversion rates was established a month after the third shot. Rates of disease were similar between the groups.

Participants getting the nine-valent vaccine had more injection site reactions -- 90.7% versus 84.9% -- with pain, swelling, erythema, and pruritus the most common.

Systemic reactions were similar, reported by 55.8% in the nine-valent group and 54.9% in the quadrivalent group. The most common events were headache, fever, nausea, dizziness, and fatigue.

The researchers cautioned that the follow-up was limited in duration, although studies of the quadrivalent vaccine have not seen any sign of waning immunity over time.

The study had support from Merck. Joura dislosed relevant relationships with Merck, Sanofi Pasteur MSD, Roche, and GlaxoSmithKline. Several authors are current or former employees of Merck. Schuchat is an employee of the CDC.