Roxbury resident Craig Heard is running for Congress. (Photo: Craig Heard for Congress)

After decades of public service, much of it under the radar, Craig Heard is ready to take the wheel.

Other than his two terms on the Roxbury Board of Education, the president and CEO of Gateway Outdoor Advertising has never held elected office. But his growing dissatisfaction with an ineffective U.S. Congress — a feeling he says is shared by the public — has motivated Heard to challenge four-term Rep. Leonard Lance in the June 7 Republican primary to represent the 7th District in Washington.

"I've been behind the scenes 35, 40 years now, and I can't stand back anymore and just watch and help Republican conservatives get elected," Heard told the Daily Record. "I want to be part of the process of fixing it. It's not working out for us, with a Congress with an 8 percent approval rating, with elected officials representing District 7 that aren't even conservative."

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Meet Roxbury resident Craig Heard, running against incumbent 7th District Congressman Leonard Lance in the June 7 Republican Primary. IPHONE VIDEO BY WILLIAM WESTHOVEN MAY 22, 2016

Lance, he said, is typical of many Republicans in Congress who tout G.O.P. policies and conservative values, but fail to back them up when the time comes to vote.

"Our (Republican-controlled) Congress has been in charge for two years now almost and what's changed, Boehner?" Heard said. "Why are we rubber stamping Boehner yay or nay for whatever he wanted instead of stepping up for values you believe in? Go along, get along. I'm not going to stand back anymore and not have people yelling from the bell tower if I don't agree with Paul Ryan. I'm going to bring it back to the community and rally the troops, rally down to Washington D.C., whatever we need to make the change. The establishment is too entrenched and Leonard is part of the problem. I've told Leonard that. I said you haven't done the job and you've been there eight years."

Friends and acquaintances have questioned him about challenging a popular incumbent, but like fellow businessman Donald Trump, he sees 2016 as an election year ripe for the picking by outsiders committed to more than just an ideological campaign.

"Absolutely, this is the time," said Heard, who also chaired the County College of Morris Board of Trustees. "I'm in it to win it. It's time for a change. To me, this is a declaration of independence in 2016."

To those who would prefer a candidate with more experience in public office, Heard says "I have a simple answer: How's that working out for you?"

He also points to his experience as a lifelong Republican, having been an honorary delegate to the Ronald Reagan conventions and chairing campaign committees for Sen. Robert Dole's presidential campaigns in 1988 and 1996.

"I have supported conservative Republicans for over 35 years," said Heard, a Glen Ridge native and 33-year-resident of Roxbury currently chairing the commission to study a possible merger of Roxbury and Mount Arlington. "Values I first supported since I first supported Ronald Reagan in the mid-'80s. I was always supporting what I felt were politicians with conservative values that they would stick by, and quite frankly, I was disappointed in some of them."

Count Leonard Lance among them. Lance, Heard said, has failed to back up his conservative principles since he was an Assemblyman voting in favor of the Highlands Act, which he said hurt farmers and other businesses by preventing development. He sees a similar pattern in Lance's record in Washington, speaking out against initiatives like Obamacare, but then voting to approve the budget that funded it.

"I believe in my values and I'll fight for them," he said. "But don't switch your values based upon your voting block.Try to convince your voting block why you feel the way you do, and then stand for them."

Heard said he also would address other issues such as an underfunded military.

"You're sitting there and the homeland security budget hasn't changed since Obama went into office.," Heard said. "Yet we have ISIS show up, we have attacks on our own homeland, and yet we have our military with their hands tied behind their back because of the rules of engagement."

Heard also has a plan to reform an economic climate that is driving businesses out of New Jersey and the country, combining a one-time incentive for businesses to return the profits they have banked offshore and reap the benefits of a federal tax reduction to 25 percent or possibly less.

"There's $5 trillion overseas that's not coming back here because of our tax structure," he said. "I want that $5 trillion to be in the United States. My common-sense solution is you give those corporations a one-time pass, those companies in the U.S. that have overseas operations, and have their profits sitting there. Bring back that $5 trillion on a one-time pass, no tax, and invest that $5 trillion in the United States to build your company and continue building your business. You know how many jobs that would save?

"It seems a simple solution when you take out the bureaucracy, and who's going to get what from that pie. No, free pass to bring $5 trillion back to the U.S., and then reduce the corporate tax so those profits will continue to come back here."

Taking out the bureaucracy in Congress, Heard says, needs to be the first step.

"There's no fuel in that engine to turn this around without a change in leadership," he said. "And this is the year. This is a political revolution going right now, against the establishment, and rightfully so."

To that end, he got out front of most New Jersey Republicans by formally declaring his endorsement of Trump on May 2.

“I have known Donald Trump and done business with him going back to the '80’s,” said Heard, who used to sell billboard advertising to Trump for his former Atlantic City casinos. "One thing I really like is he had his finger on the pulse. He demanded top service, and rightfully so. There was no compromise. You deliver what he bought and made sure it was done with good quality.

"I think he's earned it. I think his passion is there. He's reaching the people. Do I agree 100 percent with everything he says? No. But I'm confident he will bring in the best-qualified people to advise him. I saw his staff, we've walked the casinos. If he sees a piece of paper on the floor, he calls somebody over. I feel he's going to be a very confident leader and not going to go out and take on something he doesn't think he can get done. He not a person that wants to fail. And I'm that way, too. I'd love to work for him if he becomes president."

Staff Writer William Westhoven: 973-917-9242; wwesthoven@GannettNJ.com.

Read or Share this story: http://dailyre.co/1TvYMbf