David Sacks, a Yammer founder and an early PayPal executive, is joining the management team at HR software startup Zenefits. Bloomberg News

Zenefits, which offers human resources software as a service, brags that it’s growing like a weed. Now the 20-month-old company is bringing in experienced help to manage its growth.

David Sacks, a founder of business-software firm Yammer and an early PayPal executive, is joining Zenefits as chief operating officer. The company has embarked on a hiring spree to keep pace with an influx of customers, even as it faces increased regulatory scrutiny. The user base is on track to grow 1,600% this year, the company said.

Parker Conrad, Zenefits co-founder and CEO, said he was initially skeptical when a Zenefits board member, Lars Dalgaard, suggested hiring a COO. “‘I don’t want a big company bureaucrat coming in here,’” Conrad recalled telling Dalgaard. “And he said, ‘How about David Sacks?’”

Conrad changed his mind. “It felt like a very natural fit,” he said.

Sacks sold Yammer to Microsoft in 2012 for $1.2 billion, and he left the company earlier this year. Initially he “played a lot of poker” and then contemplated following the path of other former startup founders into venture capital, he said. Instead, he preferred to help run a company he cared about.

Zenefits’ software gives HR departments or small business owners online tools to manage employee health benefits, vacation time, payroll, and the like. The software is free to use. Zenefits makes money from fees paid by insurance companies when a user buys employee coverage through the site.

Sacks will be responsible for areas including product development, operations and finances, which have been under pressure to keep pace not only with new customers but with hiring as well. Zenefits said its employee count surged this year to more than 420 people from 15, and the company recently opened a sales and administrative office in Arizona that is expected eventually to employ at least 1,300 people.

Sacks said he particularly likes getting involved in young technology companies that are growing quickly, as PayPal was when he arrived there in 1999. “They’re both experiencing hypergrowth, and as a result of that dealing with issues that few companies ever see,” Sacks said. “It’s a little bit like a drug, and you want to experience it again.”

Among the hot issues for Zenefits is a regulatory run-in with Utah regulators. The state’s insurance department recently said that, under Utah law, Zenefits’ free software is an improper inducement for companies to buy insurance contracts through Zenefits.

Utah’s governor recently appeared to express support for Zenefits in his state, and Conrad said he believes Zenefits “will ultimately win on this.”