LOS ANGELES — The first year of skirmishes in state legislatures over bills that would govern the use of cheaper versions of expensive biotechnology drugs is nearly over. Health insurers and generic drug companies have prevailed in most states over brand-name pharmaceutical companies.

Their latest victory came in dramatic fashion on Saturday, when Gov. Jerry Brown of California vetoed a bill that had passed both houses of the legislature with overwhelming bipartisan support, but that critics said would limit the use of less expensive drugs.

With billions of dollars in sales at stake, the fighting is expected to continue. It is also moving from states to the federal government and even the World Health Organization.

The battle concerns how easily pharmacists can dispense cheaper, near-generic versions of biotechnology drugs, which can cost tens or hundreds of thousands of dollars a year. The biotech drugs, known as biologics, include blockbusters like the rheumatoid arthritis treatments Enbrel and Humira and the cancer drugs Avastin and Herceptin.

Until now, biologics, which are complex proteins made in living cells, have been insulated from the generic competition eventually faced by simple chemical pills like Lipitor or Prozac. But the 2010 Affordable Care Act called for the Food and Drug Administration to approve such copycat versions of biologics. They are usually called biosimilars rather than generics, because they are not exact copies of the original.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But whether pharmacists will be permitted to substitute a biosimilar for the brand-name biologic is governed by states. So biotechnology companies, led by Amgen and Genentech, began lobbying states legislatures this year to pass laws like the bill in California.

The California bill, SB 598, would have allowed biosimilars to be substituted by pharmacists if the F.D.A. deemed the biosimilar “interchangeable” with the reference product, a higher standard than merely being similar.

But the bill would have required pharmacists to tell the patient’s doctor whether a biosimilar or the brand-name drug had been dispensed. The pharmacist also would have been required to notify the patient if a substitution had been made.

Opponents of the bill, which included some labor unions and pharmacists, contended that once the F.D.A. had declared a biosimilar interchangeable with the original product, notification of doctors and patients was unnecessary and would only raise doubts about the safety of biosimilars and discourage their use.

Supporters of the bill, which included some medical societies and patient advocacy groups, said it was essential for doctors to know which drug was being used in case problems arose. Even slight differences might, for instance, cause a patient to have an immune reaction to a biosimilar but not to the original biologic.

Mr. Brown seemed torn on notification. “This requirement, which on its face looks reasonable, is for some reason highly controversial,” he said in his veto message.

“Doctors with whom I have spoken would welcome this information,” he said. “Calpers and other large purchasers warn that the requirement itself would cast doubt on the safety and desirability of more cost-effective alternatives to biologics.” Calpers is the California Public Employees’ Retirement System, which provides health benefits to more than 1.3 million people.

But Mr. Brown added that because the F.D.A. had not decided on the standards for interchangeability, a notification requirement was premature.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Ralph G. Neas, president of the Generic Pharmaceutical Association, celebrated the veto, saying that Mr. Brown had “demonstrated compassion for millions of patients and strong fiscal stewardship for the state of California.”

The Biotechnology Industry Organization by contrast said it was disappointed. “As other states continue to address issues related to biosimilars, BIO encourages policy makers to continue to put patients first,” it said in a statement issued Sunday.

According to the Generic Pharmaceutical Association, bills were proposed but did not become law this year in 10 states besides California, including Illinois and Texas.

North Dakota enacted a law in line with the proposals of the biotechnology companies. Oregon, Utah and Virginia enacted laws but with sunset provisions that might take effect before any interchangeable drugs are approved. Florida enacted a law that does not require physician notification. Bills are pending in Massachusetts and Pennsylvania.

The bills would affect only a small percentage of biologic drugs that are dispensed through retail pharmacies, like Enbrel and Humira. Most biologic drugs, like those for cancer, are administered in doctors’ offices or hospitals.

The battle now shifts to whether biosimilars should have generic names different from those of the reference products. The World Health Organization oversees those names, though the F.D.A. is expected to decide for the United States.

Once again, biotechnology companies contend that this is necessary so that any safety problems that arise can be traced back to a particular manufacturer. The generic manufacturers say that if a biosimilar has a different name from the reference product, substitution by a pharmacist would not be allowed.