Workers at Poundland get a 'miserly' 10% discount as their Christmas bonus ... but they can't use it on chocolate or fizzy drinks

Christmas offer gives Poundland workers just 10p off each item

But it excludes festive treats such as fizzy drinks and chocolate

Bargain chain has just opened its 500th store with record sales



Workers at Poundland have slammed their Christmas bonus as 'miserly' after bosses offered them a 10 per cent store discount.



The offer gives them just 10p off each item at the bargain chain.



But remarkably it excludes festive treats such as fizzy drinks and chocolate - and expires on January 7.

'Miserly' offer: Workers at Poundland have slammed their Christmas bonus of a 10 per cent store discount

In contrast, staff at other major retailers, such as BHS and Marks & Spencer, are granted a 20 per cent discount throughout the year.

It comes after Poundland celebrated the opening its 500th store last month - with annual gross revenues of nearly £1billion.



Europe's biggest single-price value retailer has seen sales surge by 15 per cent in the last year alone as cash-strapped shoppers seek out bargains on the high street.



Bosses say they plan to more than double the number of UK stores to over 1,000 - with at least 50 earmarked for next year.



Issue: Rob Johnston, of the TUC (pictured), said the bonus was indicative of a wider problem in the economy

More than 12,000 Poundland workers were informed about their Christmas bonus by letter.



One employee - who does not wish to be named - said: 'It is totally disrespectful - a slap in the face for staff who have been coming in day in day out.

'A lot of people just ripped the letter up and put it in the bin.

'Poundland has just opened its 500th store and is one of the biggest shops in England. It is disgraceful.'



'Poundland is one of the biggest shops in England - it is disgraceful'

- Unnamed worker



The TUC's Ro b Johnston said the bonus was indicative of a wider problem in the economy.

'While the Government is talking about recovery, working people aren't seeing the benefits,' he said.



'In the run-up to Christmas, the least you can expect is for companies to reward staff and stop being miserly.

'This is not an isolated case and is indicative of a broader problem of the economy turning a corner, but workers not getting the benefit.'

However, a Poundland spokesman defended the bonus - claiming it would help make the festive season 'even more affordable'.



He said: 'To recognise the hard work and dedication of over 12,000 colleagues throughout the year and particularly during our busy festive period, Poundland is pleased to confirm that it has introduced a 10 per cent discount for employees across the business, to help make Christmas even more affordable.'