Posted: May. 5, 2015 10:44 pm Updated: May. 8, 2015 10:44 pm

HERALD STAFF REPORT

newsroom @njherald.com



U.S. Rep. Scott Garrett, R-5th Dist., will answer questions on Thursday at what is believed to be his first town hall since taking office in 2003.

Garrett, a Wantage resident, will make an opening statement and take questions from the audience.

The town hall will be held at the banquet hall at Lafayette House Restaurant, in Lafayette, from 7:30 to 8:30 p.m.

The New Jersey Herald, in an editorial board meeting with Garrett last fall, asked if he would be willing to hold a town hall meeting.

“Congressman Garrett said if we would come up with a venue and an agreed-upon date, he would be there,” Herald Executive Editor Bruce Tomlinson said. “We accepted the challenge and after some exchanges got it scheduled.”

Tomlinson said this event is an extension of the Herald's role of providing information to its audience.

“We are happy to be able to facilitate this first-ever town hall meeting for constituents from the 5th District to ask questions directly to their congressman and hope they take advantage of it,” Tomlinson said. “We also trust that after this inaugural outing, he will continue to schedule more such events on his own.”

Email questions

Those who are unable to attend the event but wish to submit questions for Garrett can do by emailing them to the New Jersey Herald by noon Thursday at newsroom@njherald.com. Submissions should include “town hall meeting” on the subject line and also include the person's name and town. Tomlinson said submitted questions will be worked in as time allows.

Garrett, 55, is not up for re-election until November 2016. He won a seventh term last fall over a Democrat, Roy Cho. He would face a challenge should he seek re-election in 2016, as The Record of Bergen County reported Monday that Josh Gottheimer of Wyckoff, who worked as a speechwriter for President Bill Clinton, raised more than $219,000 in March as he prepares to seek the Democratic nomination for the 5th District seat.

In a statement on Monday afternoon, Garrett said he was looking forward to what his office characterized as his first official town hall.

“There is nothing more important to me, as the representative of New Jersey's 5th District, than hearing from my constituents. I look forward to having a thoughtful discussion about the issues affecting our state and our country on Thursday night,” Garrett said in a statement.

Until now, Garrett has steered clear of the town hall format given a degree of national prominence by Gov. Chris Christie, in contrast to other House members from New Jersey.

On Monday, U.S. Rep. Leonard Lance, R-7th Dist., held his 33rd town hall since taking office since 2009, at the Berkeley Heights Municipal Building. Lance's spokesman, John Byers, said his town halls involve little to no cost because they use public facilities.

U.S. Rep. Rodney Frelinghuysen, R-11th Dist., whose district includes the five Sussex municipalities not represented by Garrett, held a town hall in Sparta in 2012.

Garrett's office previously stressed his preference for “telephone town halls,” not open to the general public, in which participants are invited to participate in a conference call-type discussion.

A former Assembly member, Garrett is the first Sussex County resident elected to Congress in 90 years.

Though his district includes much of Sussex County, and parts of Warren and Passaic, more than 70 percent of registered voters live in Bergen County.

Most conservative

He is considered the most conservative of New Jersey's six Republican House members.

In January, he backed an unsuccessful attempt to replace House Speaker John Boehner. Three weeks later, he and eight other Republicans announced the formation of the “House Freedom Caucus,” intended as an alternative to a much larger, 42-year-old group for House conservatives, the Republican Study Committee.

Garrett, in recent weeks, has endorsed establishing a veterans' clinic in either Sussex or Warren counties, as well as reiterating his criticism of the tax code and the Affordable Care Act.

He has opposed President Obama on his Iran policy, and removing Cuba from the state-sponsored terrorism list.

The Garrett town hall meeting will occur on what is shaping up as a busy night on the local political scene.

In Blairstown, all six Assembly candidates in the 24th District, including four Republicans and two Democrats in the June 2 primary, are expected to attend a forum organized by Mark Quick, himself a former Assembly candidate. Also on Thursday, the Franklin Taxpayers Association will host a forum for candidates for mayor and council in the borough.