Longmont animal control officer Diane Milford carries a cat taken from an evacuated home across a flooded Hayden Court on Saturday afternoon. ( LEWIS GEYER )

LONGMONT -- Diana Smith waited at a police barricade Saturday afternoon hoping for word about her home and the souls inside.

She left for work Thursday as she normally would and found later that day she could not return. She waited nervously until animal control officers returned from a trek to her house on the 800 block of Hayden Court with her 16-year-old cat Max and a large cage with her parakeets, Mr. Peeps and Chirps.

"Oh Max," she called out, when she saw her gray and white cat. "Hey Max!"

Longmont animal control, police officer Sara Aerne and firefighter Nate Rae spent their day heading into heavily flooded and evacuated neighborhoods to retrieve pets left behind. Hayden Court was among the hardest hit areas with a river raging through the subdivision's streets, peeling up asphalt and leaving vehicles stranded.

"Isn't it wonderful that they are doing this?" Smith said. "I am so blessed."

She fought back tears at the help she already has received as an evacuee. She stayed with a friend and heard that her church group plans to help her recover her home when the waters recede. When officers went into her home, they found it was not flooded even though the river is at the edge of her driveway.

Aerne also retrieved her medications and other medical supplies she needed from her home. Returning with Max and the parakeets required officers to carry the cages through the moving waters, which were about 2 feet deep.

Advertisement

Animal control officer Robin Breffle said the team rescued dogs, a kitten, geckos and birds Saturday morning. As word of the service trickled out into the community, more and more calls came in from residents who wanted to reunite with pets.

Three cats were pulled from a home near Smith's and reunited with their owner at the same barricade.

Breffle also arranged for hay to be provided to a man who has a horse and mini burros along South Fordham Street. He remained at his home with the animals.

Not all of the finds were happy ones for the pet rescuers.

They checked on chickens in two coops at a property on the 700 block of South Fordham Street and learned that many had drowned and were in the waters outside the coops.

There were too many survivors to evacuate, so Rae and the animal control officers gave them fresh drinking water from a bottle and secured their coops.

The animal control crew had been working 14- to 15-hour days since Thursday but were happy on Saturday to go into homes to retrieve beloved pets.

Pierrette J. Shields can be reached at 303-684-5273 or at pshields@times-call.com.