Republicans won’t pick a nominee to take on Long Island Rep. Tim Bishop until late June, but Democrats are already trying to corner New York State Senator Lee Zeldin, who is vying for the GOP nomination.

As with Republicans hopefuls around the country, Democrats are hitting Zeldin for waffling on Rep. Paul Ryan’s budget proposal.

Zeldin won't say how he’d vote the Ryan budget. He side-stepped the question in an interview Wednesday, saying Bishop should offer his own plan to balance the budget.

“I would like to talk about what is good and not good about both to figure out what the best plan is for next year,” Zeldin said.

Bishop this spring voted against the Ryan plan and for a Democratic alternative.

The issue is one example of a pattern playing out in contested House races around the country: National Democrats want to attack Republicans for supporting Ryan’s plan to cut Medicare and a host of other programs. If Republicans decline to give them the chance, Democrats attack them for ducking the question.

For Republicans challengers running in close districts like Bishop’s NY-1 steering clear of the Ryan budget looks like the politically wise choice. Those challengers want to run against Obamacare and bad votes their opponent took. They can take advantage of their lack of incumbency by avoiding controversial issues Congress considered. Endorsing Ryan’s proposal hands Democrats an easy line of attack.

But Zeldin, an Army veteran who served in Iraq, has talked expansively about the importance of “personal courage” on the stump.

The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee argues he is not showing much by declining to weigh in on the Ryan budget and other matters.

The DCCC on Wednesday announced they were sending Zeldin a version of the “badge of courage” awarded to the Cowardly Lion in “The Wizard of Oz.” They said it will help him “find the courage to take a position on the Ryan Budget and other critical issues impacting Long Island.”

“What’s taking him so long to decide?” a spokesman for the Democratic campaign arm said. “There’s only one answer: Zeldin is either woefully uninformed, willfully ignorant or a coward.”

The DCCC also released an $8.99 Amazon receipt for the purchase and photo-shopped image of Zeldin in a Cowardly Lion outfit.

Zeldin wouldn’t take the bait interview Wednesday, repeatedly responding to questions about his views by focusing on Bishop.

“It’s the height of irony and hypocrisy the Democratic operatives in Washington would be doing this given that I have repeatedly called on the Congressman to release his plan to balance the budget, so we can have a debate about what is good and not good about the Ryan budget and the Bishop budget,” Zeldin said.

“He is always trying to deflect and spin to try to make every election about someone else,” he said.