WASHINGTON – Former New Orleans Health Commissioner Karen DeSalvo should get a confirmation vote for her nomination to be an assistant secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services when the Senate reconvenes in September after the August recess.

The Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pension Committee reported her to the Senate floor during a meeting Wednesday.

DeSalvo, a former internal medicine physician, was the health commissioner for the city of New Orleans from 2011-2014.

She has been serving as acting assistant secretary of HHS since last fall. She also has held the post of National Coordinator for Health Information Technology at HHS. She's likely to give up that post if she wins Senate confirmation.

Obama nominated her for the assistant secretary post in May.

Committee Chairman Lamar Alexander, R-Tenn., won unanimous consent from the committee to advance her nomination, when it became apparent most senators would be going home following the last vote on Wednesday, making a Thursday meeting problematic. He made the motion "subject to nominee's commitment to respond to requests to appear and testify before any duly constituted committee of the Senate."

Among the Thursday committee meetings postponed because the Senate decided to recess for the summer on Wednesday, instead of the originally scheduled Thursday, was a Senate Judiciary Committee session. It was to include a vote on Sen. David Vitter's bill to bar some federal funding to so-called sanctuary cities – communities that don't reported undocumented immigrants to federal Immigration and Enforcement agency officials.

Vitter, a Louisiana Republican, said he'll try again to move the measure when the Senate returns from its recess.

"Sanctuary cities have posed a huge law enforcement problem for a while -- but recently the nation was shocked to learn that this is in fact a life or death matter," Vitter said. "Every day these sanctuary city policies remain, American lives and communities are at risk. I'll continue to push my commonsense legislation to punish sanctuary cities to make clear that ignoring federal immigration laws will not be tolerated."

The issue heated up after a 32-year old woman was shot and killed July 1 in San Francisco, allegedly by a man deported five times. San Francisco is a sanctuary city and refused a request by Immigration and Enforcement officials to be notified when the alleged killer, Francisco Lopez Sanchez, was released on a pending drug charge. City prosecutors decided not to pursue the decade old case, but didn't notify federal officials of Sanchez' April release.

He's allegedly shot Kathryn Steinle, 32, 2 ½ months after his release from detention.

The House passed a bill July 23rd cutting of some federal funding for sanctuary cities, which includes New Orleans. Vitter is hoping for a vote on his bill before the end of the year,.

Vitter moved ahead with a scheduled round-table discussion Thursday by his Senate Small Business Committee to mark the 10th anniversary of Hurricane Katrina. He had a discussion with representatives of the Small Business Administration, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and the American Red Cross, and others.

"I witnessed firsthand after Hurricane Katrina both the endearing strength of our communities and the devastating failures of our government in delivering recovery assistance," Vitter said. "While businesses came together, willing and able to deliver vital relief, they were turned down by the bureaucracy of government agencies. That is why we are here today – to identify remaining challenges and figure out what needs further oversight and legislative action to make sure that small businesses aren't left without support after major disasters."

An earlier version of this story reported incorrectly that the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee had not voted on the DeSalvo nomination. The scheduled Thursday vote was listed as postponed on the committee's website, but did not account for Alexander's unanimous consent request vote the day before.