Did the mayoral inauguration ceremony signal the end of “A Tale of Two Cities” and the start of “Lost In Space?”

Three of the speakers that day — the Rev. Fred Lucas, Jr., Letitia James and Ramya Ramana — spoke as though we are living 300 years in the past in a slave state instead of New York State.

Take the Sanitation Department chaplain Lucas Jr. — or better yet, leave him. He stood on the podium with the city’s first biracial first family, as well as with Letitia James, the first female African-American official elected citywide, and all he could see was a plantation full of slaves.

Hey Fred, it’s 2014, do you know what year it is?

If Lucas was insulting, James, the new Public Advocate, a woman I’ve always admired for her fiery sense of justice, was all smoke and no flame.

Not only did she inexplicably bring dressed up-for-the-cameras homeless child Dasani Coates up on stage like a house pet, but the kid’s mother, Chanel Coates, was sitting in the audience in the freezing cold without a coat, clad in a hoody sweatshirt. Hello?

SPEAKERS AT MAYOR DE BLASIO'S INAUGURATION PAINT PICTURE OF DIVIDED CITY

Finally there was Ramana, the youth poet laureate, who declared in her ancient wisdom, “No more brownstones and brown skin playing tug-of-war,” apparently forgetting the white- and brown-skinned de Blasios had just taken the subway from their brownstone.

Missing from the festivities was Lis Smith, de B’s transition spokeswoman who is not a bigot and in fact is so fair-minded that she took a depraved, disgraced, disgruntled loser of an ex-guv Idiot Spitzer as her lover. Talk about smart women, really stupid choices! (Smith’s former boyfriend was Missouri state senator, same-named Jeff Smith, who went to jail for election fraud.)

Smith missed the festivities because she was “on vacation.” Who takes a vacation from a two-month gig? What kind of vacation would she take if she had a full-time job?

But you’ll be happy to know that is no longer a worry -- an insider at de Blasio’s small, friends-and-family New Year’s Eve inaugural bash at Bar Toto in Brooklyn told me Smith is now about as welcome at City Hall, as well, her boyfriend. ... Before she took up with Spitzer, all that stood between Smith and a permanent City Hall gig was her insistence on a loftier title than the one she was being offered.

But hey, who wouldn’t give up a career with a rising star to crash to earth with a failed steamroller, baby?

Karolina Wojtasik/A&E

DUCK DIE-NASTY

Because $400 million a year from merchandising duck calls, hats, and dainty tea cups isn’t enough, the Swamp Family Robertson hunted for something else that would better benefit their big-shot status. And they found it: Guns.

And once again, A&E is capitulating even though it isn't getting a piece of the semiautomatic action.

Who else on TV would keep their gig while being publicly anti-gay (homosexuality is bestiality), racist (blacks were happy picking cotton) and pro-child sexual abuse (nail a bride at 15, when she’s young enough “to pick your ducks” -- as opposed to what? Pick your cotton?).

DUCK DYNASTY’ FAMILY LAUNCHES LINE OF CAMOUFLAGE GUNS

Lesser beings with lower ratings would have been thrown out with last week’s catfish. Think Paula Deen, who lost everything when a white employee sued her for racial discrimination.

In an ad for their line of family guns, big daddy Phil intones, “Do you know what makes me happy, ladies and gentlemen? To blow a mallard drake’s head smooth off.”

So how happy would he be to use the guns to hunt gays, disgruntled black cotton pickers and 15-year-old girls who don’t want to be married off? Stay tuned. Or don’t.

THE ROOT OF ALL MONEY

The folks who idolize money are threatening to keep it from the Catholic Church because Pope Francis recently denounced the rich for idolizing money instead of using it to serve others. Rich guy Ken Langone, who is spearheading the reconstruction of St. Patrick’s Cathedral, raised this concern to Timothy Cardinal Dolan, who promptly reported to CNN: “The pope loves poor people. He also loves rich people.” Thing is? The pope would just love the rich more if they gave more of their riches to the poor. But St. Pat’s doesn’t qualify as “poor” -- the last diocesan estimate available puts its net worth at $275,900,000 in cash, properties and holdings.

CBS Photo Archive/CBS via Getty Images Dear John Miller, now that you’re the anti-terrorist boss, would it be at all possible to make the following people disappear into obscurity?

Jason Kempin/Getty Images for Clear Channel Britney Spears. Her $15 million-a-year 'Piece of Me' Vegas show doesn’t include a piece of her voice.

DEAR JOHN MILLER:

Now that you’re the anti-terrorist boss, would it be at all possible to make the following people disappear into obscurity? No, they aren’t technically terrorists, but they are so overexposed that they are terrifying.

1) The Kardashian women, who are decimating the adult male population, one poor schmuck at a time. In 2013 alone, Lamar Odom became a crackhead and Bruce Jenner became a woman.

2) Miley Cyrus. Seriously, what’s left to see? Her dental records?

3) Beyonce & Jay Z: He sells $700 ski masks at a racist establishment and she used audio from the shuttle disaster in her song, “XO.” Let’s not even discuss the whole tacky Jesus business.

4) Britney Spears. Her $15 million-a-year “Piece of Me” Vegas show doesn’t include a piece of her voice.

5) Sen. Ted Cruz, The anti-immigration senator Canuck-American citizen held the Senate hostage for 21 hours to protest Obamacare, which, ironically, uses broken-down Canadian software.

6) Eliot Spitzer and Anthony Weiner, who refuse to go away.

Heidi Gutman/ABC 'GMA' host Robin Roberts, who bravely survived a horrific bout with cancer, last week did something equally courageous for an American icon, at least. She came out.

OUT & ABOUT

“GMA” host Robin Roberts, who bravely survived a horrific bout with cancer, last week did something equally courageous for an American icon, at least. She came out.

On Facebook, Roberts thanked her health care providers, her family, friends and yes, her long-time girlfriend, Amber Laign, a massage therapist who works with people recovering from accidents.

ROBIN ROBERTS, GIRLFRIEND AMBER LAIGN'S 10-YEAR RELATIONSHIP WAS NO SECRET TO FAMILY, FRIENDS, COLLEAGUES

Although there were the expected ugly comments on social media, Roberts also received a congratulatory tweet from First Lady Michelle Obama, which was especially significant in a year when ugly remarks from folks like Phil Robertson made the news and were ultimately overlooked.

FILIPPO MONTEFORTE/AFP/Getty Images 'The pope loves poor people. He also loves rich people.' Thing is? The pope would just love the rich more if they gave more of their riches to the poor.

BEST DRESSED POPE

Esquire Magazine jumped on Pope Francis’ man-mag bandwagon by naming him “Best Dressed Man of the Year.”

Sure, Francis generally avoids the gold hat and robes thing that makes popes look like Elton John in concert, but citing a man for his taste in clothes when he wears clerical attire is like naming a woman in a burka as most chic.

LIS AIN'T NO LIZ

It has come to my attention that people have confused political flack/Spitzer lover Lis Smith with my pal, columnist Liz Smith.

This seems impossible because, for one thing, Liz Smith has never worn a backless cocktail dress to her family’s afternoon Christmas dinner. Smith the first’s fashionista pals would have beat her senseless for such a style crime.