Mitch McConnell is eyeing a major breakthrough on a multiyear highway bill that many in Congress doubted could be done. But his colleagues vying for the presidency see something else: one last chance to steal the spotlight on the Senate floor before the first GOP debate in August.

Clumped together in the single digits in recent national polls, GOP Sens. Rand Paul of Kentucky, Marco Rubio of Florida, Ted Cruz of Texas and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina sense an opportunity to get some much-needed traction in the must-pass legislation. And they’re seizing it, with plans to tack on controversial proposals — or potentially hold up the entire bill if they don’t get what they want.

Story Continued Below

Paul is pushing an amendment to defund Planned Parenthood precisely at the moment the women’s health group is under siege for videos showing officials discussing harvesting organs from aborted fetuses. The Kentucky lawmaker, of course, is well practiced in the art of taking over the Senate floor to promote his causes, most recently forcing the PATRIOT Act to lapse temporarily.

Graham is forcefully advocating revival of the defunct Export-Import Bank, which Rubio has barnstormed the country denouncing.

And Cruz is urging the Senate to yank away employer contributions for congressional staffers’ health plans under Obamacare, an idea pushed for years by Sen. David Vitter (R-La.) to the annoyance of many lawmakers. Cruz also boasts plenty of experience grinding Congress to a halt, most famously (or infamously) forcing the government to shut down for two weeks in 2013 as he tried unsuccessfully to defund Obamacare.

Asked whether he would disrupt the highway bill over his demand to kill those Obamacare contributions, Cruz responded that it has everything to do with whether Senate Majority Leader McConnell (R-Ky.) will allow a vote on Ex-Im, reviled by all the presidential aspirants in the Senate except for Graham.

“It depends whether leadership tries to reauthorize the Export-Import Bank,” Cruz said in an interview. “If leadership wants to open this bill up to nongermane amendments that are unrelated to the highway bill, there are a great many topics we should discuss.”

Four hours later, McConnell told reporters that Ex-Im will indeed get a vote. And so the presidential jockeying over the highway bill was officially on. By the end of the day, Cruz said he would file amendments on Obamacare, Planned Parenthood, Iran, gun rights and immigration.

If the 2016 contenders play it right, they could generate a moment in the national spotlight. And that, in turn, could be the ticket to a bump in the polls right before the first debate, which requires candidates to be in the Top 10 to get on stage.

“We have people who are trying to bust out and get some attention on a national level. It’s just a dynamic we are aware of and have to do our best to manage,” said Sen. John Thune of South Dakota, the GOP’s chief message man.

First, the Senate needs to get to the amendment process. The first procedural vote on the bill failed on Tuesday over complaints that Democrats didn’t have time to read the bill. Paul and Cruz also voted against even proceeding to the bill. But that was expected to be a temporary setback. The Senate is likely to take up the bill again promptly, perhaps on Wednesday.

Democrats said they‘re wary of giving the GOP’s White House hopefuls too much oxygen.

“It’s pretty clear to everyone that these candidates are looking for a headline in the newspaper,” said Senate Minority Whip Dick Durbin (D-Ill.). “We want to try to focus on solving problems rather than creating campaign opportunities.”

The transportation bill is a rare opportunity for members of Congress to force the issue on their preferred topic or topics. If they manage to get an amendment attached, it’s much more likely to become law than if it’s attached to bills not linked to a deadline. That could force leaders to accommodate individual members’ amendment demands, even if they have nothing to do with highways, simply because delay isn’t an option with just 10 days until the Highway Trust Fund runs dry.

Of the four Republican senators running for president, Graham has struggled the most raising money and gaining traction in the polls. But he has the best chance to bring home a win: At least 65 senators support reviving Ex-Im, and most of them are Democrats who have major sway over which amendments get votes. There is likely also majority support in the House to resuscitate the bank, which expired at the end of June.

Yet that concession to Graham and Democrats by McConnell, who’s long promised a vote on Ex-Im, will infuriate other Republicans. Earlier this month, Rubio called Ex-Im “a conduit for taxpayer-subsidized corporate welfare.” Cruz suggested that McConnell and House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) struck a secret deal during June’s trade debate to revive the agency that helps finance credit deals for exporters.

“Leadership in both houses assured there was no corrupt bargain, there was no corrupt deal over the Export-Import Bank. And this week we will see if those assurances were accurate or not. I hope they were,” Cruz said Tuesday.

GOP leaders and aides said they planned to allow amendments to the highway bill beyond just Ex-Im, though any one senator can stymie those attempts. Paul is already fundraising off his demands to get a vote on slashing the $528.4 million in government funding that Planned Parenthood receives each year, though he wouldn’t say how far he will go to get that vote on the transportation bill.

Getty

“We’re going to do what we can,” Paul said Tuesday. “We’re going to try.”

The lead Democratic negotiator on the highway bill, Sen. Barbara Boxer of California, said in an interview that she wouldn’t necessarily seek to block giving Paul a vote on his Planned Parenthood amendment. She said she believed it would simply fail if it were called up for a vote.

“It’s a nonstarter. I can’t believe that they’d put an abortion issue on a highway bill,” Boxer said.

Yet linking women’s health care to a highway bill isn’t a new tactic for Republicans. Sen. Roy Blunt of Missouri pushed for weeks to do so in 2012 with an amendment that would have allowed employers to deny coverage of contraception coverage. The amendment ultimately failed.

Now a member of leadership in the majority, Blunt said McConnell will do his best to accommodate the GOP’s own members who are now making a similar effort.

“The traditions of the Senate that Sen. McConnell is trying to restore is that every member can eventually get a vote on everything they want to get a vote on no matter what the topic of the day,” Blunt said. “Some of those are going to occur on this bill.”