13 Incompetent Failures in the Obama Administration

The incompetence of the Obama administration has had its shining moments -- the Obamacare rollout, the Benghazi coverup, and Hillary Clinton's email server prominent among them. This month, a New York Times profile of Deputy National Security Adviser Ben Rhodes has again reminded the American people of the failures of the current president.

Arkansas Senator Tom Cotton said such scandal is the natural result of Barack Obama's staffing choices. This "is what happens when you put van drivers and campaign flaks and failed novelists in charge of foreign policy and national security," he declared.

Cotton was barely scratching the surface. Throughout his eight years, President Obama has elevated to high office a long list of incompetent people, or people who revealed themselves to be utterly unsuited for the public office assigned to them.

Here is PJ Media's list of the 13 most egregious examples of failure in the Obama administration. This is by no means an exclusive list, and who knows what our president will cook up in his last few months.

13. Benjamin J. Rhodes

Deputy National Security Adviser For Strategic Communications Ben Rhodes (AP Photo/Pablo Martinez Monsivais, File)

Ben Rhodes, a speechwriter without any foreign policy educational experience, military experience, or international experience, became Obama's deputy national security adviser for strategic communications and speechwriting. The New York Times titled its profile "The Aspiring Novelist Who Became Obama's Foreign-Policy Guru."

As "master shaper and retailer of Obama's foreign policy narratives," Rhodes revealed his contempt for Congress, the press, and the public, along with his manipulation of the media on the Iran nuclear deal. As PJ Media's own Claudia Rosett noted, the article was "a case study of his 'narrative' of lies concocted to grease a path for Obama's signature foreign policy achievement -- the unpopular, murky, amorphous and deeply dangerous Iran nuclear deal." She pertinently asks why Obama hasn't fired Rhodes yet -- what a great question.

12. Tommy Vietor

Tommy Vietor went from press van driver to National Security Council spokesman and special assistant to the president. In a 2014 interview, Vietor let slip that he considered the spin around the September 11, 2012 attacks in Benghazi (you know, when the administration told us a terror attack was a protest about a video) "the most mundane thing," and admitted that he might have been the person who changed the word "attacks" to "demonstrations" in the official administration talking points.

Next Page: Eric Shinseki (Veterans Affairs) and Kathleen Sebelius (Health and Human Services)