In this Aug. 6, 2014 photo, Dr. Faran Bokhari, head of the trauma department at Cook Countyís Stroger Hospital in Chicago, second from right, and Dr. Jared Bernard, a lieutenant commander and trauma surgeon in the U.S. Navy, third from left, work together during surgery of a gunshot victim. (Photo: Nam Y. Huh, AP)

Lower-income insurance shoppers can slash their share of healthcare costs to an average of $14 in co-payments when they visit their primary care doctors, and the percentage of costs they have to share for emergency room visits can be as low as 19%, according to a report out today from the Kaiser Family Foundation.

As the deadline for Obamacare open enrollment nears on Sunday, the Kaiser report and a federal study out earlier this week on premium tax credits show how little many lower-income consumers would have to pay out of pocket for coverage.

The earlier report from the Department of Health and Human Services found advanced premium tax credits paid directly to insurance companies for lower income consumers cut their premiums, on average, to $105.

.

Those two reports should help convince leery consumers that the cost of coverage may be less than they expect, and the cost of not having it – including tax penalties and health issues – far higher.

"If we want people to have coverage. it has to be something they can afford to have," says Gary Claxton, a Kaiser vice president and co-author of the new cost-sharing report. "Most of the people who were uninsured before, even if they signed up, would have trouble paying for the care."

Cost sharing includes deductibles that have to be paid by consumers before insurance kicks in, as well as co-payments and co-insurance. Co-payments are a set amount consumers pay at the time of appointments; co-insurance is the percentage patients pay for certain services, such as hospitalization.

.

How cost sharing subsidies stack up:

• For plans with a combined deductible for medical and prescription expenses, costs range from $229 for those eligible for plans with the most generous coverage of 94% of costs to $2,559 for standard unsubsidized plans.

• For primary care office visits, the average co-payment amount ranges from $14 for the 94% plans to $28 for plans without cost sharing reductions.

•The average out-of-pocket limit for single coverage ranges from $879 for the 94% plans to $5,824 for standard plans.

Kaiser notes that those eligible for any of the plans with cost sharing reductions -- those earning between 100% and 250% of the federal poverty level -- can save thousands of dollars if they have serious ongoing or onetime medical needs.

The federal poverty level is $11,770 for an individual and $24,250 for a family of four.

.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1E0DBF4