WASHINGTON, Dec. 8, 2015 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- Crowell & Moring LLP today announced that Joseph M. Miller, the former general counsel of America's Health Insurance Plans (AHIP), joined the firm as a partner in its Antitrust and Health Care groups.

Based in the firm's Washington, D.C. office, Miller advises clients on a broad range of health care and antitrust issues, including health care reform risk and regulatory issues arising under the Affordable Care Act (ACA), mergers and acquisitions, joint ventures, and developing corporate compliance policies.

"Joe is an exceptional lawyer," said Angela B. Styles, chair of Crowell & Moring. "He enhances our Antitrust and Health Care groups and brings with him exemplary experience as a trusted advisor for both strategic transactions and health care regulatory issues."

As the former general counsel of AHIP, the national trade association of the health insurance industry, Miller was at the forefront of critical legal, regulatory, and policy issues facing the health industry. He supervised a team of attorneys on all aspects of AHIP's legal work, including policy development, strategic advice, and general corporate work. Miller also served as AHIP's policy lead on cybersecurity.

Before joining AHIP, Miller served as assistant chief of the Department of Justice (DOJ) Antitrust Division's Litigation 1 Section, where he was responsible for antitrust enforcement in the health industry and other sectors. Miller spearheaded the Division's competition advocacy program in the health care sector, providing advice and testimony to state and federal government officials. Miller's previous experience also includes serving as lead attorney on DOJ's antitrust investigations in multiple industries, including paper products, appliances, beer, newspapers, and steel. He started his legal career as a trial attorney in the Federal Trade Commission's Bureau of Competition.

"Joe's deep industry knowledge will strengthen our preeminent health care antitrust and regulatory practices," said Arthur N. Lerner, leader of the firm's Health Care Industry Initiative. "His experience — first as a government antitrust enforcer and more recently as an industry association executive during a time of momentous industry change — will be extremely valuable to clients navigating critical business strategy issues, particularly those involving government enforcement, internal compliance, new regulations, or broader health care policy issues."

"This is an exciting opportunity to join a firm that already has a deep well of expertise in the areas of health care and antitrust," said Miller. "I look forward to expanding the firm's capabilities and the opportunity to work with Crowell & Moring's many talented lawyers, serving health clients as well as clients in other fields."

Miller earned his J.D. from George Mason University School of Law and his B.A. from Emory University. He is admitted to practice in the District of Columbia. He is a member of both the American Health Lawyers Association and the American Bar Association's Antitrust Section.

Crowell & Moring LLP is an international law firm with approximately 500 lawyers representing clients in litigation and arbitration, regulatory, and transactional matters. The firm is internationally recognized for its representation of Fortune 500 companies in high-stakes litigation, as well as its ongoing commitment to pro bono service and diversity. The firm has offices in Washington, D.C., New York, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Orange County, Anchorage, London, and Brussels. Visit Crowell & Moring online at http://www.crowell.com.

Contact: An Pham

202.508.8740

apham@crowell.com

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150211/175008LOGO

SOURCE Crowell & Moring LLP