Courtesy of Getty Images

Tom Brady is not letting ‘Deflate-Gate’ go without a fight! The New England Patriots’ quarterback appealed his 4-game suspension on June 23, arguing his innocence in the football cheating scandal for nearly 11 hours!

In the latest chapter “Deflate-Gate,” Tom Brady, 37, appealed the punishment the NFL handed to the Superbowl Champion for his role in the scandal that rocked the football world. With his lawyer, Jeffrey Kessler, Tom met with the higher-ups with the NFL to argue that his suspension was unfair and he should be allowed to play!

Tom and Jeffrey argued with NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell and representatives from the NFL Player’s Union for close to 11 hours on June 23, reports Time magazine. While the exact details of what was said during this marathon appeal are not known, Tom’s lawyer reportedly said, “I think we put in a very compelling case.”

Tom and his lawyer said that the evidence collected by NFL investigator Theodore Wells doesn’t prove that Tom violated any NFL rules, and that the punishment issued to Tom is harsher than what has been handed out for similar violations. Tom was suspended for 4 games and his team was both fined $1 million dollars and docked a pair of draft picks.

During the appeal, Tom was reportedly his “greatest ally,” sources told ESPN’s Adam Schefter. The New England Patriots’ quarterback was “genuine,” “earnest” and very “persuasive.” Tom addressed every issue raised by Wells’s 200+ page report. That’s probably why it took nearly 11 hours to get through it all!

Now, it’s a waiting game. Tom needs to be patient and hope that his appeal changed Roger Goodell’s mind. However, the Patriots’ training camp starts in just five weeks! The team needs to know ASAP if they need to know if Tom’s eligible to play quarterback at the start of the season or if they need to start someone else!

Tom isn’t letting his suspension stop him from having a good time. He got down with his (awkward) bad self on the dance floor during the New England Patriots’ Super Bowl ring ceremony on June 14. Though Tom is considered one of the greatest quarterbacks of all time, he is a bit dorky when it comes to dancing. He pulled off some interesting moves during the celebration, all in the view of Wiz Khalifa!

Do you think Tom will win his appeal, HollywoodLifers? Or will he have to serve his suspension?

— Jason Brow

JavaScript is required to load the comments.