'It's a very big problem industry wide'

Bee enthusiasts are hoping to secure pledges from Boulder County businesses selling plants and gardening-related items to avoid use of neonicotinoids, or products that have been treated with the systemic pesticides. (Courtesy photo )

First Melody-Catalpa, now all of Boulder County. Bee Safe Boulder, the group behind the first bee-safe neighborhood in the state, is at it again.

Molly Greacen, one of Bee safe Boulder's founders, said the group is trying to contact every business in Boulder County that sells plants and/or gardening-related products and get them to sign a pledge to stop selling neonicotinoids a group of insecticides that cause neurological damage to bees, and plants that have been treated with neonicotinoids.

Bee Safe Boulder's goal is to push plant wholesalers to stop using neonicotinoids by having businesses promise to not buy wholesale plants that have been treated with neonicotinoids.

A recent study by the Harvard School of Public Health linked neonicotinoids and the collapse of honey bee colonies.

Greacen said Bee Safe Boulder is pushing this issue now because most businesses that deal in plants order their plants for the next year around this time.

"It's a very big problem industry wide," Greacen said.

Greacen said she hopes if businesses stop buying plants that have been treated with neonicotinoids, then growers will stop treating their plants with them.

Greacen said Bee Safe Boulder doesn't know what kind of response they will get from local businesses.

So far Harlequin's Gardens and Table Mesa Hardware, both in Boulder, have agreed to the pledge, Greacen said.

"They've really stepped up to be leaders in the community," Greacen said.

Harlequin's Gardens confirmed their commitment to not using neonicotinoids on its website.

Representatives of Table Mesa Hardware said they could neither confirm nor deny taking the Bee Safe pledge.

"We want everyone to be aware of the problem and talking to their stores," Greacen said.

Steve Wilke, a marketing and communication specialist for McGuckin Hardware, said McGuckin has not received any correspondence from Bee Safe Boulder, but would be open to the possibility of removing neonicotinoids.

"It's definitely something we would consider," Wilke said.

Wilke formerly worked in McGuckin's garden department, and said he has been pushing for the store to have neonicotinoids removed since 2008, but store management has been hesitant to have neonicotinoids removed.

"The products sold and we had to compete," Wilke said.

Michael Morris, a manager at the Flower Bin in Longmont, said the Flower Bin had not heard from Bee Safe Boulder either, but would consider the group's request. Morris said it would be up to Flower Bin owner Don Weakland.

The Flower Bin grows most of the plants it sells at a farm in Platteville. No neonicotinoids are used at the farm, Morris said.

Morris said it's hard to tell if wholesale plants have been treated with neonicotinoids.

"We expect them not to be. We can't guarantee that they're not," Morris said." We don't knowingly sell plants that have been treated with neonics," Morris said.

"There's so many types of products you can use for insects" that are less harmful to bees than neonicotinoids, Greacen said. "It's just a very toxic system."