Parents of students at Arapahoe High School have raised legitimate issues about the school’s lack of communication about December’s shooting and whether safety issues have been addressed.

Even more to the point are questions about the Arapahoe County sheriff leading a criminal investigation into the Dec. 13 attack when one of the sheriff’s deputies is a central figure in an incident that apparently led up to the shooting.

Authorities say months before high school senior Karl Pierson stormed the school and shot fellow classmate Claire Davis, he had been disciplined for making a verbal threat against his speech and debate coach.

Davis later died in a hospital and Pierson committed suicide in the school’s library.

Parents say the school resource officer, who is a sheriff’s deputy, would have been the one to deal with Pierson’s threat. If true, that presents a troubling conflict of interest for the sheriff’s office in conducting an unbiased review. At the least, it presents the appearance of a problem.

In a story by The Denver Post’s Zahira Torres, one parent suggested that an outside agency should conduct an investigation.

Yet Sheriff David Walcher, who recently took over the office from Grayson Robinson, dismissed the idea almost immediately.

“We are doing the investigation, period,” he said. “I don’t need someone to come in and do our investigation.”

Walcher said his office will work with a third party to review the investigation after it is complete, including the events that led up to the shooting, law enforcement’s response and any lessons or changes that can be made.

Law enforcement’s response that day appeared to be fast and heroic. But Coloradans have seen what can happen when incidents like this aren’t given an independent review.

The Jefferson County Sheriff’s Office conducted its own investigation after the 1999 Columbine High attack. The review was roundly and rightly criticized for ignoring key points — including the length of time it took law enforcement to reach the victims.

Then-Gov. Bill Owens’ commission found the sheriff’s office did not adequately respond to the massacre and had ignored warning signs involving the shooters.

Why risk another such controversy?

It would serve everyone to have an outside agency conduct an independent investigation given the role at the school played by the Arapahoe County Sheriff’s Office.