I watched the Kemp Forum on CSPAN over the weekend. The forum was meant to be a summit about poverty for Republican presidential candidates hosted by Paul Ryan. South Carolina governor Nikki Haley began the summit with a short speech that praised Paul Ryan for finally passing a bill through Congress that would repeal Obamacare (a law that has extended health insurance to millions of poor people though Medicaid).

Once the actual forum started, the candidates vowed to reduce the role of the federal government, instead assigning responsibilities to states. Which is to say: there is no plan, only an abstract procedural preference for state delegation.

State Delegation Is Bad

The preference for state delegation is mostly cynical. It's generally adopted by politicians who don't like welfare and who know that handing welfare to the states is a great way to kill it.

The classical example of this is TANF, where a delegation to the states led to the raiding of the funds for non-welfare purposes and led to a steady fall in the funding for the program over the years.

More recently, however, we have the case of Medicaid. A delegation of that to the states has had the predictable consequence of many conservative states refusing to provide health insurance to their poorest residents.

This is especially true in the deep south where anti-black racism looms large. A 2013 report from the New York Times found that this particular pattern of Medicaid expansion refusal means that two-thirds of the uninsured poor black people in the country will continue to be left out of coverage even after Obamacare. Some additional states have signed on to the Medicaid expansion since the 2013 report, though the deep south, where the concentration of poor blacks is the highest, continues to hold out.

Given the political realities we live under, state delegation inevitably means mistreatment of the poor in conservative states, and mistreatment of the black poor especially.

One Size Fits All

The forum participants consistently defended their abstract procedural preference for state delegation by saying that one-size-fits-all policy is bad. But, when it comes to poverty at least, this is wrong. The reasons people have low (market) incomes under capitalism are the same everywhere and even the same across time.

Consider this famous quote from social Darwinist Herbert Spencer's 1851 book Social Statics:

The poverty of the incapable, the distresses that come upon the imprudent, the starvation of the idle, and those shoulderings aside of the weak by the strong, which leave so many “in shallows and in miseries,” are the decrees of a large, far-seeing benevolence. It seems hard that an unskilfulness which with all his efforts he cannot overcome, should entail hunger upon the artizan. It seems hard that a labourer incapacitated by sickness from competing with his stronger fellows, should have to bear the resulting privations. It seems hard that widows and orphans should be left to struggle for life or death. Nevertheless, when regarded not separately, but in connection with the interests of universal humanity, these harsh fatalities are seen to be full of the highest beneficence—the same beneficence which brings to early graves the children of diseased parents, and singles out the low-spirited, the intemperate, and the debilitated as the victims of an epidemic.

Spencer highlights the unemployed, the sick, the disabled, the widowed, and the orphaned as the chronic sufferers of poverty. And indeed, that's why we have welfare benefits for all of these groups of people: unemployment benefits, health insurance, disability benefits, and survivor's insurance.

In 1934, I.M. Rubinow identified as the Four Horseman of the Apocalypse:

accident, illness, old age, loss of a job. These are the four horsemen that ride roughshod over lives and fortunes of millions of wage workers of every modern industrial community.

Just like Spencer before him, Rubinow points at disability, sickness, and unemployment. He also adds old age. And indeed we have welfare benefits for that as well: public old-age pensions through Social Security.

In 1969, the President's Commission on Income Maintenance Programs issued a report titled "Poverty Amid Plenty: the American Paradox." Here was its take on poverty:

Our economic and social structure virtually guarantees poverty for millions of Americans. Unemployment and underemployment are basic facts of American life. The risks of poverty are common to millions more who depend on earnings for their income. We all grow old. We all can fall victim to unemployment caused by technological change or industrial relocation. Any of us could become sick or disabled.

Once again, we have sickness, disability, unemployment, old age.

For the purposes of brevity, I won't continue on with the historical examples, but know that they go on forever. It's never been mysterious what the "cause" of poverty is under capitalism. The points about sickness, disability, old age, unemployment, and widowing/orphaning all gesture towards the general problem that capitalism awards no market income to nonworkers. In addition to these classical categories of nonworkers, it is necessary to add children, students, and carers. Nonworkers make up the vast majority of the market poor and workers who are poor tend to get that way because they live in families with a lot of nonworkers. The fundamental driver of poverty is that nonworkers need income but market capitalism provides them none (unless they own capital).

We don't need to delegate anything to the states to figure this out. It's been known for centuries. What we need are robust national progams that ensure health services for the sick, adequate welfare incomes for nonworking populations (children, elderly, disabled, students, carers, unemployed), and full employment policy. Any slight place-to-place variation necessary to deliver these things can be handled fine within a national welfare system, just as place-to-place mail delivery variations are handled fine by the postal service.