Stacey Russell wasn't trying to lose weight. But when she caught the flu one winter and was sick in bed for a few days, she forgot to take her insulin. And she quickly dropped a bunch of weight.

Russell, who has Type 1 diabetes, was a freshman in college at the time.

She wasn't going to succumb to the "freshman 15." And spring break was just a few months away.

She decided to restrict her insulin for a little while, just to lose some pounds for spring break, and then she'd return back to normal, she says. Just this one time.

But as soon as she started taking the healthy levels of insulin again, those pounds came back. Russell realized the obvious connection; she had a quick fix to lose weight literally right at her fingertips. And after spring break, there was always another event coming up, another reason to lose 5 or 10 pounds, she says. That party next week. Her friend's wedding in three months.

"That's how it escalated," she says. "There was always something triggering me in the future."

For eight years.

Eventually, Russell stumbled across the term for what she was doing: diabulimia. An eating disorder. She hadn't thought of it like that before.

"Diabulimia" is a relatively new term for the tampering or reducing of insulin intake to lose weight. It blends "diabetes" and "bulimia," but the term itself is misleading; diabulimia does not necessarily reflect the binge eating and purging that characterizes bulimia nervosa.

Experts say it can take many forms. Some people wrestling with it might eat completely normally but reduce their insulin, so their body does not absorb the calories they consume. Some, like Russell, might go through the motions of injecting insulin, or freeze or heat it to make it less effective, so the people around them don't notice different behavior, other than sudden weight loss and often a heightened interest in body image. Other symptoms might include trouble sleeping, increased thirst and exhaustion.

Russell says she drank 64 ounces of water every hour but never quenched her thirst.

The very necessity to count carbs and monitor numbers to keep healthy with diabetes also can trigger less healthy number-counting behaviors among people who might be predisposed to develop an eating disorder, experts say.

Although American Diabetes Association and local eating disorder recovery experts have long known about diabulimia, and Denver's Eating Recovery Center says incidences are on the rise, diabulimia is not yet recognized as a medical condition. There's no official psychiatric or medical diagnosis. So it's often misunderstood or left untreated.

The Fix, a website about addiction and recovery, calls it "the eating disorder you've never heard of."

"I thought I had discovered it, that I was the first person who had ever done this," Russell says.

Far from it.

In fact, the Eating Recovery Center in Denver says one-third of people in their mid-teens to mid-20s with Type 1 diabetes manipulate their insulin to lose weight. Diabulimia is most common among teens and young women with Type 1 diabetes.

The study did not clarify the frequency — whether they'd tried it once or did it regularly for an extended period of time, as Russell did — but "this is very common," says Ovidio Bermudez, the medical director of child and adolescent services at the center.

And risky, he says.

He says people with diabetes are typically well informed about the risks of running the high glucose levels that induce weight loss: the deterioration of the eyes, retinas, heart, stomach function, peripheral nerves, the risk of a diabetic coma, the loss of limbs, even death.

"This is something all diabetics know. They know. They clearly understand if they omit, underdose, delay or disable it, there's a medical price to pay," Bermudez says. "But a lot of folks sort of go into that denial state, where they say they have it under control."

Younger patients, especially, feel invincible.

The tricky thing is, life-threatening complications can pop up overnight, he says.

As Russell puts it, "Anybody I've met in treatment says the same thing: We don't realize how much damage we're doing until we've already done it."

In fact, the combination of having an eating disorder with diabetes is significantly more dangerous than having one or the other alone, Bermudez says. The death rate is 17-fold the death rate of diabetes alone, and sevenfold the death rate of anorexia alone, he says, citing a 2002 Nielsen study.

"I was lucky to wake up for eight years, every day," Russell says. "My body was struggling so hard to keep me alive. All eating disorders are dangerous, but diabulimia is so dangerous because we don't realize how quickly it can all turn. We could not wake up the next day."

This summer, Russell says, she finally admitted she needed help. She says she was too exhausted to enjoy life and was struggling at work. It had damaged her relationships because she had to protect her eating disorder with constant lies.

Before she enrolled in the Eating Recovery Center, she says she had lost 30 pounds in one month. Her back constantly hurt.

"To be honest, I did not want to go to the doctor to get my labs because I thought I was in kidney failure. I thought (my kidneys) were done," she says. "It was very scary. I was extremely lucky that they weren't."

But having to accept that they could be was beyond difficult, she says. Even more difficult: realizing that she had done this to herself, all to lose a few pounds.

If she could talk to herself eight years ago before that first spring break, she says, she would beg herself to never try it, not even once.

"I would scream, 'Don't do it,' " she says. "It is not that important. The repercussions of what can happen later down the road, and the relationships you lose, the person you become from the hiding, the secrecy, the lies that you tell — it's hard to control that. The things you lose — the trust, friendships, relationships — those are so much more important than what your scale says or what size is in your shirt."