Monroeville church offers health care for needy

Free Health-care clinic Where: Monroeville Assembly of God, 4561 Old William Penn Highway When: 5:45 to 8:30 p.m. Thursdays Details: 412-856-7900, ext. 36 Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Robin Beasley said she doesn't know what many of the patients she encounters would do if they didn't have access to a free clinic.

“When they first come to see us, they're in the room with the doctor for over an hour because there are so many things that need to be addressed,” she said.

Beasley, a registered nurse, is a regular volunteer at the Sheep Inc. Health Care Center, a free clinic based in the Monroeville Assembly of God Church in Monroeville.

An all-volunteer pool of 11 physicians, physicians assistants and nurse practitioners, plus 30 nurses, run the clinic that serves the uninsured. The clinic is open on Thursday evenings in children's classrooms at the church, on Old William Penn Highway.

The number of patients served has grown from the nine or 10 a week when Beasley's husband Robert, a physician, founded the clinic five years ago. Now, 19 to 25 patients typically visit each week, and Beasley said the volunteers have seen as many as 30 to 35 patients.

Melissa Airgood, 46, of Pitcairn works as an assistant for people with Alzheimer's disease, but doesn't have health insurance. Nor does her husband, a roofer.

“I have high blood pressure, so I need prescriptions on a monthly basis,” Airgood said.

She started coming to the clinic at the recommendation of a relative about the time that it opened. At the time, her blood pressure was 200/110, a level at which a patient requires emergency assistance, for four days, she said.

“They basically saved my life,” she said.

The mother of four said she can afford the medication alone, but wouldn't be able to pay out-of-pocket for regular doctor's visits she needs to receive her prescription.

Annette Smiach of Murrysville, a nurse practitioner who works in the Franklin Regional School District, helps out at the clinic once or twice a month.

“There's so many people that have no insurance, or are under-insured, and just fall through the cracks,” she said.

The need for free medical services has persisted despite the Affordable Care Act — federal legislation that took effect in 2014 that was intended to improve low-income Americans' access to health care with federal subsidies and expanded Medicaid programs in most states.

“Believe it or not, a lot of our pool is in their 20s,” said Eileen Andrews, director of clinic operations. Many people that age work but don't receive health benefits, “and they kind of fall through the cracks,” she said.

Dr. Patricia Documet, scientific director of the Center for Health Equity at the University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health, said many low-income people and non-U.S. citizens living in the country also are ineligible.

“Because we don't have universal health care, it's like a quilt, and the quilt is missing some squares,” Documet said.

Andrews, the Sheep Inc. clinic's director of operations, said the clinic lacks an interpreter who can help staff communicate with Spanish-speaking patients. She said immigrants from Asian countries often visit with family members who interpret for them, but many immigrants still aren't aware that the clinic is there.

Initially, the clinic was an outreach ministry of the Assembly of God church. Three years ago, the clinic registered as a separate nonprofit.

“I've actually had people tell me that they have a hard time giving to the clinic if they know that it's associated with the church,” Robin Beasley said.

The faith-based clinic receives no financial support from the church but still is considered a project of the church.

Smiach, who started volunteering in April, said her commitment to patients and helping them to take responsibility for their health prompted her to start volunteering.

“I've been blessed. My family's been blessed, and I just feel that it's important to give back to the community,” Smiach said.

Gideon Bradshaw is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at 412-871-2369 or gbradshaw@tribweb.com.