I’ve heard a lot recently about the minimum wage. Fry cooks throughout the nation took to the streets to lament their dreadful lot in life. Liberal wonks have taken to the airwaves to complain about how one just can’t live on $7.25 an hour, and it should be raise. Some of these wonks say it should be doubled even.

Oh, cry me a freaking river.

Before I get into specifics, let me point out that as an entrepreneur, if I took how much I made running two businesses and divided it by the number of hours I work, I’d probably make less than $1 per hour, so don’t try to counter this as being “the rich looking down on the poor.” I can barely pay my bills, so I hardly count as rich. Also, for the record, only one of these businesses is mine, so don’t pull the “you own two businesses, so clearly you’re well off” crap. My wife makes more than minimum wage, but not by a whole lot. We have two kids. We are scraping by, and just barely.

Now, about the minimum wage. There are some things the wonks are right about. One can not live on a minimum wage income — $7.25 per hour just isn’t enough to pay rent, a car payment, insurance on said car, utilities, and some kind of phone.

Of course, it’s also not meant to do that.

Minimum wage jobs aren’t skilled labor. They’re entry level jobs. That means they’re for people entering the workforce. They’re for high school and college kids. They’re for people who have left high school and are trying to figure out what they want to be when they grow up. They’re for the young person trying to get established. Hence the term “entry level.”

These are not career opportunities. It can happen. Sure, the Burger King fry cook can be named assistant manager, then manager, and work his way up the corporate ladder. It’s awesome when it happens, but that’s not the design.

Instead, these jobs are there to provide a service to the customer while presenting the entry level worker with an understanding of what it’s like to work. These are the jobs where you learn the importance of treating a customer well, of showing up on time, of working hard, etc.

They’re not jobs for people who’ve just been too damn lazy to try and expand their prospects over the previous five to ten years. If that’s what someone does, that’s on them.

“Not everyone wants to be a corporate CEO,” some might say. I can understand that. Running a business isn’t for everyone, but so what? There are a million different things someone can do if they want a better life. A job at a fast food joint just isn’t one of them, and it never will be. Join the military, go to tech school, find a job that pays more, any of these are viable alternatives to the minimum wage job.

What all of this really boils down to isn’t fairness, despite what the left is trying to say. What it really boils down to is that some people have no practical ambitions in life — meaning I automatically discount the guy who couldn’t get a basketball scholarship to college but wants to play in the NBA - but expects to live like those who have worked their butts off to get somewhere in life.

I’m sick of “fair” being defined by the destination, and not by the journey necessary to get there. However, that’s what these cry babies holding up signs about how they don’t make enough at their job flipping burgers are really wanting. They want equality of outcome, not equality of opportunity.

The opportunities are already there. They just have to make use of them and make it happen.