Buy Photo Cerebral Palsy, Inc. director of Adult Services Julie Tetzlaff talks about the new smaller facility planned for January 2015 during a press conference. (Photo: Jim Matthews/Press-Gazette Media)Buy Photo

The Greater Green Bay Community Foundation has awarded $95,650 to 18 local nonprofits from the Funds for Greater Green Bay.

The grants were awarded based on a competitive application process including a review by a team of community volunteers. Two grant cycles are offered annually for the Funds for Greater Green Bay.

Arts and culture

Cerebral Palsy Inc.: Music Therapy for Adult Day Services

The CP Center will offer classes and opportunities to adults with severe disabilities so they can participate in musical activities focusing on interaction and socialization skills as well as fine and gross motor skills. The CP Center has contracted with Expressive Therapies for most of 2014, and CP staff has seen client improvements in speech and verbal communication, language skills, reality orientation, among other things. The grant would extend the program until fall 2015, when the program's funding is expected to transfer to the Family Care model.

Mosaic Arts Inc.: Creative Connections and Artisan Exchanges

Mosaic Arts supports and promotes the work of artists and arts organizations throughout the greater Green Bay area to ensure that the arts remain valued and vibrant in the community. Creative Connections is a monthly program to help nonprofit arts and cultural organizations create greater public awareness and grow the creative sector. Each program features an informational presentation and discussion. The Artisan Exchange program, geared towards artists and arts entrepreneurs, follows a similar meeting format. The grant will help cover the costs of putting on both programs for one year.

Neville Public Museum Foundation: 2015 Exhibits and Educational Programming

In 2015, the Neville plans to increase educational programming for children, families, young professionals and seniors, in complement with the exhibits. The grant will help with the costs of programming and materials for exhibits focusing on local culture, including Sisters in Spirit: Native American Stories in Rocks and Beads; and Centennial Architecture of Green Bay. In addition, some of the funds will help with covering the costs of school groups visiting the exhibitions.

Wisconsin Historical Foundation Inc.: Wisconsin History Tour Green Bay

The Wisconsin Historical Society will present the Wisconsin History Tour, a traveling exhibit and complementary programming that will make a six-week stop at the Neville Public Museum in February and March. The local exhibit will feature historically significant people, places and events from Northeastern Wisconsin. The grant will support development of educational materials about the history of Northeastern Wisconsin.

Community & Neighborhood Development

Bay Area Community Council: Connecting Our Community From Many Directions

The program is designed to determine how to make Green Bay/Brown County a more welcoming community. The grant will help with the completion of an Appreciative Inquiry process for the community that focuses on assets, strengths and positive experiences of stakeholders and a broad range of Brown County residents. The ultimate aim is to stimulate positive changes in community relations through the structured interview process that generates personal stories on what is best in Green Bay and Brown County that will be disseminated in print and by social media, and lead to the Design and Destiny phases at a Community Summit.

Greater Green Bay Habitat for Humanity: Partner Family Training Toolbox

Greater Green Bay Habitat for Humanity is developing a training program to better educate new Habitat homeowners on the basics of owning a home. Because almost all of the partner families are first-time homeowners, they need information and training on everything from homeowners insurance to simple home repairs. In addition to the education, Habitat will provide families with an initial set of tools that they will be trained to use, which will reduce the cost burden of home repairs while empowering them to make simple home repairs on their own. The grant will cover the cost of 40 tool box sets, enough for new Habitat households in 2015 and 2016.

Hispanic Chamber of Commerce of Wisconsin: Training Initiative

The Hispanic Chamber of Commerce advocates and promotes economic and workforce development along with business and community development in relation to Hispanic and other businesses. They aim to recruit, train and job-place 30 low- to moderate-income unemployed or underemployed individuals into entry-level welding positions at local employers and provide trainees with Employer Essential Life Skills training and support with instruction completed at NWTC. The grant will help fund trainee remediation courses in Math Proficiency and English Fluency in the chamber's Training Initiative.

NeighborWorks: Volunteer Program Design & Implementation

NeighborWorks has a history of using volunteers for landscaping, demolition and painting projects. Opportunity exists for recruiting and maintaining volunteers for other work such as client intake, photography, web design, data entry and other mission-critical roles. NeighborWorks has been selected as an AmeriCorps host site and has the opportunity to place someone for 1,700 hours to develop policies, descriptions and procedures for a volunteer program as well as to recruit 10 long-term volunteers to help achieve their mission. The grant will cover some of the fee for NeighborWorks to host an AmeriCorps worker.

Education

Howe Community Center: Tutoring Program

Howe Community Resource Center's Tutoring Program aims to close the achievement gap for children primarily from low-income families attending Howe Elementary. These children are paired with tutors from St. Norbert College and meet twice weekly for help with homework. These college students also act as mentors. The grant will help with the coordinator's salary to lead the tutoring program.

Leonardo da Vinci School for Gifted Learners PTO: Lego Club

Leonardo da Vinci School is developing a club where kindergarten through eighth-graders have an opportunity to work on simple machines, simple and motorized mechanisms, WeDo (beginning programming and robotics) and EV3 programming and robotics. These programs allow kids to learn how and why things work in a fun and engaging way, bringing together science, technology, engineering and mathematics. The grant will help with the initial purchasing of the materials, which will be updated, repaired or replaced as needed with student participation fees.

YWCA of Green Bay-De Pere: Women's Empowerment Center: Work-site Experience

The YWCA's Women's Empowerment Center works with women to become full participants in the economic mainstream of the community through job training and support in finding, changing or maintaining a job. The Work-site Experience program provides participants with the opportunity to gain vital hands-on work experience by working a small coffee shop at the YWCA. This shop will provide revenue to support the services of the program as well as employ these women, many who have barriers to gaining other hands-on experience, while they learn hard and soft business skills. The goal is that they will become successfully employed in a related career. The grant will help cover some of the oversight of the work-experience participants, as well as some initial program supplies.

Health & Human Services

Boys & Girls Club of Green Bay: Unmet Needs Fund

The Boys and Girls Club created the Unmet Needs fund to assist youth financially with one-time unmet needs. Some needs that have been met to date are: replacing a club member's stolen backpack and school supplies; purchasing athletic shoes so a club member could join her school's volleyball team; and buying two club members two week's of food when their mother was unexpectedly jailed.

Brown County United Way/The Community Partnership for Children (CPC): Literacy Launch Pads

Literacy Launch Pads are hands-on literacy kits to be used in groups led by parents and teachers for children 5 years old and younger. They will include items that work on the five building blocks of early literacy so parents and children can work on skills beyond one-on-one reading. The grant will provide seven Launch Pads to be used at specific agencies: Howe Community Center, Family and Childcare Resources of NEW, Family Services' Healthy Families program, Literacy Green Bay, Encompass Early Education and Care, Brown County Library and the CPC.

Freedom House Ministries Inc.: THRIVE!

For low-income residents of our community, as well as others throughout Green Bay, transportation is often a barrier to employment. Freedom House will add second- and third-shift transportation services for both shelter residents and neighbors employed for those shifts.

Gathering Place Inc.: Reach Out, Gather In

The Gathering Place is a recovery center for adults with mental illnesses and co-occurring disorders. It creates a community of peers supporting each other by sharing life experiences. Many individuals in the community are undiagnosed with mental illness, and those who have been diagnosed may not have found the peer support they need or could use. Through community educational presentations about the Gathering Place and mental illness, and increased connections with leaders of community organizations, an outreach coordinator will increase the visibility and usage of the Gathering Place by those who need its support. The grant will help with the costs of having a person creating and making connections in the community through outreach presentations.

New Community Shelter: Addictions Support

Several years ago, the New Community Shelter added a part-time addictions counselor to the staff to help homeless individuals with addictions. They quickly realized they needed to provide more comprehensive service and expanded the position from 30 to 40 hours per week. Through work with Brown County Human mental health services, the shelter's counselor makes recommendations to the county psychiatrists as well as plans co-case management for these individuals. The grant will help cover some of the costs of the salary of the Addictions Counselor.

New Leaf Foods Inc.: Green Bay Garden Blitz 2015

New Leaf Foods will host the second Green Bay Garden Blitz in 2015, which aims to improve food security by providing affordable fresh food to families through the installation of garden boxes at low-income homes, schools, food pantries and community centers and by providing garden mentors for new gardeners. All of the garden boxes are installed in one weekend in May. More than half of the garden boxes in 2015 are to be installed at the homes of low-income families and individuals, at a reduced cost ($25 versus $150). Recipients will be identified through partnerships with schools, agencies, neighborhood associations and pantries. The grant will help cover the cost of the garden boxes provided to low-income families.

St. Vincent Hospital: Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner (SANE) Program

The Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner Program provides specialized services that address the medical, emotional and legal needs of individuals after a sexual assault. This is the only program of this nature in Brown, Kewaunee, Door and Menominee counties, and they provide service to about 200 cases a year, primarily to victims from Brown County. Both Bellin Health and St. Mary's Hospital provide contributions annually to support the program. Because this program provides an important service, St. Vincent is committed to the program even though the costs of service are not always fully met by insurance or other fundraising. The grant will support the program's ongoing expenses and would be leveraged to raise community awareness of the program to create broader-based community support.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1ARasKS