Obamacare advocates pitched the health care overhaul as a way to help people who have to choose between buying prescription drugs and paying the rent. A newly released audit from Tennessee Comptroller Justin Wilson says Obamacare might have forced Robertson County officials to choose between raising taxes and breaking the law.

Last year, county commissioners transferred $632,500 from the General Debt Service Fund to the General Purpose School Fund to comply with Obamacare, according to Wilson’s audit.

County officials needed the money to pay for health insurance for part-time employees working 30 hours a week or more, such as bus drivers and substitute teachers, said County Commissioner Ervin Brown.

The General Debt Service Fund exists to pay county debt, while money from the General Purpose School Fund pays to keep the schools running, Brown said.

“Based on existing opinions of the state attorney general and case law, the transfer noted is illegal,” John Dunn, a spokesman for Wilson, said in an email to Watchdog.org.

According to the Tennessee Attorney General’s Office, if a taxpayer pays taxes for a specific purpose, any other use of that money is against the law.

But the fund switch has not raised any ruckus in the county north of Nashville, and Wilson’s audit said nothing about the county facing any legal consequences for transferring the money.

“To our knowledge, no one has requested an attorney general’s opinion in this specific situation, so we are not waiting on anything further from the attorney general’s office,” Dunn said.

Representatives from the office of Tennessee Attorney General Herbert Slatery did not respond to requests for comment. Robertson County school officials were unavailable for comment Friday and Monday, as was county Finance Director Jody Stewart.

RELATED — Tennessee leans on federal money

County commissioners were well aware they were operating in iffy territory, telling auditors they “decided it prudent to accept an audit finding instead of burdening taxpayers with tax increases the following year.”

Last year, county commissioners charged a property tax of $2.96 per $100 of assessed value; 85 cents went into the county’s General Debt Service Fund while $1.07 went into the General Purpose School Fund, according to the county’s website.

Without the transfer, commissioners would have had to raise taxes another 2 cents per $100 of assessed value, according to the audit.

Commissioners have since raised property taxes to $3.085 per $100 of assessed value for fiscal 2016, said Brown, who added that he “was an adamant opponent of the tax increase.”

Brown, the only one of 24 commissioners reached who would speak on the record about the audit, called what happened “an oversight.”

“We should have pre-planned for this and we didn’t. I don’t think anybody was trying to do anything nefarious,” he said.

Contact Christopher Butler at chris@tennesseewatchdog.org

Follow Tennessee Watchdog and receive regular updates through Facebook and Twitter

Follow Chris on his professional Facebook page at Chris Butler Writer Journalist