You must enter the characters with black color that stand out from the other characters

— From sun-up to sun-down, at heights that would scare many, Andrew Capobianco and Jordan Windle thrive.

"I train from seven in the morning to five at night, and then I do school after that,” said Windle, a Morrisville resident who won four gold medals in the 18-and-under division at last week’s U.S. National Diving Championships in Knoxville, Tenn. “That's how I do it: eat, sleep, and dive."

"I just love getting the rush of it, flipping from 33 feet." Capobianco, who swept all three medals in the 14-15-year-old division said.

The 15-year-old Windle was born in Cambodia but adopted at a young age by an American family. His four recent medals came as he was competing against kids three years his senior.

“He's a wonderful acrobat, he's got a great sense of where he is in the air,” said Nunzio Esposto, the Duke swimming and diving coach who trains both Windle and Capobianco. “Jordan is essentially the future of U.S. Diving."

Campobianco, who is also 15 and relocated to the Triangle from New York to work with Esposto, won gold’s in the 1-meter, 3-meter and platform at the junior championships. He said he enjoys the rush.

“You can hear the sound of the rip,” he said. “And then when you come out of the water, hear all the people cheering, you just go 'wow.'"

Esposto points to Campbiano’s technical abilities as a key to his future success



"He is a great twister,” Esposto, who was an 11-time junior national finalist in his own right, said. “He's also developing some great entries, a great rip, and as far as his future, he's going to be a force to be reckoned with.”

In two weeks, the two best in the country will get to see how they stack up against the best in the world at FINA World Junior Championships in Penza, Russia.

"It's sort of like a mini-Olympics for them because it is Junior Worlds and all the countries are represented,” Esposto said. “It's going to be phenomenal and I'm hoping they come back with some medals."