HARRISBURG, Pa. (AP) - Pennsylvania’s highest court has ruled against Verizon in an 11-year-old tax dispute about whether the company owes millions over revenues from installing private phone lines, providing directory assistance and performing a variety of repairs and services.

The Supreme Court ruled 3-2 on Wednesday against the telephone provider in a dispute that an industry group predicted would have profound implications.

The case began when Verizon filed a gross receipts tax report for 2004, telling the state it paid $74 million. The Department of Revenue increased how much it owed by $48 million before the department’s board of appeals lowered the additional amount to just under $10 million.

Commonwealth Court unanimously ruled against Verizon in 2013, saying the company should pay taxes on the fees from installing phone lines and providing directory assistance. It said, however, the company did not owe the state for moving and changing lines and services and repairs of phone lines. The new high court ruling said all those costs are taxable.

A Verizon spokesman declined comment. The Department of Revenue and the attorney general’s office, which handled the appeal, also declined comment, citing state laws that govern confidentiality of tax matters.

A friend-of-the-court brief filed in November 2013 by the Pennsylvania Telephone Association, an industry group that does not include Verizon, warned of the consequences if the justices were to rule against Verizon.

The association said the case was of “great financial and operational significance to the PTA member companies, many of whom face substantially similar issues in various stages of proceeding and appeals pending before the Board of Finance and Review and the Commonwealth Court.” Most of those matters, the association wrote, were put on hold pending resolution of the Verizon case.

The ruling did not make clear precisely how much money Verizon will have to pay, or if it would owe any back payments.

In a dissent, Chief Justice Thomas Saylor said it’s been 72 years since the Legislature clarified the scope of the gross receipts tax. He said the majority opinion represented a significant broadening of the tax’s applicability.

“I find this state of affairs an unhappy one and would welcome a decision by the legislative branch to enter the field and provide guidance,” Saylor wrote.