In talking about the number of Planned Parenthood clinics in black communities, Republican presidential candidate Dr. Ben Carson recently said there was an important issue being overlooked as people focus on the Black Lives Matter campaign.

"The No. 1 cause of death for black people is abortion," he said during an interview on Fox News. "I wonder if maybe some people might at some point become concerned about that and ask why is that happening and what can be done to alleviate that situation. I think that's really the important question."

He added that it's important to educate people. I agree.

First off, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says that black women account for about 36 percent of the country's reported abortions, even though blacks constitute less than 13 percent of the population. In 2011, the most recent year for which numbers are available, there were 146,856 reported black abortions performed.

But the CDC doesn't list abortion as the leading cause of death for black people — heart disease has that distinction, with 90,888 deaths — because such statistics are based on deaths of individuals born alive. And abortions don't result in live births.

Let's go back to Carson's point about why the black abortion rate is high and what can be done to fix it.

Experts say the reason the rate is disproportionately high is complex, but one main reason is that black women (who are also disproportionately low-income) have higher rates of unintended pregnancies. Often, that's a result of them not having access to the most effective contraception and sex education, as well as quality health care.

So it's easy to look at the numbers rather than get to the root of the problem.

To talk about that, I spoke with Gaylon Alcaraz, a national reproductive justice activist and the former executive director of the Chicago Abortion Fund. She said she wonders why people focus on the rate instead of the decisions that black and brown women have to make to survive.

"We have to ask: Why do they need to have an abortion?" she said. "We have to look at what's going on in her home, in her community, in her life. It's not just about abortion for a woman even though that may be the outcome."

We also have to ask: Is she working in a job where she can take care of herself and her family? Is she making a living wage? Is she in a safe relationship and home environment?

"But conservatives don't want the social services programs in place that help black women, women of color and all low-income women survive," said Alcaraz.

So, maybe, if we care about what's happening to black women and their bodies, we should support the Affordable Care Act's requirement that most health insurance plans provide contraceptive coverage without a copay.

Carson vehemently opposes the Affordable Care Act because he says it's too intrusive. He's called it the "worst thing that has happened in this nation since slavery."

Really? That's the worst thing?

If we really care about black women and their bodies, then we should care about overall racial disparities in health care and health outcomes. Black women continue to suffer or die from HIV/AIDS, diabetes, heart disease and breast cancer at disproportionate rates.

And, if we really care, we should push for comprehensive sex education in high schools, especially for young people who don't have family members who can teach them how to protect their bodies and stave off unwanted pregnancies.

Cherisse Scott, founder of SisterReach, a reproductive justice organization in Memphis, Tenn., said that while the Chicago Public Schools system supports comprehensive sex ed, schools in many of the country's most conservative states do not.

"Women still don't understand their bodies, and young people don't have access to contraception in the way they need to," said Scott, who used to live in Chicago. "It's night and day when you look at what's going on here.

"In the Deep South, conservatives are so intent on supporting abstinence-based education, rather than making comprehensive sex ed available. We have high rates of unwanted pregnancies, STDs and kids engaging in risky behavior practices."

So, Carson asked: Why is this happening and what can be done to fix it? Maybe the real question is: What are we really willing to do?

I would expect a man of science, who purports to also be a man of conscience, to work to figure it out.

dmturner@tribpub.com