People Moves of the Week: ACG, Carlyle, Cantor Fitzgerald

On eve of InterGrowth, ACG promotes Maggie Endres; Carlyle picks up seasoned consumer pro from P&G; Cantor Fitzgerald hires two from Canaccord

The Association for Corporate Growth — The middle-market professional organization announced the promotion of Maggie Endres to director, strategic development. The move was effective March 30. Endres, who joined ACG in November 2012, was previously with the Professional Convention Management Association and the American Academy of Cosmetic Surgery.

Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. — The New York financial advisory firm has hired a duo from Canaccord Genuity Group Inc. Laura Champine and Jason Smith have both joined Cantor Fizgerald and have been named managing director and vice president, respectively. Champine and Smith will both be a part of the firm's consumer research analyst team.

Carlyle Group (Nasdaq: CG) — Filippo Passerini, former group president of global business services and chief information officer for Procter & Gamble Co. (NYSE: PG), will join the New York asset management firm as an operating executive when he retires from P&G in the summer. He has been with the consumer goods giant for 35 years.

Saw Mill Capital — The Briarcliff Manor, New York private firm has promoted Timothy Nelson and Scott Rivard to partner and Jason Mueller to principal. Howard Unger, managing partner, commented that, “Tim, Scott and Jason have made valuable contributions to the firm for many years and these promotions reflect their importance to the future leadership of Saw Mill Capital. They will lead transaction teams and will be responsible for sourcing and executing transactions, as well as working closely with our management teams to achieve their strategic and operational goals.”

Steben & Co. — The Gaithersburg, Maryland-based alternative investment provider hired Christopher Maxey as a senior portfolio manager. Maxey jumps over from LPL Financial, where he oversaw due diligence processes for hedge funds and alternative mutual funds. Before that, he worked at Trusco Capital Management.

WeiserMazars LLP — Debra Bornstein has been hired to lead the New York accounting and advisory firm's health care practice. Prior to joining WeiserMazars, Bornstein was the chief operating officer of Creative Health Concepts Inc., a health care management company in New York. She has also held leadership positions at Aetna (NYSE: AET), UnitedHealth Group Inc.(NYSE: UNH) and Oxford Health Plans LLC.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: