What to Expect When Congress Returns in 2016

WASHINGTON – Lawmakers return to Washington next month after the traditional holiday respite with plenty of issues pending as they enter the second session of the 114th Congress, but time and politics might get in the way of any substantial successes.

Whatever members of Congress choose to address in 2016, they’re not leaving themselves much time to do it. The recently released House calendar shows the lower chamber in session for only 111 days with the Senate showing up for work 149 times. After an extended August recess – providing those seeking re-election with ample time to campaign – only 42 days will remain to wrap things up.

And, of course, the race for the presidency will play a role in what gets considered and what doesn’t. With both chambers under GOP control, leaders may want to delay major actions until it’s determined who will be residing in the White House for four years beginning in 2017.

Lame duck sessions are rarely the best time to get any legislating done but two factors may force some action -- 2016 provides President Obama with a final opportunity to add to his legacy and newly-installed House Speaker Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) may want to leave an immediate mark.

During an address at the Library of Congress on Dec. 3, Ryan said his top congressional priority for 2016 “is to put together a complete alternative to the left’s agenda,” which he termed “a work in progress, no doubt.”

Topping Ryan’s list is tax reform – a phrase that attracts widespread support on both sides of the political aisle but means different things to different people, and that’s the rub.

Ryan said he wants a code “all of us can live by.” Currently “we have a tax code that none of us can understand.” It should be a tax code “that rewards good work instead of good connections.”

“The only way to fix our broken tax code is to simplify, simplify, simplify,” he said. “Close all those loopholes and use that money to cut tax rates for everybody. Take the seven tax rates we have now and collapse them to two or three.”

Ryan said he understands why individuals and organizations might want to retain the “loopholes” that work to their advantage.

“But there are so many of them that now the tax code is like a to-do list --Washington’s to-do list,” he said. “But Washington has no business micromanaging people’s lives -- pure and simple. I also know many of these loopholes will be fiercely defended. All I can say is we will not be cowed. We are not here to smooth things over. We are here to shake things up.”

Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell, of Kentucky, also is on board, but he expressed doubt that Obama “had an epiphany and decided to join with us.”

“We need to do comprehensive tax reform and what are the conditions under which you can achieve that? I think you have to have a bipartisan agreement that it’s going to be revenue neutral to the government,” McConnell told reporters.

Also on the agenda – and it’s a big maybe – is the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership, a trade agreement with 11 Pacific Rim countries to "promote economic growth; support the creation and retention of jobs; enhance innovation, productivity and competitiveness; raise living standards; reduce poverty in our countries; and promote transparency, good governance, and enhanced labor and environmental protections." The pact includes provision to reduce tariffs and create a dispute settlement mechanism.

Ryan wants to get to it pronto. At an event earlier this month sponsored by Politico, Ryan called the deal “very important,” asserting that it has “a lot of promise” since it provides the U.S. with an opportunity to set the rules for global trade in a growing economic region.

The White House would certainly like to move the agreement but McConnell is decidedly more cautious, suggesting that action might have to wait until after the November election, a move that would save GOP incumbents seeking a return to Washington some cover for a potentially tough vote.

Obama, who has called TPP “the most progressive trade deal in history,” has made passage of the pact a priority heading into the legislative session despite some opposition from both Republicans and protectionist Democrats. The administration, he said, will have to "stitch together the same kind of bipartisan effort" that helped his administration win a fight over fast-track trade authority.