There’s a lot being written about the Civil Rights Act of 1964 today, and with good reason. One of the most consequential pieces of legislation in our nation’s history, it helped to finally put an end to decades of Jim Crow segregation in the South. A great accomplishment by any measure, and one that got me to thinking about the Supreme Court’s recent decision in the Hobby Lobby case – where the Supreme Court struck down the contraception mandate in Obamacare for small, privately owned companies – and how it illustrates some of the ways conservatives have shifted the playing field on civil rights over the past 60 years, particularly when it comes to questions of intent, impact and race.

Here's what I mean.

In the 1950s and '60s, courts started invalidating state laws that reflected racially discriminatory intent. In the South, that wasn’t hard to do. Jim Crow laws explicitly denied African-Americans access to all sorts of social goods. Conservatives largely opposed efforts to do away with Jim Crow and, when it crumbled, moved quickly to suggest that its demise obviated the need for any further reforms. Others, however, observed that even if a law or policy did not make explicit mention of race, it could still have a disproportionately deleterious impact on a particular racial group. For example, if the way a state funded its schools (say, property taxes) didn’t make explicit mention of race but nevertheless meant that schools in predominantly white communities (where property values were higher) received a lot more funding than those in predominantly black communities (where property values were lower), some argued that the funding scheme was unconstitutionally discriminatory in its effect, regardless of legislative intent.

[READ: What the Hobby Lobby Ruling Is Really About]

When court cases making this argument began to gain traction, however, conservatives rose up in outrage. You must show discriminatory intent to invalidate a law on the basis of racial animus, they said. In their efforts, conservatives managed to effectively redefine what it means to be prejudiced, making the test not whether you behaved in a discriminatory manner, but rather whether you were clumsy enough to identify it as such. At the same time, conservatives shifted the terms of the debate sufficiently to make being accused of being racist as grave an ill as actual discrimination. Over time, as the court moved right, it became increasingly hostile to racial impact claims, taking off the table a whole slew of avenues for further remedies.

Hobby Lobby isn’t about race, but it is about a fundamental, constitutionally protected right. If the court’s jurisprudence in the racial sphere is any guide, Hobby Lobby should have won the case if it proved intentional discrimination, and should have lost if the only discrimination it could show was in the law’s impact. So which was it?

If the government regulation in question said something like: Everyone gets governmentally subsidized health care except Methodists, that would be one thing. Like Jim Crow, that’s a government action that intentionally disadvantages a specific group of people based on a definition of who they are — in this case, their religious beliefs.

[MORE: Cartoons on the Catholic Contraception Controversy]

But that’s not what happened in Hobby Lobby. Nothing in the legislation at issue explicitly pegs differential treatment to religion and no one is seriously arguing that the administration intended to discriminate. In fact, the law takes pains to exempt religious entities from the contraceptives requirement. Nevertheless, Norman and Elizabeth Hahn (who founded Conestoga Wood Specialties, a company whose lawsuit was combined with Hobby Lobby's) claimed that the otherwise neutral law had a disproportionately negative impact on people who share their faith. So this is an impact case, not one about intent.

Let’s compare the impact complained of in Hobby Lobby to that offered in a typical racial impact case. In the latter, state legislatures crafted school funding schemes that sent a lot more money to white neighborhoods than black ones, resulting in dramatic disparities in the quality of education being offered therein. Here’s a government action that has a direct, concrete and disadvantageous impact on one racial group relative to another, with a clearly identifiable harm. This, said the court, was constitutionally permissible.

In Hobby Lobby, the owners of a corporation (which, its worth noting, is a separate legal entity — that’s one reason you set up a corporation) said a government action compelling that corporation to provide its employees with coverage for certain kinds of contraceptives (that they were in no way compelled to use) violated the owners free exercise of religion (because they objected to some of the contraceptives that employees may or may not actually be using). Whether you agree with that or not, you have to admit its relies on a significantly more attenuated connection between the action found offensive and the impact on an actual living, breathing person than do the school funding cases. And yet here, the court found the law constitutionally impermissible.

[VOTE: Was the Supreme Court Right to Rule in Favor of Hobby Lobby?]

Why? The court and its defenders will point to this or that jurisprudence, but anyone who watches the court understands that its professed reliance on precedence goes only as deep as its ideological dispositions. Meaning: when the court leans right, it finds precedence to support its rightward bent, just as much as it does its more liberal rulings, when it’s more left leaning in its composition.

I believe the right to practice your faith is eminently worthy of protection. But what we see in Hobby Lobby is a court taking a much more expansive and generous view of what constitutes discrimination when it comes to one class of complainants (faith) than it does another (race), and a court that is much more comfortable imposing costs on some to protect what it perceives to be the rights of others in the faith context than it does with race. And, I think it is fair to say, a court that finds victims much more easily among classes of people who have enjoyed preferred status in our society than it does among those who have struggled, that finds comfort aligning with people who have prospered rather than those who are more in need of protection.

And when you think about what the federal government was accomplishing 50 years ago, that’s a real shame.