The Broncos travel to Foxborough, Mass., this weekend to take on the Patriots at Gillette Stadium, where Denver has yet to win since 2006. In fact, the Patriots own a 33-game winning streak against AFC opponents on their home turf, making Sunday’s Peyton Manning vs. Tom Brady showdown all the more enticing. We scoured the web to give you the most comprehensive preview available for the game. Here’s what we dug up:

Bill, your thoughts on the weather forecast?

“I’d say based on the forecasts we’ve gotten so far this year, none of them have been even very close to what game conditions were. There was 100 percent chance of rain last week and the only water I saw was on the Gatorade table. … We played down in Miami two years ago and there was a zero percent chance of rain – zero – and it rained. I’m just telling you. If I did my job the way they do theirs, I’d be here about a week.”

Friendly reminder: Broncos’ D doesn’t do nice:

“It’s defense. We’re not nice,” said Broncos defensive lineman Derek Wolfe. “We’re not nice people. I’m not a nice guy. I might be nice if you come up and say ‘Hi’ to me, but if I see you when I have full pads on, I’m not very nice.”

Most important stats to know for Sunday:

John Elway: Manning turns it up for Brady

“Even though Peyton’s got it pretty much cranked all the time anyway, obviously there’s the rivalry and the competitiveness that they both have. They see each other on each side of the field, there’s going to be a little more meaning to it, because it’s going to be made a bigger deal, and rightfully so. You’re talking about the two greatest quarterbacks that have played the game.”

Let’s revisit all Tom vs. Peyton meetings ….:

… but examine which quarterback “won” the game-within-the-game by using the 10-point must system from boxing. You can thank Bill Barnwell for this.

Why Tom and Peyton need each other:

If it weren’t for Brady, we’d have to think of Manning as a celebrity, but if it weren’t for Manning, we’d have to think of Brady as a guy doing a job — or worse: as a guy who signs paperwork, who wakes up worried in the middle of the night, who gets stuck in traffic, who waits on hold, who wonders where time is going, who feels unexplained pain in his tooth.

Is Peyton, at 38, getting better?

“Peyton Manning IS getting better at playing regular-season professional football. … But Manning is also getting worse at playing football.” So says Bill Simmons.

Aqib Talib is a Bronco this time. Guess who’s happy.

“If we would’ve had Aqib last year, it would’ve been different,” linebacker Von Miller said. “But we got him this year, so we just got to go out there and play.”

But Talib almost wasn’t a Bronco

“I definitely came close, man,” Talib said yesterday by phone. “It was a negotiation, and it came down to the language of the contracts. I just went with what I feel was best with me and my family. I can’t remember the logistics and everything. It wasn’t bad at all. The offer wasn’t bad. It was just the language of the offer, how the payout comes. It was some language that I wasn’t trying to hear.”

Let’s take a moment to relive this sack:

Tale of the tape

Based on a true story …

Thanks, Bill.

It’s SOOOOOO yesterday

A single play in last season’s AFC championship game drew Bill Belichick’s wrath. The New England boss called Welker’s collision with cornerback Aqib Talib intentional, “one of the dirtiest plays I have seen.” Belichick and Welker traded praise, not barbs, Wednesday, both saying they have moved on. “Way past that,” Belichick said. “(I have) a lot of respect for Wes and what he did for us, what he’s done for the Broncos and what he’s done throughout his career.”

The debate is supposedly over

“For those people devoted to the stats, the data, the truth; for those people devoted to the Cold, Hard Football Facts, there is no debate: Tom Brady is an empirically superior quarterback.”

All of Peyton’s TDs … for the other team:

After Manning threw touchdown pass No. 510, we unveiled a complex breakdown of all of his career TDs, by location, receiver, distance and more. On Friday, Deadspin broke down all of his pick-sixes.