TRENTON — Disappointed the state stuck to its decision to approve a controversial line of health plans, lawmakers Wednesday debated how they could change the law to give regulators more power to protect lower-income patients and city hospitals.

Acting Banking and Insurance Commissioner Richard Badolato on Monday rejected an appeal by 17 community and urban hospitals arguing he allowed Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey to unfairly exclude them from the new OMNIA plan's "tier 1" group of hospitals that will cost less for patients to use.

The 17 hospitals – relegated to "tier 2" status without explanation – contend the eventual loss of patients flocking to cheaper coverage will drive them out of business.

RELATED: State: We got it right by approving disputed N.J. Horizon hospital plans



But Badolato determined there were geographically enough hospitals and medical professionals in OMNIA's tier 1 network. And the law doesn't require the Department of Banking and Insurance to consider the economic impact on other hospitals or dictate how an insurance company designs a tiered network, according to the commissioner's decision.

Linda Schwimmer, president and CEO of a consumer advocacy organization, the New Jersey Health Care Quality Institute, told a joint Assembly committee the problem was not with Badolato's "well-reasoned and well-written" decision.

He is "interpreting regulations as they are today, and they are woefully outdated," Schwimmer said. Write a better law, she told the Assembly Health and Senior Services and Regulatory Oversight committees.

The committes had scheduled the hearing to discuss tiered networks before Badalato's decision, but it served as the focal point for the five-hour-plus hearing.

Under current rules, one key test of a network's adequacy is if 90 percent of policy holders in a county or "service area" are within 20 miles or 30 minutes of a hospital.

But the rules don't ask the state to weigh the impact on "essential community providers" that largely serve Medicaid clients and uninsured people, or examine how tiered networks are designed, she said.

Assembly Health and Senior Citizens Committee Chairman and physician Herb Conaway (D-Burlington) agreed revisions are necessary. "We need to stand for as much transparency as possible because the consequences are great," he said.

Consumer access to more affordable tier 1 hospitals is one concern the mayors of Trenton and Elizabeth and Warren County Freeholder Director discussed. There are only tier 2 hospitals within their city and county limits, and many of their residents do not have cars.

"There is virtually no public transportation in Warren County," said an exasperated Freeholder Director Edward Smith said.

"Let us not be fooled. A health plan that squeezes hospitals and patients for more money does not translate into more affordable or accessible health care," Smith said. "Lawmakers face hard decisions here."

Regulatory Oversight Committee Chairman Reed Guiscora agreed proximity to hospitals should be more of a priority when the state vets new insurance products.

"This is nothing more than a 'bait and switch' to encourage people to sign up for affordable rates but with no hospital care at their reach," he said.

Sarah McLallen, vice president for the New Jersey Association of Health Plans, said tiered insurance networks debuted in New Jersey five years ago, in response to "consumers and purchasers demanding more affordable options, especially in light of the Affordable Care Act's mandate for coverage."

"Tiered health plans can be an attractive option and solution to help contain costs" to avoid the health care law's so-called "Cadillac tax," McLallen said. In 2018, employers that offer insurance plans with premiums that exceed $10,200 for individuals and $27,500 for families will be hit with a 40 percent tax. The self-insured State Health Benefits Program has estimated the tax will cost taxpayers $58 million, she added.

State insurance regulators and Horizon representatives declined to attend the hearing.

"Due to active lawsuits seeking to preserve the status quo of rising health care costs, Horizon BCBSNJ will not be able to appear before the Assembly hearing on Wednesday, but instead will be represented by the New Jersey Association of Health Plans," Horizon spokesman Tom Vincz said.

In addition to the 17 hospital challenging the state's approval of the OMNIA plans, Saint Peter's University Hospital in New Brunswick is also suing Horizon for excluding it from the "tier 1" category.

Susan K. Livio may be reached at slivio@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @SusanKLivio. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.