Allen Smith, a nurse practitioner, needed more than medical training and entrepreneurial spirit to open a primary care practice in Bethlehem. He had to find a doctor to sponsor him.

That was easier said than done. Many doctors, it turned out, were prohibited by contractual agreements with the health care networks that employed them.

Eventually, Smith did find a willing and able doctor — an hour away in Reading.

"I can only tell you that it was more than a challenge to find a collaborating physician," said Smith, whose practice, Novus Adult Care, opened in 2013.

Legislation introduced in Harrisburg this month would free Smith and other nurse practitioners in Pennsylvania to work without a doctor's stamp of approval, as is required under existing law. According to Jesse Topper, R-Bedford, the chief sponsor of House Bill 765, the change would help address the shortage of health care providers.

Proposed PA law would allow nurse practitioners to work without a doctor’s approval (DONNA FISHER / THE MORNING CALL) (DONNA FISHER / THE MORNING CALL)

"Nationally, the supply of health providers has not kept pace with demand. … I have experienced the shortage in my district," Topper wrote in a memorandum introducing the bill. "Allowing nurse practitioners to practice, without unnecessary burdens and to the full extent of their education and training, would provide much-needed primary care in not only rural areas, but across the entire commonwealth."

State Sen. Pat Vance, R-Cumberland, is drafting companion legislation after sponsoring similar bills that failed to advance in the past two legislative sessions.

"We're talking about basic medicine in areas where it's badly needed — in rural areas, in urban areas," she said.

Demand for primary care is increasing as baby boomers enter old age, and also because of the Affordable Care Act.

Under the health law, more than 11.7 million people nationwide, including 472,000 Pennsylvanians, have signed up for health insurance. An additional 600,000 state residents — largely working poor who don't qualify for government subsidies under Obamacare — are eligible for Medicaid this year.

By 2020, the United States will have 223,000 primary care doctors, or 20,400 fewer than it needs, according to the U.S. Health Resources and Services Administration. In Pennsylvania, HRSA has identified 155 areas already lacking adequate primary care, including parts of Schuylkill County and Philadelphia.

Nurse practitioners, who must have at least a master's degree, do many of the tasks doctors do, such as prescribe medication and order diagnostic tests. Most of the 8,700 nurse practitioners in Pennsylvania work for health care networks, hospitals and private practices. Typically, those such as Smith who establish their own practices have to pay a monthly stipend to sponsoring doctors.

The Pennsylvania Coalition of Nurse Practitioners, based in Pittsburgh, supports Topper's bill, saying it will promote timely access to health care.

Opposed is the Pennsylvania Medical Society in Harrisburg, which represents doctors. The Medical Society, whose position is backed by the Academy of Family Physicians in Shawnee Mission, Kan., advocates "team-based" care in which nurse practitioners work within a group of medical professionals led by a doctor.

"Anything that leads to the fragmentation of the team detracts from that ultimate goal of providing the highest quality of care for patients in the safest environment possible," Medical Society President Dr. Karen Rizzo said.

Essentially, both sides say they have patients' best interests in mind. Elected officials in Harrisburg will have to decide whose case is more convincing.

Doctors divided

In Bethlehem, Smith's practice — Novus Adult Care on Linden Street — caters to the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender population, though his patients also include heterosexuals. Because Novus doesn't require or even accept health insurance — Smith charges a flat rate of $40 a visit — it serves many who wouldn't go to a regular primary care practice.

"If every nurse practitioner did this, it would really hit hospitals hard," he said of his business model and pricing strategy. "You're taking away money from networks and doctors."

That's not why many doctors are against the proposed change, according to Dr. John Pagan, chairman of the Medical Society's board of trustees.

"It's not a power thing," he said.

As a surgeon at Grand View Hospital in West Rockhill Township, Pagan said he values nurse practitioners and has relied on them as "physician extenders." For example, if he's tied up in surgery, a nurse practitioner in his office could vet incoming patients, making initial assessments and other decisions until his return.

"We don't want to see anybody get it wrong," he said. "We want the whole team to get it right every time, for every patient."

Pagan said his children, three boys who range in age from 12 to 17, sometimes see nurse practitioners. He's confident in the care they are receiving because those nurse practitioners are working in teams that include doctors, he said.

"I know that in the background, in the office, a doctor is by [the nurse practitioner's] side, readily available," he said. "You can't take the most trained and experience person out of it."

Rizzo echoed the point, noting that, according to the American Medical Association, doctors spend 12,000-16,000 hours in clinical training, compared with nurse practitioners' 500-700 hours.

"That's a huge difference," she said. "It takes years of education and clinical experience" to become a doctor.

Not all doctors are opposed to removing the strictures that apply to nurse practitioners, however.

Dr. Eric Kane, a founding partner of Lehigh Valley Family Practice in Hanover Township, Northampton County, works with a group of six doctors and two nurse practitioners, including Lynn Phillips. Phillips sees patients just as he does, and some patients prefer to see her over the doctors, Kane said.

"I really see Lynn and the other nurse practitioner as assets, not just something that backs us up in a busy time," he said.

The sentiment is echoed by Jodi Evans, a Bethlehem teacher who, along with her husband and two teenage children, are longtime patients of Lehigh Valley Family Practice.

"They are very knowledgeable," she said. "If you didn't tell me they were nurse practitioners, I wouldn't know that. The experience is very comparable" to that of seeing a doctor.