- -Text: 12/06/00 By Stewart Bowman, The Courier-Journal Leeco mine #68, in Jeff Kentucky. Caption: COURTESY OF KENTUCKY DEPARTMENT OF MINES AND MINERALS Leeco's No. 68 mine in Jeff, in Perry County, is where Hurt was injured. The federal Mine Safety and Health Administration's request for criminal charges in connection with Hurt's injury is under review by federal prosecutors in Lexington. (Photo: Copyright 2000 The Courier-Journ)

With no explanation and little discussion, the House budget bill passed this month slashed Gov. Steve Beshear’s proposals for mine safety by nearly $2.3 million a year — raising concerns among safety advocates that there might not be enough money to conduct required inspections.

Beshear had proposed using $7.6 million of coal severance tax revenues in each of the next two years for the state program that inspects and licenses coal mines. But the budget bill passed by the House reduces that to $5.3 million per year.

Overall, when including other state funding for the Office of Mine Safety and Licensing, the House cut represents a 15 percent reduction, compared to Beshear’s proposal — from $14.7 million to $12.4 million in 2014-15 and from $14.9 million to $12.6 million in 2015-16.

And Beshear’s proposal already included a 5 percent cut to the 145-employee agency that inspects and licenses coal mines, trains and certifies all coal miners, performs mine rescue operations and investigates mining accidents.

The House cut was not mentioned during the budget committee meeting or floor session when the budget bill was passed. But it was noticed by Beshear’s budget office.

“We’re very concerned about the lack of sufficient funds to ensure safety for our miners, and we will work with the House and the Senate to make certain the budget will include enough money to cover the critical needs in this agency,” Beshear said in a statement responding to a question about the cut.

Governor’s Office spokeswoman Kerri Richardson, and Dick Brown, spokesman for the Energy and Environment Cabinet, declined to elaborate or say specifically how the cut might affect the safety program’s ability to do its job.

But they emphasized that the budget bill will undergo changes as it proceeds through the Senate and a House-Senate conference committee.

The proposed cut has touched off a debate over whether the sharp drop in Kentucky coal miner employment in the past two years justifies a reversal of state actions taken to beef up mine safety since 15 miners died in Kentucky coal mines in 2006.

Rep. Rick Rand, a Bedford Democrat who chairs the House budget committee, said with employment down and coal severance revenues down overall, his committee decided that mine safety funds could be safely reduced. “There’s not nearly so much mining going on now as there has been,” Rand said. “So the need for those programs is probably not as great as it was — not that mine safety is not important. It’s very important. But as the number of mines decrease, the number of jobs decrease, the need for those inspections probably decreases as well.”

Rep. John Will Stacy, D-West Liberty, who chairs a budget subcommittee, said, “There’s no doubt that mine safety needs” the money that was cut. “But there’s all kinds of needs for it. But the truth of the matter is that receipts are down ... so we’re forced to tighten our belt.”

Some mine safety advocates say the House cut is cause for concern.

“It sounds terribly bad if they’ve cut that much from what was proposed by Beshear,” said Stanley Sturgill, an activist for mine safety and retired miner from Lynch. “I’m pretty sure the governor didn’t propose spending any more than he thought was necessary. ... It’s supposed to be a tight budget.”

Wes Addington, deputy director of the Appalachian Citizens Law Center, in Whitesburg, said, “We would be very concerned if it affects the ability of the office to do the six required inspections of mines each year.”

Steve Earle, an international vice president for the United Mine Workers whose district includes Western Kentucky, said, “I don’t like it. Yes employment is down, butit’s not time to cut mine safety.”

The budget bill is now in the hands of the Senate, where President Robert Stivers, R-Manchester, said he assumes the House’s reason for the cut is the steep decline in mining employment in recent years. The Energy and Environment Cabinet’s data shows coal employment in the last quarter of 2013 fell to 11,781, down from 18,096 in the final quarter of 2011.

“That’s one of the discussions we’ll have in the next couple of days to see if, based on the amount of activity ... do they need to have the personnel there to do the inspections that will be required,” Stivers said.

In each of the last two years there were two fatalities at Kentucky mines, according to the cabinet’s website. But mine safety emerged as a priority for the General Assembly in 2006 when 15 Kentucky miners died in coal mines including five at a methane explosion at the Kentucky Darby mine in Harlan County.

Those 2006 deaths prompted the General Assembly to strengthen safety laws, including increasing the number of required state inspections per year at mines from two to six.

Rep. Brent Yonts, D-Greenville, was sponsor of the those bills to strengthen mine safety. He said Friday he was unaware that the House version of the budget had cut mine safey funding. He said reduced mining activity and the fact that mines are also examined by federal inspectors may justify the cut.

“But the question of mine safety is very critical ... .” Yonts said. “I hope it doesn’t result in a tragedy.”

Mine safety is the largest of seven budget items that in recent years have been partly funded with coal severance tax receipts that were cut by the House. Others cut are programs that serve coal counties, including education and anti-drug programs.

Combined, the House cut $5.4 million per year from these programs and moved that money to a program that distributes part of coal severance tax revenues back to coal producing counties in the form of projects and grants decided by legislators from those counties.

The House budget includes 425 different diverse projects costing about $18 million per year within 34 coal counties. These include water and sewer projects; grants to cities, counties, school districts, volunteer fire departments, local civic organizations, senior citizen centers, libraries and other projects.

A few of the largest itemized projects are to pay debt service on county projects.

And for Pike County, the House budget lists a single project: a $2.4 million per year pool of money to which government agencies in the county can apply for grants from the Department for Local Government which award the grants after consultation with “the Pike County legislative delegation.”

The House did not cut two of Beshear’s new proposed uses of coal severance tax funds. It retained the use of $2 million each year for a Regional Strategic Development Fund and $200,000 each year for administrative costs of the new SOAR (Shaping Our Appalachian Region) which is the initiative to revive the Eastern Kentucky economy announced late last year by Beshear and 5th District Congressman U.S. Rep. Hal Rogers.

Jason Bailey, director of the Kentucky Center for Economic Policy, said these projects in coal counties “can definitely have value and many of these projects are for basic infrastructure and services that these counties need.”

But Bailey said, “Mine safety must be seen as an essential expense.” He said lawmakers must carefully examine the needs of the safety agency amid declining coal employment before deciding whether it can endure a cut.

Reporter Tom Loftus can be reached at (502) 875-5136. Follow him on Twitter at @TomLoftus_CJ.

What’s nextThe Senate budget committee will decide how it wants to fund mine safety when it amends the state’s $20 billion 2014-16 budget bill early this week and sends it to the Senate floor for a vote. The final budget will be hammered out in a House-Senate conference committee in the session’s final days.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1gfj9HD