This spring’s ho-hum municipal election barely registered with voters, and Mayor Michael Hancock coasted to re-election. His inaugural speech was classic Hancock: upbeat and full of sweeping generalities. Denver is hot, the millennials are flocking here. It’s summertime and the livin’ is easy.

In fact, the down-ballot elections reflect a different tone. The city elected an experienced and professional auditor, Tim O’Brien. An incumbent council member was defeated for the first time since 1987. Five of the six remaining councilors were elected four years ago. Only at-large Councilwoman Debbie Ortega has the experience of serving with four previous mayors: Federico Peña, Wellington Webb, John Hickenlooper and Bill Vidal.

Several new councilors have interesting backgrounds. Kevin Flynn was a former City Hall reporter with the Rocky Mountain News. Paul Kashmann was the longtime editor and publisher of The Washington Park Profile, a respected neighborhood newspaper. The two possess solid knowledge of the city.

Rafael Espinoza is an activist and an architect who trounced incumbent Susan Shepherd. Wayne New won a tight race against Anna Jones, a knowledgeable urbanist and former planning board member. Both New and Espinoza succeeded by leveraging neighborhood anxiety about over-development, congestion and threats to Denver’s cherished parks and open space.

Hancock and his team may think their clients are the hip, young creatives flocking to Denver. They are wrong. The voters they count on to approve tax initiatives and civic improvements are primarily seniors, families with children and engaged 30- and 40-somethings who value Denver’s accessible, human-scaled and relaxed way-of-life.

If your neighborhood is changing too drastically, traffic is a nightmare and there’s a homeless guy living in your alley, you are angry and you will vote.

My advice to the City Council: Get out of the City and County Building and move back to your districts. The reasons:

• The magnificent 1932 City and County Building is an impenetrable fortress. The front doors are sealed. Building entrances adjacent to the reserved Cherokee Street parking lots are accessible only to public officials or locked. It’s anyone’s guess which of the remaining six entrances is open.

• Parking is expensive, inaccessible and in short supply. Though the garage beneath the Webb Building was built to serve the public, it’s off-limits to all but city officials and employees.

• It’s challenging enough to enter the City and County Building for Monday evening council meetings. It is more challenging to locate the council’s committee meeting room, hidden behind the elevators on the third floor.

Denver’s $1.2 billion General Fund budget is robust. Sales-tax revenues are increasing by more than 5 percent annually. Between 2013 and 2015, the mayor’s office budget grew by 20 percent, the General Fund’s operating budget — 70 percent dedicated to personnel costs — increased by $140 million (16 percent) while the City Council’s budget added a paltry $500,000 to a $4 million base.

Council members should maintain offices within their districts. Taxpayers can afford it and deserve to have access to council offices and staff.

Another move for transparency? Publish the names, job descriptions and direct phone numbers for city employees, because the 311 information system is impenetrable.

Civic activist Susan Barnes-Gelt can be reached at Barnesgelt@ gmail.com.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.