Senator Rand Paul’s avid libertarian supporters view him as a philosopher statesman with a robust and nuanced understanding of government. His more progressive critics argue that Paul is an old fossil representing outdated and discredited ideas.

Either way, Rand Paul’s 2016 presidential ambitions continue to strengthen, especially in the wake of New Jersey Governor Chris Christie’s recent “Bridgegate” scandal.

So here’s a review of the feisty Kentucky senator’s political views in a form that perfectly assents to both characterizations of Rand Paul: “Philosoraptor” meme parodies– that is– PhilosoRandPaul memes:

Actual Quote: “Mr. President, are you willing to take Obamacare? If you don’t want it, why are we stuck with it?”

Actual Quote: (Referring to Congress) “Nothing ever happens around here.”

Actual Quote: “People are already saying now you need to weave and dodge, now you need to switch. Now you need to give up your conservative message. You need to become a moderate. You need to give up the tea party… The tea party message is not a radical message. It’s not an extreme message. What is extreme is a $2 trillion deficit.”

Actual Quote: “When will your rights be restored if the battle has no end, and the battlefield is limitless, and the war is endless?”

Actual Quote: “There is nothing conservative about bailing out Wall Street. Likewise, there is nothing progressive about billion dollar loans to millionaires to build solar panels.”

Actual Quote: (After Senator John McCain referred to tea party Republicans as “hobbits”) “I’d rather be a hobbit than a troll.”

Actual Quote: “Would a bombing campaign in Syria make the region more or less stable? … Just about any bad outcome you can imagine is made more likely by U.S. involvement in the Syrian civil war.”

Actual Quote: “Where’s the cacophony that stood up and said ‘How can [they] tap my phone without going to a judge first’? I say: ‘How can you kill someone without going to a judge first’?”

Make your own PhilosoRandPaul meme.

Here’s the template: