‘Race of the Santas and Reindeer

Join us in Breckenridge for the 3rd Annual Race of the Santa’s/Race of the Reindeer on Saturday, Dec. 7 at 4:15 p.m. This is a fun run on historic Breckenridge Main Street. All proceeds benefit Summit County Adopt an Angel. Come out have a good time and support a great cause. Registration: $40 (Includes a Santa Suit, and yes, you keep the suit), $15 - if you wear your own suit. Registration for the Race of the Reindeer (open to children 12 and under) is $10, Registration includes antlers and bells. To register, more info, go to www.brecksantarace.com or call (970) 453-5074.

Free HOA Presentation

The Mountain HOA Academy is hosting presentations on HOA Finance and Risk Management on Wednesday, Nov. 20 at the Mount Royal Room at County Commons, 37 Peak One Dr., Frisco. The event runs from 5:30 to 7:30 p.m. The presentation on HOA Finance will discuss effective assessment collection policies and how new legislation regarding bad debt affects delinquent accounts. Additionally, funding strategies for major capital projects will be addressed. The presentation on Risk Management will discuss reducing exposure to loss, significance of preventative maintenance and further pertinent remedies. There will be time for question and answer as well as some general discussion. The presentations are free and open to the public; light refreshments will be served. Registration is requested due to limited seating, but attendance is encouraged even if you do not register. Registration may be attended to by contacting Murray Bain at (970) 485-0829, or at murray@summitHOAservices.com.

Fill the Van

Colorado Mountain Express’s 16th annual Fill the Van food drive will take place this Saturday, Nov. 16 where thousands of pounds of food will be collected for food banks across Colorado’s mountain communities in Summit, Eagle, Garfield, and Pitkin Counties. CME vans will be parked outside of area grocery stores throughout Summit County, Eagle County and the Roaring Fork Valley for collections between 10 a.m. and 2 p.m. The collected donations will remain in the county in which they were donated. Beneficiaries include Family & Intercultural Resource Center (FIRC) in Summit County. Collection sites include: Dillon - City Market, Frisco –Wal-Mart, and Breckenridge – City Market.

Annual Nordic Ski Swap

Join us this weekend for the Nordic Ski Swap offering the best deals in the county on Classic, Skate, Telemark, Backcountry & Snowshoe equipment and accessories on Sat Nov. 16 and Sunday Nov. 17 at 1200 Ski Hill Rd. in Breckenridge & Nov. 22-24 at 616 Recreation Way at the Frisco Nordic Center. Turn your old gear or clothing into cash. No charge to consign items or attend the event, call us at (970) 453-6855 or visit www.breckenridgenordic.com events calendar for details and times.

Commander’s Call

Our next “Commander’s Call meeting will be on Pearl Harbor Day, Sat Dec. 7. All veterans, active duty and retired military personnel are encouraged and invited to attend. This will be held at Adriano’s Bistro and Pizza 240 Lake Dillon Dr., Dillon. This is a get together for all those who have served in our military and an opportunity to meet some great people that make Summit County their home. We will have a special observance to remember Pearl Harbor. Our host is a former US Air Force Chief of Staff General. For more information please call Willie Hoevers at (970) 368-6734.

Creating you personal Holidays greetings

This seminar will help you spice up your personal holiday greetings to relatives and friends using Microsoft Word. Whether it’s a calendar, a collage, or a newsletter we will briefly discuss each. We will also discuss the advantages of commercial services and private printers to prepare the copies of your greeting. This will be a “hands on” seminar so bring your computers and plan to follow along. The seminar will run Saturday, Nov. 16 from 9-11 a.m. at the Senior Center in Frisco. The cost is $5.00 and the seminar is limited to 20 so please call the Senior Center to pre-register at (970) 668-2940.

Reiling Gold Dredge Preservation

The Breckenridge Heritage Alliance is working on a Preservation Master Plan for the Reiling Gold Dredge in French Gulch. The public is invited to attend the second of two open houses to review and comment on options for preservation of the dredge, interpretation of the site and potential listing on the National Register of Historic Places. The public open house is scheduled for Thursday, Nov. 21, from 5 to 6:30 p.m. at Breckenridge Town Hall. This project is funded in part by a grant from the State Historical Fund. For more information, call Larissa O’Neil at (970) 453-9767 x101.

Optimist basketball

3rd-5th graders can register at any of the elementary schools. Registration deadline is Nov. 22. This will be a fun opportunity to learn the game and improve skills. We welcome sponsors and coaches. Please contact Mary Guilfoyle with any questions (719) 839-0971.

Winter Kick-off and fundraiser party

Nov. 16 from 5-9 p.m., the Backcountry Brewery in Frisco will host the club’s Second Annual Winter Kick-off Party and Fundraiser. Special guest, Matt Entz, will be there to talk sleds and premiere the new Boondockers 10 video. We have tons of prizes to give away from BCA, Boondockers, Motorfist, 509, Fly and other backcountry and snowmobile gear! The event is free for members and $5 for non-members. The club is a not-for-profit organization that protects, preserves and promotes snowmobiling in Summit County. All funds raised go directly to the club’s grooming program at Spring Creek. For more information: www.summitsnowmobilers.com.

Freeride registration

Team Breck Sports Club Alpine and Freeride program registration is open. Visit www.teambrecksportsclub.com, or call (970) 547-9099.

Little Red Schoolhouse Board

The Little Red Schoolhouse in Breckenridge is seeking a new board member. Interest in being on the fund-raising committee a plus. Please direct questions or letters of interest to Greta Shackelford: Greta@littleredbreck.com. (970)453-6871.

Young Adults and High School Students Concussion and Head Injury Support Group

This group will meet on Thursday Nov. 21, from 6-7 p.m. at the Church at Agape Outpost. The address is 15404 Colorado 9, Breckenridge. This is a fun, informative, and supportive group for survivors, their supporters and friends. Please join us. For more information, please contact Melissa Chang, an Occupational Therapist with Avalanche Physical Therapy, at (970) 668-6980 in the therapy department at St. Anthony Summit Medical Center/Avalanche PT and Sports Rehabilitation.

Backstage Theater looking for volunteers

It’s an exciting, fun filled new season at the Breckenridge Backstage Theatre. We invite all interested parties to join our enthusiastic throng of volunteers who support and participate in a variety of ways. Email nanageralyn@gmail.com to find out more.

Optimists honor middle school students

The Summit-Lake Dillon Optimist club recently honored several Summit Middle School students and their parents with a luncheon in recognition of the students’ community service work. Performing community service projects is part of the International Baccalaureate program at the school. Students recognized were, 6th grade: Shannon O’Brien, Jacob Lau and Lily Young, 7th grade: Simone Babet and 8th grade: Joey Klaas and Nicole McLachlan.

Right brain success process workshop

This Right Brain Success workshop will introduce you to the principles of the inventing process and show how the mind interprets what you experience based on how it is programmed. The good news is - when it is programmed the way you want it to be, it will become your partner in fulfilling your heart’s desire and on the road to having a happy and fulfilling life. The workshop will take place on Nov. 16. If you are interested in hearing more about Right Brain Success, please email: swan center@mindspring.com or call John Longhill at (970) 468-0924. The workshop fee is $475 and is fully guaranteed. If it does not meet or exceed your expectations you will receive a full refund.

It’s Elementary at Peppino’s

Eat-at or take-out from Peppino’s Pizza in Frisco on Tuesday, Nov. 19 and support Frisco Elementary School. A portion of the proceeds will benefit the school. Please mention Frisco Elementary when placing order. Thank you!

Adventures in Food and Art

Arts Alive Gallery & BOEC presents ADVENTURES IN FOOD & ART, An Adventure Filled fund-raiser For The Senses At Arts Alive Gallery on Thursday, Nov. 21, 2013, 5:30 p.m. to 8:30 p.m. hosted by: Arts Alive Gallery & Artists and BOEC. Let the worlds of art, food and adventure blend at Arts Alive Gallery where artists will prepare an international buffet of entrees with wines to match. Mingle with artists, learn about their art & enjoy an unforgettable evening. Enjoy early holiday shopping as Arts Alive will also donate 15% of all art sold to the BOEC. Cost is $50 per person to benefit the BOEC (limited space so please register early). Arts Alive Gallery is located in LaCima Mall at 500 South Main Street, Breckenridge. A convenient parking lot is directly behind LaCima Mall with entrance from Ridge Street. RSVP by Nov. 20 to Marci Sloan at marci@boec.org, or call (970) 453-6422 x 20. Details also available on www.boec.org.

Ready for Spaghetti

The Lake Dillon Preschool invites Summit County’s families, residents, and guests to our annual “Ready for Spaghetti” event Saturday, Nov. 16 at 5 p.m. at the Silverthorne Pavilion. Join us for a great meal provided by Copper Mountain Resort, a puppet show featuring renown marionnettiste Toni Napolitano, a performance by Lake Dillon Preschool students, activities, door prizes, and the chance to win one of six exciting raffle packages. Tickets are $20 for adults and $5 for children 3-12. Children 2 and under are free. All proceeds benefit the Lake Dillon Preschool, a non-profit early childhood education center providing high quality education in a safe, nurturing, creative, and earth-friendly environment. For information, (970) 468-1606.

Community Cub Scouts

In September, the Cub Scouts volunteered for the Vail Resorts Echo Day project. Pack 187 joined forces with the US Forest Service, Friends of the Dillon Ranger District, Boy Scout Troop 187, Keystone and Breckenridge Ski Resort to help rehabilitate the Frisco Peninsula trails. It was a great way to have fun while helping out our community. In October, Pack 187 Cub Scouts visited the Breckenridge Police Department. Scouts learned about how they can help protect and serve our community by being good citizens, respecting the job that our local officers do and understanding our laws. They also got to see lots of cool police gear, tour the station and get inside a patrol car. Pack 187 Cub Scouts also began working on their advancement activities. Scouts gather once every two weeks with their peers and adult leaders to complete activities that are both fun and provide a forum to teach them outdoor skills while instilling the 12 Cub Scout Core Values: Citizenship, Compassion, Cooperation, Courage, Faith, Health and Fitness, Honesty, Perseverance, Positive Attitude, Resourcefulness, Respect and Responsibility. Scouting is “fun with a purpose”. The program helps to develop a boy’s character, trains them in the responsibilities of participating as a citizen of our community and develops personal fitness. It’s not too late to join Breckenridge Cub Scout Pack 187. Cub Scouts is open to all boys going into 1st through 5th grades regardless of race, religion, socioeconomic status or disability. No previous scouting is required – you can start at any Cub Scout level as determined by your age or school grade. Most meetings are held weekday evenings so as not to interfere with family weekend plans.

Come join us for a fun evening of sledding and s’mores at Carter Park on December 3rd at 6:30 p.m. Just bring a helmet, headlamp, sled, snow suit, boots and gloves. For more info contact cub master Chris Johnson at johnson-christopher@comcast.net or committee chair Jen Gallagher at tenthousandft@comcast.net or check out our website https://cubscoutpack187.shutterfly.com. Pack 187 gives thanks to the Rotary Club of Summit County for being our charter organization.

Knights of Columbus thank you

The second annual “Coats for Kids Campaign” provided warm winter clothing for 500 children. This was made possible in large part because compassionate and caring individuals realized the need. A special thanks to Hudson Auto- Tim Weiers, Century 21- Amy Smits, Bank of the West, Breckenridge Grand Vacations, B.B.C., Dillon Ridge Liqours, Hertz, Summit Foundation, Target Rotary, all Summit Churches and schools, Pat and Jack Thomass, Daniel Stratna, Chuck Leathers, Betty Stielow, Tom Driemeyer, Mary Jo and John Culver, Michael Bruggeman, Tommy Barnart, Krystal 93, Summit Daily, and Walmart- Elizabeth, Gammie, Bridget, and April.

Salvation Army bell ringers

The Salvation Army’s bell-ringing campaign is looking for volunteers to ring the bells and collect money. The money raised stays here in Summit County to help out our fellow residents. Volunteers are needed Dec. 1-23 at City Market in Dillon and Breckenridge, Safeway and Walmart in Frisco. Shifts are two hours. To sign up for shifts or for more information, contact FIRC at (970)262-3888 ext. 302.

Coffee chat with Lake Dillon Theatre

The Lake Dillon Theatre Company is hosting a free public “coffee chat” at the Red Buffalo Coffee Shop at 358 Blue River Parkway in Silverthorne on Nov. 8 and Nov. 22 between 9-11 a.m. This is your opportunity to chat informally with the staff of the theatre and ask questions or share thoughts about the theater company. You can also get updates about the organization and new programing for 2014. This is free and open to the public, just drop by and chat.

Library board seeks new member

The Summit County Library is seeking a dedicated person to fill one vacant position on the library board. Being a board member requires a time commitment of two to three hours per month, for one meeting in which members discuss and manage library policies, oversee the library budget and implement new strategies to achieve library objectives and goals. Board members will also be asked to assist with the new South Branch project, which will require some experience with fundraising and grant-writing. In addition, board members may serve on library committees, which will often require more time. If you are interested in becoming a library board member, please submit a letter of application and resume to: Summit County Library Board, P.O. Box 770, Frisco, CO 80443 by 5 p.m. on Friday, Nov. 9. If you would like more information on this position or other volunteer opportunities with the Summit County Library, please call Joyce Dierauer, executive director, at (970) 668-4130. To learn more about the numerous services available at the Summit County Library, please visit our website at www.summitcountylibraries.org; “like” us on Facebook; follow us on Pinterest and Twitter, or simply come by and check with us at any of our three locations, in Frisco, Breckenridge and Silverthorne.

4-H STEM Trainings

Welcome STEM Enthusiasts! CSU Extension/Summit County 4-H are offering free trainings to help community members, parents, & teachers learn how to offer 4-H STEM programs at the school of your choice. Dr. Barbara Shaw, CSU Extension/4-H STEM Specialist and Kathie Kralik, Summit County 4-H Program Manager are offering STEM trainings Nov. 14 through Nov. 16. On Thursday, Nov. 14, join us at Summit Cove Elementary, 4:30-6:30 p.m., for a Robotics Training — no experience necessary; and on Friday, Nov. 15, 5:30-7:30 p.m. or Saturday, Nov.16, 9-11 a.m., both at the County Commons in Frisco, trainings will be offered on how to get an afterschool STEM program going in your school with a focus on the 2013 National 4-H Science Experiment, 4-H Maps & Apps (GIS). www.4-H.org/NYSD Other STEM areas will also be offered to teach parents and volunteers how to put together a STEM program that fits into your schedule & interests. Please RSVP for these FREE CSU/4-H Trainings by Friday, November 8--kkralik@co.summit.co.us or 668-4142

Breckenridge Nordic Ski Swap

Come get the best deals in the county on Nordic and Backcountry equipment and clothing at the Nordic Center Ski Swap, Nov. 15-17 at 1200 Ski Hill Road at the Breckenridge Nordic Center and Nov. 22-24 at 616 Recreation Way at the Frisco Recreation Center. Have gear or clothing to sell — earn store credit or cash for your items. No charge to consign items and no entry fee for the event, call us at 970-453-6855 or visit www.breckenridgenordic.com events calendar for details and times.

High School Short Story Contest

The Rotary Club of Summit County and The Summit Daily News present the fourth annual Summit High School Short Story Contest. The contest is open to all SHS students as well as home-schooled students.

• Word limit: 2,000

• Subject: Whatever you’d like

• Deadline: Midnight, Nov. 16

• Submission: E-mail your story as a Word document to btrollinger@summitdaily.com with subject: short story contest.

The top three winners will earn cash prizes and will read their stories aloud at a Rotary meeting. Winning stories will also be published in The Summit Daily News.

A few things to consider:

• Be sure to have your name and e-mail address on your submission.

• List the word count.

• Spell-check.

• Creativity and good writing are the two main qualities to be judged, but proper grammar, spelling and style will figure heavily as well.

• Have fun.

Head injury support group

Young Adults and High School Students Concussion and Head Injury Support Group: This group will meet on Thursday, Nov. 21, from 6-7 p.m. at the Church at Agape Outpost. The address is 15404 Highway 9, Breckenridge, CO. This is a fun, informative and supportive group for survivors, their supporters and friends. Please join us! For more information, please contact Melissa Chang, an occupational therapist with Avalanche Physical Therapy, at (970) 668-6980 in the therapy department at St. Anthony Summit Medical Center/Avalanche PT and Sports Rehabilitation.

Christmas shopping helps your local library

The Friends of the Library are selling tickets for the Outlets at Silverthorne eighth annual Holiday Shopping Extravaganza. This annual event will take place on Saturday, Nov. 23, at the Outlets at Silverthorne, from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Stores will stay open until 8 p.m. Those purchasing tickets will receive free: raffle ticket for over $25,000 in hourly giveaways and prizes, continental breakfast, lunch, beer, wine & cordial tastings, dessert bar, entertainment, shuttle service, goody bag and exclusive shopping discounts, offers and giveaways. Ticket prices are $20, with $10 of each ticket sold going directly to the Friends of the Library (FOL), who use the money to support many of the programs offered by the Summit County Library. Plus, when 75 or more tickets are sold, FOL is eligible to share in the raffle money, which further supports the Library. Tickets will be available at each of the Library locations. You may also purchase tickets or volunteer to help with the event by calling the Main Library at (970) 668-5555.

Rotary Thanksgiving dinner

Summit County Rotary Community Thanksgiving Dinner will be held at the Silverthorne Pavilion on Thursday, Nov. 28 from noon to 3 p.m. Come and give thanks with your family and friends while enjoying a wonderful traditional Thanksgiving feast provided by the Keystone Conference Center. The dinner is free and everyone is welcome! For further information, call Wendy Myers at (970) 262-9336.

Summit County Libraries Closed for Thanksgiving

The Summit County Libraries will be closed on Thursday, Nov. 28 and Friday, Nov. 29, so that our staff may celebrate Thanksgiving with their families. We are thankful for all of our Library Patrons and hope that you enjoy this day. We will resume our regular business hours on Saturday, Nov. 30.

Summit County Library needs your help

The Summit County Library is seeking volunteers to assist with the upcoming Book & Bake sale Friday, Dec. 6, from noon to 6 p.m., and Saturday, Dec. 7, from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., held by the Summit County Friends of the Library. The sale will provide funding for programs that benefit residents and visitors alike. Donations of any type of baked goods, such as pies, brownies, cookies, cakes and breads, are requested and appreciated. We also need people to help set up for the sale on Thursday, Dec. 5, around 3 p.m., in the Buffalo Mountain room at the Main Branch, Frisco. We also need assistance during the sale. In addition, help is requested during the take-down process, which will begin promptly at 5 p.m. at the completion of the sale. If you are available at any of these times, and would like to help out your local library, please call Joyce Dierauer, at (970) 668-5555.

Summit County Libraries closed for holiday

The Summit County Libraries will be open on Christmas Eve, from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m.

We will be closed all day on Christmas, and all day on New Year’s Day, so that our staff will have the opportunity to enjoy some time with their families. We hope you all enjoy this wonderful holiday season!

Weekly Job Seeker Workshop

Go2Work offers free weekly workshops for job seekers. Drop in any time on Tuesdays between noon and 4 p.m. Workshops are offered at Colorado Mountain College, in Dillon, in the Computer Lab, Room 11. Services available include computer access, Internet job searches, job application and resume assistance, interviewing skills, interest inventories, computer-based work skill enhancement, skill assessment and certification through ACT WorkKeys, and earn the new CareerReady Colorado Certificate! Go2Work also offers skill training through Career Ready 101™, a web-based study program, information on Colorado Mountain College classes and financial aid, information on other training and educational resources, online registration for Colorado WorkForce Center, information regarding WIA (WorkForce Investment Act) benefits, and referrals to additional services. All Services are free & no pre-registration is required. Contact Jason Read at (970) 468-5989, or via email at jread@coloradomtn.edu.

Recycle Candy Wrappers at Summit Cove Elementary

Students and teachers at Summit Cove Elementary joined Terracycle to turn trash into cash, and more importantly, to reduce trash going to our local landfill. Recycle any brand or any size candy wrapper (no gum wrappers or candy boxes) and SCE gets 1 cent per wrapper. Collection boxes will be in the school cafeteria through mid-November and at the Fall Carnival (Nov. 1 5-8 p.m.).

Keystone Science School looking for outdoor gear

Are you looking to clean out and sort through your winter and summer gear? Please think of donating those items to Keystone Science School. KSS is in search of quality outdoor gear that can be used by our fabulous teaching staff and the students we serve. We are looking for x-country skis/boots/poles, in any size. We are also in need of synthetic warm layers (jackets, pants, fleece), rain gear (jackets, pants), hiking boots, sleeping bags, tents and backpacks (minimum 1,400 cubic inches). We have set up a drop-off station on the KSS campus, located at 1053 Soda Ridge Road, Keystone. Gear can be left in the KSS trailer, located in the parking lot to the left of the entrance, just past the Keystone Stables. If you have any questions, please contact Kristina Horton, (970) 468-2098. We thank you in advance for your generous donations!

Support your local library

With 2013 quickly winding down, many of you are considering charitable donations as a way to trim your tax bill. One idea, to help make the most of your end-of-year gift, is to support your local library foundation. The Summit County Library Foundation supports a variety of programs and services at each of the Summit County Library’s three branches. These include the children’s summer reading programs; continued expansion of the downloadable e-book and audio book collections; funding for the Library’s community relations events; and the purchase of special equipment that will improve available services for our patrons. To reach our financial goals to fully support these programs and more, the Foundation recently launched its Annual Fall Fund Raising campaign and is seeking donations to help it continue to fund these programs. If you are able to support the Foundation, please make your contribution, by check, to: The Summit County Library Foundation, P.O. Box 770, Frisco, CO 80443. You may also pay by credit card, or by using Paypal on the website at www.summitcountylibraries.org/library-foundation.

Friends of the Library week

Please join us as we celebrate Friends of the Library Week at the Summit County Libraries. This special week is designated to show our Friends how much we appreciate their support and all they do for the Summit libraries. The Friends of the Library is a nonprofit, volunteer group organized in Summit County in 1960 and incorporated in 1977. The Friends of the Library work hard to increase public awareness, use and support of libraries; to provide financial assistance by purchasing special items in support of library programs; and to sponsor programs designed to add to the cultural life of Summit County, such as the Travel Slide Show Series, all three of the book sales and the Teen Summer Reading Program. Volunteers are always needed and greatly appreciated. The Friends meet the second Wednesday of each month at 5:30 p.m. in the Buffalo Mountain Room at the County Commons Building in Frisco. Anyone interested in learning more about this wonderful group is welcome! If you have any questions or would like additional information, please call 668-5555; visit our website at www.summitcountylibraries.org.; “like” us on Facebook; follow us on Pinterest or Twitter (@summitlibraries); or simply come by and check with us at any of our three locations, in Frisco, Breckenridge and Silverthorne.

It pays to get A’s

At Alpine Bank, we want to reward your child for earning good grades. Each grading period, bring a copy of your child’s most recent report card to Alpine Bank in Breckenridge, Dillon or Frisco. We will draw five report cards from each branch, and each of those report cards will receive $10 for A’s or 4’s and 3’s and $5 for B’s or 2’s for five main subjects. That means a straight-A report card will earn your child $50 cash! The deadline for submission of report cards for this quarter will be Nov. 22. Please limit submissions to one report card per child per quarter.

Open Arms has openings

Open Arms Childcare and Preschool has current openings available for preschool students. We have highly trained teachers who offer a quality academic curriculum with Christian values to prepare students for kindergarten and beyond. Parents are welcome to visit our center, located at Christ Lutheran Church, 16072 Hwy 9, Farmer’s Korner. For more information please call (970) 237-3229, visit our website at www.OpenArmsChildcareAndPreschool.com or follow us on Facebook.

CMC English language classes

Students can register for English Language classes this week at Colorado Mountain College in Dillon. The cost to register is very low and financial aid is available. Classes are offered on Tuesday and Thursday evenings and Monday and Wednesday mornings, with childcare available! Now is a great time for employers to encourage workers who speak foreign languages to learn English. For more information contact professor Sharon Aguiar at (970) 468-5989.

CMC clases de inglés

Estudiantes pueden inscribir para clases de inglés esta semana al colegio CMC en Dillon. El precio es muy bajo y becas son disponibles. Las clases reúnen los martes y jueves en la tarde y en los lunes y miércoles en la mañana con guardería disponible. Para más información llame a la profesora Sharon Aguiar al (970) 468-5989.

Breckenridge Dining Passports

The Breckenridge Restaurant Association (BRA) is offering fall dining specials at participating restaurants as a fundraiser for Summit County Cares, a collection of organizations that includes the Care Clinic, Family & Intercultural Resource Center, Advocates for Victims of Assault and Social Services. The restaurant community wants to give back to the organizations that help many of its employees, patrons and community members. Breckenridge Dining Passports are each valid for two people and are valid now through Nov. 14. Passports are available at the Breckenridge Welcome Center, the Summit Foundation and participating restaurants.

N’Balance class

Join us for a community-based balance class on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 1:15-2:15 p.m. at the Summit County Community and Senior Center in Frisco. Classes started Oct. 22 and run through Dec. 5, with no class during Thanksgiving week. Come improve your balance, increase core and leg strength, improve posture and enhance your ability to navigate obstacles! This class is taught by Pat Aden, PT with Avalanche Physical Therapy. The suggested donation is $5 per class.

Take ‘The Great Adventure’!

A Journey through the Bible, with Jeff Cavins, Tim Gray and Sarah Christmyer. A Story of Salvation using The Bible Timeline learning system to get across the “big picture.” This system simplifies the biblical narrative by dividing it into 12 periods of Bible history, focusing on 14 of the 73 books of the Bible that tell the story in order from Creation to the time of the Church. Once that overall context is learned, the rest of the Bible is read from within the understanding that framework provides. If you are Catholic and want a better understanding of Sacred Scripture; If you were raised Catholic but have fallen away or attend Mass only on Christmas and Easter; If you are not Catholic but your Christian faith is hungry for a Bible-study class; If you are not Christian and want to know why Christians are so zealous about God’s plan through His son Jesus Christ; then join the Great Adventure at Our Lady of Peace in Silverthorne. This will be a 24-class adventure from November 2013 through May 2014. Call Larry at (970) 513-0045 for more details or request information by email from larry@cattlehedging.com.

2014 Master Gardener Training

Colorado State University Extension in Summit County is accepting applications for the 2014 Colorado Master Gardener Training. This signature CSU Extension program provides a unique opportunity for local gardening enthusiasts to help their community while learning more about home gardening issues. The 2014 training will take place on Thursdays at the County Commons building in Frisco, from Jan. 23 to March 27. The 10-week course offers comprehensive, research-based instruction in home gardening topics, delivered via distance education technology and presented by CSU Extension specialists from around the state. Upon completion of training, Colorado Master Gardener trainees agree to contribute 50 hours of volunteer service toward home gardening education. The cost of the training program is $265. A non-volunteer option is also available for $625, and is often chosen by professionals in the green industry as continuing education. Please contact the CSU Extension office at (970) 668-4140 or write dan.schroder@colostate.edu for further information and to request an application form. Applications can also be downloaded at www.co.summit.co.us/extension. The deadline to register is Friday, Dec. 13.

Travel slide show series at North Branch Library

Get ready to visit exciting new places without having to worry about delayed flights, lost luggage and the other hassles of traveling when the Friends of the Library present the annual Travel Slide Show Series. The program begins this year on Jan. 31, 2014, at 7 p.m. This event will be held in the Blue River Meeting Room of the North Branch Library, 651 Center Circle, Silverthorne. During our first program, we learn that winter can be a magical time of year for outdoor photography. Join local photographer and author Dave Cooper on a journey through the Western States and Canada, as he shares his own images from his favorite winter locations and offering tips to improve your winter shots. We are still looking for participants for this year’s Travel Slide Show Series. If you would like to share your photos from your own travel adventures and experiences with our community, please call Janet at (970) 468-5887

Seedling trees for conservation

Summit County Extension and the Colorado State Forest Service are partnering to provide local landowners with low-cost seedling trees, grown from native stock at the Colorado State Forest Service Nursery in Fort Collins. Seedlings are sold in lots of 30 or 50, and include native mountain species such as aspen, Engelmann spruce, Colorado blue spruce, limber pine and bristlecone pine. CSFS seedlings offer an affordable way to ensure a diverse, forested landscape on your property in years to come. Place your order early for the best selection, as popular varieties often run out. The extension office will accept orders until April 18, 2014. Seedlings will be available for pickup in Frisco in mid-May (exact date to be determined). To download an order form and for more information on selecting appropriate species for your property, visit the extension website at www.co.summit.co.us/Extension, or call (970) 668-3595.

Summit High School says muchas gracias!

A huge thank you to charitable Summit County from Summit High School’s Spanish Honor Society and Summit in Honduras! We asked that our community go through and simplify their lives by cleaning out, and the outpouring of donations we received for the Fill-A-Truck ARC fundraiser was truly overwhelming. A very special thank you to the following businesses that were so generous in their donations — Recycled Sports, FIRC in Dillon, FIRC in Breckenridge, Habitat for Humanity ReStore, Horse Cents Thrift, For Pet’s Sake, A Furniture Find, Mountain Comfort, Alpine Accents, Sogno, Krystal 93, Summit Daily News, LIFT 106/KRKY/KSMT and all of our wonderful neighbors and community! Your generosity will help offset the cost for the nine high school students traveling in November on a Spanish immersion service trip to rural Honduras to volunteer at an orphanage, paint a school and create a nursery at a medical clinic. We are so fortunate and thankful to live in such a giving and amazing community. Muchas gracias!

Extreme Baseball thanks

Summit Extreme Baseball, Summit Youth Baseball and American Legion Baseball would like to extend our utmost appreciation and thanks to the Rotary Club of Summit County for “Make A Difference Day.” Many volunteers, including members of the local Boy Scouts and Cub Scouts, assisted us in improving our new indoor Baseball Academy across the hall from the Bowling Alley in Dillon. Volunteers removed debris, cleaned and painted to help make this amazing facility a better place to serve our local youth athletes.

Thank for from the Summit Baseball Academy

Summit Extreme, Summit Youth Baseball and Summit Tigers American Legion would like to express sincere thanks and gratitude for the incredible generosity of the many sponsors of the new Summit Baseball Academy across the hall from the Bowling Alley in Dillon. Grand Slam sponsors include: Stan Miller Inc., Helton Backhoe Service, Taylor Electric, The Summit Foundation, Greg Hess Contracting, Inc., Orr Concrete, Inc., Everist Materials, JVC & KB Mechanical Contractors, Morgan Flooring, iON, Quandary Grille; Dos Locos, Grand Lodge on Peak 7, La Riva Del Lago, Law Office of William R. Falcone, Peak 1 Express, Stuhr & Associates, and White Mountain Tours.

Other generous sponsors include: Lowe’s, Mountain Building Solutions, Pika Glass, Superior Alarm, Summit Roll Offs, Summit County Waste Facility, Breckenridge Building Center, Vail Valley Fire & Sprinkler, Mountain Escapes Accents, Acorn Creek Builders, Linda Pasternak, US Bank, High Country Healing, and Pug Ryan’s Brewery.