Spending on medicines increased by double digits for a second year in 2015 and reached $425 billion based on invoice prices. After adjusting for rebates and other price concessions by manufacturers, net spending was $310 billion, up 8.5 percent over 2014 levels, according to a healthcare industry research report.

The surge of new medicines remained strong and the use of recently launched brands remained at historically high levels, while the savings from brands facing generic competition were relatively low, according the report, Medicines Use and Spending in the U.S.: A Review of 2015 and Outlook to 2020, from the IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics.

The findings reflect a market where drug manufacturers are accepting lower prices on well-established drugs while gaining increasing revenues on newer specialty and innovative drugs. Specialty drug spending reached $121 billion on a net basis, up more than 15 percent from 2014.

The study’s outlook for medicine spending through 2020 is for mid-single digit growth, driven by innovative treatments and offset by brands facing generic competition. The report forecasts that U.S. spending on medicines on a net price basis will reach $370-400 billion in 2020, growing at a compound annual growth rate of 4 to 7 percent. This growth will reflect increased spending on innovative medicines, offset by lower spending on brands that will lose market exclusivity over the next five years.

The average patient with a commercial plan paid $44 per prescription last year.

The average patient cost for brand prescriptions filled through a commercial plan has increased more than 25 percent since 2010, reaching $44 per prescription last year. according to the report from the New Jersey research institute.

The report says that a number of additional innovative medicines should become available for patients over the next five years as the late-phase pipeline currently holds 2,320 novel products.

Healthcare Delivery

The study found that longer-term trends continued to play out last year, driven by the Affordable Care Act and rising overall healthcare costs. Increasingly, healthcare is being delivered by different types of healthcare professionals and from different facilities, while patients face higher out-of-pocket costs and barriers to access.

The invoice prices for branded medicines rose 12.4 percent in 2015, compared with 14.3 percent in the prior year. The study says that heightened competition among manufacturers, along with more aggressive efforts by health plans and pharmacy benefit managers to limit price growth, resulted in concessions that reduced price increases on an estimated net basis to 2.8 percent, significantly lower than in prior years.

“The challenge of balancing access and the cost of care in an era of innovative but more expensive treatments continues as a theme across our healthcare system,” said Murray Aitken, IMS Health senior vice president and executive director of the IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics. “The level of price concessions achieved in 2015 points to a shift in market dynamics as manufacturers accept lower price increases on existing products. At the same time, spending on new brands continued at near-historic levels.”

The report’s findings include the following: