Love has her plans: Repeal Obamacare, secure the border, simplify the tax code, build jobs. These all are ambitious goals for a freshman. They are also the same objectives the Republican-led House has unsuccessfully pushed over and over. (The House, for example, has voted more than 50 times to repeal or slash funding for Obamacare with zero effect on the president's landmark legislation.)

Traditionally, freshmen stay relatively quiet, learn the ropes and try to ingratiate themselves with their more senior colleagues. But Love's plan, as the representative for Utah's 4th Congressional District, is to be out front from the start.

"Instead of going back and forth, getting buried in the dysfunction in Washington, I'm going to do everything I can to go out and represent Utah to the public," she said. "I want to be out there talking about some of the things we are doing great, some of the things we could be doing better.

"I don't believe you can change public policy without garnering public support and public opinion," she said, "so I'm going to go and try to inspire people."

In many ways, it sounds like the strategy employed by President Barack Obama, which has failed to win over much of Washington. Even with the White House bully pulpit, Obama's agenda has been marginalized.

The key is to step back and focus — at least, that's the advice Dave Hansen, Love's campaign manager, has for her. "Don't get caught up in all of the crap of Washington," he said.

"Don't get caught up in wanting to please all of the groups that want to pull you in a million different directions, whether it be the national parties and the national committees saying, 'We need you to go here' and 'We need you to go there,' " he adds. "Learn to say no and say it strongly."

Love recognizes that she'll be unique in D.C. — a black Mormon and a woman from a red state not known for its minority populations, in a party crowded with aging white guys.

Florida Sen. Marco Rubio learned this quickly when he came to Congress in 2011. The Cuban American was an attractive front guy for the GOP, a Latino who could build bridges to a community that had largely abandoned the party.

But Rubio made it clear in his first years in office that he wasn't there to be a show horse. He turned down national media interviews, making Florida journalists his priority. "I needed to step off the national stage for a while," Rubio wrote in his autobiography, "An American Son."

"If I had started my Senate career by focusing my attention on press opportunities, my staff would conclude that our office's highest priority was to keep me in the national spotlight," Rubio wrote.

Love said she recognizes that point but believes keeping a high profile is the best way to help her district and her party in the crowded House. "I am no good to you if I am one vote of 435," she says.

And even if Love has second thoughts, others may try to draw her out. In the modern media cycle, pundits are a dime-a-dozen and cable TV loves to turn to members of Congress to fill all those minutes in the 24-7 news churn. Fox News would love her. MSNBC would enjoy tangling with her. CNN is always looking for a new voice.

Inside the Capitol complex, she will be an instant go-to source for reporters hunting for a media-friendly member with a unique perspective. They may ask her more questions about race and her party's challenges with black voters than she's been comfortable with to date.