With all the talk about the impact of the Affordable Care Act on government healthcare costs and consumer choice, there’s a little-known provision in the law that is about to bear fruit in the form of lower drug costs and more access to lifesaving drugs for patients.

Currently, more and more patients with potentially deadly and debilitating diseases such as cancer, multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis rely on biologic drugs, medicines that are not chemically synthesized but produced by living cell lines in a biological process. These drugs often work miracles in treating their condition but they can cost thousands of dollars every month out of pocket, even with insurance. But now we’re at the tipping point and soon competition will change this anti-consumer dynamic.

ADVERTISEMENT

The Affordable Care Act created an overdue pathway for generic versions of these drugs, called biosimilars, to compete with the brand names – just as the Hatch-Waxman Act did three decades ago for standard, chemically synthesized drugs. Because of that 1984 law, today more than 90 percent of typical drugs have generic counterparts, saving patients and the health care system hundreds of billions of dollars.

Now, the biosimilars provision of the Affordable Care Act is finally becoming reality. In September, the first biosimilar, Zarxio, became available to patients. This drug reduces infections caused by chemotherapy. Other biosimilars are lining up behind it to get Food & Drug Administration (FDA) approval and compete with expensive brand-name biologics.

This new, competitive marketplace for biologic drugs means increased access for patients – many of whom are struggling to pay for these drugs or just choose to go without. It also means reduced costs for taxpayers. A Rand Corporation study predicted a drop of $44.2 billion in direct spending on biologic drugs between 2014 and 2024. Earlier, the Federal Trade Commission estimated biosimilars would be between 10-30 percent less expensive than their brand-name counterparts. This has proven true in Europe where biosimilars have been used safely for years and patients have been benefitting from more choice.

Nonetheless, the pharmaceutical companies that make name-brand biologics are working hard behind the scenes to delay competition and keep the prices of biologics high. First, they funded disingenuous “patient” groups to claim the biosimilars weren’t safe. But the law and the FDA have implemented stringent requirements on biosimilar manufactures ensuring that their products would have no “clinically meaningful differences” from the brand-name drugs.

Failing at scare tactics, the latest stunt for the big pharmaceutical companies is to drag the makers of biosimilars through the courts. High-priced corporate lawyers are seeking injunctions and exploiting technicalities in the 2010 law to discourage biosimilar manufacturers by saddling them with legal costs and delays. The courts will likely throw out these arguments but, in the meantime patients have to wait months to see lower prices while the court figures out highly technical issues. Patients lose the most when these companies spend money in the legal system instead of in the laboratory.

For example, a federal appeals court recently found that biosimilars maker Sandoz had indeed followed proper steps under the law for bringing Zarxio to market. The suit brought by Amgen, however, delayed Zarxio’s availability to patients for six months. Amgen, Pfizer, Johnson & Johnson and other big pharmaceutical companies have more such lawsuits in the works.

These cases have nothing to do with safety or fairness. They have everything to do with squeezing every penny of profit out of lifesaving drugs. In effect they are no different from Martin Shkreli, the 32-year-old billionaire who bought the rights to an AIDS drug and raised the price 55 fold. There is nothing stopping pharmaceutical companies from abusing the legal system to postpone fair competition just as there is nothing stopping Shkreli. But for the sake of both patients and taxpayers, these shenanigans should be exposed.

The Constitution allows Congress to secure “for limited times” exclusive rights to the inventor of a new product. “Limited” does not mean forever, particularly when many patients have already waited a long time. The 2010 health care law created a fair path to bringing safe biosimilars to market and create competition. We are beginning to see this incredible consumer benefit in the law open up access and provide choices for patients who need these new miracle drugs to survive and live a normal life. Let’s not let the big pharmaceutical companies continue with their delay tactics in the shadows.

Maffei served in the House from 2009 to 2011 and again from 2013 to 2015.