(KUTV) To enlist in the U.S. armed forces one must be at least 17-years-old. Kheelan Allred, 2-years-old, certainly wouldn't qualify, but try telling that to the federal government.



Kheelan lost his Affordable Care Act health insurance because the feds say they're concerned he might not be American. His mom, Niquole Allred, was born in Utah, as was Kheelan's father.

Niquole sent in her son's social security card and his birth certificate showing he was born at L.D.S. Hospital; that wasn't good enough.

The feds want more and gave Niquole a list of what she can provide to appeal the decision. It's a very difficult if not impossible list.

They ask her to show Kheelan's passport, certificate of naturalization, certificate of citizenship or a state-issued enhanced driver's license. When Niquole pointed out, again, her son is two-year-old and doesn't have any of those things, she was given another option.

"They said a military I.D." she said.

Niquole is continuing the appeals process but decided to Get Gephardt because she says she's fed up, and worse, her bruiser son has been without insurance for four months.

"It's scary. What if he got hurt? Broke an arm? God-forbid somebody hit him with a car or something," she said.

Health and Human Services spokesman Michael Fierberg says the system is working. He couldn't say why Kheelan was flagged. He said it could be anything from human error, to suspicion of fraud, or even just a random audit. But he says that Niquole is following the correct steps, as cumbersome as they may be.

"When faced with a situation that appears to be illogical or erroneous, the best way to overcome that is to go through the appeals process," Fierberg said.

The good news is that if and when Kheelan is verified as the citizen he is, HHS will go back and make sure the months where Kheelan didn't have insurance don't cost his mom, Fierberg said.

"In cases where it was a mistake, it can be undone retroactively. The appeals officer does have the power to retroactively re-instate."

When the appeals process fails you do have the right to sue in federal court, Fierberg says, but that of course comes with lawyer billable hours.

Sure enough, the appeals process finally did work. In the end, it took Nichole sending in page after page of personal records, including doctor's notes records, immunization records and even a note from Kheelan's doctor giving the feds a physical description of the toddler - like his hair and eye color.

Kheelan is now retroactively insured. His mom is mad that it took such time consuming hurdles.

Edited by Steven Crass