– The sugar beet harvest is finished here, so now it's time to get to politicking.

Minnesota House District 1B, near the North Dakota border, is nearly 3,000 square miles and includes dozens of tiny townships with names like Badger, Fisher, Garden and Liberty.

In 2010, Rep. Debra Kiel, whose family farms 2,100 acres, became the first Republican to win the seat in decades. But she faces an energetic and well-financed challenger in DFLer Eric Bergeson, who sold a family nursery to his brother to run for office.

Republicans are counting on Kiel to hang on — they need to win seven seats to gain the House majority, and the defeat of a Republican incumbent would make the hill that much steeper.

In 1997, Bergeson took over the family nursery, but has lived an eclectic professional life. He wrote a newspaper column about small-town life that was syndicated in about 20 Upper Midwest newspapers; wrote a book about the Minnesota version of the underdog basketball team in "Hoosiers"; taught history; and was even a page in the state House as an adult.

That experience furthered a passion for the Minnesota House, whose chamber he calls one of the most beautiful rooms in America. It also catalyzed what he calls his "Minnesota chauvinism," a belief that Minnesota has led the nation in education, social services and other measures of quality of life.

"It's a mission of mine to stand up for that Minnesota civic tradition that I think is under attack," he said over a slab of prime rib at Erickson's Smokehouse in his hometown of Fertile. "It's OK to do things together through government," he said.

When it comes to advancing that agenda, Bergeson has no qualms about attacking his opponent. He said Kiel has consistently voted against rural interests. He cites a 2011 vote to change the Homestead Market Value Tax Credit that, according to the Department of Revenue, led to a property tax increase for some Minnesotans.

Kiel said legislators faced a huge shortfall because of the recession and had to make tough choices, and said some taxpayers benefited from the change.

Bergeson also points out that at a voter forum Kiel applauded a 5 percent increase in funding for nursing home care — an important issue in rural Minnesota — even though she voted against the 2013 bill that provided the increase.

Kiel said she supported the increase but had to vote nay because the legislation had too much other irresponsible spending.

"My concern is we're going to get in trouble because we increased spending 12 percent. Have we put ourselves back in that boat again? That's what's troubling," she said.

Finally, Bergeson points to more than $900,000 in farm subsidies the Kiel family farm has received since 1995 and wonders how consistent that is with Republican free-market ideology.

Kiel concedes she may be out of step with free-market dogma, but says federal farm programs have been an important guarantee of a safe, affordable food supply while helping save family farms.

Kiel, a mother of four and a former school board member, said she will continue to bring a badly needed rural perspective to the Legislature. If re-elected, she said, she would focus on education issues, such as ensuring that every child can read by third grade and aligning higher education with workforce needs so students graduate ready to take a good-paying job.

She also said she would fight for rural roads and bridges, which, she said, have been shortchanged by Twin Cities transit projects.

Kiel said she was able to get things done even in the minority, pointing to bonding bill projects for the district, including a University of Minnesota, Crookston, wellness center, work on the airport runway at Thief River Falls, workforce housing and an East Grand Forks park.