Topics: bad blood, Bitch Better, Feminism, Music, Rihanna, Taylor Swift, Video, Entertainment News

Throughout her video for “Bitch Better Have My Money,” Rihanna’s new gleefully violent revenge anthem, Rihanna channels the motifs, images and iconography of directors ranging from Martin Scorsese to Quentin Tarantino. Rihanna’s video aims to shock and titillate viewers with scenes of sexualized violence. In one of the first scenes a kidnapped woman is hung upside down, topless. We see images of her incapacitated, forced to drink and vomit in a bucket, and hit over the head with a glass bottle when she tries to seek out help. In the end, the twist of the video is that the “bitch” refers not to the beautiful woman who has been kidnapped, but her husband, who refuses to dish out money, even after learning that his wife is being tortured.

What happens to the kidnapped woman is ambiguous; some viewers contend that she was drowned in a swimming pool: In one scene toward the end we see her lifeless facedown under the water next to Rihanna, who is buoyant and beautiful. Others claim, as a friend expanded on in detail over lunch, that she becomes a member of Rihanna’s girl gang: at times in the video she seems to really enjoy hanging out with the women who kidnapped her, smiling and laughing, even as she is tied up. In an essay for New Statesman, writer Margaret Corvid suggests that “BBHMM” is a BDSM fantasy. The video features a number of pieces of S&M gear, and plays with many taboos regarding gender, race, and class.

One of the intriguing aspects of “BBHMM” is just how divided women have been in their response to the seven-minute music video. Rihanna’s use of a female body as kidnapping victim has caused many feminists to express concern, just as Rihanna’s reclaiming of power from a white, wealthy couple who tried to victimize her has been seen by other feminists as brave and triumphant. In her article “This Is What Rihanna’s BBHMM Video Says About Black Women, White Women and Feminism,” Mia McKenzie says,

“The harm done to us by white men and white women isn’t vastly different to many of us. White women have been unapologetically violent towards black women for centuries. They’ve used the power of the state, of the police, of the courts, of the media, and of individual white men to harm black people, including black women, time and time again. They are as harmful to us as white men are. So, for many of us, kidnapping the white brother or the white wife is all the same.”

Is “BBHMM” a power anthem, reclaiming troubling images of sexualized violence, with an empowered black woman at the helm, or is it simply feeding into a culture that habitually features beautiful, tortured women as a trope?

Often, when we talk about images of violence against women we assume that we are talking about how these images titillate male audiences. But the advent of videos like Rihanna’s “BBHMM” and other female revenge fantasies like Taylor Swift’s “Bad Blood” make a case for the ways in which women have also been socialized to view enacting violence, and especially enacting violence on female bodies, as a sign of strength. Throughout “BBHMM,” Rihanna plays with elements of what is today often referred to as “toxic masculinity” — guns, money, expensive foreign cars, yachts, swimming pools, drugs and sexualized violence abound, and the revenge fantasy is predicated on a sense of absolute entitlement. Rather than transforming or reimagining any of these images, Rihanna adopts them, even using the language of pimps to demand that the male “bitch” give her hard earned cash.

Likewise, Taylor Swift’s “Bad Blood” presents an all-female army who use an arsenal of deadly weapons to eviscerate the woman who betrayed her. Each video is an escape to a world of fantasy violence that is typically read as “masculine”—the women seeking retribution are hard-eyed, focused, and bent on getting what is owed to them, even if it means destroying everything around them in the process. In the world of “BBHMM” and “Bad Blood,” empathy and kindness are presented as weak, while the kind of cold sadism necessary to destroy an enemy is presented as intrinsically powerful.

In her essay “Dead Girls Sold Here,” writer Anna March argues that feminists should push back on images of women being brutalized for entertainment, rather than silently accept that the influx of these narratives is unchangeable. One of the reasons rejecting sexism is challenging for women is not simply because they feel powerless; it’s that women have also been seduced by these same images. Who wouldn’t be? We grew up on artists, musicians and directors who taught us that violence is sexy, that true power comes from calling the shots. For the past 10 years, we’ve watched male antiheroes dominate on-screen and become the most lauded shows on television. The iconography of these worlds always includes objectified women, who are frequently the victims of violence. Videos like “BBHMM” and “Bad Blood” show how the women who are watching these iconic films and TV shows are not necessarily identifying with female victims at all.