Oroville Hospital CEO Bob Wentz talks about the reduction of charges at the medical facility Thursday in Oroville. Dan Reidel — Mercury-Register

Oroville >> Oroville Hospital has reduced its charges by 30 percent.

The hospital spent three years negotiating with health insurance companies to be able to reduce its charges and make health care more affordable for its customers, said hospital President and CEO Bob Wentz.

The change became effective Dec. 1, 2015.

“Our team has spent a lot of time reviewing hospital charges to better assess how we could make medical care more affordable,” Wentz said.

Oroville Hospital is using what the California Hospital Association calls “modern pricing.” The hospital group’s website describes modern pricing as “an approach hospitals can voluntarily adopt to adjust their charges to a level that is explainable and understandable, and reflects the unique cost structure of the hospital’s mission and patient population.”

For the medical facility on Olive Highway, that means the insurance companies now pay a higher percentage of the hospital’s charges. But since the charges are 30 percent lower, the insurance companies actually pay about the same amount they did before. The actual cost of the health care doesn’t change.

At Oroville Hospital, the reduction is seen mostly in outpatient care and with prescription medication.

“It’s skewed toward pharmaceutical charges,” Wentz said. “People wonder why an aspirin cost $60; we’re trying to fix that.”

Wentz didn’t say the hospital had been overcharging in the past, but he did say the health care industry has historically raised its rates to get the insurance companies to pay closer to the actual operating cost.

“We’re trying to make a difference to the individual patient,” Wentz said. “If the bill was $100 and the insurance company paid $50, you had to pay the rest. We had to say to (the insurance companies) instead of paying 50 percent, pay all of it and we’ll reduce the charges to $50.”

The hospital is betting that more affordable health care will enable people who have high deductible insurance plans or no insurance to get treatment.

The Affordable Care Act has seen more people get health insurance, but some people still opt to pay the fine or get plans that have very high deductibles so basic service still comes out of their pocket.

“The Affordable Care Act in itself hasn’t had much of an impact,” Wentz said. “We haven’t seen a significant impact.”

People sometimes avoid getting treatment because of the high cost, which often leads to worsening health problems, he said.

If the rates are more affordable, health care providers hope more people will seek treatment. A higher volume of patients could offset any lost funds.

Advertisement

“We believe that more people may be able to access health care,” Wentz said. “Hopefully this is going to empower people to get medical treatment when they need it.”

Oroville Hospital is one of the first in the state to implement modern pricing, but Wentz said he expects it to be a future trend in the industry.

“The CHA told us there were maybe one or two other hospitals doing this,” Wentz said. “We’re just trying to be responsible.”