The fellowship gives teachers and principals opportunity to apply their experience in schools to a broader content and impact education practice, policy, and public discussion.

Kristin DeLorenzo has been selected for the America Achieves’ Fellowship for Teachers and Principals as a fellow for the 2014-16 school years. (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF READING-FLEMING INTERMEDIATE SCHOOL ) Story Highlights The program is highly selective, with less than 20 percent of nominees selected

Kristin DeLorenzo joins 180 national fellows located across 35 states and the District of Columbia

DeLorenzo has been a math teacher at Reading-Fleming Intermediate School in Flemington for 13 years

Kristin DeLorenzo, a math teacher at Reading-Fleming Intermediate School in Flemington for 13 years, has been selected by the America Achieves' Fellowship for Teachers and Principals as a fellow for the 2014-16 school years.

This program is highly selective, with less than 20 percvent of nominees selected.

DeLorenzo joins 180 national fellows located across 35 states and the District of Columbia, who will work to develop skills aimed at impacting students locally and nationally. To launch this work, DeLorenzo traveled to New York City Oct. 17 to 19 to meet with other fellows to discuss critical issues, collaborate on ways to scale their impact, develop action plans, and advise policymakers and thought leaders.

"I am honored to be a part of this group of exceptional teachers, and excited to collaborate with educators from across the nation," DeLorenzo said.

As part of their work, each fellow takes on an Impact Project to help expand their reach beyond the walls of their school and classrooms, and gain an increased understanding of current research, opportunities and challenges in practice, systems and policies.

"This fellowship gives teachers and principals opportunity to apply their experience in schools to a broader context and impact education practice, policy, and public discussion. We are thrilled to welcome Mrs. DeLorenzo as a 2014-2016 fellow in this prestigious program," says Sarah Zuckerman, manager of the National Fellowship program.

To learn more about the America Achieves Fellowship for Teachers and Principals, visit www.americaachieves.org/leadership.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1tMs1ed