The U.S. House recently voted to gut the Food and Drug Administration’s proposed rule for calorie counts on menus at restaurant chains.

The legislation, the Common Sense Nutrition Disclosure Act — with bipartisan sponsorship and strong support from the restaurant industry — is now before the Senate.

The measure would diminish the impact of the FDA’s effort at requiring restaurants to inform diners about calories and nutrition.

On lobbyists' menu

“Despite the clever name, this anti-menu labeling bill is neither common sense nor would it disclose additional information,” said Margo G. Wootan, director of nutrition policy at the Center for Science in the Public Interest. “It would result in consumer confusion and prevent disclosure of straightforward, consistent calorie information at many food service establishments.”

A recent study released by Harvard showed that menu labeling could prevent up to 41,000 cases of child obesity and save more than $4.6 billion in health care costs over 10 years.

Also, a national poll found about 80 percent of Americans support menu labeling.

The federal requirement for menu labeling at restaurants with more than 20 sites passed six years ago, as part of the Affordable Care Act, but lobbying by the food industry delayed implementation. The chief opponents of labeling are the Food Marketing Institute, a supermarket trade group, and the American Pizza Community, led by Domino’s Pizza.

A coalition of more than 100 health and nutrition groups, including the American Cancer Society, American Heart Association and American Diabetes Association opposes the congressional attempt to weaken the rule.

“We do not think that it is common sense to weaken a policy that would allow people to make their own, informed choices about how many calories to eat at a time when obesity rates are at a record high,” the groups said in a joint statement.

The health and nutrition advocates now are focused on the Senate, where Republican Roy Blunt of Missouri has introduced a companion bill.

DID YOU KNOW?

Americans eat and drink about one-third of their calories away from home, according to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, which has proposed a rule requiring the posting of calorie information on chain restaurant menus.