"How many of you have been declared dead by the federal government?" host Scott Pelley asked a panel of four taxpayers on Sunday night's "60 Minutes." All four raised their hands.

"All of you," Pelley simpered. "You're looking pretty well to me."

And so began the CBS news program's latest hit piece on the Social Security Administration, which maintains a Death Master File, or DMF, that is reported to be rife with errors--not only living people listed as deceased, but deceased people not listed as dead. The latter issue, "60 Minutes" asserted, "costs taxpayers billions of dollars in fraudulent payments to people standing in for the departed." But its main focus was on the first problem.

The "60 Minutes" report wasn't as inept as its last attack on Social Security, a 2013 segment in which it attacked the disability program without interviewing a single disabled person or disability advocate. But that's not saying much.

This time around, the subjects' stories were disturbing, even infuriating. Clerical errors had landed them on the DMF, resulting in blocked bank accounts, credit denials, and in one case a grilling by police as an identity fraud suspect. But if you were hoping to hear a coherent explanation of how this happened or who was responsible, much less a rundown of the easy and obvious remedies, you were in the wrong place. "60 Minutes" didn't provide any of that.

This expensive data validation effort for non-beneficiary records would divert resources away from mission critical work. — Social Security Administration, explaining why it doesn't verify death notices for people not receiving benefits

The program implied that it had turned up this scandal through its own digging, so it didn't mention that finding errors in the DMF is a hardy journalistic perennial, like reports on how bad the traffic is in your town or sweeps-week TV pieces on gourmet restaurants flunking sanitary inspections.

Previous versions, some of them with almost identical statistics, appeared in the Washington Post in 2013, on CNN and in the Scripps Howard newspapers in 2011, and on MSNBC in 2008. You had to watch to the very end of the "60 Minutes" piece to discover that it was timed to coincide with a Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee hearing scheduled for Monday. One of the TV segment's star witnesses, Judy Rivers of Logan, Ala., was on the witness roster of the Senate hearing, and also was featured in the Scripps Howard series four years ago.

Of course, it's not a journalistic crime to plow previously farmed ground, especially when a problem hasn't yet been solved. But "60 Minutes" used to be famous for doing its own research, not taking Congressional handouts or reheating other reporters' chestnuts. (Its 2013 disability segment also relied on a Senate report, from then-Sen. Tom Coburn, R-Okla., a known enemy of Social Security.)

Most news reports on the DMF errors have a few things in common. They all seem to reflect the assumption that keeping an error-free master death list should be easy. And they blame the Social Security Administration for the flaws.

Wrote the Washington Post: "A task that requires near-perfection--maintaining the death records used by agencies across Washington--has fallen, by default, to an agency that does not believe perfection is its job." This was a gratuitous, and unwarranted, slap at an agency that has a well-deserved reputation for accuracy.

Most of the reports also disclosed that the percentage of erroneous death reports processed by Social Security is somewhere between one-third to one-half of 1%. Numerous studies by its own inspector general and the Government Accountability Office suggest that for the Social Security Administration to verify every report it receives of 2.8 million American deaths per year would be a Herculean job.

Why? Because those reports arrive from thousands of sources of varying reliability across the country--funeral directors, family members, banks, Medicare and Veterans Affairs offices, post offices. Social Security considers the most reliable source to be electronic death records from the states, but only 35 states submit these to the agency.

Verification can be extremely labor-intensive. So the agency attempts to verify the reports only where necessary, chiefly when they come from less reliable sources (post offices, Medicare and financial institutions) and when they refer to beneficiaries already receiving Social Security checks. This is proper, because the agency's main concern should be safeguarding its own resources.

Although the agency provides the full DMF to government agencies that pay out benefit checks and sells a limited version to private parties to help them fight identity fraud, it tells them explicitly that it "does not guarantee the veracity of the file." (Emphasis added.)

"60 Minutes" wrung its hands over the nation's inability to compile totally accurate data on deaths. Pelley illustrated the issue by visiting Alabama's Vital Records Vault, "a place so secure that you need a key and a fingerprint to get inside....But once in here, the technology becomes pretty 19th century." He brandished a folder crammed with old papers. "These are death certificates from 1912, for example," he said in dismay.

Well, yes. That's how they did things in 1912. If "60 Minutes" has any notion of how much it would cost in time or money to convert a century's worth of old paper death certificates to electronic form, what errors might be incorporated permanently into the database via the conversion process, or why this would be even necessary, it didn't say.