Search and rescue missions continued throughout the rainy night in Garland and Rowlett, with officials concerned the death toll from Saturday night’s tornado would rise.

“There are five confirmed now and there could be more,” in Garland, city fire spokesman Merrill Balanciere said. “We had five or six transports.”

Fallen trees kept people from getting out of some houses. Three house fires near the tornado may have been caused by downed power lines, Balanciere said.

By midnight, about two dozen displaced Garland residents had landed at the shelter set up at the city’s Gale Fields Recreation Center. Blankets, food and water were there for them and cots were en route.

It was much the same at Steadham Elementary in Rowlett, where the Red Cross and Salvation Army were helping displaced residents.

“The outpouring is unbelievable,” Mayor Todd Gottel said as the city’s emergency responders worked an evolving plan at Fire Station No. 1. “We have CERT (Community Emergency Response Teams) from all over the area – Garland, Sachse, Wylie, Rockwall and Hunt County – offering service.”

About 300 of those volunteers will go door-to-door at daybreak to assess damage and needs.

“Tonight, it’s taking care of any injuries, making sure there’s not any fatalities,” Gottel said. “More of a search-and-rescue.

About half of Rowlett homes lost power, Gottel said, but much of the service in neighborhoods not directly hit was restored by midnight. A gas leak had forced a neighborhood evacuation on the eastern edge of town.

Stephan Casteneda, an assistant manager, was keeping doors open all night at Rowlett’s Home Depot.

“It’s been a steady trickle,” he said. “A few generators, some tarps and buckets. And shop vacs for the water damage.”

But once residents leave their storm-damaged neighborhoods, they’re having trouble getting back in.

Interstate 30 remained closed near Lake Ray Hubbard and traffic that detoured to cross the lake in Rowlett was at a standstill on State Highway 66.

A man walked up to Garland firefighters at the command center at I-30 and Belt Line Road, desperate to check on his disabled parents within the blocked perimeter. Firefighters checked the address, told him they knew the street to have only minor damage and that they would check personally on the parents. But they also assured him that retrieving his wallet was not sufficient cause to be getting in.

“We’re making sure people are alive,” he was told before being offered directions to the Fields Center.

Six hours into the crisis, local officials were getting a hold on the situation. Fire crews from farthest outlying areas like Cedar Hill, Hutchins and DeKalb were heading home.

Emergency partnerships where Dallas and Richardson help man stations in parts of Garland near those cities will continue – allowing Garland to give full attention to its farthest southeast section.

Rowlett City Manager Brian Funderburk will give an update on damages and share information on curfews and volunteer mobilization at a 7 a.m. press conference at City Hall.

Complete coverage of the storm’s devastation

‘Total devastation’: Residents, emergency crews work frantically after tornadoes

Tornado in Rowlett classified as EF3; 11 confirmed dead in storms in Garland, Collin County

Officials identify six of eight tornado victims who died in Garland

Storm damages over 100 buildings in Glenn Heights

Floyd: Weather’s tragic capriciousness is still beyond our control

NBC5: Staff shortage left NWS scrambling to cover tornado outbreak

Colliding weather systems caused tornado outbreak

Gov. Abbott offers condolences, says state is taking action in midst of storms

Rescue workers assessing damage, needs in wake of tornadoes across North Texas

Tracking the storm

Interactive map shows storm’s route of destruction in North Texas

After the storm: Before and after images of the damage done by December tornadoes in North

Video, photos, tweets show massive damage tornadoes brought to North Texas

Updated photos: Daylight reveals damage from D-FW holiday season storm

El Paso to East Texas: Widespread images/video of extreme weather shake social media

Tales from the damage

Heartbreaking call during storm was Mesquite couple’s last

Survivor stories: Ruined churches, a flying lawnmower and a truck ride through the air

Editorial: What’s stronger than even catastrophic tornadoes? North Texans

Video: Glenn Heights family reunited with dog after tornado

Children hide under mattress as house falls around them

Resources

How you can help | How to get help

Resources for tracking lost pets in North Texas storms

Shelters are popping up in wake of tornado damage across North Texas

Watchdog: In tornado’s wake, protect yourself from bad builders’ scams

Check here for pet shelter updates

Managing traumatic stress after a tornado