Lafayette resident Mary Thomas says secret to life is 'keep moving'

Mary Thomas, about to turn 101, works out in her Gentle Movement SilverSneakers fitness class at the Erie Community Center. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

In a fitness room at the Erie Community Center, Mary Thomas marches to the tempo of an upbeat song while holding onto the back of a chair for balance.

Lifting her knees as high as she can, the 100-year-old Lafayette resident never lets the strain on her muscles limit the movement.

"Use it or lose it," fitness instructor Wendy Hood shouts to the participants in her Gentle Movement class Friday.

Thomas embodies the motto, Hood said, inspiring others to stay active days before her 101 birthday.

Thomas' energy inspired Hood to organized a 101 Dalmatians-themed celebration Thursday at the community center.

Hood is expecting 101 guests dressed in black and white for the party that will take place during the Senior Nutrition Lunch Program followed by a few songs and cake in honor of one of her most dedicated students.

For the past two years, since she moved into her daughter's home in Lafayette, Thomas has been attending fitness classes every week at the Erie Community Center. Gentle Movement and SilverSneakers Classic are her favorite classes, Thomas said.

Thomas also frequents a SilverSneakers class, catered to seniors, in Lafayette and walks the neighborhood around her daughter's home when she can't make it to a class.

"I just keep moving," Thomas said.

Growing up in Ohio, Thomas was always athletic.

Advertisement

She fenced, was a diver and still sports a field hockey scar on her pinky finger from a fast-moving ball.

"I remember when I was a little girl and my sister and I would just run everywhere," she said. "We never walked, we always ran."

She taught her husband to golf during their courtship and barely slowed down a to raise her four children.

But as the kids grew, Thomas began supplementing her physical activities with mental exercise.

When her daughter, Robin Smith, became a high school freshman, 49-year-old Thomas became a college freshman.

"She does everything with gusto and zest and enjoyment," Smith said. "She's always been that way."

Thomas received her bachelor's degree in education from Stetson University and went on to get her Master's from Florida State at age 52.

For the next 20 years, Thomas taught deaf students, inspired by her hearing-impaired daughter.

In retirement, Thomas has maintained her sharp mind and physical strength through knitting, bridge club and daily trips to the grocery store — a tradition Thomas has been unable to give up.

"Mom and dad used to get groceries every day. That's how you got fresh produce back then," Smith said. "It's not really practical I guess but she enjoys it so I just kept it going."

Smith said her mom speed-walks down the aisles of the market using her shopping cart for balance.

For Thomas, the secret to life is simple — "keep moving."

"My husband always supported me in everything I did and do," Thomas said when asked what has kept her going. "I eat wisely. I do everything in moderation. And I'm always active."

Whitney Bryen: 303-473-1113, wbryen@coloradohometownweekly.com or twitter.com/soonerreporter