Eli Lucio started living with his grandmother after his parents died. When his grandmother was battling health problems he no longer wanted to be a financial burden to her and moved out on his own. Lucio, 17, currently lives at The Inn Between at 250 Kimbark St. ( Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer )

Eli Lucio spent most of his childhood living with his grandmother in Boulder. His parents died, and she was his primary caretaker.

But this spring, Lucio's grandmother was diagnosed with breast cancer, so Lucio, 17 and a junior at Boulder High School, decided that it would be better for her if he wasn't around, so he moved out.

"I figured that would be too much for her to be supporting me and herself with bills and everything," Lucio said. "I thought it would be best if I left."

To learn more about the agencies and resources mentioned in this article Department of Children, Youth and Families: 303-651-8580 The Inn Between: theinnbetween.org , 303-684-0810 Luis Chavez, chavez_luis@svvsd.org, 303-682-7262

Lucio landed at an emergency overnight shelter in Boulder for youths ages 11 to 21 commonly referred to as The Source, run by Attention Homes. He stayed there through most of the spring, and then in May, with the help of the staff, secured a room at The Inn Between in Longmont, a transitional housing center in Longmont. There he can go through its self-sufficiency program and stay rent-free until he graduates from high school in the spring of 2016.

Lucio's story is not uncommon.

Advertisement

In January, the Metro Denver Homeless Initiative commissioned a survey of the homeless population in Longmont and Boulder County. Of the 285 surveyed, 33 percent in Longmont were families with children, and 6.54 percent were single youths under the age of 25. For the county, 12.56 percent were single youths.

The Inn Between stated that out of 262 people served last year, 103 were youths under the age of 18, about 40 percent of the population. Right now, there are 60 youths under 18 staying there.

While these young people may not have a home, they are not completely on their own.

The St. Vrain Valley School District has a position dedicated specifically to helping district students who find themselves without a stable living condition.

"My role is to basically help meet the needs of those students who are dealing with the crisis of not having a regular, fixed, adequate living setting," said Luis Chavez, St. Vrain Valley homeless education liaison.

Chavez said that last year the district identified 870 students who were eligible for Chavez's help. Once a student is identified, that student stays on the list all year, even if his situation changes.

The district provides includes automatic free meal eligibility, the waiving of certain school fees, and other items depending on the student's needs.

"Depending on what's in the best interest in the child, the waived fees may be in the way of school bus or gas vouchers or bus passes," Chavez said. "We also have a little bit of money from state funding to provide some hygiene products or clothes or school supplies."

Chavez also helps in terms of referrals, whether it's to the city or a private non-profit organization that can help put the family back on track.

"We try to cover all areas, and whatever is not in our control, we try to contact or advocate on their behalf," Chavez said. "Housing and Human Services, any agencies in the community, the biggest allies are the OUR Center, Safe Shelter (of the St. Vrain Valley)."

Chavez said when it comes to identifying students who need help, the district relies mostly on referrals from individual schools, usually teachers or administrators, but sometimes families or students reach out themselves. Every case he deals with is different.

"It's whatever they want or need, not all in desperate need," Chavez said. "There are some families that are in desperate need, from couch to couch, car to car, campground to campground. But some are able to double up and are able to manage. There are some that just need some kind of referral, get a grant to pay for a debt or something."

One of the agencies to which Chavez refers students and their families is the city of Longmont's Children, Youth and Families department.

Eli Lucio started living with his grandmother after his parents died. (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

Olga Bermudez of the Children, Youth and Families Department, said the city mostly partners with The Inn Between, but does get referrals from Chavez. Bermudez said the homeless youth cases that end up on her desk are not exactly what you would expect.

"A lot of times families will split because of financial situations," Bermudez said. "Kids will end up couch surfing and then maybe homeless. Families will say, 'I can't do it anymore. Do you have any resources?'"

Bermudez said she had two phone calls recently from youths needing help, and there has been an increase this year.

"We have seen an increase," Bermudez said. "Since the economy went down, families are sending their kids with other family members. Those numbers don't go down that much. We always have kids knocking on our door asking for help."

Bermudez said her case management focuses less on getting the entire family back into financial stability and more helping the kid learn self-sufficiency and provide tools so he or she can live on their own.

"My job is to help them and guide them towards goals," Bermudez said. "For most, this is the first time they are on their own. They don't know how to create a budget or do laundry. I am helping them develop some basic skills. Baby steps."

Sometimes, it's not a financial situation that drives a family apart, but internal dysfunction causing a child to decide he is better off on his own.

"We're not seeing a lot of temporary situations," Bermudez said. "... Sometimes the families are dysfunctional. The kids realize, 'I would be better on my own.'"

With the help of resources like The Inn Between, Lucio said he feels like he's in a stable situation again, even if it's a daunting one.

"It's kind of scary at times, living alone," Lucio said. "But I'm getting used to it."

He has a job at the St. Julien Hotel in Boulder, and during the school year The Inn Between helps with tutoring and makes sure he stays on track to graduate. He still talks to his grandmother regularly, and said he "really likes" his living situation, even if it was something he never expected.

"I never really thought this would happen," Lucio said. "But I know everyone has to at some point. Usually it's for college. For me, it happened a little sooner. But it's all right."

Isa Jones: 303-684-5274, jonesi@timescall.com or twitter.com/theisajones