Yalonda M. James/The Commercial Appeal Oct. 28, 2015 — J. Todd Sigmon, with St. Francis Hospital, signs his name on a beam as co-worker Bill Stone, with St. Francis Hospital, watches him during a topping off ceremony at 9485 Crestwyn Hills Dr. in Germantown Wednesday. St. Francis, Baptist, and Delta Medical Center are partnering to build a 60-bed hospital called Crestwyn Behavioral Health, scheduled to open in April.

By Jane Roberts of The Commercial Appeal

In the shell of a gymnasium, with sweeping views of rural countryside, three hospital executives pledged their commitment to mental health in the region that should also benefit their bottom lines.

Starting in April, when Crestwyn Behavioral Health opens off a quiet stretch of Winchester in south Germantown, the 20-county region will have access to mental health care that several hospitals already provide but not in a bucolic setting or the level of privacy Crestwyn promises.

The three executives will be watching. For the first time in anyone's memory, Baptist Memorial Health Care, St. Francis Healthcare and Acadia Healthcare are combining forces to create a new breed of mental health hospital in a part of the city with little access but potentially great need.

If business goes as they expect, each hospital will make a profit based on its level of investment.

Wednesday, they celebrating the symbolic "topping off" of the $25.8 million, one-story hospital that will serve teens through senior citizens and offer a separate unit for chemical addictions. It is expected to employee 200 people.

"We're finding that behavioral health has gone through a revolution," said Bill Patterson, interim Crestwyn CEO. "It's getting broader acceptance and people are aware of the benefits if provides. It's a major part of the health care scenario today.

"We're embracing it, but yet, what we have discovered, other hospitals did not have the services to provide the care."

Baptist, which got out of the mental health care business when it moved east from Downtown, contributed 20 acres to the project. St. Francis, which has 102 mental health beds but uses fewer than half, gave 40 licensed beds. Acadia, an expert in managing mental health facilities here and abroad, will manage the new facility, plus transfer 20 mental health beds from Delta Medical Center, which it also manages.

Crestwyn owns 60 percent of the venture; Baptist and St. Francis each have 20 percent.

"We felt this would be a better use of those beds," said David Archer, president and CEO, St. Francis Healthcare. "This allows us to be involved in a different type of facility in a different part of town."

Baptist owns a mental health hospital in Columbus, Mississippi, and has seen the benefit there, said Zach Chandler, executive vice president and chief strategy officer.

"One in five Tennesseans have a mental health issue every single year, but 60 to 70 percent never receive any treatment," he told the audience. "Here, they can come to a place where they are comfortable and confident, but also in a more serene setting without all the hustle and bustle. It gives them time to focus and concentrate on getting better."

He also says mental health issues are underlying problems for many hospital patients, shortening their lives an average of 25 years.

Lakeside Behavioral Health, the dominant player in the mental health arena in Shelby County, serves 6,522 patients a year, 55 percent of the total, on its campus on Brunswick Road.

Crestwyn's goal is to appeal to a similar client, who prefers the non-hospital setting.

"We expect to be full, emphatically, yes," Patterson said. "We are providing a broad array of services, reaching out to adolescents, adults and seniors with advanced dementia."

According to its application to the state, filed in 2013, Crestwyn expects occupancy of 45 percent in the first year. In the second year, it is projected to rise to 74 percent, producing $24.8 million in total gross revenue.

The average patient will be in the security hospital 8-10 days and be charged an average of $1,438 a day, based on 2015 projections. TennCare and Medicare are expected to represent 40 percent of gross revenue.

Under the Affordable Care Act, mental health care is fully covered by insurance, potentially increasing usage and hospital revenue streams.