Watch a clip from the film "Like Father, Like Son." When Ryota learns that his biological son was switched with another child after birth, he must choose his true son or the boy he raised as his own. (Photo/Video: Sundance Selects)

Stories about babies switched at birth follow a familiar pattern in the era of DNA. Genetic tests are performed, for one reason or another. Parents are summoned. The mistake is revealed. The accuracy of the genetic evidence is emphasized in the face of shock and grief, which give way to a what-then section that fills the rest of the narrative. And the subtext is similar as well: the mysteries of nature vs. the vagaries of nurture. Hirokazu Kore-eda's "Like Father, Like Son," in Japanese with English subtitles, follows the pattern fairly predictably at first, then transcends it with tenderness, humor and exquisite depth of feeling. Mr. Kore-eda has a rare gift for working with children—in this case two 6-year-old boys—so the what-then part is especially affecting. Beyond that, he uses his case to dramatize the plight of a rigid, driven father trapped by conventional notions of family and success in a culture that has enshrined work as a national religion.

The film opens with an interview that should ring a bell—an alarm bell—with American parents seeking to get their kids into the right private school at any cost. The would-be first-grader, Keita (Keita Ninomiya), sits between his parents, responding to fatuous questions from a pair of admissions officials. Round-faced and unwaveringly focused, Keita would be adorable were it not for his robotized demeanor and his tense, metallic voice. Still, his architect father, Ryota, and his self-effacing mother, Midori, seem pleased by his scary performance. (They're played, respectively, by Masaharu Fukuyama and Machiko Ono.) It's all an empty ritual that has nothing to do with the sweet and eager child Keita reveals himself to be in the bosom of his family, and the wonderful child he continues to be when the switched-at-birth plot line kicks in.

ENLARGE Masaharu Fukuyama as Ryota Nonomiya (Man) and Machiko Ono as Midori Nonomiya (Woman) Sundance Selects

Exactly who is he, though? The question takes on layers of irony, as well as mystery, when Keita's biological parents prove to be an amiable slacker, Yudai (Lily Franky), and his newly anxious wife, Yukari (Yoko Maki). Working-class owners of a scruffy appliance store, they're as loose and loving in the parenting department as Ryota is striving and cold. (The child they've believed to be their son from birth reflects his upbringing; he may not be bound for academic glory, but he's funny and clearly carefree.)

A lot of plot is evident at this point—the less-than-subtle juxtaposition of social classes; the dilemma of whether to reswitch the kids between their two homes; an impending civil trial; a nature-nurture debate argued by Ryota's father, who's obsessed by the importance of blood lines; and Midori's mother, who believes "it's who raises you that matters." Both families are bewildered by a situation for which there's no operating manual, but Ryota is beset by a particular source of pain—his growing sense of failure as a father, whether or not the kind, vulnerable child he's been raising, and goading, and disciplining in the name of achievement, carries his DNA.

The modern architect is clearly intended to be a modern Japanese archetype—prepsychological as a person, domineering as a husband, remote as a father. Fortunately he's played by someone who can get behind the character's facade without tearing it down prematurely: Mr. Fukuyama is one of Japan's leading singer-songwriters, as well as a celebrated actor. Ryota's distress is all the more stirring in a story that's about, among other things, transmitting the remoteness virus from one generation to the next. (Of all the marvelous scenes in this lovely film, the one that moved me most was when Ryota, checking his camera, sees himself in several frames that Keita shot—and, perhaps for the first time, truly sees himself in his little boy's eyes.)

"Like Father, Like Son" has still more on its mind—a vision of a Japan in which work will be balanced with leisure and love. The main messenger in this regard isn't the other father—that would be too obvious, and his flakiness would undermine the case—but, surprisingly, Ryota's boss. "You've always kept your foot on the gas pedal, right? It's about time for you to brake," the older man tells him." Ryota is confused. "But you got this far because you kept going," he says. "That," his boss replies, "was another time."

'Gloria'

Watch a clip from the film "Gloria," a story set in Santiago and centered on a free-spirited older woman, and the realities of her whirlwind relationship with a former naval officer whom she meets out in the clubs. (Photo/Video: Roadside Attractions)

The heroine of "Gloria," Chile's entry for this year's foreign-language Oscar, is divorced, middle-aged and looking for love. No news in that? Oh, but there is. Gloria (a gorgeous performance by Paulina García) does her looking by putting herself out there with a zest that belies her years. This endearing film, directed by Sebastián Lelio from a screenplay he wrote with Gonzalo Maza, opens in a disco where Gloria alternately loses herself in dance—she moves as gleefully, if not quite as gracefully, as a teenager—and finds herself when an attractive man comes into view. Ever hopeful, she's a poster woman for impassioned persistence.

That's not to suggest her quest is free of setbacks. If there's a moral to this guardedly feel-good fable, it's that the course of true love never will run smooth, no matter how old you get to be. Gloria isn't old; neither is Rodolfo (Sergio Hernández), a nice man with a gentle soul who owns a paintball park and teaches her how to shoot in splattering colors. They're certainly not too old for ardent sex, and one of the film's great distinctions—a remarkable one, in the context of the dominant youth culture—is its equanimity in depicting naked bodies that are notably imperfect. Yet the clock is ticking loudly in Gloria's life, and she's still struggling to see the reality behind Rodolfo's words—and, sporadically, deeds—of committed love. (Her newly diagnosed glaucoma, which requires eye drops, is both a symptom and a symbol of her situation in life.)

With someone else in the central role, "Gloria" might have been cloyingly sentimental or downright maudlin. With Ms. García on hand, it's a mostly convincing celebration of unquenchable energy. Gloria can be slightly self-ironic on the dance floor, but irony isn't her specialty; enthusiasm is. In a class that employs group laughter for purposes of therapy, she has the best laugh, though far from the loudest. The world may be crazier than she can imagine, but she deals with the craziness day by day. She's so alive to signs of life in others that she stops, during a trip to a shopping mall, to join a crowd that's watching a huckster demonstrate a dancing puppet. The puppet is a skeleton, a creature of disjointed plastic bones and nylon strings, but it dances like a dream.

Rewind DVD // Streaming // Download

ENLARGE

"I Wish" (2011)

Of the several films that Hirokazu Kore-eda has made about childhood and children, this one is the most modest, but no less pleasing for its delicate tone and small scale. "I Wish" was originally called "Miracle," and the change is for the better. The two-word title makes you want to know who's wishing for what, while the single word sounds generic and self-congratulatory. That said, this wise and funny film, in Japanese with English subtitles, works small miracles in depicting the pivotal moment when kids turn from the wishfulness of childhood into shaping the world for themselves.

The sweetly reflective hero, a sixth-grader named Koichi (Koki Maeda), starts out by wishing for a volcano to erupt. Not just any volcano, but the one that towers above his town, smoking ominously and scattering ash. An eruption would lead to an evacuation, which would lead, at least in his mind, to a reunion with his father and kid brother, who've been living up north in Hakata while Koichi lives down south in Kagoshima with his mother and retired grandparents. The volcano, knowing nothing of this, declines to erupt, but Koichi hears of another approach to provoking the desired miracle. A new bullet train line will soon be linking the two cities. Rumor has it that if you stand at the exact spot where the northbound and southbound trains pass each other, whatever you wish will come true.

One of the pleasures of "I Wish" is watching how kids behave—how Koichi attacks his dinner, for example. Another pleasure is rediscovering, in case you'd forgotten, how kids think. These kids can be logical and ever so ruseful, as witness the brothers' success in organizing their journeys to the bullet-train convergence spot. But children's thought processes can also be extragalactic. A girl who wants to paint beautiful pictures without working at it wishes her school's program of "relaxed education" would come back. A boy wishes he could play baseball like his idol, who eats curry for breakfast; so he, too, starts eating curry for breakfast, instead of practicing on the field. Another boy tries to wish his dead dog, Marble, back to life. And what does Koichi finally wish for? I wish you'd see this delightful film to find out.

ENLARGE

"After Life" (1998)

Don't confuse Mr. Kore-eda's meditation on memory and death with "After. Life," a sententious stinker starring Christina Ricci and Liam Neeson. The Japanese film, which mixes fiction and documentary modes, grew out of interviews in which hundreds of people were asked to describe the one memory of life on Earth that they'd want to take with them to heaven. The film is slow, and one post on Netflix is dismissive: "Setting is dull. Characters are dull. There are too many of them." For me, though, "After Life" is a work of magical beauty, and I'm hardly alone in my admiration. According to another post from a Netflix user, "a ratio of viewer satisfaction to the cost of making 'After Life' should make Steven Spielberg blush in shame." That ratio is news to me, but the user makes a useful point.

ENLARGE

"Nobody Knows" (2004)

This masterly drama is entirely fictional, though based on a true story, and was shot by Mr. Kore-eda in documentary style over the course of a year. Although the film declares its fictional status in the very first frames, I had the unshakable feeling that I was watching a true story played out slowly, enchantingly, sometimes surprisingly and always tenderly, to its inexorable, awful end.

The premise is straightforward. A young mother, Keiko, who's Hello Kitty-cute but infantile, narcissistic and a cheerful slut, shares a modest apartment in a pleasant Tokyo neighborhood with her four children, each one sired by a different man. Pleasant is the operative word for the life of this little family as they cuddle and giggle together, although the oldest sibling, a handsome 12-year-old named Akira, seems to see his mother's foibles fairly clearly. But the kids are prisoners in Keiko's playpen. She's hiding three of them from the landlord, so she won't let them go to school, out to play or, except for Akira, out at all until after dark. Then, without warning, she takes off for unknown sexual adventures, leaving Akira with a little money to spend as head of the household, and a saga of survival begins.

Harrowing as it becomes, "Nobody Knows" has many gifts to give. It's a meditation on the depth and intensity of children's love for their parents, however lacking the parents may be; a study of childhood's intimate pleasures; a measure of both the resilience and fragility of middle-class mores; and a portrait of Akira, a beautiful boy struggling to become a man he isn't ready to be. Apart from a singer named You, who plays Keiko, the members of the cast are nonprofessionals.

Write to Joe Morgenstern at joe.morgenstern@wsj.com and follow him on Twitter: @JoeMorgenstern.