1907 - A new state —- Oklahoma

President Theodore Roosevelt signed — or "shoved the quill" as a newspaper headline reported — a proclamation making the Oklahoma and Indian Territories a single state. Two hours later, Charles N. Haskell took the oath of office as the new state's first governor. The inauguration event at Guthrie included a "wedding" of Mr. Oklahoma and Miss Indian Territory. Plans had been made for a big inauguration event at Guthrie, which would be the capital of the new 46th state, but the feelings of Territorial Gov. Frank Frantz had been ruffled and he refused to have any part in the event.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

1982 - NFL strike ends

A 57-day National Football League strike ended and play resumed five days later on the shortest season in NFL history that was limited to nine games. Training began the next day. Players ratified a 5-year $1.6 billion agreement by a 3-1 margin on Dec. 9.

1989 - 6 priests massacred

Six Jesuit priests were tortured and killed in a massacre a church leader blamed on El Salvadoran troops in San Salvador. A few hours later, a dozen Lutheran missionary workers were arrested by uniformed officers who raided a Lutheran office. Dozens of religious workers, labor activists, academics and political figures went into hiding. The priests were among nearly 700 people who had died in six days of fighting after insurgents launched the biggest offensive in a decade-old civil war.

2010 - Congressman censured