Paul and Ellen McDonough paid $7.5 million for this contemporary house in Snowmass Village, Colo., in 2008, according to public records. They then spent approximately $2 million and 18 months renovating the home for their family of six. Jeremy Swanson …

The 5,023-square-foot house has six bedrooms and six bathrooms and ski-in, ski-out access to a main run on Snowmass Mountain. The McDonoughs, who are both self-employed real-estate investors whose main residence is near Chicago, had vacationed in Snowmass for years before deciding to buy a home there. Michael Brands …

There are four different seating areas in the living room. The couple looked at 40 houses before they saw this one. 'We were in search of just the right home and when we finally saw this one it had everything you could look for—it sits right on one of the best ski runs," says Mrs. McDonough. 'You can ski to the base village in five minutes.' Michael Brands …

In addition to the dining-room table and the counter seating, there is a breakfast table by the kitchen window. The dining-room table was custom-made; the house is being sold furnished. 'We love to gather at the table and look out and enjoy the view and it's an easy transition from the kitchen,' says Mrs. McDonough. Michael Brands …

The wine room has a small seating area and storage for approximately 700 bottles. Mrs. McDonough says the house needed updating when they bought it. 'It was dated and we knew we had to fix it up,' she says. The couple added a roof deck, a metal roof, a snow melt system and stacked stone walls. She says they installed radiant heat and new mechanical systems. Michael Brands …

The master bedroom has a stone fireplace. Four of the bedrooms, including a bunk-bed room with a vaulted ceiling, connect to an outdoor walkway and an outdoor hot tub. Mrs. McDonough says that her favorite memories include her four children sledding down to the village. Michael Brands …

'It's also a wonderful summer property,' says Mrs. McDonough. A stream runs through the 1-acre property and there is a natural pond. Two bridges, one of which is shown here, cross the stream. Jeremy Swanson …

The couple added a roof deck. 'We love sitting on the roof deck and making s'mores on the fire pit,' says Mrs. McDonough. They say there are selling because they don't use the house enough. 'We've made it really special and beautiful and we feel like it's ready for a family that can use it more often.' Andrew Ernemann …