CHARLESTON, S.C., Oct. 24, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Benefitfocus, Inc. (NASDAQ: BNFT), a leading provider of cloud-based benefits software solutions, today announced that Outsource, LLC has selected Benefitfocus HR INTOUCH MARKETPLACE® to automate benefits enrollment and administrative tasks that were previously managed manually on paper. Headquartered in Los Angeles, Outsource is the largest staffing firm in the commercial and industrial wiring industry with 19 branch offices across the country that service over 400 clients a year. HR INTOUCH MARKETPLACE enables Outsource to manage benefits information, eligibility and communication for its internal staff as well as its contract employees within a single solution.

In 2015, a significant number of Outsource's technicians that mainly work offsite will become eligible for employee-sponsored benefits under the Affordable Care Act (ACA). By centralizing benefits information and activity within the mobile-friendly HR INTOUCH MARKETPLACE portal, Outsource can offer its geographically dispersed workforce a more convenient way to enroll in their benefits while streamlining administration. This consolidation eliminates paper forms and reduces the risk of costly errors that can result from manual data entry. In addition, the portal features a dynamic messaging center and content manager that provides a simple process for administrators to tailor communication and create a personalized benefits experience.

"Adopting a cloud-based enrollment system was a necessary step for us to be able to streamline processes moving forward while providing our employees with convenient access to their benefits information," said Kayt Priester, Human Resources Manager at Outsource. "After researching other solutions, we found that Benefitfocus was the only option that offered the core elements we needed to make this transition seamless and better communicate the value of our benefits package with our geographically diverse workforce. In addition, Benefitfocus provides the scalable administrative capabilities that make us confident we will be prepared to address the future needs of our rapidly growing workforce and the evolving benefits landscape."

HR INTOUCH MARKETPLACE combines an intuitive interface with a rules-driven engine to create a guided workflow that presents employees with all of the benefits for which they are eligible. The BENEFITFOCUS® Plan Shopping App allows employees to evaluate health plans based on expected utilization and estimated costs, helping them identify which option best meets their health and financial needs. The app, along with educational videos, provides employees with easy-to-understand explanations of other coverage options such as voluntary benefits that may be a cost-effective supplement to their healthcare coverage.

"In addition to automating the transmission of benefits data between systems, we are helping companies address two key components of employee benefits - communication and cost transparency," stated Benefitfocus President and CEO Shawn Jenkins. "We are thrilled that Outsource will be able to leverage the flexibility of our Platform to offer greater support both to their administrators and their workforce. As benefits become more complex, our goal at Benefitfocus is to offer these stakeholders the support they need to make good decisions for themselves and their families."

About Outsource LLC

Outsource is a leading Specialized Labor Contractor focused on delivering technical resources to companies that install and service wired systems within commercial buildings. These Industries include: Building Automation, Controls, Fire/Life Safety, Security, Access Controls, CCTV, Audio Visual, HVAC, Structured Cabling and Electrical. Outsource has been in business since 1998 with 19 locations across the nation. The company is headquartered in Los Angeles, California.

About Benefitfocus

Benefitfocus, Inc. (NASDAQ: BNFT) is a leading provider of cloud-based benefits software solutions for consumers, employers, insurance carriers and brokers. Benefitfocus has served more than 23 million consumers on its platform that consists of an integrated portfolio of products and services enabling clients to more efficiently shop, enroll, manage and exchange benefits information. With a user-friendly interface and consumer-centric design, the Benefitfocus Platform provides one place for consumers to access all their benefits. Benefitfocus solutions support the administration of all types of benefits including core medical, dental and other voluntary benefits plans as well as wellness programs. For more information, visit www.benefitfocus.com.

Except for historical information, all of the statements, expectations, and assumptions contained in this press release are forward-looking statements. Actual results might differ materially from those explicit or implicit in the forward-looking statements. Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially include: the need to innovate and provide useful products and services; the immature and volatile nature of the market for our products and services and other factors that could impact our anticipated growth; management of growth; our ability to compete effectively; reliance on key personnel; our ability to maintain our culture and recruit and retain qualified personnel; changes in government regulations; privacy, security and other risks associated with our business; fluctuations in our financial results; general economic risks; and the other risk factors set forth from time to time in our SEC filings, copies of which are available free of charge within the Investor Relations section of the Benefitfocus website at http://investor.benefitfocus.com/sec.cfm or upon request from our investor relations department. Benefitfocus assumes no obligation and does not intend to update these forward-looking statements, except as required by law.

Benefitfocus, Inc.

843.284.1052 ext. 6846

pr@benefitfocus.com

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20110602/CL12553LOGO

SOURCE Benefitfocus, Inc.