BOSTON - The first ad Republican gubernatorial candidate Charlie Baker released after he and Democratic nominee Martha Coakley won their respective primaries featured Baker talking to his daughter. Though the ad focuses on economic issues, it mentions his support for abortion rights.

Baker, a former health care executive, on Thursday released a video featuring his wife, then held a luncheon fundraiser with his running mate Karyn Polito with 300 women.

Polito spoke to reporters before the event about why women will vote for the Republican ticket. "As a small business owner, as a mom, someone that has served in government, I feel we are the best team to help people get jobs, have good schools everywhere and help working families get ahead," Polito said.

Baker and Polito are working hard to woo female voters away from Coakley, the current attorney general, and her running mate Steve Kerrigan. The reason comes down to numbers. Women typically make up more than 50 percent of the general electorate and for now, they favor Coakley.

"It's going to be everything to reach out to women on issues important to them for both sides," said Anthony Cignoli, a political consultant from Springfield. "They've got to make that case."

While women, like any other group, do not vote as one bloc, they tend to vote Democratic in Massachusetts at a higher rate than men.

In 2012, for example, Democrat Elizabeth Warren defeated Republican Scott Brown for U.S. Senate by 8 percent, but her margin of victory among women was 18 percent, according to exit polls. The same year, Democratic President Barack Obama defeated Republican presidential nominee and former Massachusetts governor Mitt Romney by 24 percent in Massachusetts and 31 percent among women. In 2008, Obama won 68 percent of the female vote in Massachusetts compared to 56 percent of the male vote.

The last time Baker ran for governor, in 2010, he lost to Democratic Gov. Deval Patrick by 7 percentage points. Among women, Baker lost to Patrick by 25 points.

For now, polling shows women prefer Coakley. A poll conducted for WBUR by the MassINC Polling Group Sept. 11-14 found Coakley leading Baker by 7 percent among likely voters. Among women, Coakley's lead grew to 20 percent. A New York Times/CBS News/YouGov.com tracking poll conducted Aug. 18 to Sept. 2 found Coakley leading Baker by 5 percent among all voters, and 19 percent among women.

Democratic U.S. Rep. Katherine Clark, of Melrose, told The Republican/MassLive.com that women support Coakley because of her stances on issues. "She understands the priorities we have, what women face in the workforce as they try to raise children and be successful," Clark said.

Clark stressed Coakley's emphasis on investments in childcare and early education, her support for mandatory earned sick time and for women's rights to make their own health care decisions on abortion and contraception. She said Coakley understands that helping women economically will help the entire state. Clark said Baker is "out of touch" with these priorities.

Coakley downplays suggestions that her support from women is because of her gender.

"Woman are supporting woman not just because they're women but because they're qualified," Coakley told reporters after winning the Democratic primary. "As my dad said when I graduated law school, sometimes the best man for a job is a woman."

"I don't think there's a ton of people who are voting for someone just on gender," added John Walsh, a former chairman of the Massachusetts Democratic Party in an interview.

Echoing a Democratic talking point that Massachusetts has prospered under Patrick and Coakley will continue that legacy, Walsh said, "Women understand we've accomplished a lot, we're in a better position than other parts of the country, and there's no reason for us not to broaden that success to more of the Massachusetts population."

Coakley's most recent television ad calls her a "powerful advocate for women and kids." Issues Coakley stresses on the campaign trail could appeal to women who are their families' primary caregivers - her emphasis on investing in pre-kindergarten and mandating earned sick time. In her primary night speech, Coakley touched on abortion rights and equal pay for women and criticized Baker's comments that the Supreme Court's decision in the Hobby Lobby case "doesn't matter" for Massachusetts.

The Hobby Lobby decision allowed family-owned companies to deny insurance coverage for contraception under the Affordable Care Act based on religious beliefs. Baker said the decision does not affect Massachusetts' contraception coverage mandate, but backed away from his remarks after Democrats pointed out that the ruling impacts self-insured companies.

Pro-abortion rights groups like Planned Parenthood and EMILY's List are backing Coakley. "With Martha Coakley, we have a proven leader who's demonstrated not just in words but in actions how she's a champion of women's access to health care, and that's something that voters can rely on," said Marty Walz, president of Planned Parenthood Advocacy Fund of Massachusetts.

But Baker's supporters say Baker is a pro-choice Republican who also wants to help women economically.

Renee Heffernan, a Republican small business owner from Dover, said she supports Baker because she thinks he will do a good job on economic policy, and she dislikes Obama's health care reform. Asked whether she thinks Baker can attract female voters, Heffernan said, "Karyn Polito can get other women to support him."

Polito said she is not worried about a history of women voting Democratic or about the polls. "Let's look at Charlie and I as our own brand," Polito said. "We're two people that embrace marriage equality, that are pro-choice Republicans, that have an experience and a record that includes both private and public sector experience, and the other side doesn't have that."

"I think female voters want what male voters want, which are more jobs and opportunities for people to work and get ahead," Polito said. "I meet so many women that are stuck in poverty, stuck in a system of dependency, that want to get out. Charlie and I have plans, a vision of specific things we want to accomplish together when we get to Beacon Hill."

Karen Teller, an angel investor from Boston and an independent-leaning Republican, said she likes that Baker is socially liberal and fiscally conservative. "Believe me, I'd like a strong woman," Teller said. "I'm glad Karyn's with him."

Even some Democratic women are open to Baker's candidacy. Democrat Karen Kaplan, CEO of Hill Holiday and former chair of the Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce, recently endorsed Baker.

Millicent Cutler, a Democratic interior designer from Cambridge, attended Baker's Thursday fundraiser. She is undecided and likes that Baker "tries to blur the line" between parties. Cutler said health care and women's rights are important to her and she likes that Baker supports abortion rights. She thinks Coakley is smart and clear about her stances. "They both have good platforms," Culter said. "I'm interested in what he has to say."