Move over, Moms for Obama. The President has a new batch of fans thanks to the Affordable Care Act, and it’s “Hookers for Obama” now.

The “independent contractors” — prostitutes — at the Moonlite Bunny Ranch in Carson City, Nev., used to be virtually uninsurable because insurance companies classified them as “illegal working girls,” many of whom had high rates of getting sexually transmitted diseases or AIDS, Nevada’s News 10 reported. But the Affordable Care Act solves all of their problems, and for the first time, receiving health coverage is a possibility.

“They just, they absolutely equate us to illegal working girls that have very high rates of STDs and AIDS,” Caressa Kisses,a Bunny Ranch prostitute, told News 10. “And so, since they group us into the illegal working girls, they just deny us. I mean, I have the best care insurance in the world, but that’s the only thing that’s covered.”

But starting January 1, insurance companies will no longer be able to deny these independent contractors access to health insurance. And many prostitutes at the Bunny Ranch view Obamacare as a blessing.

“So it is truly a miracle because it is harder for us to get health insurance because not everyone understands our profession and agree with that we do,” Bunny Ranch independent contractor Bella Dawn said.

Brothels are illegal across all 50 states except for in eight counties in Nevada, which is the only state to allow legal prostitution. However, it must be in the form of a regulated brothel like the Moonlite Bunny Ranch.

But while Obamacare is praised by Bunny Ranch’s prostitutes, its owner, Dennis Hof, views the law as a double-edged sword.

In addition to his working girls — who can receive health coverage — Hof also employs abut 150 non-prostitute employees across his several businesses. Under the employer mandate, Hof must not provide them all with health insurance, an endeavor that is expected to cost him about $250,000 per year.

Still, Hof is happy for what the law does for his working girls.

“Well, I think it’s hookers for Obama,” Hof said, “because they appreciate what he’s done and Obamacare works for them.”