Buy Photo Gov. Steve Beshear and Lt. Gov. Crit Luallen announce the rise in the minimum wage for state workers. (Photo: Tom Loftus/The C-J)Buy Photo Story Highlights Only state government executive branch employees will see a change in wages.

Tipped state employees will make $4.90 an hour, instead of $2.19.

The salaries of nearly 800 state workers will increase on July 1 under an executive order signed Monday by Gov. Steve Beshear that raises the minimum wage for employees of the executive branch of state government from $7.25 an hour to $10.10.

Beshear's order also raises the pay of tipped state employees — mostly waiters and waitresses at state parks — from $2.19 an hour to $4.90.

"The current minimum wage in this country of $7.25 a hour — no matter what measure you use — is simply not enough to support a family," Beshear said at a news conferences in Lexington and Louisville. "So, we need to change that reality."

RELATED | Beshear is losing his spokeswoman

RELATED | Beshear: Whatever it takes to keep Humana here

The governor said his action will cost state government about $1.6 million per year. The order applies only to executive branch employees — not employees of the legislative or judicial branches, or employees of state universities.

Beshear's surprise announcement comes at the outset of a general election campaign where Democratic gubernatorial nominee Jack Conway, currently Kentucky's attorney general, has stressed his party's support for raising the minimum wage.

But Beshear said he's taking the action now because state revenue growth has finally improved to the point where the state can afford it. "Raising the minimum wage is a basic, moral issue with me, ..." Beshear said. "We came to the point where I felt that the state could afford to take this step, that's why we're taking it now."

Republican legislative leaders, however, questioned whether the state can afford the move, as well as Beshear's decision to enact the policy by executive order.

"Gov. Beshear is taking a page out of the Obama administration's playbook by forcing through failed legislation by executive action," said House Minority Leader Jeff Hoover, R-Jamestown. "It seems Gov. Beshear apparently now understands he doesn't have to pass another budget and feels comfortable in adding to the strain on Kentucky's finances."

While state revenues have improved, Hoover noted the 2016 General Assembly must confront daunting new costs, particularly a massive unfunded liability in the Kentucky Teachers Retirement System and new costs for the expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.

Senate President Robert Stivers, R-Manchester, said, "Given the future needs of our budget, I hope this does not cause any future year fiscal problems."

Beshear completes his second term as governor in December and under the Kentucky Constitution must step down.

In the last two legislative sessions House Speaker Greg Stumbo, D-Prestonsburg, proposed bills to gradually raise the minimum wage for all workers in the state to $10.10 per hour. Yesterday he said he was pleased with Beshear's action and supports a similar step for workers in the legislative branch.

Beshear said his order will raise the salaries of a total of 779 state workers. Of those, he said 510 currently make less than $10.10 per hour or are tipped employees. In addition, he said the order will give a "slight bump in pay" to an additional 269 state workers who currently make $10.10 per hour or slightly higher.

Beshear's order also will require companies holding state contracts pay at least $10.10 per hour to their workers working on those contracts. That policy will take effect when existing contracts come up for renewal, he said.

Many of the state workers who will see the boost in pay currently work as caregivers in state veterans hospitals or in behavioral health facilities, Beshear said.

"It's an appalling irony that the people we have tasked with the difficult job of caring for our vulnerable populations are paid so little that they too are vulnerable," he said.

Beshear urged the private sector employers to follow his example. He argued that a higher minimum wage is economically beneficial to employers in the long haul because it reduces turnover and training costs.

Beshear also repeated arguments he's made before on why he believes raising the minimum wage is a good idea.

He said a statewide law requiring all public and private sector employers to raise the minimum wage to $10.10 per hour would move about 13,000 Kentuckians off of the state's Medicaid rolls.

He said he vast majority of minimum wage workers are not teens, but are over the age of 20. And he said statistics show a higher minimum wage does not reduce the number of jobs. He said U.S. Department of Labor statistics show that 13 states that raised the minimum wage in the beginning of 2014 have added jobs faster than those states that did not.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1Mi9Bsg