To be anything but blunt about Donald Trump misses the point right now as the nation takes time to give thanks and reflect on the equality, human rights and liberties this country has long championed. The man is a liar, a racist, an agent provocateur for human rights violations — and he’s fast becoming the face of the Republican Party.

This can’t be what the majority of Republicans actually want, and it certainly isn’t what the majority of all Americans are looking for in the next president. So why is he consistently the most-popular choice among polled GOP voters?

Last week the leading GOP candidate shocked the world and became even more popular after insisting that U.S. Muslim citizens should be persecuted just like the Nazis persecuted Jews, only because they’re Muslims.

In the same week, he said that if he were elected president, he would close down Muslim mosques in the United States. And most recently, Trump said that he once saw televised coverage of Muslims or Arabs in New Jersey “cheering” in the streets and celebrating when the World Trade Center was attacked in 2001.

It never happened. No one, anywhere, has ever produced any evidence or even credible collaboration that such a thing happened. He simply dismissed charges that he’s a liar, again, and moved on unabated.

Those were but a couple of the highlights of Trump’s week as the leading GOP presidential candidate, a week that has seen him climb better than 10 percent in the polls over his closest competitor, Ben Carson.

During a Trump rally this week, a black protester was assaulted and kicked by Trump fans, and Trump later said that the audience was right to “rough him up.”

Fresh off his surreal 90-minute rant about Carson last week, Trump moved on to supporting torture and has never backed down on his insistence he would deport millions of immigrants, and build a fabulously expensive, useless wall along Mexico, even though every credible source has said such things would be practically impossible and unwise.

Yet the more Trump lies and advocates his extremist, xenophobic, nativist, backward, unconstitutional and comically bent campaign for president, the more a strong segment of the GOP loves it.

Who are these people that either idolize Trump’s nefarious throwback to the criminal Sen. Joe McCarthy and J. Edgar Hoover — supporters willing to overlook Trump’s unhinged rants and patently offensive, hateful rhetoric and ideas simply because he isn’t a Beltway politician?

Regular poll analyses consistently show that likely Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton is seriously vulnerable to most of the other GOP contenders. But not Trump. Trump is the one candidate polls show that Clinton could almost handily beat if the election were held now. You can imagine how much worse the rhetoric and vitriol will get if Trump’s ego is boosted by real political victories.

Trump’s almost inexplicable 15 minutes of political fame has outlived everyone’s expectations that his popularity is nothing but early presidential political high jinks and entertainment. Republican voters start nominating a presidential candidate in about two months. His persistent progress eclipses any opportunity during debates to let voters see what GOP contenders are really offering as ways to solve the increasingly problematic Affordable Care Act, worry over terrorism, immigration, a seemingly endless war in the Middle East and the disintegrating middle class.

If Trump is truly representative of the majority of Republican voters, the party and the country are in dire trouble. We don’t think he is, and it’s past time for the GOP to call Trump out for the appalling, repugnant person that he is.