By Liz Freeman of the Naples Daily News

Lee Dixon wants to understand how his son's brief visit with an emergency room physician, X-rays and a cast put on the next day in an orthopedic surgeon's office means three bills totaling $5,000.

The Naples resident posed the question Tuesday to Gov. Rick Scott's health care and hospital commission, which was meeting at Florida Gulf Coast University to explore what is driving up health costs and how to promote price transparency among hospitals.

"To me, as a parent and a consumer, I don't know any other business where you don't have to justify costs," Dixon told the commission. "How can a cast cost $1,800?"

One commission member, Dr. Jason Rosenberg, a surgeon who attended the meeting by telephone, tried to explain the complexity of medical codes for billing and the negotiated rates for what insurance companies pay.

Dixon was the only consumer to address the commission Tuesday. Scott flagged price gouging as a new initiative for the commission Oct. 20, and Tuesday's meeting was the first one for the panel since that announcement, said Liz Dudek, secretary of the Florida Agency for Health Care Administration.

To date, 100 Florida residents have submitted their stories of hospital price gouging to the commission's website, where personal data and hospital names have been redacted.

No local hospitals were asked to make presentations Tuesday to the commission.

David Newman, executive director of the Washington, D.C.-based Health Care Cost Institute, was invited to discuss how the independent institute collects claims data to help policymakers.

He told the commission price transparency is not going to be the silver bullet to fix problems in health care — and he said it can actually raise costs in local markets.

Further, Newman said creating websites to enable consumers to compare prices is problematic because of the complexity of the data — and also because consumers historically do not use websites to shop around.

"No matter what, unless we change payment models, transparency tools are generally imperfect estimates," Newman said. "There is nothing less homogeneous in this country than hospitals."

Dr. Lee Gross, a Northport physician, told the commission how he designed a "concierge light" practice, where members pay a flat monthly fee for visits to his primary care practice. Services include all laboratory work, preventive tests like mammograms, steroid injections and the like with no extra expense to members.

For a family of four, the monthly membership fee is $135 a month — way below what the same family would pay of $1,935 enrolled in a 2014 plan under the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, he said.

Gross' presentation was welcomed by the commission, which asked for more information from him.

"These are the type of things we should try to help foster in Florida," said Carlos Beruff, the commission chairman.