Stefano Pessina has proved his savvy as a dealmaker, boardroom infighter and Wall Street schmoozer.

Now we'll find out if the 73-year-old Italian billionaire can run the sprawling enterprise he forged by selling Boots Alliance, his European drugstore and pharmaceutical distribution company, to Deerfield-based Walgreen.

When he agreed to take the CEO role at Walgreens Boots Alliance on a permanent basis, he also took full responsibility for the performance of a huge, complex company facing difficult challenges on several fronts. Pessina, acting CEO until July 9, has been calling the shots for some time. He pushed aside former CEO Greg Wasson and installed a phalanx of former Alliance Boots execs in top jobs at the merged retailer.

“For anybody else to be the CEO is just a charade,” says professor Erik Gordon of the University of Michigan's Ross School of Business.

The decision makes sense for a couple of reasons: Pessina is Walgreens' largest shareholder, with a 16 percent stake; and he will continue to make key strategic decisions. As CEO, he'll have no fall guy if things go wrong.

Gordon notes that Walgreens is avoiding the scenario that played out at Sears Holdings, another company dominated by a major shareholder who wielded power for years without taking the CEO title. Top executives came on board only to leave in frustration over Eddie Lampert's meddling. Lampert himself finally became CEO of the Hoffman Estates-based retailer in 2013.

Walgreens Executive Chairman James Skinner says in a statement that Pessina was picked because of how well he has managed the merger so far: “In order to continue this momentum and to recognize the progress that is already being made, the board concluded Stefano is the very best person to achieve our vision to be a truly global health care champion, the first choice for pharmacy, health care and well-being across the world.”

Wall Street clearly agrees. Walgreens Boots Alliance shares jumped 4.2 percent on news of Pessina's appointment, which was accompanied by fiscal third-quarter results that topped expectations and a higher full-year earnings forecast.

Pessina enjoys strong support from an investment community that prizes his “financial discipline,” otherwise known as cost-cutting. Since taking over, he has launched a campaign to reduce annual expenses by $1.5 billion. He has sweetened the pot with billions of dollars in share buybacks and a dividend hike.

But he'll need another set of skills to manage his mammoth creation. The combined company, with a projected $117 billion in annual revenue, is four times the size of Alliance Boots. It's a complex hybrid of retail pharmacy and wholesaling operations spanning two dozen countries.

Despite its global scope, most of Walgreens' business is in the U.S., unfamiliar territory to Pessina (who will continue to live in Monaco) and his European lieutenants. The chain contends not only with a formidable archrival in CVS Health but also with powerful pharmaceutical industry players such as pharmacy benefit managers. At the same time, Walgreens must navigate a changing U.S. health care sector where the cost-control mandates of Obamacare are squeezing profits.

Pressure on pharmacy profit margins at Walgreens' U.S. stores is a concern, as is sluggish growth in “front-end” merchandise sales. Boots has done better on both measures, sparking hope Pessina can translate that success to Walgreens.

And Walgreens only will become more complex as Pessina pursues his passion for dealmaking. Talking with analysts and investors on July 9, he predicted a “substantial wave of consolidation” in health care—and vowed to participate.

We know he can cut deals. But when the ink dries, a CEO has to run the company he built.