What should federal workers expect from Rep. Mark Meadows (R-N.C.) in his new role as chairman of the House Oversight and Government Reform subcomittee on government operations? (Jahi Chikwendiu/The Washington Post)

Mark Meadows is a difficult man to predict.

As the new chairman of the House Oversight and Government Reform subcommittee on government operations, the North Carolina Republican is in a key position to affect federal workplace and employee issues.

But what should they expect from him?

While his right-wing credentials shine, he appears more open to the concerns of federal government workers than his terrible federal union ratings would indicate. He plans to meet with employees in a different agency each month.

Yet in a political party that trumpets its conservative positions, Meadows tries to push it further from the center. Witness his vote against the reelection of Rep. John A. Boehner (R-Ohio) as speaker. Meadows is also a founder of the newly organized House Freedom Caucus, which apparently feels that House Republicans need to be reminded of conservative principles. The Freedom Caucus, he said, will “provide a unified conservative voice in the House Republican Conference . . . to make the concerns of conservatives known.”

Meadows has flirted with “birthers,” who gag on the notion that President Obama is a natural-born American, although the congressman doesn’t doubt the president’s citizenship. He was among the Republicans blamed for instigating the 2013 government shutdown, but he says he never wanted it and sees no benefits that came from it.

In a committee with a reputation for caustic partisanship, Meadows and Rep. Gerald E. Connolly (Va.), a progressive and the top Democrat on the subcommittee, speak warmly of their personal and professional relationship.

“Mark and I like each other a lot, and the chemistry between us is very positive,” said Connolly, adding that both are “committed to making government more effective and to a fair approach to federal employees.” Despite his strong conservative position, Meadows “is someone who is capable of seeing beyond partisan politics,” Connolly said.

There will be a number of opportunities to find out whether Connolly is right.

Pay is a perennial issue among Republicans who cite conservative think tank studies indicating that federal employees are often overpaid compared with their private-sector counterparts. Democrats and their union supporters point to a government survey that annually demonstrates significantly lower average federal salaries.

Meadows takes the middle ground, saying some feds are underpaid and some are overpaid. A hearing on the issue to get a wide range of opinions “would be appropriate,” he said. He would not endorse or denounce Connolly’s bill calling for a 3.8 percent pay raise for federal employees, saying that might not be enough for some workers and could be too much for others.

He is more certain about the need to increase the “accountability” of federal workers. Among their supporters, that is sometimes considered a euphemism for making it easier to punish or fire workers.

“We’ve got great federal workers across the country,” he said, but those “not pulling their fair share need . . . to get dealt with.”

“There certainly needs to be some level of reform there,” he added. “It’s probably too early to say exactly what form that takes. But I have heard from agency to agency [about] the extreme difficulty in rooting out those who are not doing what they are hired to do.”

Meadows recognizes the importance of improving employee morale but also knows it “can be very systemic and a difficult thing” to boost.

Nothing hurt morale in recent years like the 16-day partial shutdown.

A letter Meadows wrote, which was co-signed by scores of other Republicans, suggested crippling the government as a way of disarming the Affordable Care Act. CNN called Meadows the “mastermind behind the shutdown.” Blaming him for that, Meadows said, “gives a lot more credence to my persuasive ability than I actually have,” adding that it accomplished nothing.

He also distances himself from the blathering birther crowd.

He didn’t, however, distance himself from birthers during a 2012 tea party forum when he was asked: “If the president is not a natural-born citizen, then he does not control the military. So the question I have, if you’re Congress, will you pursue some kind of an investigation to find out whether or not this guy is really a citizen and entitled to [that] authority?”

Meadows said “Yes.”

Given the wide-ranging investigative powers of the Oversight and Government Reform Committee, Meadows is in a position to push for such an investigation. But he won’t.

“I don’t even remember that quote. Obviously I distance myself from that,” he said last week, adding that there will be no investigation into the president’s citizenship.

“That doesn’t apply to anything I’m doing now.”

With an aide’s knock on the door signaling that the interview was over, Meadows closed with the inclusive message he repeatedly pushed.

“I want to hear from everybody and every perspective I possibly can,” he said.

Twitter: @JoeDavidsonWP

Previous columns by Joe Davidson are available at wapo.st/JoeDavidson.