Finger Lakes unique white deer herd faces uncertain future With their Finger Lakes home for sale, future uncertain for white-coated herd









Image 1 of / 3 Caption Close Image 1 of 3 A visitor to the former Seneca Army Depot sees a white deer behind the base fence. A visitor to the former Seneca Army Depot sees a white deer behind the base fence. Image 2 of 3 A white buck at the Seneca Army Depot in the Finger Lakes north of Ithaca. A white buck at the Seneca Army Depot in the Finger Lakes north of Ithaca. Photo: D$2011 Image 3 of 3 White deer behind the fence at the 7,000-acre Seneca Army Depot face an uncertain future as Seneca County officials consider selling the property for development. White deer behind the fence at the 7,000-acre Seneca Army Depot face an uncertain future as Seneca County officials consider selling the property for development. Finger Lakes unique white deer herd faces uncertain future 1 / 3 Back to Gallery

Seneca Lake

If the world's largest herd of white deer — protected for decades behind fences at a sprawling Finger Lakes military base — is to survive, it might be as a tourist attraction in the heart of the state's popular wine country.

Now, the herd's home at the 7,000-acre former Seneca Army Depot is up for sale, and its future owner could determine what happens to roughly 300 white deer roaming undisturbed about 30 miles north of Ithaca.

An eye-popping genetic rarity, the white deer propagated at the base due to the protection of Army officials and about 24 miles of fencing that have sealed off the herd from predators and hunters. After the first ghostly deer were seen by soldiers in 1949, the base commander decided the animals should not be hunted.

As numbers grew over the years, the deer became a local legend to people who saw the striking animals at the edge of the base fence. Some joked that the white deer were the result of radiation from the nuclear bombs rumored to be stored there.

Actually, white fur is caused by a recessive gene within white-tailed deer, with the odds of a white deer birth from two brown deer estimated at about 1 in 20,000. When two white deer breed, the odds of a white offspring are greater. White deer are not albinos and have brown eyes rather than pink.

More Information Legends of the white deer White deer have had a mythical status among cultures around the world. For the native American Lenape, who lived in the Hudson Valley, a legend tells that a pair of male and female white deer coming together is a sign that indigenous people would join in harmony and salvation. In the medieval legend of King Arthur, the white stag — which the king pursued but could never catch — was said to represent mankind's quest for spiritual knowledge. A 12th century Scottish legend recounts a king hunting a white stag when the animal turned on him. As the king appealed for divine help, the stag's antlers turned into a cross and the animal disappeared. Ancient Celts considered white stags to be otherworldly messengers whose appearance foretold profound change in the lives of those who encountered them. Hungarian mythology credits their national origins to the guidance of a white stag. South of Tokyo, Japan, the Engakuji Temple is the site of a cave where a herd of divine white deer are said to have emerged to listen to the sermon of the temple's Buddhist founder the day it opened in the 13th century.

While the Army closed operations at Seneca in 1995, the fences stayed up, keeping the herd intact. But the Army is pulling out permanently next year and no one will tend the fences after that.

Conservationists see continued fencing and eco-tourism as the best way to preserve the white herd, said Dennis Money, president and founder of the not-for-profit Seneca White Deer and a retired utility executive.

His group is trying to raise the money to bid on the property, which is being sold by the Seneca County Industrial Development Agency. So far, the group has collected more than a quarter-million dollars. This week, the founders and owners of the Herron Hill Winery, in Hammondsport on Keuka Lake, pledged a $200,000 matching challenge donation. Through Jan. 31, John and Josephine Ingle will match all donations made up to a total of $200,000. "This is a positive start to a campaign that will stimulate job growth and impact the quality of life for our entire region," the couple said in a statement.

In past efforts to drum up support, Money's organization ran sold-out paid tours within the depot in 2006, 2009 and 2012. "We did 11 weekends and had more than 6,300 people come through to see the deer. We had to turn people away," Money said.

This month, about 70 potential bidders attended a tour of the base, which is crisscrossed with 100 miles of roadway and hundreds of reinforced buried concrete bunkers once used to store weapons. Bidding on the property will run through Feb. 29, said IDA Executive Director Bob Aronson.

In addition to Money's group, there is interest in the land from area farmers, including the Amish, he said. No minimum price has been set on the property, but land in the area normally sells for between $3,000 and $10,000 an acre.

"We have an economic development mission," said Aronson. "We want to see an outcome that produces jobs and gets the property back into the tax rolls." And he said that the herd could still be preserved as part of any potential redevelopment. "Some people are under the mistaken impression that this is an either-or situation," he said.

Money said the deer can fuel additional tourism in the area, which already gets a steady stream of visitors to the Seneca Lake Wine Trail and nearby Sampson State Park. As his model, Money looks to Elk County in central Pennsylvania, about four hours' drive to the southwest.

There, tourists line up to see wild elk that were first reintroduced into the area from Colorado about a century ago by state wildlife officials. "There are elk in the fields, elk walking down the street. The local hotel serves elk burger," said Money. "Businesses have sprung up ... the elk are an engine promoting economic development. Our white deer could do the same."

Built in 2010 in Benezette, the county's 245-acre visitors' center is drawing thousands of people each year, said Ashley O'Dell, the center's community outreach coordinator. "Five or six years ago, this was a pretty quiet area, with just a few camps, and a general store," said O'Dell. "Now we have a number of shops, places with antiques, wineries, and a distillery."

Guide businesses have also opened to help steer visitors to the best places to see elk, which are not confined and roam freely. "Real estate values have gone up. You used to be able to get a camp here for $20,000. Now it's $50,000," O'Dell said. "This has become a prime spot where people want to be."

Male elk can be up to 700 pounds or more, and give out a loud call known as "bugling." In the fall mating season, males fight each other in dramatic, horn-locking encounters for female attention. Accordingly, big-game hunters are now also among the visitors to the region. Each year, the state Game Commission gets about 20,000 applications for 100 or fewer elk hunting licenses.

Money is hoping to convince New York state to get behind a conservation plan for the white deer, and met recently with officials from the Department of Environmental Conservation and Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation.

The depot is across Route 96A from Sampson State Park, which draws more than 160,000 visitors annually. Plans there call for a $2.4 million project to add 15 full-service lakefront rental cottages aimed at tourists from the nearby wine trail

Parks spokesman Dan Keefe said as county leaders "evaluate redevelopment proposals, we will be happy to discuss how our efforts at Sampson could complement their plans."

DEC officials met with Money and had a "productive discussion about potential future management of the depot, including habitat conservation. No decisions have been made at this time," agency spokesman Benning DeLaMater said.

bnearing@timesunion.com • 518-454-5094 • @Bnearing10