Ron Gallegos

Ron Gallegos

Website: Ronformayor.com

Age:61

Family: Married to Diane Goldenstein

How long have you lived in Longmont? 27 years

Professional background:Consultant, gallery owner, abstract artist

Political/community experience: City Council 1995-1999, transportation advisory board, Longmont Area Economic Council, National League of Cities, Colorado Municipal League, Hispanic Locally Elected Officials, President of Neighborhood Group Leaders, Member of Pioneering Spanish Families Settled San Luis Valley 1830

Education: CU Boulder, Dartmouth College, BA in business from University of Phoenix

Name a person you admire and explain why? LBJ because of major legislative accomplishments — Medicare, Medicaid, Voting Rights Act

Marijuana dispensaries are currently banned within Longmont city limits, yet legal in Colorado. If elected, would you want to keep or repeal the ban? Why or why not?

Sitting council has established current policy with regard to marijuana dispensaries. If the citizens of Longmont want a change in the policy in terms of dispensaries and sales within city limits they [citizens] need to make their needs and desires known; I will abide by the will and desires of the majority of citizens of Longmont.

Advertisement

Question 2: In May, City Council directed staff to research funding options for an affordable housing goal of an additional 50 and 100 dwelling units in Longmont annually. Funding options discussed included a sales tax, density bonuses for developers and increasing building fees on some construction. If elected, would you keep the council's current direction on affordable housing or would you propose a different course? Why?

Any discussion of funding options for affordable housing is premature without a viable vision — a concrete plan. Let's not put the cart before the horse. We need a vision of where we want to go. I think a concrete course of action, a detailed and strategic-specific and date-certain plan needs to be undertaken in a public process with public input, to address a vision of the housing needs of the community with the resulting answer being multiple types and forms to increase the overall housing stock for the near and far future of this community.

What is the most important thing you want to accomplish during your term if elected?

The most important thing to accomplish during my term of office should I get elected would be to foster increased viability and economic business activity in the core downtown area by way of a Comprehensive Master Parking Plan that will result in a Parking Garage Initiative conducted in a dynamic fashion or process that results in the building of parking garages in the Downtown Development Area that yield an overall positive economic benefit to the core downtown business environment. People are tired of talk and want a vision with a plan and a date-specific goal for project completion.