Tax filers without health insurance in the previous year face much harsher penalties under the Affordable Care Act this tax season than last — unless they qualify for an exemption.

Dozens of exemptions for everything from financial hardship to tribal affiliation allow people to sidestep penalties, or what the health law refers to as "shared responsibility" payments. The trick is figuring out which of the exemptions, if any, might apply.

"It's kind of one of those things where it's hard to know what you don't know that you need to know," said Lindsey Buchholz, a health law specialist at The Tax Institute at H&R Block.

At issue is the ACA's so-called individual mandate. Last tax season, people without insurance in the previous year were supposed to pay $95 or 1 percent of their income, depending on which was higher. The penalty this time around has been upped to $325, or 2 percent of income.

Deductions for uninsured children, which are half those of adults, can result in even larger penalties for families. The Kaiser Family Foundation has predicted the average penalty for not having insurance will be $969 per household.

Buchholz said she expects the higher stakes will result in greater interest in exemptions. "People who truly need them put the time and effort into figuring them out," she said.

The most common exemption is for unaffordability, she said. Generally, it applies to people for whom the lowest cost Bronze level marketplace plan would have cost more than 8.05 percent of household income.

For most people — those with insurance through work or through government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid — the ACA has little impact on filing. They simply check a box on line 61 of Form 1040.

For those who got insurance through state and federal marketplaces, it's a little more complicated. They have to file at least one additional form: Form 8962.

But applying for the unaffordability exemption involves a separate process, which some tax filers find overwhelming. To claim the exemption, people must figure in the amount of the premium tax credit, or subsidy, they would have received had they actually signed up for insurance.

"We do get a lot of questions about, 'How do I find this information so I can do these calculations?" Buchholz said.

The added complexity demands more time to complete returns and, for those who rely on professional help, greater expense. The IRS says more than half of taxpayers hire a tax preparer to do their returns. Some preparers, such as H&R Block, charge customers on a per-form basis.

"While this is only the second year that taxpayers need to report information about their health coverage when filing their income tax returns, we expect that these requirements will soon become a routine part of tax time," Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy, Mark Mazur said in a news release last month. "We are working to ensure that consumers can easily access clear information on what the requirements mean for them as they prepare to file their taxes."

People who don't qualify for the unaffordability exemption may be eligible for other exemptions, such as those for people who were uninsured for less than three consecutive months or who experienced hardships, such as:

• Fire, flood or another natural or human-caused disaster that resulted in substantial home damage

• Unexpected increases in necessary expenses to care for an ill, disabled, or aging family member

• The death of a close family member

• A shut-off notice from a utility company

• Domestic violence

• Homelessness.

There is also an array of less common exemptions that apply, for example, to members of Indian tribes or prisoners.

"It's trying to weed through all your options and find out where you tax benefit is," Buchholz said

To help people make that determination, the government-run insurance marketplace offers an online tool at https://www.healthcare.gov/exemptions-tool/#/.

People without insurance aren't the only ones who might find they owe the government money. The 2015 health insurance subsidies, or advance insurance premium tax credits, were based on projected incomes, so people need to report if their actual incomes for the year were higher or lower for some reason such as, perhaps, a job change.

If their incomes were lower, they might qualify for a larger tax refund. But if their incomes were higher, they might have to pay back some or all of their subsidy, either through a smaller tax refund or a payment.

Of marketplace enrollees who received subsidies in 2014, about half underestimated their income, H&R Block reported last year. They had to pay back the government $530 on average.

Conversely, roughly one-third overestimated their 2014 income. As a result, they got an additional premium tax credit of $365 on average, increasing their refunds 11 percent to $3,816.

The deadline to file taxes is April 15, although extensions are possible.

skennedy@mcall.com

610-820-6130

PAYING UP

What: The shared responsibility payment is a penalty for going without health insurance as required by the Affordable Care Act's individual mandate

Exemptions: For tribal members, prisoners, people who cannot afford premiums and those who've suffered hardships, such as domestic violence or a utility shut-off