Russia is particularly eager to increase availability of the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage. Envying the U.S. mortgage system?

Moscow officials hoping to boost the Russian housing market have been visiting the United States for more than a year to learn how the American mortgage machine works.

That would be the machine that blew a gasket in 2007, causing a housing market crash that led to a financial crisis that then spurred on the deepest recession since the Great Depression. It’s also the machine U.S. lawmakers are working to replace with a new system.

Story Continued Below

But Russia is one of several countries hoping to export parts of the U.S. mortgage market back home as it remains a tantalizing model for foreign officials who want to make the dream of homeownership more widely available. Emissaries from Japan, Thailand and South Korea have also been studying how the U.S. housing market finds the money for so many loans.

( Also on POLITICO: Full finance policy coverage)

“The system that we set up has worked very well generally over the years,” said Kerry Vandell, dean’s professor of finance at the University of California, Irvine. “The caveat is that it can be abused under certain conditions.”

Despite the recent volatility of the American housing market, foreign officials want to emulate how the U.S. system makes 30-year mortgages available from a variety of lenders and in all corners of the country. In their countries, loans are harder to come by or have terms that can saddle heirs with debt — and they lack a system for attracting the number of investors needed to fund new loans.

Much of the interaction between foreign officials and the United States has centered on Ginnie Mae, a housing agency that backs securities made up of loans insured by the Federal Housing Administration that are bought by investors — a process that helps banks get funding for more loans. Their role in the housing market is similar, but typically smaller, than the one played by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which were bailed out by taxpayers in 2008.

For instance, Ginnie Mae President Ted Tozer has held a handful of meetings with officials from the Agency for Housing Mortgage Lending — Russia’s version of Fannie and Freddie — since 2012.

( POLITICO Magazine PHOTOS: The empty shells where Detroit’s houses used to be)

“Nobody has a finance system close to what we have,” Tozer said.

These discussions could now be on hold following Russia’s decision to seize Crimea, an event that has escalated tensions to a level not seen since the end of the Cold War.

They started, however, soon after President Vladimir Putin came back into office in 2012 as he looked for ways to help more Russians buy a home and boost the country’s economy.

Russian officials are particularly eager to increase the availability of the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage — a staple of the U.S. market.

But to do so, they will need a system in which the government will guarantee more of the losses on loans that are packaged into bonds; otherwise, investors will be reluctant to buy the securities that provide the funding for these mortgages.

Ginnie Mae provides an example of how this can be done.

Russia has no direct mortgage insurer and government-controlled banks such as Moscow’s Sberbank control the relatively small market by making new home loans and keeping them on their balance sheet. Sberbank announced in January that it issued a record 453,700 mortgages in 2013, up 43 percent from the previous year.

University of Arizona sociology professor Jane Zavisca, who authored the book “Housing the New Russia” in 2012, estimates that the government-controlled banks are responsible for 70 percent of the market.

But the loans carry interest rates often above 12 percent and have terms of up to 15 years.

“Mortgages are not affordable to most Russians,” Zavisca said. “You have to have income stability that doesn’t exist for most people.”

The Russians have told U.S. officials, Tozer said, that they want to expand ways to finance home loans in the country’s far-flung regions that have been hard to reach for the country’s banking sector.

Establishing a better legal system for its housing market is also needed and at some meetings, U.S. officials have handed over copies of federal and state property ownership laws as a template. In addition, Russia will need to figure out what currency loans would be based on because the ruble has proved to be a bad option.