Montana's health insurance providers have requested some big rate increases on some plans.

Last week, U.S. Senator Steve Daines (R-Montana) took to the Senate floor with a chart of the increases, ranging from 23 percent (for Blue Cross Blue Shield of Montana) up to 47 percent (for Time Insurance).

Daines said the data is proof of the “broken promises” of the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

He said he showed the numbers to a group of Montana businessman just before coming to the floor.

"And one of the builders said, 'This likely means that I no longer will be able to provide health care insurance for my employees,'” he said.

However, those rate increases, if approved by the Montana Commissioner of Securities and Insurance (the State Auditor, Monica Lindeen), would only apply to individual plans under the Affordable Care Act, not to group plans, where most people get their coverage.

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Montana says the need for the increase stems from the way the company tried to predict its costs when the individual plans were introduced.

"We were making an educated guess as to what the medical experience or medical utilization would be for this brand new market,” said John Doran, director of public relations for BCBSMT. “Unfortunately we took on a higher risk pool in 2014 than we anticipated, which means essentially that we brought in less premiums than we paid out in medical and pharmaceutical costs."

The mis-estimate has several explanations: Blue Cross paid a lot for a new Hepatitis drug it didn't anticipate; and the individual plans represented a new kind of insurance plan, with little data on the past health of the people enrolling. Those plans also take all comers, regardless of pre-existing conditions.

"And that means individuals can no longer be discriminated against because of their health status,” said Christina Goe, general counsel for the insurance commissioner.

The pent-up demand, people receiving services after years of no coverage, and in some cases stopping payment on premiums and dropping off the plans, also contributes to price instability.

Goe said it's expected to take about three years for the pent-up demand to level out. Doran said the Blue Cross rates are carefully calculated and are intended to create long-term stability.

The total number of enrollees in the plans affected is just a small portion of people in the state, and about 80 percent of those enrollees receive federal subsidies, with their own costs capped as a percentage of income.

“So a good percentage of the individual market in Montana will not really see the full effect of the rate increase,” Goe said.

Montana Health Co-op, a nonprofit created by the ACA, is asking for an increase in part because it lost a lot of money in its platinum plan, the most comprehensive package of benefits.

“So sicker people gravitated to [the] platinum plan,” said Jerry Dworak, the co-op's president and CEO. “The mix that we got was a lot different than what we thought we would.”

The co-op is dropping that platinum offering for 2016.

Dvorak said there's a general rule in insurance that about 20 percent of the enrollees will incur about 80 percent of the claims, and vice versa. In the co-op, just 120 people out of 14,000 enrollees, less than 1 percent, ran up about half of all costs, he said.

The plan is paying for some drug treatments costing upwards of $70,000 a month.

“The number of mega-claims, large claims, was far greater than we ever anticipated,” he said.

Meanwhile overall health costs keep going up, including traditional group plans.

Richard Miltenberger of The Leavitt Group consults for employers seeking group plans.

He points to three reasons starting with individual behavior starting with individuals and their poor health habits.

"We all need to take better care of ourselves. That's part of the reason costs are high in this country,” he said. “Secondly, I point to the health care system. We don't have transparent pricing. I can tell you the price of gasoline in Montana right now. I can't tell you the price of an appendectomy.

“The third thing — and I wouldn't let these folks off the hook — are the insurance companies. The insurance companies are taking too big a part of the pie."

Dvorak agreed on the need for lower costs for medical services and drugs.

"Unless there's some kind of cost-structure to control the claims, we're never going to get control of the premiums,” he said.

The ACA specifies how much insurers can spend on its non-medical costs in administering the plan. And if they end up overcharging, customers will get refunds.

"There's no incentive for us to inflate prices by any beams,” Doran said. "Because (a) we won't be competitive in the marketplace, and (b) we would have to make rebates to our members in the future.

The state insurance commissioner will act on the rate requests later this summer. Goe said many things come into consideration when considering the requests, and that there's “back and forth” between her office and the insurers before a final price is set.

Those prices will be in effect when open enrollment for the plans starts in November, with plans taking effect in January.