SAN DIEGO--(BUSINESS WIRE)--MediExcel Health Plan (www.MediExcelHP.com) has received regulatory approval from the California Department of Managed Health Care to market and sell its 2014 small group healthcare coverage plans. “This has been a major undertaking for our organization as we developed the necessary benefit programs, systems, and processes to comply with the 2014 Affordable Care Act (ACA) standards and requirements,” says MediExcel Health Plan CEO Dr. José Hernández.

The challenges and complexities of ACA compliance have caused a few health plans to discontinue participation in the small group, cross-border marketplace in 2014. “We applaud MediExcel’s perseverance and commitment to serving the small business community,” says Jessica Word, President of the Word & Brown General Agency. “With an ACA-compliant selection of coverage options, we expect many small group employers in San Diego and Imperial counties to take advantage of MediExcel’s high-quality and affordable cross-border healthcare coverage.”

MediExcel offers four small group plan options. All MediExcel small group plans include Essential Health Benefits and meet the federal Minimum Essential Coverage and ACA Actuarial Value requirements. Essential Health Benefits include pediatric dental and vision as well as all of the other new benefits covered in California’s base-benchmark plan as specified in state law. The rate methodology for MediExcel’s small group plans is structured in conformance with the ACA, which follows the compressed age ratios for each enrollee’s age.

“With the onset of the less-forgiving regulatory environment in 2014 for non-compliance, brokers and employers will undoubtedly feel much more comfortable with ACA-compliant plans, even if it pertains to cross-border healthcare coverage,” says Caitlin Gadel, J.D., Lead Benefits Consultant for Benefits Compliance Link (www.benecomplink.com). “The potential fines and penalties for employers with non-compliant plans in their employer benefit program will compel all brokers to make small group medical plan recommendations that are ACA compliant,” Gadel adds.

About MediExcel Health Plan

MediExcel Health Plan is a Mexican-based company licensed by the California Department of Managed Healthcare to offer group healthcare coverage to U.S. employers in San Diego and Imperial Counties with healthcare delivery in Mexico. For more information, visit the company website at: www.MediExcelHP.com.

About Word & Brown and The Word & Brown Companies

For nearly 30 years, the Word & Brown® General Agency has been recognized as an insurance industry and technology leader – and a trusted resource for brokers selling individual and family health and ancillary insurance, Medicare coverage, and group insurance solutions. The Word & Brown General Agency is part of The Word & Brown Companies, which provide insurance services nationwide through more than 50,000 brokers to hundreds of thousands of consumers and approximately 60,000 employers with nearly 6.5 million eligible employees.