Saturday, December 5, 2015 - by Mary Petruska

Claire Vassort breathing in the "Breath of Life" bus and the reality that her art, which is all about nature, is now on an "electric" shuttle bus in Chattanooga. This is Claire's second public art project - the first one was in Trenton.

This article was previously published in The Pulse in 2011, but the question keeps coming up.

Sometimes I wonder just how much art really matters... especially when, in hard times, the art budget is always the first to be cut and the hardest to defend. This, despite countless findings that a healthy art environment attracts both business and tourists to a community. When the CEO of Volkswagen announced their decision to locate in Chattanooga, he chose to do it at the Hunter Museum and said that the rich public art program in Chattanooga was the key to their final decision.

Even knowing this to be true, last week as I sat at my computer in 90 degree heat with no air conditioning, I was questioning my choices in life - one more time - when I saw an email from a fellow artist.

Claire Vassort had sent out pictures of a shuttle bus that was wrapped in her art work. She was one of five artists to receive a grant thru "Art in Motion", a program sponsored by Public Art Chattanooga in collaboration with CARTA and the River City Company. Visual and graphic artists were invited to submit original two-dimensional designs to be wrapped on the free zero emission shuttles that transport passengers around downtown Chattanooga. The other winning proposals were created by Rondell Crier, Jaimie Davis, Karen Estes, and Daryl Thetford.

Claire's first public art project was a series of ten banners for Trenton, Georgia. They hung on poles along the park on the way to the Chamber of Commerce. She, being a hang glider pilot, called her banner series "Eyes to the Sky" and they depicted flight.

We met at the park to talk about her commission and she told me that when she saw the call for proposals in the paper, she thought of the banners again and how much she had enjoyed the whole idea of public art and making it available to people on the street. The banners were commissioned by the Trenton Arts Council with the support of the City of Trenton. It was an ongoing project, commissioning an artist every six months for a new series.

We talked about why so many people don't seem to understand the importance of art in their lives. She said that when people asked her why she made art and why she thought it mattered, she would tell them to take every picture off their walls - every vase and every keepsake off the shelves, and then walk back into their home again and see how it felt. And then we laughed, and acknowledged the fact that most artists still spend a lot of their time working silly jobs to support their passion.

I decided to go into Chattanooga and try to ride the shuttle and ask people how they felt about getting on that bus. It wasn't on the street when I was there so I went to the terminal. It is the first of the five shuttles to be wrapped in artist’s designs. There it was, with no passengers to ask, when another shuttle came in to rest and the driver stepped out.

I asked Lawrence Wilkerson, the bus driver, what he thought about the project and if he had even noticed Claire's bus. He told me, "I love that bus, it reminds me of the 70's and peace and love... I feel like I'm driving the Love Bug around... it makes me happy." I asked Mr. Wilkerson if he could request that bus but he told me he couldn't - that it was all about maintenance and rotation - but, he added, "when I get it - I know it will be a good day".

So there, on the hot cement in Chattanooga, in 90 degree weather, my heart filled and I knew - one more time - that art does matter.

----

Mary Petruska is an artist living in Wildwood, and still looking around for the answers.