Virginia's largest health insurer won't be grandfathering policies that don't meet Affordable Care Act standards, despite a last-minute change in state law that would allow it to do so.

Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield said this week that the wheels are too far in motion, and it will continue transitioning customers into new, more robust policies required by the ACA, also known as Obamacare.

"We believe changing course would cause unnecessary disruption in the Virginia market, and frankly, is not possible to accomplish at this late hour," Anthem Blue Cross spokesman Scott Golden said in an email.

A smaller player in the Virginia market, Golden Rule, will grandfather policies. It's the only insurer in Virginia that has told the state Bureau of Insurance it will do so, BOI spokesman Ken Schrad said.

Golden Rule, which covers about 13,000 people in Virginia, is affiliated with larger UnitedHealthcare, but United hasn't announced plans to keep its older policies in place. A company spokesman did not respond to the Daily Press' requests for comment Tuesday.

The policies in question are individual-market-type policies, not the group coverage policies many employees get through large employers.

Golden Rule sent its customers letters last month, telling people who expected to have their old policies canceled that they could keep them simply by continuing to pay premiums. Those who had already chosen a new plan could make the transition, the company said, or potentially go back to their old plan.

This became possible in Virginia last month after the General Assembly passed, and Gov. Terry McAuliffe signed, legislation allowing it. Federal regulations in the ACA required the more robust, and often more expensive, policies, but older policies were grandfathered in after a public outcry.

President Obama, and other politicians, had promised people they could keep policies they liked, and many were surprised to get cancellation letters.

The grandfathering required a change at the state level, though. Virginia legislators failed to pass that legislation at least twice this year before coming together nearly unanimously on the issue Nov. 10.

State Sen. Thomas K. "Tommy" Norment, R-James City, sponsored that bill in the Senate, and Del. David Yancey, R-Newport News, sponsored companion legislation in the House.

At the time, a number of legislators, and some in the insurance industry, said it was too late for companies to keep old policies in place. Letters had already gone out, they said, people were transitioning to new plans and there would be too many bureaucratic and regulatory hoops to jump through.

Golden Rule spokeswoman Ellen Laden said her company was ready to go when the legislation passed.

"I think the process worked well and went smoothly," she said.

Anthem's spokesman said backtracking would have required new rate submissions to the Virginia Bureau of Insurance, which would need to approve those rates. Open-enrollment for new Obamacare policies began Nov. 15, further complicating things, he said in an email.

Anthem is easily Virginia's largest health insurer by market share. Golden said its plans have 3 million members here.

"Anthem will continue the transition of its members to ACA-compliant plans as planned," Golden said in his email.

George Clark, a Newport News insurance agent who lobbied the General Assembly to pass its legislation last month, questioned Anthem's unwillingness to backtrack. He said the needed infrastructure to run the old plans is already in place.

"They need to make it happen," Clark said. "Where there's a will there's a way."

Fain can be reached by phone at 757-525-1759.