<p>Naples residents Patrick and Tina Mellon will see the premiums for the Healthy Kids insurance program for their children, Oakley, 12, and Chelsea, 8, nearly double on Oct. 1. The Healthy Kids insurance program run by the state but under contract with private insurers is raising premiums for full-pay families from $153 to $299 per month. The program was started years ago and targeted low-income families but it created an option for families with no access to insurance to get something affordable for their school-age kids at a full premium rate. (David Albers/Staff)</p>

By Liz Freeman of the Naples Daily News

Tina Mellon learned offhand at a doctor’s office that her Healthy Kids insurance plan for her son and daughter is being eliminated at the end of September.

Then she got a letter in the mail that was like a punch in the stomach: New plan offerings with premiums of $299 per child, double what she has been paying of $153 per child.

“I cried a lot last week,” Mellon, 41, of Naples said. “We can’t afford $600. My (children’s) insurance just doubled in the blink of eye. You think you are making headway with bills and they slam you again.”

Tina and her husband, Patrick, are joined by nearly 36,000 families statewide in the same bind who have children in Healthy Kids in a “full pay” category.

They need insurance for their children but their income is at or above a threshold — 200 percent of the federal poverty limit — and they do not qualify for subsidized premiums.

For a family of four, 200 percent of the federal poverty level is annual income $48,500. Below that, a family of four qualifies for subsidized Healthy Kids premiums of $15 or $20 a month.

Healthy Kids officials in Tallahassee said benefits’ requirements under the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, brought changes that meant the full-pay program would either be eliminated or premiums would have to rise.

“Although it is not required for us to provide a full-pay option at all, we feel strongly that providing this option for Florida’s families is right,” Rebecca Matthews, chief executive officer of Healthy Kids, wrote in the letter to families. “We have managed to preserve the full-pay option in the face of the unfunded mandates and burdensome bureaucracy brought on by the ACA.”

The required changes eliminates all annual and lifetime dollar limits on essential health benefits, requires developmental therapy services, and adds more eye glasses coverage.

Healthy Kids had to seek new contracts with insurers this past summer and for the first time, the full-pay plans had to be secured separately from the subsidized plans.

Healthy Kids contracted with Sunshine Health for two plan choices for the full-pay families effective Oct. 1 and the existing plans terminate Sept. 30.

All full-pay families will be automatically assigned to a Sunshine Health Stars Plus with a $299 a month premium for each child with dental coverage or $284 without dental, according to the notices.

Families have 90 days to switch to a lower premium option of $220 a month with dental or $205 without dental but there is a $3,000 medical deductible and $1,500 pharmacy deductible.

Because there are no subsidies with the full-pay program, the new Sunshine Health plans could not be exempt under federal law from having to meet all of the essential benefit requirements of the ACA, Laura Brennaman, policy and research director for Florida CHAIN, a consumer’s advocacy group, said.

Families need to explore ACA plans because subsidies are available for families whose incomes is up to 400 percent of the federal poverty level, Brennaman said.

Stephanie Vick, administrator of the Florida Department of Health in Collier, agrees.

Because the full-pay plans with Sunshine Health are new, the impacted families qualify for a special enrollment period under the ACA, Vick said. They could qualify for subsidies to help with premiums.

She recommends they make appointments with a navigator who helps people sign up for coverage under the ACA. The application deadline for Oct. 1 coverage is Sept. 30. For coverage starting Dec. 1, the deadline is Nov. 30.

In Collier, there are 3,372 children in Healthy Kids but how many are “full pay” was not readily available.

“If I had to do an educated guess, may be 500,” Vick said.

She recognizes some full-pay families will drop Healthy Kids coverage and risk having their children uninsured.

“It’s going to be unfortunate,” Vick said.

Families can still get immunizations at the health department but without coverage, the kids won’t get regular check up with pediatricians and health problems will be missed and hospital stays will increase, Vick said.

Sunshine Health is affiliated with Florida Blue and it was awarded a statewide contract for all full-pay families, Dr. Robert Wilson, a Naples pediatrician who has served as medical director of the Healthy Kids program in Collier.

Coverage for full-pay families traditionally has been through Community Health Partners, the local physician/hospital network, he said.

“A lot will say they can’t afford it and will drop out,” Wilson said, referring to Sunshine Health. “That is the going to be the end result. Families are going to have to figure it out if they can budget this or not.”

He understands the need for the premium hike and points out that Healthy Kids has essentially been a charity program.

“I think it (the hike) is probably justified and can be accounted for in the end,” Wilson said. “The pharmacy bill in Healthy Kid was a real big chunk of the budget.”

Mellon, the Naples mother who is full-pay with two children enrolled, said her son has a condition that requires frequent trips to an ear, nose and throat specialist and he has had eight surgeries. She can’t let the coverage lapse.

“It is so overwhelming,” she said.

(In Southwest Florida, navigators can be reached at 1-866-547-2793 or visit the website www.hpcswf.com)