Columbia might not be Roswell, N.M., and maybe little green men aren't known to turn up here. Tuesday, however, a special landing is scheduled at Jesse Auditorium. Tall blue men will arrive to interact with local human ambassadors in a sold-out performance of the Blue Man Group.

The University of Missouri's Concert Series website describes Blue Man Group as a "Las Vegas-style theatrical" experience "featuring percussion, comedy and multi-media. This is a trio of humanoid characters with bald heads and blue makeup!"

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

Well. OK, they're not wrong — but there's a bit more to it. As for exactly what that "bit more" entails, that's trickier to answer. By all accounts, the show is less a purely theatrical production and more a performance-based happening: an energetic, interactive experience. With a lot of percussion and splashing.

And audience participation is encouraged. Mike Brown, who has more than 10 years of experience in blue greasepaint — he has performed for the company in multiple cities in the United States and abroad and is now a member of the U.S. touring group — said in an interview that the point of the show, "on a whole, is about creating a larger sense of community and connecting everybody involved."

COLORFUL CONNECTIONS

The performance gradually builds momentum as the characters of the Blue Men — ostensibly alien life-forms — begin to explore our world and gradually seek to increase audience involvement. The men, who should be thought of in the gender-neutral sense of the pronoun — at least one woman has played the role in the show's decades of performances, and a new female role, "Showbot," was introduced in Las Vegas last year — don't speak. They explore the world of human nature and technology with gestural wonder. Participants are bumped out of their safety zone, in a pleasant way, when the invisible fourth wall comes down, and the blue men begin to splash and interact with the audience.

"The Blue Man's main objective is to break that wall, to interact with these people and to really look them in the eye and have a deep connection or a deep conversation with them without words, that's just about feelings and energy and tangible things," like colorful goo, "that are floating in the air between us all, if that makes sense — to me, it makes complete sense," Brown said.

A few humans from the audience might be invited onstage to participate in the exchange. "In the beginning of the show, the audience will be extremely quiet," Brown said. "And by the end, you have them up dancing and interacting with each other and taking photos."

The end of the show usually involves a meet-and-greet. Blue Men typically stay in character, not speaking but communicating through gestures and "autographing" merchandise by wiping blue paint on the items. Brown said that during this time, "you'll see other audience members come up to" those chosen to participate onstage "and say, 'You were great. You did a really awesome job,' or something like that, and that always gives us a sense that they're really proud a member of their community was taken up and got to act with us, and that we sort of use as this kind of talisman.

"It's just really cool to see how much people connect at the end of the show," he continued, "and also on a larger scale — a few years ago, Blue Man was a little more mysterious because not everybody knew who we were and not everybody knew what the show was exactly. Now that the show's gotten a bit more international, a bit more popular, everybody kind of knows who we are, but it still has that effect where people can't really explain it and still say, 'You've gotta see it for yourself.' "

COMPANY MEN

There are many repeat customers, said Brown, who are attracted to the sense of community inherent in the experience, and the show continues to gain momentum; the fact that it's no longer as much of a novelty doesn't seem to be having a negative effect on its impact. CNN Money reported last year that the company's combined performances gross approximately $3.5 million a week.

Brown himself was one of those repeat customers before joining the company. He first experienced a live show in New York while in college as a theater student in the 1990s. With a background in percussion, "I fell in love with it instantly," he said. "I was one of those kids in the audience who — I really wanted the blue paint all over my face.

"Cut to several years later, after graduating I moved to New York, and I didn't want to be a hustling actor," he continued. He had worked for various companies doing scenic work, loading shows and working backstage. A crew job opened with Blue Man Group, and Brown took it.

The company had humble beginnings in New York in the late 1980s, when co-founders Phil Stanton, Matt Goldman and Chris Wink donned bald caps and blue makeup for a performance with friends in Central Park. They dubbed the performance a "Funeral for the '80s," Stanton said in an interview with CNN Money. "We did a bonfire and got rid of icons like a Rambo doll," he said.

Over the next several years, often operating by the skin of their teeth, the co-founders transformed the company from a ragtag affair into a multicity, multimillion-dollar force, that even boasts its own school, the "Blue School."

And in spite of the astounding growth of the company, its founders were determined not to lose sight of their vision of creating a positive environment for their employees. Goldman told CNN Money that "we were trying to create an organization where people treated each other with a bit more consideration than other offices."

"I always wanted to work for Blue Man as a company," said Brown, who auditioned for, and earned, a Blue Man role in 2003. "… To be a part of the company is great — Blue Man truly is a community in itself. … It's actually, in my mind, a dream come true."

The experience of working for the company is reflective of the Blue Man persona and the point of the performance itself, Brown said.

The point of the show is in "connecting audience members that have shown up to see this performance — and that really does extend into the company," he said. "The company is about creating this larger sense of community, whether it means artists, musicians, performers, business managers — we're all in it together to create a change. To create a real, lasting performance that isn't about making money. It's about having an effect on the culture, commenting in comical ways about what is going on in society in terms of communication, in terms of technology, in terms of just how we all sort of exist.

"The Blue Man company is, at the heart of it, why everybody continues to work," Brown said. "That's really the reason why I've continued to work for Blue Man for 10 years. I love the people that I work with. … Really, it's communal effort — creating a really communal energy. I'm definitely very lucky."