Locals remember Longmont's Twin Peaks Mall as the owners prepare for demolition

Exterior demolition of Longmont's Twin Peaks Mall will begin Aug. 1.

As the mall's owners prepare to tear down the structure, locals share some of their favorite memories at the mall.

"That mall was basically our life story. So watching it disappear is very bittersweet. I have a million memories of the Twin Peaks Mall. It is where my family had our restaurant Tacos Etc. for 14 years. It is where I met my husband during the construction in 1985. It is where my two kids had at least 5,000 tacos and several birthday parties, including taking dozens of classmates and friends to the theaters. I saw every new movie for 20-some years there. I also bought four of my puppies at the pet store that was once there. I am very sad about the demise of this mall. But time marches on and change is inevitable."

- Paula Manning Fagre

"It was my first job out of high school, and I am glad that I got to spend that summer there along with the fellow cast members (employees). The theater always felt like a big welcoming family, and after being born and raised in Longmont it was really the first, major theatres I saw some of the most memorable movies in. No, it wasn't the best looking theaters and was run-down. But it was surely one of the few places a lot of us have some precious memories in. I remember when my mother and father weren't fighting and were finally talking again. Even after 4 years of divorce, they were able to stop fighting long enough to take me, together as a family, to see the "Hulk" movie. Something I will remember for the rest of my life — the first time my parents were semi-together as a family again. Thank you Twin Peaks."

Advertisement

- Nathanael Reinsmith

"(I remember) waiting for a movie and a shoplifting incident was going on nearby and we helped apprehend the thief; Also, seeing Gamma Acosta's murals in the lobby; And $5 movie tickets, which will probably never come back once the theater is upgraded. (I am) looking forward to better seating."

- Brigette Reed Rodriguez

Contact Times-Call community reporter Whitney Bryen at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com