Group issues scam warning

The Better Business Bureau of Central Oklahoma on Wednesday warned Oklahomans to avoid and immediately stop doing business with a string of computer repair companies.

The bureau said Prime Technologies LLC and its Avangatee, Divine Tech, PCaid24x7, Prime & Tech Solutions, Prime Tech, Prime Tech Help, Prime Technology, Speeders PC, Superior Tech, Superior TechHelp, and TechMind4u have been using fraudulent business practices. The BBB, U.S. Postal Service, FBI and U.S. attorney's office have been working together on an effort that led in January to the arrest of Linda Massey of Greenwood, S.C., who is accused of mail fraud, racketeering and money laundering. If convicted, Massey is liable for more than $5.1 million. The BBB said it has 123 complaints on file for Prime Technologies spanning from Canada, through the United States to the Caribbean.

Consumers allege that initial contact is made either by a pop-up freezing the computer with a phone number prompt or a phone call insisting immediate action needs to be taken or else there will be dire consequences. The technicians then charge up to several thousand dollars and guide the computer owner to install software that grants them access to the computer, allowing them to install software they claim will prevent future hacking, the BBB said.

Consumers should never give out personal or financial information to an unsolicited caller and should never grant remote access to unknown parties, the BBB said. Consumers who have been victims of the scam can report the incident at http://www.ic3.gov.

State law schools on 'best' list

Oklahoma law schools ranked among the country's best in the U.S. News & World Report 2017 Ranking of Best Law Schools.

The University of Oklahoma College of Law led the state at No. 60 overall, followed by the University of Tulsa at No. 86 and Oklahoma City University at No. 144.

“Our College of Law continues to be recognized as one of the top law schools in the country,” OU President David L. Boren said. “I predict that its ranking will continue to rise in the future. Our faculty, under the leadership of Dean Harroz, has never been stronger, and even as law school applications decline nationally, we have maintained very high standards for the student body.”

Health insurance coverage grows

About 61,000 new Oklahoma consumers enrolled in the health insurance marketplace during the third open enrollment period, the U.S. Health and Human Services said Wednesday.

Nationwide, about 4.9 million new customers signed up.

“Almost 5 million Americans were new to the Health Insurance Marketplaces in 2015, and about 20 million uninsured Americans have gained coverage because of the Affordable Care Act,” HHS Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell said. “This year's customers are more engaged, savvier and better informed. New customers came in earlier because they wanted a full year's coverage, and 70 percent of existing customers came back to shop and actively selected a plan."

Oklahomans who switched issuers as well as plans saved $13 per month, or nearly $162 annually for the same level of coverage, the report stated. Nationally, about 66 percent of people who changed plans also changed issuers, and 31 percent of people who changed plans also changed their metal level.

Business embroidery event set

Sewing, embroidery and quilting machine manufacturer Bernina of America will hold a business of embroidery event Friday and Saturday in Oklahoma City. The free event will be from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. at 6817 N Mary St. and will focus on the steps necessary to start an embroidery business. Registration is available by calling 840-8911.

From Staff Reports