PHOENIX — Corey Dickerson pumped his fist as he rounded first base.

Was it sheer jubilation? Pent-up frustration? Probably a mixture of both.

Dickerson’s solo home run to right-center field in the 10th inning off Oliver Perez lifted the Rockies to a 5-3 victory over the Arizona Diamondbacks at Chase Field on Sunday afternoon. Dickerson’s homer, his 14th, came on 78 mph, 0-1 curveball.

“It was great for the team,” Dickerson said. “I went out there looking for something out over the plate. He (quick-pitched) that second pitch, and I just used my hands as a reaction. It was a line drive, and I thought it was going to hit the wall, but it just carried out.

“I was just pretty excited for our team. It put us ahead in a good situation. I thought we needed that today.”

Especially after being embarrassed Saturday night in a 14-4 loss in which the Diamondbacks scored nine runs in the eighth inning. Entering Sunday’s game, the Rockies had lost 20 of their previous 22 road games. They remain tied with the Texas Rangers for the worst record in baseball (46-71), on pace to go 64-98.

If ever a team needed a cast of late-inning heroes, it was the Rockies.

WATCH: Corey Dickerson on game-winning homer

PHOTOS: Colorado Rockies beat Arizona Diamondbacks, 5-3

Colorado added a bonus run in the 10th on an RBI single by Wilin Rosario. He drove in Brandon Barnes from second. Barnes reached on a bunt single and advanced to second when Perez plunked Nolan Arenado. Closer LaTroy Hawkins struck out the side in the 10th for his 18th save.

The Rockies’ beleaguered bullpen pulled off a Houdini act in the ninth. Arizona kept running traffic at lefty reliever Rex Brothers, who looked to be in dire straights when he walked Didi Gregorius and Ender Inciarte and gave up a single to Aaron Hill in his two-thirds of an inning. But Brothers cut down Gregorius at second on a bunt to the mound. Then, with the bases loaded, Brothers induced David Peralta to ground out to Charlie Culberson at short, who calmly threw home for a forceout.

“It was an instinctual play,” Brothers said of his critical throw to second. “I heard Wilin (Rosario) yell, ‘Two!’ So that’s where I was going with it.”

Into the breach came right-handed reliever Matt Belisle to face right-handed cleanup hitter Mark Trumbo. Belisle got Trumbo to hit a slow roller to first baseman Ben Paulsen, squelching the Diamondbacks’ would-be rally.

“It was easy,” weary Rockies manager Walt Weiss said, managing a smile. “It got a little hairy there in the ninth. Rex has been grinding through some things, but we got some big outs. To be able to win a game like that — we needed it.”

Before the game, Hawkins, in his 20th year in the majors, talked about how important it is for the Rockies to salvage something from what has been a disastrous, injury-plagued season.

“You don’t want to be a part of an organization’s first 100-loss season, that’s for sure, ” he said. “There have been some sleepless night’s lately trying to figure this out. It’s been utterly disappointing, and embarrassing.

“The guys haven’t quit, but it’s been frustrating. We haven’t quit, but when you lose this much, everything gets magnified to the 20th degree. We haven’t been able to put any of the puzzle pieces together.”

Mercurial starter Franklin Morales gave the Rockies some needed stability early. The lefty pitched six innings, allowing three runs (two earned) on five hits.

Colorado scored four of its five runs via the long ball. Paulsen hit a two-run homer in the second off Arizona starter Wade Miley. The ball bounced into the swimming pool beyond the wall in right-center field. It was the first home run of Paulsen’s major-league career, coming on a 1-0 slider.

Paulsen was recalled from Triple-A Colorado Springs on Sunday, replacing the ailing Carlos Gonzalez on the 25-man roster. CarGo was placed on the 15-day disabled list because of a right ankle sprain and lingering patella tendinitis in his left knee.

Rosario made amends for a throwing error by hitting a one-out, solo home run in the sixth, tying the game 3-3. It was Rosario’s 10th home run of the season.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp