Carlos Gomez hits a three-run double in the third inning Saturday. Gomez could land a big free-agent contract when his current deal expires after the 2016 season. But he’d like to stay in Milwaukee. Credit: Getty Images

By

Los Angeles — Carlos Gomez spent a good deal of time Friday afternoon talking with Scott Boras at Dodger Stadium.

It's Boras, the most powerful agent in the game, who's expected to land the Milwaukee Brewers centerfielder a megabucks free-agent contract once his current deal runs out after the 2016 season.

Common sense would dictate that the Brewers won't be able to come anywhere close to matching the type of offer Gomez is likely to generate on the open market.

So with that in mind, and with the Brewers contemplating a rebuild as they muddle through a highly disappointing 2015, did Gomez spend any time talking to Boras about potentially being traded as the July 31 nonwaiver trading deadline approaches?

"I don't ask. Because if I ask, then I have it in my mind," he said. "It's not my problem. The only thing I have to care about is today, and I'm part of the Milwaukee Brewers. It's nothing I can control. If the Brewers want to trade me, they're going to do it. Even if I cry and say, 'Don't do it.' It's not something that I can control.

"The only thing I can control is to come here and give everything I have for the team."

It's been a struggle this season for the 29-year-old Gomez to even do that, as several nagging leg injuries and one stint on the disabled list have limited him to 60 games. His numbers have suffered as a result, and with a .274 average, eight home runs and 36 runs batted in, Gomez fell well short of earning a third consecutive appearance in the All-Star Game.

Still, Gomez has come on of late and is the type of impact player who could tempt a team trying to bolster itself for a playoff push. And with another year remaining on his contract, Gomez would be more than just a rent-a-player, allowing the Brewers to extract an even bigger haul for him.

Assuming the Brewers elect to keep catcher Jonathan Lucroy and his club-friendly contract, Gomez and shortstop Jean Segura would figure to draw the most interest from contending clubs. Both already have been mentioned in various trade rumors the past few weeks.

Having already been traded twice in his career — by the New York Mets to the Minnesota Twins before the 2008 season and by the Twins to the Brewers after the 2009 season — Gomez is well-aware of the business aspect of the game.

"I don't watch a lot of TV," said Gomez, who added the Brewers haven't discussed a contract extension with Boras to his knowledge.

"The only time I watch it is when I'm in the clubhouse. They talk about you getting traded. This is my sixth season in this organization and if it does happen, it's going to hurt for me and my family because we owe a lot to this organization. But I've been in the game so long that I understand I have to move forward.

"If this happens, there's nothing I can do. If that happens, it's because the organization thinks it has a better future to bring in new prospects to rebuild everything."

If Gomez had his way, he'd remain with the Brewers. One of his high-profile teammates, closer Francisco Rodriguez, echoed the sentiment when asked about potential changes looming with the team struggling.

"I don't think it's going to happen and I don't have this on my mind," said Gomez. "The only thing I have on my mind is play every day and give everything I have. Next year is my last year under contract, and I wish I could stay here for the rest of my career. You spend seven seasons with one team, I don't think you want to move. You want to stay here, especially with the group we have.

"I feel like I'm a Milwaukee Brewer. I don't look at myself as anything else."

Gomez also isn't assuming a huge free-agent contract is awaiting him.

"Who says I'm going to have a big contract? I don't have this in my mind," he said. "If you're not healthy, you're not going to have a big contract. Money doesn't make you happy. Where it's good for you and what makes you happy mentally is where you have to go. I have my future for my family, so I don't worry about the next contract.

"I just enjoy the day today. I already have the future safe for my kids."

The three-year, $24 million extension Gomez inked with the Brewers in March 2013 was the first big payday of his career. He's owed $9 million next season and will have earned nearly $35 million in his career by the time he reaches free agency.

That's a figure Boras likely will try to blow out of the water, but Gomez said his focus will be on chasing a World Series ring.

"When you're in the minor leagues, you want to make it to the big leagues. When you're in the big leagues, you want to get paid. And when you get paid, what do you want?" he asked. "To win. I'm in the process of that now.

"The only thing I care about is winning."

SATURDAY'S GAME

The Brewers-Dodgers game ended too late for this edition. Please check out

www.jsonline.com for complete coverage.