Persistent allegations of sexual harassment and failure to report child abuse appear to have damaged the lengthy career of an influential Religious Right leader.

Bill Gothard, 79, resigned March 6 from his post as president of the Institute in Basic Life Principles (IBLP) after 34 women accused the preacher of harassment; four had accused him of molestation. Gothard had already been placed on leave pending an investigation into the allegations, which span the last three decades.

Gothard, who is unmarried, founded IBLP in 1961 to hawk his “Basic Seminar,” which purports to teach families how to solve interpersonal conflicts. IBLP quickly expanded and now functions as an umbrella organization for a fundamen- talist Christian empire that includes prison ministries, homes for troubled youth and a law school.

An early advocate of the Christian home-school movement, Gothard also produced a fundamentalist curriculum under the banner of the Advanced Training Institute (ATI), a branch of IBLP.

Gothard’s material has found its way into various public institutions. Zack Kopplin’s recent Slate exposé of Responsive Education Solutions, a Texas-based charter school system, revealed that the ostensibly secular company lifted material directly from Gothard’s curriculum and relied on IBLP buzzwords.

“Some of Responsive Ed’s lessons appear harmless at first, but their origin is troubling,” Kopplin wrote. “Students also learn about ‘discernment,’ which is defined as ‘understanding the deeper reasons why things happen.’ In other sections, students learn other moral lessons such as ‘values’ and ‘deference.’”

Responsive Ed, which educates approximately 12,000 students in Texas alone and has a presence in other states, received taxpayer funds through a voucher plan to push Gothard’s extremist views in classrooms.

Gothard’s teachings have also found their way into prisons. IBLP trains prison chaplains and delivers Gothard’s Basic Seminar to inmates in voluntary programs. His approach has received praise from elected officials, including former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee and Florida state Rep. Charles Van Zant.

Former Fla. Gov. Jeb Bush, who promised to lead a “moral and spiritual awakening” in the state during his inauguration in 1999, also had a fondness for Gothard’s work. Under Bush’s guidance, hundreds of state employees who oversaw welfare programs were trained in a controversial program cal­led “Character First.” The Fort L­au­d­­erdale Sun-Sentinel reported that Goth­ard’s program teaches “the importance of meekness, deference and obedience” – at least as Gothard interprets them.

Additionally, IBLP runs a network of “training centers,” which advertise themselves as safe havens for troubled youngsters. An eyewitness investigation by WTHR-TV, an NBC affiliate in In­diana, revealed that IBLP’s Indian­a­po­lis Training Center (ITC) abused its juv­enile residents – with the state’s help.

“Hundreds of young people from around the country come to the ITC – some sent by their parents, others by juvenile court – for a special brand of Bible-based learning and counseling,” the report read.

ITC, like all IBLP training centers, answered directly to Gothard and used his religious curriculum and disciplinary methods to work with minors. According to WTHR, a local juvenile court judge sent more than three dozen children to the center.

Gothard even has close ties to Hobby Lobby President Steve Green, whose case over the Affordable Care Act’s contraceptive mandate has reached the U.S. Supreme Court. In 2002, Green, acting through his family trust, purchased and then leased a vacant college campus to Gothard’s ministry. A year later, Green, this time acting through Hobby Lobby itself, purchased a shuttered hospital in Little Rock, Ark., and donated it to Gothard for the purposes of building a local training center.

Unsurprisingly, Green has not said anything about Gothard’s predicament on the record. Neither have Huckabee or Van Zant, and it’s not known whether any of Gothard’s famous friends will continue their work with his ministry.