— For the fourth time in the past six years, the Tampa Bay Buccaneers will spend the second half of their season preparing more for next year’s draft than this year’s playoffs.

Many in their dwindling fan base already have beaten them to the punch.

Debate over what to do with a first-round pick that could be among the top five overall is fast replacing debates about who should start at quarterback or get the most carries at running back.

Most of that debate, of course, centers around quarterbacks, some arguing the pick should be spent on Florida State’s Jameis Winston, still an underclassmen, with others arguing for Oregon’s Marcus Mariota.

But there are inherent risks to consider in taking either player. Winston, who has the look of a franchise-caliber player on the field, has displayed nothing but bust potential off it. And while Mariota has few, if any, character flaws, his development since high school has been in a scheme that doesn’t require him to do many of the things that are absolutely essential in the NFL game.

For instance, the version of the spread offense Oregon runs doesn’t require Mariota to make a lot of the throws that are fundamental elements in the NFL route tree. Because they’re not a part of their scheme, Oregon players seldom, if ever, even practice routes such as the skinny post, which forces a quarterback to throw between two closing defenders in the middle of the field; the dig, another midfield throw against a hard-charging defender; or the back-shoulder fade, which is supposed to be a big part of the Bucs’ offense.

As a result, some scouts believe Mariota might need at least a year, maybe two, of development before he can become truly successful in the NFL. The Bucs might not wish to wait that long.

Besides, Bucs coach Lovie Smith said just last week that the play of quarterbacks Josh McCown and Mike Glennon, though far from exceptional, is the least of his concerns right now. He’s far more concerned with a sub-standard pass rush on pace to record just 25 sacks, a group of pass protectors that are on pace to give up 44 sacks and a coverage unit that has just six interceptions.

If little changes between now and the end of the season — and there is little reason to believe that anything will — those are the areas the Bucs might look to address first come draft day. So instead of looking solely at quarterbacks, Bucs fans eager to move into draft mode might want to start looking at some of the upcoming draft’s top-rated edge rushers, left tackles and cornerbacks.

They also might want to look at the top-rated middle linebackers, safeties and guards. The Bucs are a team with a lot of holes to fill, and with a little maneuvering they could fill several in one draft.

Nebraska defensive end Randy Gregory, Texas A&M left tackle Cedric Ogbuehi and Miami middle linebacker Denzel Perryman are players whose names Bucs fans might want to learn.

If the Bucs have a top-five pick and still deem quarterback a secondary need, they could easily turn that top-five selection into a pair of first-round picks that allow them to fill two primary needs.

So, while Winston and Mariota look like the dream picks now, a greater need — both in the short term and the long term — could force the Bucs to spend their first pick (or picks) on other positions.

Every team wants and most need a franchise quarterback. But the Bucs, as they’re situated, need a lot more than that if they’re going to spend the second half of the 2015 season preparing for the playoffs.

rcummings@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7979

Twitter: @RCummingsTBO