New Jersey voters will fill seats in the United States House of Representatives in all twelve congressional districts in November, plus one Senate seat. This column will attempt to provide at least a snapshot of each of the twenty-six major party candidates in these races. Any reader who would like to see coverage of any third-party candidate in any of these races should please contact the author with at least the identity of the candidate and the race in which he is running.

This article covers the major candidates in the 2nd legislative district; the entire series will be indexed here as articles are added.

The 2nd Congressional District covers all of Salem, Cumberland, Cape May, and Atlantic Counties, the southern edge of Gloucester County, southeastern Burlington County, the northeast corner of Camden County, and the southern third of Ocean County. The cities of Salem, Bridgeton, Millville, Vineland, Cape May, Ocean City, and Atlantic City are all within this district, the largest by geographical area in the state.

Republican incumbent Congressman Frank Lobiondo has held the seat since 1995. His voting record suggests he strongly favors gun rights, green energy, stimulus plans, privatized social security, keeping God in the public sphere, stricter criminal punishment, animal rights, an expanded military, and involvement in Iran, and also favors affirmative action and campaign funding limits. He strongly opposes abortion, taxing the wealthy, yielding sovereignty to the United Nations, and legalizing marijuana, while also opposing Obamacare, free trade legislation, and easy citizenship for illegal immigrants. He has been neutral in regard to same-sex marriage. This mix of positions makes him a more moderate centrist Republican, frequently voting against the party line. The Tea Party fielded a candidate against him in the primary, but he won with more than four fifths of the vote.

In what might be considered a grudge match, his Democratic opponent Bill Hughes, Jr., is the son of the Congressman Bill Hughes from whom Lobiondo took the seat in the 1994 election. His campaign includes job creation, education funding, protecting social security, medicare, and veterans' benefits, improving Obamacare, women's pay and health issue equality, and fighting government waste.

Footnote: Lobiondo did not run against the senior Hughes; Congressman Hughes retired at the end of 1994, and Louis Magazzu ran on the democratic ticket that year.

The population of the district is three quarters white, slightly above the average for the state, with a roughly average black contingent of one in eight, Asian population second lowest in the state, and an about average one in six Hispanic. It has one of the lowest high school graduation rates, and the lowest college graduation rate, below one in four. Unemployment ties for second highest in the state, median income in the lower half. Lobiondo usually wins by strong margins, but the seat was held by the Democrats until 1995.

Neither candidate has responded to our invitation to be interviewed.

The author is attempting to contact all candidates in New Jersey Congressional races, and will in the weeks ahead provide featured coverage of those who respond.