The press releases started trickling in hours before the speech actually began—manifestos from 2014 candidates looking to get a word in, interview solicitations from PR reps peddling their clients’ wares and even full State of the Union reactions from a few early-bird members of Congress (embargoed, of course). By 10:35 p.m.—we’ll call it “peak press release”—the emails, heralded by all-caps subject lines promising “succinct” commentary, were streaming in faster than we could count—Who got snubbed? (the Keystone pipeline), Who’s angry? (Ted Cruz), Who’s “particularly pleased”? (hoteliers). There are love letters (Barbara Boxer), hate mail (Steve Stockman), disappointed epistles from long-suffering players (Greenpeace). And of course, there are countless interest groups determined to present to you their “SOTU REAX” even though, during his 65-minute speech, the president hadn’t tread within a mile of their area of concern. For your perusal, Politico Magazine has collected a small sampling from this salvo of SOTU press releases. (Yep, we read them all so you didn’t have to.) This is what the State of the Union does to an inbox.

***

Story Continued Below

10:28 a.m.: SOTU/’Here’s hoping for something different tonight’, from Sen. Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.)

“He could ask members of both parties to help him make 2014 a real year of action, rather than just a talking point. If he does, he’s going to find he has a lot of support from Republicans. Because we want to work with him to get things done—we always have.”

11:00 a.m.: SOTU Preview: The Obama, Warner Economy, from the Republican Party of Virginia

“A significant snowstorm is on its way into Virginia. … Unfortunately for many Virginians, that means they’ll be stuck at home with little to watch on TV except re-runs— including the worst re-run of all, Barack Obama’s State of the Union speech.”

11:35 a.m.: Contract Workers, Members of Congress Statements on Executive Order

“Luis Chiliquinga, a 65 year-old McDonald’s Smithsonian Air & Space Museum worker, who earns $8.32 an hour said, “After risking it all to go on strike for a fair wage, I’m proud to have a President who will stand-up for a living wage because the workers themselves decided to take a stand.”

12:49 p.m.: SOTU: Embargoed statement & law experts available

“I just wanted to send you a friendly reminder that some experts from George Mason University School of Law are available to provide insights into what the President addresses tonight during the State of the Union.”

1:07 p.m.: President Should Address Obamacare Failings in SOTU Address, from the Office of Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.)

4:06 p.m.: WHITFIELD STATEMENT ON TONIGHT’S STATE OF THE UNION ADDRESS

“While I recognize climate change may be an issue some people care about, the President’s extreme actions on the matter are of little comfort to those who cannot find a job and are worried about how they are going to make ends meet.”

4:08 p.m.: Kirk and Manchin Statement on Attending the State of the Union Together

“Tonight we will be sitting together at the State of the Union Address not only as best friends, but as a Democrat and a Republican who are working together on behalf of our nation. Together we joined the bipartisan No Labels Problem Solvers coalition to try and find common ground on our nation’s top priorities.”

4:15 p.m.: “State of the Uterus” Speech to Address This Year’s Anti-Woman Legislation

“The state of our uterus is in the hands of so many,” Madam Uterus will say, according to the text of her prepared remarks, attached and embargoed until 8:57 PM ET. (Note to reporters: subject to last-minute change or off-the-cuff improvisation!) “As the old saying goes, behind every successful uterus is a man calling her a whore while cutting her pay.”

4:18 p.m.: MEDIA ALERT: Immigration And Customs Enforcement (ICE) Council President On State of the Union, House Republican Immigration Principles

“According to news accounts, the President has once again invited illegal immigrants to the State of the Union – and yet the President still refuses to meet with ICE officers.”

4:20 p.m.: Farmworkers and Advocates to Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers: Be Bold on Immigration Reform

“In October last year, McMorris Rodgers promised to make immigration reform a “priority” for 2013 , but failed to keep her word.”

4:27 p.m.: DO NOT SHARE - Draft remarks State of the Union, from the Republican National Committee

“And let me just add, for no particular reason at all, most certainly not a book, that Vice President Biden has been on the right side of all foreign policy decisions—even if someone else, I don’t know who, says otherwise.” http://www.gop.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/Obamas-Leaked-SOTU-Draft-2014.pdf

5:24 p.m.: National Retail Federation [The Voice of Retail Worldwide] Says Minimum Wage Hike Would Bring ‘Minimum Opportunities’

6:18 p.m.: EMBARGOED UNTIL THE CONLUSION OF THE STATE OF THE UNION: Bennie Thompson Press Update: THOMPSON STATEMENT ON PRESIDENT OBAMA’S STATE OF THE UNION ADDRESS

***9:15 Obama begins his speech***

9:35 p.m.: Obama Downplays Trade Authority, Trans-Pacific Partnership: Fleeting Mention Doesn’t Even Reference Recently Introduced Camp-Baucus Fast Track Bill, from Public Citizen

“Opposition has been growing to the massive Trans-Pacific Partnership deal. Implementing this NAFTA-on-steroids deal would undermine Obama’s efforts to battle income inequality. It would be like drilling a hole in a boat just as you are trying to seal the cracks that are letting the water in.”

9:50 p.m.: Greenpeace reaction to State of the Union address

“If you want to bend history in one direction, you need to pick a side and put your all into it. Unfortunately, the President continues to stand right in the middle.”

9:55 p.m.: Hotel Industry Response to State of the Union Address

“Hoteliers are particularly pleased that he included key issues—immigration reform, curbing the abuses of patent trolls, and tax reform—that are crucial to our industry in cities and towns across the country. … If hoteliers are to continue their positive growth in the years ahead, our government must set aside lingering and non-productive partisan differences to make this a reality.”

10:00 p.m.: SOTU: President Snubs Small Business, from National Federation of Independent Business

10:00 p.m.: State of the Union - gun issue, from Independent Firearm Owners Association

“The President said last year he would support firearm training and safety education, in fact he made it an Executive Order. What happened? My small home town of Rindge, NH ran a program, why can’t the federal government replicate and expand such a non-controversial effort?”