A confident Dr. Donald May launched his latest congressional campaign Thursday morning with a press conference at the Texas Tech McKenzie-Merket Alumni Center.

May will run in the Republican Primary for the 19th Congressional District of Texas in 2016. May has previously run for the 19th District, albeit unsuccessfully, in 2003 and 2014.

In an interview with KFYO News, May said he expected the vote in the rural counties to be double of the previous primary in 2014. He also stated that his campaign will focus on three major areas: agriculture, water and natural resources, and national security.

Concerning the federal government, May said, “The federal government is there to protect us. Not to draft us. Not to harass us. Not to tell us what to eat. Or how much water we can use for our shower, or what kind of a vehicle we can drive; or what we can do, or what we can’t do. Our federal government is there to protect us from our enemies: domestic and foreign. As I said, we need to cut taxes and regulations.”

May also discussed military veterans, “We need to take care of our veterans,” he said. “If we don’t care for our veterans we are not going to attract good men and women to our military. If our veterans need help, they need to be able to go to a veterans facility, or another medical facility. If they need urgent help, they need to be able to get that help right away; not the next day, not the next week, not the next month.”

May was asked about a defamation lawsuit he filed earlier this year against a female Texas Tech law school student. He was accused of sexual harassment and the suit is still working its way through a Lubbock County District Court. “That situation, we just found out about in the recent past, but apparently happened back in 2012,” he said.

May continued, “A person was making allegations against me at the 2012 Texas Republican Convention. This person wanted to be the lead delegate (for Texas) at the Republican National Convention. That didn’t work out, unknowing to me, apparently the allegations continued. We weren’t able to find out what these allegations really were, the person was not cooperative so we had no choice but to file a legal suit. I think the greatest information you can find in this is that in our first hearing her attorney filed a paper. And that paper will explain the situation very well as to what is going on.”

I asked May if he sees the ongoing lawsuit as a distraction for his congressional campaign. “I’m going up to Washington to initiate lawsuits,” May said. “My job up there is to challenge the government, to challenge people. When something isn’t right, our legal system is there for the purpose of resolution of problems.”

He continued, “So, I look at this as simply showing ‘I’m not afraid to stand up to anybody’ ‘I’m not afraid to stand up to anything’. I don’t sweep things under the rug. I address them. I’m going up there to Washington, and there’s problems, and my Republican colleagues up there often just ignore them and put them under the rug. Because they’re afraid they won’t be re-elected if they start addressing problems.”

The complete interview with Dr. Donald May, conducted by KFYO News’ Rob Snyder and KCBD’s Scott Mann, can be heard in the video below.

May will be running against a number of Republicans in the 2016 Primary for the 19th Congressional District: including, but not limited to: Glen Robertson, Jodey Arrington, Greg Garrett, DeRenda Warren, and Col. Bob Starr, of Abilene.

May released an abbreviated version of his campaign launch speech, which can be listened to on the first video in this story.

From Donald R. May, MD, FACS:

To the People of the Texas 19th Congressional District

I am running for the United States House of Representatives because I am alarmed by how very rapidly Obama has greatly damaged our nation by weakening our national security, destroying our jobs, and undermining our prosperity.

Our national security must be rapidly restored, especially our military preparedness.

Our border must be rapidly and completely secured by our military and a combination of federal, state, and local police agencies. We need to know who and what is entering and leaving our nation.

Agriculture production and the economic prosperity of our farms is a vital part of our national security. Without the increased domestic production of food and natural fibers, our nation cannot be secure or prosperous.

Oil, natural gas, coal, and electricity production are foundational to our national security and our future prosperity.

Our national debt has spiraled out of control, the outrageous rate of growth in the size of our federal government has increased, and ObamaCare has destroyed our Liberty and greatly increased the cost of our healthcare.

I will represent you by actively addressing the problems that threaten our nation. I will bring West Texas values and common sense to Washington.

I will speak from the floor of the House as often as possible. I will update you and the news media every day. I will spend my time in Washington doing important work and not seeking to be important.

I will write bills intended to incrementally take apart ObamaCare, the EPA, the IRS, the Department of Energy, the Department of Education, and the bloated welfare system. This money and power must be returned to the people and to the individual states where the Tenth Amendment tells us it belongs in the first place.

You and I believe that Liberty is the answer, with each man and woman able to make decisions for themselves and their families. Our Constitution protects you and me from our government, from politicians, from bureaucrats, from tyrants, and from elitist busy bodies.

Washington is broken, and both parties are to blame. Much of the Republican Party has not had the courage to confront Obama and the Far Left.

That is why I am running for the Texas 19th Congressional District House seat. We need accountability in Washington. We need leaders who are not afraid to fight for our Conservative values.

America¹s best days are always before us when We the People stand up to fight for those values that built our great nation.