Last week's news about OfficeMax closing its Grape Road store didn't surprise many shoppers.

Some figured it was just a matter of time, considering parent company Office Depot operates a newer store around the corner on Main Street in Mishawaka.

Others chalked the closing up to the location.

Wilshire Plaza is not the oldest shopping center on Mishawaka's Grape Road. But the 26-year-old L-shaped plaza that's anchored by Hobby Lobby and Burlington Coat Factory, sits back — far back from shoppers along the corridor and behind a sea of parking spaces.

The center spent time on the selling block several years ago. But Cleveland-based Chase Properties quietly decided to retain the 350,000-square-foot center and its sister Indian Ridge Plaza across the street to the north.

Clearly outdated in layout compared to newer shopping centers, Wilshire has witnessed more closings than openings. Paper Factory, Room Place, Old Country Buffet, Apple Valley Natural Foods and OfficeMax have departed the center in the past few years, leaving some gaping vacancies.

But two recent new leases might be the catalyst this center needs to turn the corner.

Contractors recently began removing the concrete slab in front of the former Room Place space and tearing down the old sign and store facade.

Fresh Thyme Farmers Market, a rapidly growing Chicago-based specialty grocer, has signed a long-term lease for 30,000 square feet adjacent to Hobby Lobby. Both storefronts are considered part of Wilshire Plaza, even though they are owned by a partnership based in Baltimore.

And Sky Zone is under construction and working toward a November opening behind Fun F/X. The trampoline center's entrance along Douglas Road will give a new face to the southern-most part of the building.

Both tenants could breathe new life and bring new faces to the center.

"Any activity that will be generated by Sky Zone and Fresh Thyme will be positive activity," says Tim Mehall, vice president of retail at Newmark Grubb Cressy & Everett in Mishawaka. Mehall assisted with the grocery store deal.

Fresh Thyme could draw some shoppers to the center two, even three times per week. It's safe to say consumers are shopping for food more often than they are shopping for furniture.

"Grape Road is as viable today as it's ever been," Mehall says. "But what will help Grape Road considerably is when the owners of existing older plazas put a new face on their centers. That will make them more competitive against the newer properties."

Still, most older centers have lower lease rates than newly constructed shopping centers on the city's north-east side.

Combined with Grape Road frontage, traffic and visibility, Wilshire Plaza remains a viable center. Factor in Fresh Thyme and Sky Zone, and Wilshire becomes that much more attractive an option.

"We still view the location as 'ground zero' in Mishawaka," says Andy Kline, principal and managing director at Chase Properties. Chase owns 28 shopping centers in 15 states.

Fresh Thyme Farmers Market could very well change the dynamics of the center.

"I can tell you we are working to bring some other tenants to Wilshire Plaza that would transform the center," Kline says. "Any face-lift, as you call it, will happen naturally as we bring new tenants in. That will go a long way in improving the general feel of the center."

We reached out to Fresh Thyme and did not hear back from company officials. No timeline for construction has been announced.

In fact, Fresh Thyme has not yet announced the Mishawaka location, despite plans filed with the city and a building permit that hangs on the store window clearly identifying the name of the future tenant.

Mishawaka City Planner Ken Prince believes the location worked strategically well for Fresh Thyme for three reasons.

The center sits just north of Douglas Road, which serves as a main artery from Mishawaka to the University of Notre Dame and South Bend. Wilshire is located north of competitor Whole Foods, and closer to the north side of the city and Granger.

"And I'm going to sound like a broken record, but Grape Road sees investment over and over again based on its location in the region and the traffic moving through the corridor. There's also a comfort in locating near so many other businesses. You put all that together and it's a strong market."

Allie's chef needs your vote

If you do one thing today, you should vote for Betty Sulok, owner of Allie's Cafe in South Bend, to advance to the next round of a national competition called the "Hometown Breakfast Battle."

To celebrate its 135th anniversary, Thomas' Breads has selected 135 chefs from 135 cities across the country to create their best recipe that consumers can make at home using its English muffin or bagel.

Sulok says she blended fresh fruit and whipped cream in her "Thomas' Stuffed French Muffin," which can be ordered anytime at Allies, 2323 Mishawaka Ave. "It's the best of both worlds," she says about her choice of ingredients.

First round voting ends today at www.thomasbreakfastbattle.com. Sulok's recipe also is available on the website.

Have you heard

Family Express convenience stores are proposing two locations in Mishawaka. Stores and gas stations are proposed at the northwest corner of Douglas and Fir roads and on the northeast corner of Edison and Hickory roads, near Cinemark Movies 14. The location near Cinemark also would contain a car wash. Family Express has requested zoning changes that must be approved by city officials before the projects move forward.

Heidi Prescott's column runs on Wednesdays and Sundays. Contact her at hprescott@sbtinfo.com or 574-235-6070. You also can talk retail at Facebook.com/thebasket and at Twitter.com/marketbasket. Hear her weekday and Sunday reports at 6:52 a.m. and 8:52 a.m. on The WSBT Morning News with JT at WSBT-AM (960) and WSBT-FM (96.1). The Market Basket Minute airs Thursdays on the WSBT-TV "First News at 4."