Topics: comedy central, Jon Stewart, Stephen Colbert, The Colbert Report, The Late Show, Entertainment News

“From eternity, I’m Stephen Colbert. Jon?”

Those were the last words of the last episode of “The Colbert Report,” a delightful, zany half-hour that had to do the hard work of saying goodbye to one of the oddest creations on television. “The Colbert Report” was a fake-news late-night show on a comedy network that leaned hard left by pretending to lean hard right; try explaining that to anyone in 20 years, and see where it gets you. The final words seemed to be a nod to the ephemeral nature of the show—Stephen Colbert, a character played by a comedian named Stephen Colbert, floated away to eternity, guided by Santa Claus, unicorn Abraham Lincoln, and, obviously, Alex Trebek (the man with all the answers; every answer is a question).

And with his last word he tossed the ball back to Jon Stewart, the guy who ran the show that Colbert spawned from, the guy who will be holding down the fort after the real Colbert moves on to CBS. And after Jon Stewart himself said goodnight to the audience, the episode cut to an exchange between the two from June 3, 2010—probably an outtake—with a rare occurrence indeed. Stephen Colbert broke character. Stewart asks: “Hey Stephen, what are you doing?” Colbert responds: “I’m getting angry at liberals,” a grin cracking his face.

It felt like a perfectly fitting coda. Whoever or whatever “The Late Show With Stephen Colbert” will be hosted by, it will not be “The Colbert Report”’s Stephen Colbert, the one who presented to Congress and spoke at the White House Correspondents’ Association dinner in flawless, pitch-perfect character. Unless CBS and mainstream American audiences are in for the craziest long-con prank in history, Stephen Colbert will no longer be America’s most conservative superhero, but a guy who talks to celebrities about upcoming movies and does a minutes-long stand-up introduction to the show. Colbert being okay, he’ll find a way to make it interesting—and, in all likelihood, sneakily liberal—but look, it’s not going to be this. It’s not going to be Stephen Colbert acting out lightning striking him and making him immortal; it’s not going to be dozens if not hundreds of former guests on the show gathering into a small Comedy Central studio to sing “We’ll Meet Again”—which, incidentally, also plays over the end of “Dr. Strangelove.” Vox made a list of the guests that returned: There were a lot, including Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Bryan Cranston, Patrick Stewart, Bill Clinton (!), Arianna Huffington, Katie Couric, Cyndi Lauper, Jeff Daniels, Sam Waterston, and oh, yeah, Cookie Monster. Finales of beloved shows are typically terrible; “The Colbert Report” found a way to go out in an over-the-top style that felt true to the show’s batty humor.

Because that’s the thing: “Colbert Report” wasn’t always a bona fide hit; it wasn’t always something people got. The intensely performative character Colbert was playing didn’t sit right with everyone; the joke required so much work by the audience that studies discovered that conservatives thought Colbert was being perfectly sincere. There are a lot of late-night hosts in the world, and a lot of them assume a personality that’s made just for the camera. Colbert took that so far—and made it so political—that he’s been intense character for a literal decade, bringing that persona to the real world over and over again, revealing politics as performance, news as splashy fiction, and history as farce, and he did it while making us laugh, too.