Rare feeling: Dylan Buckley, Patrick Cripps and Nick Graham singing after the round 12 win. Photo: Getty Images

Leigh Matthews is an official Legend of the Game for good reason. Eight premierships as a player and coach and eight best and fairests go a long way to explaining why.

But Matthews' pragmatism and capacity to cut through the bluster and hype that can sometimes surround football have been no less a gift, and are particularly apt right now. "Nothing is ever as good as it seems and nothing is ever as bad," is a Matthews mantra of which many clubs would do well to remind themselves either heading into or emerging from their mid-season breaks.

It certainly applied to any analysis of Carlton's second win of the season against Port Adelaide on Saturday. And it's a bit of homespun philosophy both North Melbourne and the Western Bulldogs might want to take on board as they launch a second-half assault on the top eight.

Advertisement

The Blues' inspiring win over the Power at the MCG might have seemed the stuff of fantasy only a month back. But there it was, Carlton making the running against a team popularly tipped as a grand finalist pre-season, then holding on under fierce assault at the finish.

Make what you will of the coaching changeover from Mick Malthouse to John Barker. There's no doubting the Blues have played with a greater freedom and dare in their past two games against Adelaide and Port.

Whether that's the result of his coaching credo or merely the significant amount of pressure on the club being released with Malthouse's departure is an assessment Carlton's coaching sub-committee will have to make very carefully.

Blues' veteran Kade Simpson himself had supporting evidence for both arguments when interviewed on SEN on Sunday, particularly his observation that the Blues were especially enjoying turning up for work each day not surrounded by a battery of cameras as if a major crime had been committed.

Public pressure being what it is, another few performances as spirited as those and Barker's chances of inheriting the post permanently will rise exponentially. And they're already reasonable given the popular view that Carlton has failed with both the "big name" and "favourite son" approaches to the job.

Yet these have also been a particularly encouraging few weeks from a list management perspective as well. Patrick Cripps is an outstanding prospect for Carlton, and Saturday's game his best yet. He set the tone for the Blues with his ferocity at the ball and his tackling. We've said repeatedly in this column the past couple of years that Nick Graham deserved more regular game time. Saturday was more evidence why.

That pair together laid 18 of Carlton's 69 tackles, but were hardly alone. Tom Bell's bullocking midfield play is becoming increasingly important to the Blues, and it was he along with another youngster in Sam Docherty who were critical in the frantic closing minutes of Saturday's thriller.

They are the future of Carlton post-Chris Judd. And perhaps it isn't quite so bleak a picture as that earlier run of demoralising heavy defeats was painting.

Saturday was also a good day for North Melbourne and the Western Bulldogs, the Roos dispensing of an injury-struck GWS and the Doggies making short work of Brisbane.

The aftermath of those two victories had plenty reaching for the fixture and what superficially seem favourable draws for both in the run home. Which brings us to the other part of that Matthews mantra.

Over the next seven rounds, North Melbourne will play what are currently the six bottom teams on the ladder. The Bulldogs, in their run home, get to play the bottom five. But if such speculation is the stuff of punditry, surely both clubs won't be putting the cart before the horse.

Indeed, the Bulldogs may have fallen for that trap once already this year. We have, enthusing after their terrific SCG win in round five about how impressively their win-loss ledger could soon read. That preceded three straight defeats, two of them to the hardly-intimidating St Kilda and Melbourne.

Recent weeks have delivered enough salutary warnings on that score. There's been the Blues' vastly improved form. Bottom side Gold Coast came within seven points of the biggest upset of the season against top team Fremantle.

And just ask Port Adelaide about the dangers of expectation. The Power had already been stitched up by Brisbane when the Lions were in last spot on the ladder. By next weekend, Port will probably be four games adrift of the top four.

They'd need to win virtually every one of their last 10 games from here in to get there. It ain't going to happen. Yet as sporadic in delivery as it has been, the Power's best, their first term against Hawthorn, for example, and even shorter periods on Saturday, is still good enough to worry anyone.

Another reminder, perhaps, not to throw the baby out with the bathwater should 2015 continue to go pear-shaped. As even the bottom-placed Suns can't afford to. Nor, for that matter, the likes of Fremantle and Sydney take too much for granted. Consistency of performance might separate the best from the worst. But in terms of natural talent, fitness, resources and coaching, the gap between most AFL clubs has never been smaller. You wouldn't need to remind Leigh Matthews of that. And he'd have a pithier way of putting it, too.

And while I'm at it...

Bryce Gibbs' controversial tackle on Robbie Gray is sure to again stoke the fires of what has been an ongoing debate about duty of care in a collision sport. And not for the first time, it may well leave the AFL in a no-win situation.

No one can dispute that the aftermath of Gibbs' tackle wasn't a great look, a player left semi-conscious on the ground, then carted off on a stretcher with his neck in a brace.

With his arms pinned in the tackle, the Port player simply had no way to brace himself for the thud as he was flung aggressively to the turf by Gibbs, an action that most observers believe is going to cost the Carlton player a suspension.

Going on precedents, that's probably fair enough. I do have some sympathy for the tackler, though, Gibbs hardly in a position to know what the consequences of his aggression were going to be in the split-second the tackle was applied.

I have even more sympathy for Gold Coast's Steven May for receiving a three-week suspension (yes, he could have copped a guilty plea and got two) for a textbook bump on Brisbane's Tom Rockliff.

Those who see the bottom line simply as the extent of the injuries to those on the receiving end of such contact are overly simplistic. Pretty much anything can happen when, as in May's case, two bodies not stationary meet with some momentum, regardless of the care taken.

And the duty of care mantra remains a Pandora's box for the AFL and the game in general. It implies that the initiator of any contact has the time and space to make a considered judgment about what impact his physicality is going to have. And in today's football, there's less of that than ever. The AFL is again walking a fine line with the Gray incident and the inevitable pressure that will be applied to tighten rules concerning tackling and bumping further. And there aren't any obvious solutions that won't fundamentally change the laws of the game as we've come to know them.

The league has to attempt to strike the correct balance between modern standards surrounding the risk of injury, and keeping the game the physical contest it has always been. Finding that balance will be no enviable task.