People chatting (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Slippery slope

Another officer has been killed in the line of duty. I can almost hear the cheering from the cop-haters and the unasked question by others of, "What did that trooper do wrong that provoked the suspect?"

It is a dangerous, slippery slope we're on. Yes, there are some bad apples among law enforcement, but that is no reason to demean and disrespect all officers. Officers risk their lives to keep us safe, dealing day in and day out with an element of society that the majority of us will never meet (because officers are doing their job).

Some say those in law enforcement have too much power; I would much rather have it that way than for the criminals to be holding the power.

Carla Halvorson, Mishicot

Mirro building

When Justin Nickels first ran for mayor I was undecided. I eventually cast my vote for him based on his promise to deal with the crumbling Mirro building. Now, six years later the building is still a crumbling eyesore and public nuisance. A parade of private interests have been allowed to loot the site of any remaining value, leaving the city holding the now empty bag.

Perhaps there might still be a value in letting it stand. It could serve as a memorial to the demise of effective government and the inevitable outcome of free market solutions. The names of every city politician and official who over the last 30 years sat limply by allowing it to happen should be inscribed on the walls.

Bernard Starzewski, Valders

Science

I grew up loving science. I never saw it separate from God. I thought, and still think that science is nothing more than understanding the minutia of God's beautiful creation: its complexity, its simplicity. We are an inquisitive people, we humans. We have to know how everything works. But to what end?

When I was growing up it was better living through chemistry. When I was in Vietnam it was Agent Orange. At 19 I spent 45 days in the A-Shau Valley. It had been sprayed for years with the defoliant and our task force set it on fire. We breathed the smoke, were covered in its red dust and bathed in its streams, all laden with chemical residue.

Almost every Vietnam vet I know has prostate cancer and, whether in remission or not, their lives have been changed forever, and not for the better!

Do you think this is what God wants us to do with the creation? Maybe the story of the "Garden" was not about the past, but the future!

Ed Hansen, Manitowoc

GOP leaders

Ron Johnson, Republican senator from Wisconsin, signed an open letter to Iran, basically saying don't trust our President. Republican Speaker Boehner invited the Prime Minister of Israel to speak to Congress, not informing the President. Republican Sen. Lindsey Graham claims Iran is worse than ISIS.

In 1985 Iran turned to the U.S. for help in its war against Iraq. Iran made a secret request to buy weapons from America even though the U.S. was leading a worldwide embargo against selling Iran weapons. President Reagan agreed with the deal, using Israel as the middle man. We sent over 1,500 missiles to the regime that just took over the U.S. embassy. Remember Reagan for what he was, not for what you want him to be, your favorite Republican who did nothing wrong.

Jerome Bolle, Whitelaw

Compulsion

I've been told that I'm obsessive compulsive. It's true that when I have to wait for the doctor, in the exam room, I do get up and straighten all the diplomas, but doesn't everyone do that? I'm fussy about my car; I don't like those little dings on my side panels. When my wife and I go to Walmart, I'll always go to the end of the row and even leave an extra half dozen empty spaces, so I don't have to park next to anyone.

One time, after I parked but before I turned off the car, my wife said, "there's some empty spaces behind the office supply store." You know, that's where we parked. She knows I don't mind walking a little farther to maybe avoid a ding. She no longer questions where I park. I feel really bad and I'd like to offer my apologies to whomever had the edge of their car door attacked by the side of my car. I believe it occurred in the parking lot for the Holy Family Memorial fitness center. The blue paint, that's on my car, makes me feel as though some touch-up may be required. Please contact me, (but not with your car), and together we'll see if we can rectify the matter.

Les Graebel, Manitowoc

Old school country

I like country music and I listen to it on XM radio in my car. I love the old-time hits by Hank Williams and Patsy Kline. Country music is claimed by its fans to be the music of America, the music of God-fearing and patriotic Americans.

However, lately I have come to the conclusion that modern country music is mostly about drinking, getting drunk, cheating on your spouse or significant other, pickup trucks and guns. I guess I'll just have to select an XM station that plays the oldies but goodies.

Don Hallwachs, Two Rivers

Read or Share this story: http://htrne.ws/1CkhGJB