L-R: The co-founders of Storefront Inc., Tristan Pollock (COO) and Erik Eliason (CEO) Storefront Inc.

Spark Capital, an investor in Warby Parker, is leading a $7.3 million investment in another business that unifies online e-commerce with physical retail–Storefront Inc.

The 10-employee startup in San Francisco operates a marketplace where merchants, marketers and artisans can find and book a store space for just a few days or a few months.

Non-traditional store spaces listed on TheStorefront.com include kiosks or booths at malls, trade shows, flea markets, art fairs and farmer’s markets.

The site also lists “shop-in-shops,” or spaces for rent within existing stores and restaurants, along with standalone shops and event spaces that are available for just a short period of time.

Storefront was founded in 2012, went through the AngelPad accelerator in San Francisco, and raised $1.6 million in seed funding soon after.

AngelPad founder and Storefront investor Thomas Korte says the startup’s inventory of listings is unique and needed today more than ever.

He said brands that start as direct-to-consumer, online businesses–such as Bonobos, Nasty Gal, and Everlane –ultimately all want a “physical outlet” to connect with customers face-to-face, especially around holidays and other seasonal events that drive demand for their products.

Spark Capital General Partner Mo Koyfman said that before Storefront, “the market for short-term rental [of retail spaces] was completely disorganized and ad hoc.”

To use fifteen square feet within this Long Beach, Calif. boutique artists or marketers pay about $150 per month via TheStorefront.com. Storefront Inc.

He says Storefront is just beginning to “open up the eyes” of property owners to the possibility of making money from their real estate assets with short-term agreements and greater flexibility than leases.

For those who believe that mobile and online shopping may “kill” brick-and-mortar shopping altogether, according to the 2013 Deloitte Annual Holiday Survey 66% of Americans planned to spend over one-third of their holiday budget at local, small and independent business venues.

Such venues comprise a growing segment of listings on Storefront.

Co-founders Erik Eliason and Tristan Pollock plan to use their company’s funding to bring Storefront’s services to major metropolitan areas in and beyond North America. It is currently operating in San Francisco, New York and newly in Los Angeles.

The company has managed to win over independent artists, and huge celebrities alike to selling in pop-up shops and temporary spaces. Kanye West used a Storefront space to sell branded merchandise for about a week ahead of a huge concert in New York last year, noted Erik Eliason, Storefront CEO.

Storefront leaves the pricing consideration up to property owners, and does not buy or lease property itself. The company makes revenue as a percentage of each transaction paid by both the property owner and the renter of the property.

According to original research by Storefront, merchants spend some $80 billion on temporary spaces to sell their goods each year in the U.S. alone Mr. Eliason said.

Joining Spark in the Series A investment are Storefront’s earlier backers–Mohr Davidow Ventures, Great Oaks Venture Capital, 500 Startups and Box Group–and new investors including SV Angel, Gary Vaynerchuk, the rapper Nas (subject of the forthcoming documentary ‘Time is Illmatic’), Tom Glocer, Vikram Pandit and Troy Carter.

CORRECTION 4/14/14: An earlier version of this story said Spark Capital invested in Shopify. It did not. The story has been corrected.

Write to Lora Kolodny at lora.kolodny@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @lorakolodny