House Speaker John Boehner of Ohio administers the House oath to Rep. Mia Love (R-Utah) during a ceremonial re-enactment swearing-in ceremony, Tuesday, Jan. 6, 2015, in the Rayburn Room on Capitol Hill in Washington. Joining them are Love's husband Jason Love, center, and other family members. (AP Photo/Pablo Martinez Monsivais )

So apparently, some tea party conservatives were not happy with Rep. Mia Love's (R-Utah) vote for John Boehner for House speaker. Her backing of House Majority Whip Steve Scalise (R-La.) amid his scandal also rankled some on the right:

@SmillingHK @WarrenWilhelmJr @MiaBLove If this is an example of how Mia Love will be in Congress, she'll be done in 2 years. #disappointed — Be-Obi Kenobi (@be_obi_kenobi) January 7, 2015

This is from The Shark Tank, a conservative blog:

The Twitter/blogger backlash prompted Love to weigh in on her vote. She explained her vote in an e-mail to the Washington Examiner:

There were no qualified or notable campaigns for speaker within the Republican Party other than John Boehner. Casting a vote for a candidate who has not actively campaigned and does not have the support to be speaker is an indirect vote for Nancy Pelosi, and I will not vote for Nancy Pelosi. There will be a time and a place for me to stand as a lone voice of dissension, but the vote for the speaker, is not that place. For me to be an effective congressman over the next two years it is important for me to be on the side of the elected speaker.

Love has dealt with the tea party question since she ran in 2012. In that race, some tea party-style conservatives backed her primary opponent -- among them, Utah Sen. Mike Lee (R). And a story by The Salt Lake Tribune detailed how the city's budget and property tax rate went up when she was mayor of Saratoga Springs.

At the same time, she did get an endorsement from FreedomWorks, a national tea party group, and was seen as a rising star.

In 2014, she nabbed the endorsement of the Tea Party Express. They cited her fiscal responsibility and opposition to the Affordable Care Act. Yet, at some point, during the race, she seemed to reject the tea party label, which again drew some scrutiny. Love said she wasn't rejecting the tea party, but rather the concept of labeling more broadly.

It's also true that Love's rhetoric from 2012 to 2014 changed a bit, even as her policy positions remained fairly constant. Her comments about the Congressional Black Caucus, for instance, were very strident in 2012 and less so in 2014. And she angered some conservatives when she questioned the tea party driven government shutdown in 2013 over Obamacare.

And yet, it seems the "official" tea party (whatever that is) counts her as one of their own.

From a current teaparty.org headline.

It all harkens back to another well-known rising star, Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.), who was once seen as the tea party senator, after mounting an upset of Charlie Crist in 2010. But in reality, he had a record as a more establishment figure in Florida politics. (Jeb Bush was his mentor, for instance.) And sure enough, in Congress he has been conservative but hardly a tea party firebrand. He even spearheaded comprehensive immigration reform.

Part of it is that candidates campaign in poetry, as the late Mario Cuomo was apt to say, and the tone and content of that poetry depends on the political climate at the time. Both Rubio and Love rose when the tea party had more of a grip on the GOP.

(Another reason is that the tea party would love to be a part of two rising congressional stars. Claiming Love as a tea partier makes the tea party look ascendant.)

But governing in this less-tea-party-inflected time will likely be much more about practical prose, especially for ambitious lawmakers who see a path beyond their current seat. And, like Rubio, Love has every reason to believe she has a future in her party beyond her district. Being "on the side of the elected speaker," bent on sending a message to defectors, can only help that cause.