CampBiz - September 2015

September 3, 2015

by John Long



Now Open: Woody’s Classic Sports Pub Jeff and Eric, the owners of Hamburger Mary’s and Industry Video Bar now have their third bar open -- Woody’s Classic Sports Pub -- one block away at 3740 Broadway. It opened to the general public on Aug. 17. The bar has been completely restyled with expert design assistance from Wonderland’s Andy Chambers and Alan Dunham and it looks fantastic.



Woody’s also has a small kitchen and serves a bar menu. As you’d expect from a gay sports bar, there are TVs in every room and they have a great patio. The bar opens daily at 4 p.m. and it has a 3 a.m. license, so it’s a great place for either happy hour or late-night fun. They plan to have a grand opening party sometime in the next few weeks. Like them on Facebook for more information. Community Healing Event After Tamara Dominguez’s Death

held on Aug. 30 Kansas City Anti-Violence Project, Una Lucha KC, the Justice Project and One Struggle KC are calling for action and healing in response to the murder of Tamara Dominguez, a transgender Latina woman, on Aug. 15 in Kansas City, Mo.



KCAVP reported on her death in this press release:



“Tamara was intentionally run over three times by a large vehicle, sending a threatening, direct message of hate towards other trans women and the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer (LGBTQ) Latin@ communities in Kansas City. Our organizations are working collectively together to help support and advocate with Tamara’s chosen family and friends.



“Tamara was loved and cherished by her chosen family. She is survived by her partner of six years and her four dogs—Luna, Travis, Sensei and Arigato.”



Her partner said, “She was happy with who she was.”



Dominguez was cherished for her smile and her laugh and was known as a sweet, gentle and generous person, the press release said. She was a beloved cook, and her partner and chosen family loved her shrimp ceviche and empanadas. Her friends said they wanted the focus on who did this, not on her being transgender.



The release stated that Dominguez’s chosen family wishes for her body to remain in the United States, but that her relatives may take her remains to Mexico. It goes on: “Her chosen family is collecting donations for memorial services for Tamara, as well as supporting her partner and community through this process of grief and healing. KCAVP, Una Lucha KC and the Justice Project are planning a series of community healing events and support groups for the communities most impacted by this violence. The first event was on Sunday, Aug. 30. Check this Facebook page for updates: facebook.com/kcavp.



Anyone who identifies as transgender or LGBQ and is grieving about this brutal murder is encouraged to reach out to KCAVP for free support and advocacy services. Help is available by calling 816-561-0550 or emailing info@kcavp.org. Mid-America Gay & Lesbian Chamber of Commerce Receives National Award The Mid-America Gay & Lesbian Chamber of Commerce (MAGLCC) was honored Aug. 13 with the Rising Star Chamber Award at the National Gay & Lesbian Chamber of Commerce’s 2015 International Business & Leadership Conference in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. The Rising Star Award is given to a chamber that exhibits vitality and relevance in its community, brings a unified voice to the LGBT business community and its allies, and proves its commitment to the broader national business equality movement. “The professional support that NGLCC leadership has shared with us over these first four years has been incredible and one of the key reasons we are out for business today. This recognition is very important to us,” said Dan Nilsen, founder and board president of MAGLCC. “In addition to the growing number of passionate members, our success is also due to our corporate sponsor partners. Kansas City was definitely ready to support our new chamber. Just about every major corporation in the Metro Kansas City area enthusiastically agreed to join our efforts to ensure that LGBT professionals and entrepreneurs are able to bring their whole selves to work.” Chance Mitchell, NGLCC co-founder and CEO, said, “Mid-America GLCC has experienced incredible growth in members and corporate partners over the past few years, and they have pioneered new programs and advocacy efforts to engage with the local business community. We are excited to see what they will do in the future.” The Mid-America Gay & Lesbian Chamber of Commerce advocates, promotes and facilitates the success of the LGBT business community and its allies through the guiding principles of equality, inclusion, economics and education. Mid-America GLCC’s purpose is to create, identify and enhance business opportunities for LGBT and LGBT-friendly organizations, thereby fostering a more inclusive and vibrant economy in the Midwest. For additional information, visit maglcc.org. Transgender Survey If you are 18 or older and are transgender, make sure you are counted. The U.S. Trans Survey is taking place now through Sept. 21. Visit ustranssurvey.org to anonymously answer questions about your demographics, health, and experiences of being trans in the United States. KC CARE Clinic Receives New

Federal Health Center Designation The Kansas City CARE Clinic (formerly the Kansas City Free Health Clinic), a private, nonprofit community health center, was designated in August by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services as a Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC). With this designation, the clinic will receive annual federal funds of about $650,000, which will greatly expand its capacity to provide high-quality primary care for those who need it in the Kansas City region. News of this designation arrived shortly after U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell announced $169 million in Affordable Care Act funding to 266 new health-center sites in 46 states for the delivery of comprehensive primary health-care services in communities that need them most. These new health centers are projected to increase access to health care for nearly 1.2 million patients nationwide, adding to the more than 700 new health-center sites supported through the Affordable Care Act. “The Kansas City CARE Clinic has provided critical community health services in the Kansas City area for more than four decades,” said U.S. Rep. Emanuel Cleaver. “I am pleased that they have earned status as a fully fledged FQHC. The Affordable Care Act established $11 billion in additional funding to increase and expand the operation and construction of health centers throughout the nation. This is a great opportunity to ensure we are taking care of the area’s most vulnerable.” As a safety net provider in the Kansas City metro for more than 44 years, the KC CARE Clinic has always been committed to providing high-quality, culturally competent primary care and reducing health disparities in the underinsured and uninsured populations. With nearly 250,000 individuals estimated to need access to primary care in the Kansas City metro, the KC CARE Clinic views itself as a leader in HIV services and an essential regional partner, collaborating for years with the area’s other FQHCs, community safety-net clinics, health-care providers, regional foundations, and civic leaders to help address this larger community need. The clinic also received notification that it has been recognized as a Patient-Centered Medical Home by the National Committee for Quality Assurance, which is a private, nonprofit organization dedicated to improving health-care quality. Its standards were established with the American College of Physicians, the American Academy of Family Physicians, the American Academy of Pediatrics and the American Osteopathic Association. “The safety net for Kansas City is now stronger with the clinic becoming both an FQHC and a Patient-Centered Medical Home,” said Sheri Wood, chief executive officer of the KC CARE Clinic. “These significant designations are the next steps in our evolution as we respond to the rapidly changing health-care environment that exists today.” LIKEME Lighthouse Events The LIKEME Lighthouse reports that it will be closed, starting Friday, Sept. 4, for Labor Day weekend, and will open back up on Tuesday, Sept. 8. On Saturday, Sept. 12, they are professionally filming a philanthropic video with local creative talent Michael Mackie and Rachel Coleman. They also will soon be announcing the talent lineup for their comedy fundraiser at the Folly Theater on Nov. 13. You can sign up for their email list at likemelighthouse.org to keep informed, or follow LIKEME Lighthouse on Facebook. LGBT COMMUNITY CENTER

3911 Main St, Kansas City, MO 64111

(816) 753-7770

likemelighthouse.org Sept 1 Tuesday Night Movie, 7-9 p.m.

Sept 3 Rainbow Warriors, 7-9 p.m.

Sept 4-7 Closed for Labor Day Weekend

Sept 8 Tuesday Night Movie, 7-9 p.m.

Sept 9 Hear Me Out Toastmasters, 6:15-7:30 p.m

Sept 9 HASL KC Board Meeting, 7-9 p.m.

Sept 10 Social Cycle, 6-7:30 p.m.

Sept 10 Rainbow Warriors, 7-9 p.m.

Sept 12 Filming LIKEME Lighthouse Video

Sept 14 Eat Their Words, 7-8 p.m.

Sept 15 Tuesday Night Movie, 7-9 p.m.

Sept 17 EQUAL Trans Support Group, 5-8 p.m.

Sept 17 Rainbow Warriors, 7-9 p.m.

Sept 19 Filming LIKEME Lighthouse Video (fallback date)

Sept 20 Fabulous Queer Writers, 4-6 p.m.

Sept 22 Tuesday Night Movie, 7-9 p.m.

Sept 23 Hear Me Out Toastmasters, 6-8 p.m

Sept 24 Social Cycle, 6-7:30 p.m.

Sept 24 Rainbow Warriors, 7-9 p.m.

Sept 27 PFLAG Monthly Meeting, 3-4 p.m.

Sept 29 Tuesday Night Movie, 7-9 p.m. Hear Me Out Toastmasters At Hear Me Out Toastmasters, Kansas City’s LGBTQIPA community can attain public speaking confidence and leadership experience. Hear Me Out Toastmasters meets from 6:15 to 7:30 p.m. on the second and fourth Wednesdays of each month at the LIKEME Lighthouse. Upcoming Events Sept. 4-28

‘Black Bewitched’ from Late Night Theater After a sold-out run of Alfred Hitchcock’s The Birds, Late Night Theater is bringing back this satire of the TV show from the 1960s and ’70s, this time with an all-black cast of actors. The show will feature Moltyn Decadence, Widow Von’Du, Regina La-rae and more. Mark your calendars and check their Facebook page for more information. Tickets on sale now at 816-235-6222 or Black Bewitched Tickets. Sept. 8 & 15

Heartland Men’s Chorus tryouts Interested in singing with HMC? Auditions for new singers take place at the beginning of each concert cycle. You’ll have a chance to get to know HMC by coming to their first two rehearsals for their holiday concert: Sept. 8 and Sept. 15 from 7-10 p.m. in Founder’s Hall at Grace & Holy Trinity Cathedral (13th and Broadway in downtown Kansas City, Mo.). For more information: Join The Chorus. Sept. 8-13

Cirque Eloize Director Jeannot Painchaud presents a show crackling with daring and modernity. Cirque Éloize’s ninth creation, called iD, is a blend of circus acts and urban dance. The scene is set in the heart of a city, in a public space where people seek refuge, shed their anonymity, forge an identity and express individuality. Fifteen performers from 13 disciplines create iD’s entertaining and resolutely urban universe. Performances are at 8 p.m. at Starlight Theatre, 4600 Starlight Rd., Kansas City, Mo. Tickets can be purchased at kcstarlight.com. Sept. 11-12

7th annual Latino Gay Pride Latino Gay Pride will be a two-day event again this year. Friday night will be a street party with great entertainment on Westport Road, and Saturday will be a family-friendly event in Hyde Park. There will be dancing to DJs and entertainers on Friday night, as well as stage entertainment on Saturday. For more information, visit latinogaypridekc.com or on Facebook: Latino Gay Pride. Sept. 12

Mid America Freedom Band hosts Casino Night Show your support of the Mid America Freedom Band by joining them for an evening of fun, music, and casino games hosted by Kansas City’s original redhead, Melinda Ryder, and Kirk Nelson. The Mighty Mo Combo will be on hand to perform selections from their well-attended and highly regarded KC Fringe show, Casino Royale. Win at poker, craps, blackjack, roulette, and plinko for a chance to walk away with some fabulous prizes. Light appetizers are provided, and drink tickets will be available for purchase for those 21 and over.



The event will take place at the Simpson House, 4509 Walnut St, Kansas City, Mo., from 8 to 11p.m. Your entry ticket starts you with chips. Purchase tickets at Casino Royal. Sept. 13

11th annual AIDS Bicycle Cruise This ride grows stronger every year. The 2014 event had 300 riders and it raised $35,000, according to organizer Josh Strodtman. This year they want to top $40,000. They will have a new venue, too. The party on wheels will begin and end in the parking lot of Hamburger Mary’s, 3700 Broadway Blvd., Kansas City, Mo., with rest stops that include food, adult and regular beverages, and live music. They will also have an after-party at Hamburger Mary’s in the afternoon. It’s a fun, non-competitive ride, designed for the average cyclist and for those who want to pick up the pace. Registration is at 11 a.m., and the ride begins at noon. Registration is $40 before the cruise or $45 on the day of the event. For more information, visit abckc.org or on Facebook: AIDS Bicycle Cruise Sept. 18

PerformOUTKC Ovation Cocktail Party fundraiser PerformOUTKC, a performing arts program for LGBTQA youth ages 14-22, is hosting a party from 7 to 9:30 p.m. called “Ovation.”



It will be at the Diastole Scholars’ Center, 2501 Holmes St., Kansas City, Mo. Tickets are $20 and include entry, hot hors d’oeuvres, a performance by the PerformOUTKC youth and a silent auction.



PerformOUTKC provides a safe and supportive place for youth to foster positive identity development through excellence in musical performance and creative expression. The young artists of PerformOUTKC share their talent within the community by telling compelling stories and sharing their life journeys that ultimately showcase their personal authenticity.



To register for Ovation, please visit: Ovation Oct. 17

Heartland Men’s Chorus Dinner of Note HMC’s theme for Dinner of Note 2015 is “Road Trip.” They’ll kick off their 30th season with their annual creative black-tie benefit. The event will be at 6 p.m. in the Century Ballroom of the Westin Crown Center Hotel, 1 W. Pershing Rd., Kansas City, Mo. Heartland Men's Chorus Oct. 18

Good Samaritan Project 30th Anniversary Brunch Join GSP as they celebrate 30 years of providing advocacy, care and education to people affected by HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted infections in the Greater Kansas City community. Noon-3 p.m. at the Masquerade Event Hall, 3027 Walnut St., Kansas City, Mo. Purchase tickets at GSP 30th Anniversary Brunch Nov. 6

SAVE Inc. HomeComing ‘Downtown Funk’ At “HomeComing: Downtown Funk,” you will be treated to great food, drinks and entertainment. The event will feature fabulous cocktails and tasty noshes from delish! Catering, as well as an exciting silent auction and raffle. A funky-fresh dance floor with live music by KC All Stars will only be interrupted to showcase the city’s finest and most prestigious HomeComing Coronation. They’ll be honoring the winners with a generous HomeComing prize from Tivol.



SAVE Inc. describes HomeComing as “an event that represents what it means to have a GREAT time for a GREAT cause. Now in year 4, this event will bring together all the elements of a fabulous party while also showcasing the important mission of one of our community’s keystone organizations. For 29 years, SAVE Inc. has been providing home, hope and dignity for those living with HIV/AIDS, mental illness and substance abuse. The name of the event, HomeComing, speaks directly to SAVE Inc.’s mission, as the agency represents stability, safety and an opportunity to feel supported to over 900 individuals and families every month.”



HomeComing 2015 will be from 8 p.m.to midnight at Pennway Place at Studio Dan Meiners, 2500 W. Pennway St. Kansas City, Mo. Tickets: Homecoming.