NATIONAL HARBOR, Md. – Sen. John McCain R-Ariz., a war hero and longtime Washington insider, was considered a moderate presidential candidate in 2008 who could lead the party to triumph over upstart Democrat candidate Barack Obama.

Then, in 2012, it was Mitt Romney, a former governor of Massachusetts who implemented a precursor to Obamacare as well as same-sex marriage, who was trumpeted as a centrist who would return the GOP to the Oval Office.

So what will happen when 2016 comes around?

Sen. Mike Lee, R-Utah, says the GOP candidate needs to be a real, genuine, died-in-the-wool conservative.

In a speech Thursday to the Conservative Political Action Conference, he first made clear he is not running for president in 2016.

But he emphasized the need for a conservative who has won a significant election and who has stood on principle when push came to shove.

“When conservatives elevate unserious presidential candidates – candidates who are not principled, positive and proven – it’s not the media’s fault,” Lee said. “It’s not the establishment’s fault. It’s our fault, and we can’t let that happen.”

The senator said he is tired of Republican politicians offering empty platitudes and wants conservative politicians with real policies and real answers.

“Please help me find that candidate,” Lee implored the crowd.

Lee also made it clear that it’s just as important for conservatives to communicate with moderates as it is for moderates to communicate with conservatives. But as they communicate to moderates, conservatives must stay true to their ideals, he said.

In a question-and-answer session immediately after his speech, Lee said President Obama’s biggest fault has been his seizure of too much executive power.

Obama’s use of executive powers is being challenged on a number of fronts, including his de facto amnesty program and changes in the Obamacare law.

Lee also reminded attendees that the Founding Fathers created in the Constitution a separation of powers as well as a division of power between the federal government and the states.

The senator cited the Founding Fathers’ complaints against King George III, subtly suggesting Obama has become too much like the notorious British monarch.

“[The Founders] understood something about power – that there’s great harm that can come from government if you allow too much power to be concentrated in the hands of one person, or in the hands of a few people,” Lee said.

Among the possible GOP candidates in 2016 is Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, who has won three elections in recent years and took on the powerful public-sector unions in Wisconsin and won.

Another is Dr. Ben Carson, the famed surgeon whose popularity skyrocketed when he confronted Obama’s policies in a speech while Obama sat next to him.

Another is Carly Fiorina, a business executive who would bring to the table the experience of balancing a budget and meeting the needs of a consumer base.

Others are former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, Sen. Lindsey Graham, New York Gov. George Pataki, Texas Gov. Rick Perry, Ambassador John Bolton, Sen. Ted Cruz, Maryland Gov. Bob Ehrlich, former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, Ohio Gov. John Kasich, Rep. Peter King, former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin, Sen. Rand Paul, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence, Sen. Marco Rubio, former Sen. Rick Santorum, and business and television personality Donald Trump.

Check out WND’s extensive coverage of the 2016 Conservative Political Action Conference:

Scott Walker ‘wants to make America great again’

Sarah Palin: Obama’s VA ‘killing our veterans’

Jindal pounds Common Core in CPAC speech

Cruz: Hillary ’embodies the corruption of Washington’

‘Next 20 months will be very dangerous’

Cruz strongly signals presidential bid

Christie: ‘I gave up the New York Times for Lent’

Fiorina argues for woman to take on Hillary