The Blue Cross of Idaho Board of Directors selected Charlene Maher to serve as the new president and chief executive officer for the organization. Most recently, Maher was chief marketing officer and senior vice president for commercial sales at Emblem Health in New York. She starts her tenure at Blue Cross of Idaho on March 1, 2016.

Maher brings more than 25 years of health insurance experience to Blue Cross of Idaho, including strategic planning and execution, new business development, operations, sales and marketing. During her five years with Emblem Health in New York, she was responsible for the profit and loss of the commercial market segment that covers more than 3 million lives and $8 billion in revenue.

“Charlene’s strategic leadership and expertise are an ideal fit for Blue Cross of Idaho, and will help us continue to navigate an industry that is increasingly complex and constantly changing,” said JoAnne Stringfield, Chairwoman of the Blue Cross of Idaho Board of Directors. “Above all, she shares our passion for helping our members improve their lives with access to affordable, high-quality healthcare.”

Prior to working at Emblem Health, Maher worked at Medica Health Plans, Inc. in Minneapolis, MN, where she provided executive responsibility for the Individual and Family managed healthcare business in four states. She also spent fifteen years with WellPoint, Inc., where she rose to the position of vice president and general manager for individual services for 14 BlueCross BlueShield states. In this capacity, Maher had divisional profit and loss responsibility for more than $5.4 billion in revenue for 2.1 million lives.

Maher began her career as a registered nurse after receiving her Bachelor of Science in nursing from the University of Texas.

Maher follows Zelda Geyer-Sylvia, who fulfilled this role at Blue Cross for the past 5 years and announced her retirement late last year.

“Zelda provided exceptional leadership and guidance during an ever-evolving time in the health insurance industry,” said Stringfield. “We are grateful for the countless hours she put in to ensure a smooth transition into the new world of the Affordable Care Act. On behalf of the Blue Cross of Idaho Board of Directors, I want to wish her success as she enters the next phase of her