The New York Times editorial board was the target of Fox News’ Greta Van Susteren wrath Sunday evening as she lambasted the board over its editorial saying the president “misspoke” when he said Americans could keep their health insurance plans, doctors, etc. if they liked them.

New York Times makes itself look pathetic – the American people just are not that stupid ! http://t.co/CpOh1rRReZ — Greta Van Susteren (@gretawire) November 3, 2013

Van Susteren tweeted about a post on her “Gretawire” blog where she demolished the Times, writing in part:

Whether you like Obamacare or not — it is absurd to say the President “misspoke” when he said “if you like the insurance you have, you can keep it.” (See NYT Editorial below in red type in which it tries to cover for the President’s “pledge” – their description of his remark.) The President said this not once, not twice, but multiple times and it was part of the Obamacare supporter talking points. You say it one time and it could be misspeaking — but when it is part of your mantra, and your talking points…repeated over and over and over again……well, the rest of us just are not that stupid. That is not misspeaking. Misspeaking is the slip of a tongue — not part of your repeated talking points. Even the New York Times in its Editorial calls President Obama’s talking points a pledge — how can a repeated pledge be something you accidentally said? The point of this blog post is to point out how pathetic the NY Times Editorial Board looks trying to describe this as ‘misspeaking.’ Does the Board think the American people are that stupid? Misspeaking?

Shortly after, an even more furious Van Susteren blasted another tweet, all in capital letters, pointing to another new post on her blog about Edie Littlefield Sundby, a woman suffering Stage IV cancer and about to lose her medical insurance thanks to the Affordable Care Act.

THE NEW YORK TIMES EDITORIAL BOARD SHOULD READ THIS Op/Ed from WALL STREET JOURNAL http://t.co/lgDdAEqyIa — Greta Van Susteren (@gretawire) November 4, 2013

Everyone now is clamoring about Affordable Care Act winners and losers. I am one of the losers. My grievance is not political; all my energies are directed to enjoying life and staying alive, and I have no time for politics. For almost seven years I have fought and survived stage-4 gallbladder cancer, with a five-year survival rate of less than 2% after diagnosis. I am a determined fighter and extremely lucky. But this luck may have just run out: My affordable, lifesaving medical insurance policy has been canceled effective Dec. 31. My choice is to get coverage through the government health exchange and lose access to my cancer doctors, or pay much more for insurance outside the exchange (the quotes average 40% to 50% more) for the privilege of starting over with an unfamiliar insurance company and impaired benefits.

Van Susteren vowed to help Sundby, and some Twitter reaction followed:

H/T: Twitchy

[poll id=”134″]