Q: Are sleeping pills safe to take long-term?

A: About 8 million adults turn to prescription sleeping pills every month, according to a study published last year by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. And these medications all have flaws.

Popular prescription medications for insomnia include the so-called Z-drugs: Ambien (zolpidem), Lunesta (eszopiclone) and Sonata (zaleplon).

These drugs have shorter durations of action than older drugs such as the benzodiazepine Dalmane (flurazepam). That means they may help you fall asleep, but their effects don't last very long. They also are less likely to lead to morning grogginess.

And yet, recent data show that even the Z-drugs can cause problems. Last year, the FDA recommended that prescribed doses of Ambien be lowered, particularly for women. This came after reports of lingering effects in the morning, including drowsiness and impaired driving.

There are concerns with the Z-drugs in elderly people as well, with persisting effects causing daytime confusion, memory problems and falls, says Gregg Jacobs, a specialist at the Sleep Disorders Center at the University of Massachusetts Medical School.

In fact, the American Geriatric Society recently discouraged the use of Z-drugs for any period longer than 90 days.

Benzodiazepines when taken for insomnia are on the list as well.

The Z-drugs have similar effects on the brain as Dalmane and other benzodiazepines such as Klonopin and Halcion. These drugs act on GABA receptors, inhibiting neuronal function and tending to dampen many brain functions, including a wakeful state.

Other drugs are prescribed for sleep, such as certain antidepressants (Desyrel and Sinequan) that tweak the balance of brain chemicals involved in mood and alertness, and the melatonin-mimicking drug Rozerem (ramelteon), which delivers sleepytime signals to the brain.

There is a non-drug alternative. Cognitive behavioral therapy, which includes using relaxation techniques, controlling stimulation before bedtime and reframing how people think about their sleep needs, may work better than any pill.

If you do go the medicine route, understand that short-term side effects can include: hangovers, amnesia; abnormal behavior, such as sleep driving or sleep eating (rare), and abuse and addiction (also rare), says Thomas Roth, a sleep medicine researcher at the Henry Ford Hospital.

If you have taken the drug long term (beyond a month or three), side effects may include dependence, so that stopping suddenly can cause withdrawal effects; and tolerance, when you need more drug to get the same effect. –Jill U. Adams, The Washington Post