The Supreme Court declined on Monday to hear an appeal from New Mexico photographers who refused to work a same-sex commitment ceremony. The court left in place an earlier ruling by the New Mexico Supreme Court, which said the photographers had violated the state’s anti-discrimination law.

Elaine and Jon Huguenin, co-owners of Elane Photography, argued that photographing Vanessa Willock and Misti Collinsworth’s ceremony would go against their religion and violate their free speech rights as artists. In a petition to the court, the Huguenins’ attorneys wrote that they declined the couple’s request “because they did not want to create images expressing messages about marriage that conflict with their religious beliefs.”

Willock’s attorneys, however, said Huguenin had discriminated against the couple on the basis of their sexual orientation, violating the New Mexico Human Rights Act. "The law simply says: Whatever service you provide, you must not discriminate against customers when you engage in public commerce," the lawyers argued. "Moreover, when the company sells its goods and services to the general public, it is not a private actor engaged in the expression of its own message. Customers do not pay for the privilege of facilitating the company's message."

[ See a collection of political cartoons on gay marriage.]

Slate's Mark Joseph Stern says the case was "just too messy" for the Supreme Court to have interfered. "By my count," Stern writes, "it involves at least four separate issues: Hybrid rights [i.e., free speech rights combined with free exercise rights]; compelled speech; photography-as-speech; and a religious objection to anti-discrimination statutes. It's just too much for one case."

Jorden Lorence of Alliance Defending Freedom, a conservative Christian nonprofit organization, expressed disappointment over the court's denial. "Today’s actions by the Supreme Court may unfortunately embolden some to expand their efforts to punish and humiliate publicly those who believe marriage is defined only as one man and one woman," he wrote in a National Review blog post.

The Supreme Court’s refusal comes at a time when the country is seriously debating issues of religious freedom and gay rights. In February, Arizona Gov. Jan Brewer vetoed a controversial bill that would allow business owners to use religious freedom as a defense against discrimination claims. The bill, backed by Republicans and opposed by major corporations, was seen as an attack on the gay and lesbian community. On Tuesday, legislators in Mississippi passed a similar bill to protect businesses' religious freedom, and Republican Gov. Phil Bryant has indicated he will sign it into law.

[See a collection of political cartoons on the Catholic contraception controversy.]

Issues at stake in the Elane Photography case are somewhat parallel to the concerns raised in Sebelius v. Hobby Lobby, a religious liberty case surrounding the Affordable Care Act mandate on birth control, says Ian Millhiser at Think Progress: