ST. PAUL, minn. —

In Quebec City, Alex Tanguay lined up for a faceoff against Joe Sakic.

Sakic put the puck between Tanguay’s legs, went around him and scored on Nordiques goalie Ron Hextall.

Both were younger then, of course.

Sakic was 22 and Tanguay was 12, on the ice at the Colisee for a practice promotion held in conjunction with the annual and world-famous Quebec peewee tournament. Hextall played in goal for the kids, while the goalie for Tanguay’s team was in the net for the Nordiques.

Sakic winces at the story, but Tanguay enjoys telling it. And the full-circle twists keep coming. They played together on a Stanley Cup championship team in 2001 and now, in his second tour of duty with the Avalanche, Tanguay is playing for Sakic, the Avalanche’s general manager, while another former teammate, Patrick Roy, is his coach.

Tanguay is the “bridge” between Avalanche eras.

He will be one of five current Avalanche players among the 20 selections for the Avs’ 20th anniversary team honored Monday at the Colorado-Minnesota game at the Pepsi Center. The other four named to the team after team-conducted fan voting: Erik Johnson, Matt Duchene, Gabe Landeskog and Semyon Varlamov. Sakic and Roy will join them.

(The Denver Post’s earlier choices in October — a list finalized after give-and-take and horse trading between Mike Chambers and me — were the same in 19 of the 20 cases. Ryan O’Reilly was on our list; the team-announced choices included Johnson instead.)

“This team has a 20-year history and tradition now, and being a part of those ‘good’ years, I think the fans remember those years and the excitement with those teams we had,” Tanguay said during the Avalanche’s week-long road trip. “I’m just fortunate I came in at the right time and be a part of it.

“So I’m very honored that the fans think of me as one of the 20 guys. You look at that lineup, and it’s a pretty good lineup. I’m happy and I can’t wait to see some of the guys on Monday. I haven’t seen some of them for a long time, so it will be really nice.”

Duchene, 24, was an Avalanche fan growing up — revering Sakic, Roy and Peter Forsberg — in Ontario and just missed playing with Sakic. When Sakic announced his retirement in 2009, Duchene was attending the Avalanche’s rookie orientation camp and even was at the news conference.

“It’s a big honor and it’s going to be special to be among some of my heroes, and some of my teammates as well,” Duchene said. “It should be fun. … I still really looked up to those three guys as a kid and it’s always fun being around those guys and being part of this franchise.”

Said the Minnesota-raised Johnson: “When I was a kid, I idolized a lot of the guys that are on the 20th team. I have a Sakic jersey I had when I was a little kid. It’s special when the fans vote you in as one of the best 20 guys of all time and it will be a fun night for sure.”

At last count, the only selections who definitely won’t be in Denver on Monday are Chris Drury plus the still-active John-Michael Liles (Carolina) and Paul Stastny (St. Louis). Claude Lemieux hopes to make it, but is a maybe at this point.

For Roy, there is a bit of a reunion factor.

“When you win the Stanley Cup and you are part of a group like this, it’s always special to see the guys again,” he said. “I understand this is not for the Stanley Cup, it’s for the 20th anniversary all-star team, but it’s nice to see the guys you won with.”

Terry Frei: tfrei@ denverpost.com or @TFrei

Spotlight on …

The Patrick Roy trade

When: Sunday is the 20th anniversary of the controversial trade that brought Roy to the Avalanche from the Montreal Canadiens.

What’s up: The timing might be coincidence, but the anniversary of the trade closely coincides with the Avalanche’s salute to its 20th anniversary team Monday night — a team that, of course, includes Roy.

Background: The lead-up to the famous trade has been well documented, most recently in an extensive All Things Avs blog last week. A few additional details have come out since December 1995, including that an earlier deal involving Roy coming to the Avalanche for Owen Nolen fell through when Canadiens general manager Serge Savard was fired in October. Nolen soon was traded to San Jose for Sandis Ozolinsh.

Frei’s take: I spoke with Roy again about all of this in New York during the Avalanche’s road trip that wrapped up Saturday. Understandably, he also has other things on his mind now and he has addressed it all many times, most notably in returns to Montreal.

“I don’t really have a reflection,” he said. “It’s part of me. I will move on. I try to focus on what I am doing now. To me, it’s part of the past. Sometimes things happen. I haven’t changed my approach to what happened that night. I still feel the same. Today, I move on and I am comfortable where I am.”

He did add: “I’ve said this in the past. I should not have reacted during the (game). That’s the person I was when I was playing. There was some good, there was some bad, and when you make a decision, you have to live with those. I always appreciated my years in Montreal. They were great fans and extremely supportive to me. I had a lot of respect for them.”