Video campaign to raise funds for ALS is great, but give for another disease, too.

Former president George W. Bush takes the Ice Bucket Challenge in Kennebunkport, Maine. (Photo: George W. Bush Presidential Center)

A friend of mine posted a video on Facebook showing him dumping a cold bucket of ice on his shirtless body. At first, I was dumbfounded, but at the end of the video he mentioned he did it to support donations to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). He invited me to partake in the challenge. After some thought, I declined. Instead, I gave blood to support those suffering from sickle cell disease.

As a medical student I have seen the disabling effects of ALS firsthand. Two years ago, I met an immobilized elderly white man confined to a hospital bed. He had lost the ability to breathe on his own and a ventilator was required to keep him alive. He had reached the end-stage of ALS, a progressive disease where the motor nerve cells of the brain and spinal cord degenerate and die off. These nerves are responsible for the voluntary movements we take for granted such as walking or speaking. Ultimately, difficulty breathing and swallowing leads to respiratory failure and pneumonia, the most common causes of death in ALS.

I have never met an elderly sickle cell patient. By age 60, more than half of people with sickle cell disease are dead. I remember my encounter with a young African-American male dealing with sickle cell disease. The red blood cells which carry oxygen vital to survival had become a double-edged sword. Due to a genetic defect, his cells had lost their flexible round shape and transformed into needle-shaped cells, clogging his blood vessels. He withered in agony as the clots formed in different parts of his body. The only cure is bone marrow transplantation. However, a bone marrow transplant is only possible for a small minority of people, comes with its own risks, and requires lifelong use of medications.

While both diseases can lead to death and lack a highly accessible cure, they have many contrasts. For one, the diseases differ by race. While ALS occurs mostly in Caucasians, sickle cell disease disproportionately affects African Americans. Between 12,000 and 30,000 Americans have ALS, while 70,000 and 100,000 Americans have sickle cell disease. From 2011-2013, the National Institutes of Health provided $39-$44 million to ALS research and $65-$70 million to sickle cell disease research. Taking the most conservative approach, $1,300 per capita per year is dedicated for ALS and $1,000 per capita per year for sickle cell disease.

According to Guidestar, an online database of U.S. non-profit organizations, the Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Association (ALSA) generated $5.5 million in revenue in the 2012-2013 fiscal year, while the Sickle Cell Disease Association of America (SCDAA) made $1.1 million in revenue.

There is one more important difference between the two diseases: ALS has a face. ALS is also known as "Lou Gehrig's Disease" in honor of the famous baseball player on the New York Yankees. Unfortunately, there is no champion for sickle cell disease. The current advocacy for sickle cell disease is not enough to make it a public agenda. Where there is no agency, there can be no alleviation.

The Ice Bucket Challenge demonstrates that everyday people can elicit change even from their backyard, using social media. Celebrity is not required; only a willingness to better the lives of those suffering from disease. This means that sickle cell disease can be moved from neglected to the public agenda.

Both these diseases are underfunded. Donations are welcome. But I would also challenge you to give blood for those suffering for sickle cell disease. Blood transfusions are used to treat acute organ damage in sickle cell disease and can reduce the risk of organ damage. A recent clinical trial found that monthly blood transfusions in affected children with evidence of prior "silent" stroke decreases the chance of future stroke by more than 50%. Giving blood is free and your body will replenish the blood donated in 1-2 days. You can save a life by this selfless act.

Need some more incentive? September is sickle cell disease month and the Red Cross will give out a coupon for a free haircut for anyone who donates blood.

Kunmi Sobowale is currently a fourth-year medical student at the University of Chicago.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the opinion front page or follow us on twitter @USATopinion or Facebook.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1pzHj56