Written by Brett Sholtis and Gary Haber, York Daily Record | Sep 17, 2015 4:00 PM

York dental products maker Dentsply International will merge with New York-based Sirona Dental Systems in an all-stock deal, a move the companies said will result in "the world's largest manufacturer of professional dental products and technologies."

A joint press release assessed the two companies' combined net revenue at $3.8 billion over the past year. The companies' combined equity, based on Sept. 14 closing prices, was about $13.3 billion. Several media reports put the merger value at $5.5 billion.

After the merger, Dentsply shareholders will own 58 percent of the combined company, the release said, while Sirona shareholders will own 42 percent. The deal is slated to close in the first quarter of 2016, the company said. The deal is subject to approval by both companies' shareholders and by regulators.

Sirona CEO Jeffrey Slovin will be the combined company's CEO. Dentsply CEO Bret Wise will be executive chairman, a role the news release said would include working with the CEO "to execute the corporate strategy and to integrate the companies and cultures."

The new company will be called Dentsply Sirona and will trade on the Nasdaq stock exchange with the ticker symbol XRAY. The company's global headquarters will be in York at the location of the current Dentsply headquarters. There will also be an international headquarters in Salzburg, Austria, the news release said.

Dentsply spokeswoman Meghan Smith said the "merger of equals" will allow Dentsply Sirona to offer a complete range of dental solutions, complementing Dentsply's portfolio of consumable dental products with Sirona's digital dental equipment.

Smith said it was too early to predict whether the merger might add jobs or initiate other changes at the York headquarters.

The new company will employ 13,000 people worldwide, she said, including about 600 scientists and engineers developing new dental technologies.

York County has seen big corporate mergers before, said Darrell Auterson, president and CEO of the York County Economic Alliance. He pointed to the 2010 merger of Snyder's of Hanover Inc. and Lance Inc. as an example that benefited both companies.

"This is a huge opportunity for both companies and will be strategic to their success around the globe," Auterson said of the proposed Dentsply-Sirona deal.

The dental equipment industry in the U.S. is a $12.8 billion business and growing. Fueled by a greater availability of dental insurance coverage for children and young adults the Affordable Care Act, and an increase in disposable income for workers, the industry is expected to grow 4.5 percent a year over the next five years, according to an IBISWorld report. It is expected to reach $15.9 billion in revenue in 2020, the report said.

The Dentsply-Sirona deal is the latest proposed combination among companies that make dental equipment. Zimmer Holdings Inc. said last year it would buy Biomet Inc. for $13.4 billion.

A Dentsply-Sirona merger would create a company with a broader line of products and a more diverse source of revenue than either one has separately, analysts say.

Dentsply is a large manufacturer and seller of consumable dental items - the products and small implements used during dental procedures - and specialized products used in procedures including root canals, orthodontia and dental implants. Sirona's revenue comes largely from selling dental equipment, including digital imaging equipment.

The combined company's sales force could potentially promote the two product lines to dentists or "potentially even designing their equipment products to optimally work with their consumables products," Jeff Johnson, an analyst at Baird, said in a research note.

Related

Dentsply to eliminated some back-office positions in York and Switzerland

Dentsply profit rises in fourth quarter

Dentsply first-quarter earnings exceed expectations

Dentsply earnings rise in second quarter