Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) speaks in Waukee, Iowa, in April. (Nati Harnik/Associated Press)

Give credit to Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.), former Florida governor Jeb Bush, former Texas governor Rick Perry and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie. Each one has presented a raft of specific, interesting ideas as part of a cohesive agenda. Unlike Hillary Clinton and some of their GOP rivals, they do not duck difficult policy issues.

Rubio rolled out a complete tax plan, a higher education plan, an economic revival plan, an immigration plan and numerous foreign policy proposals. Unlike Clinton, he is willing to take concrete positions on controversial issues. He certainly has a sweeping vision about generational change, but it is backed up with specific agenda items. Being prepared to be president in large part depends on knowing what you want to do once you get there.

Likewise, Bush has put out a series of proposals on refashioning government, health care, a 4 percent growth plan, foreign policy and immigration. Perry has laid out an economic empowerment plan, an anti-cyberterrorism plan, an energy plan and foreign policy proposals on everything from Russia to fighting terrorism. And Christie has put out an entitlement reform plan and a tax reform plan.

It is encouraging that these contenders have reform plans, with varying degrees of specificity, that can appeal widely to conservatives and independents. They are not relying on posturing or platitudes (“fight the special interests”), nor are they pitching pie-in-the-sky proposals (“abolish the IRS!”). The same cannot be said, however, of many other candidates.

Governors and ex-governors can recite what they have done at the state level. But basking in the glory of past accomplishments does not amount to an agenda. Perhaps that is the basis for a national agenda, but unless you are prepared to translate those into truly national initiatives, you will sound as though you are running for reelection for the office you currently hold.

A good number of the GOP candidates offer attitude (fight the special interests) but nothing that approaches a meaty agenda. What do they want to do on immigration other than oppose “amnesty” (whatever that means)? What’s their tax plan or Obamacare alternative?

In the debates, the candidates should be pressed to tell us what they are for, not simply what they’ve done or what they are against. Excuses for not having specific ideas — that one has just entered the race, for example — don’t fly. You have to question whether we want a candidate who wants very badly to be president but does not know what he wants to do once he gets there. If you don’t have an idea of the major initiatives you want to pursue — or are not willing to spell them out — then, like Clinton, you leave yourself open to the charge that all you are interested in is personal triumph and power.

In the debates, candidates should be pushed to put forth some concrete items — or acknowledge that their policy cupboard is bare. Here are a few:

What is the proper level of defense spending, and how would you pay for it? What do we do with illegal immigrants here? What reforms, if any, do we need in our legal immigration system? What parts of No Child Left Behind should be kept and which discarded, and what specifically should the federal government do with regard to K-12 education? What is the alternative to the current student loan system? What reforms are needed for Medicaid, Medicare and Social Security? Do you scrap the 2011 Budget Control Act, and if so, what replaces it? How should we address China’s cyberterrorism?

There are lots of these questions to be posed in debates and interviews. What we don’t need from candidates is political punditry (how they win, whom they appeal to), empty phrases (return power to the people!) or content-free promises (give every child a first-rate education). If that is all they have to offer, they aren’t ready to be president.