Melissa McCarthy isn’t stupid. She simply can’t be in her line of work. As a film actress she gives over the top performances, most of these which poke fun at her weight. To say that McCarthy is an incredibly self-aware comedian is an understatement. After all she’s living in an industry that rewards women who drop sizes and shun or shave down the waistlines of plus-sized actresses.

McCarthy in the same way that comedian Chris Farley did has made her weight service her comedy. That’s not so say that she’s promoting her choice of lifestyle, she’s just embracing it.

The 43-year-old became frank during an interview with Rolling Stone when it was brought up that her career hinges on some unhealthy habits. McCarthy doesn’t deny this fact and even admits that she could be a bit healthier.

“I could eat healthier, I could drink less. I should be learning another language and working out more, but I’m just always saying, ‘Ah, I could get hit by a bus tomorrow.”

Aside from her weight Melissa McCarthy shines playing a myriad of characters who are all brash, witty and as subtle as a bull in a china shop. In one of her films she’s actually referred to as a bull in a china shop. Most of these hilarious characters go on cursing tirades, which was hilariously showcased in Bridesmaids and The Heat.

Of her raunchy characters, McCarthy, who currently stars in the new film Tammy, told Rolling Stone:

“I really truly didn’t remember saying most of it.”

McCarthy is often described as loud, bold and brash, and for the comedian there was definitely a switch that allowed her to channel in all of these qualities through her work. For the actress this happened during her rebellious teenage years, which included drinking and shoplifting.

“I turned slightly nuts. We’d wrap sweaters around ourselves and walk out.”

Soon McCarthy will also add designer to her name as she plans to design plus figured clothes for women. She recently told People StyleWatch:

“We’re getting closer to starting a line. I hate to mention it now because people are going to say, ‘You’ve been talking about it for a year!’ but it is getting closer. I’m definitely excited!”

As for her film career it doesn’t look like McCarthy is slowing down anytime soon. In addition to Tammy, the star is rumored to co-star in The Heat 2, and has four projects in various stages of development.