— To many people, the idea of a rolling keg full of coffee sounds like a little bit of heaven.

And if so, Joel Davis of Commune + Co. coffee is pedaling a small bit of heaven around Ybor City in a tricycle.

Davis is a one-man coffee entrepreneur who is bringing a radically different kind of coffee to the market, cold-brewed under pressurized nitrogen — a process that a brave few cafes are trying around the world — so coffee flows from a beer keg tap in a way that closely resembles pouring a pint of Guinness, with billions of bubbles condensing down to a deep, dark brew.

“This is Florida, and it’s pretty hot for most of the year,” Davis says while filling a “growler” full of his special cold brew. “A cold coffee can be really refreshing, and this is a new way to make it.”

Davis’ chosen vehicle for bringing this brew to the people: A custom-built tricycle that carries his entire keg/coffee/tap setup from place to place in Ybor City — at least until he opens up in a new cafe planned for a renovated gas station/cafe just north of Ybor City. That kind of experimentation is actually becoming quite popular in coffee circles as more foodies begin focusing on different and extreme methods for brewing java, from the now-popular “pour over” method to more extreme “siphon” methods that are now common in Japan.

❖ ❖ ❖

Tampa lately has a booming coffee culture.

For nearly a century, the Naviera Coffee Mills has operated a coffee roastery on Seventh Avenue in Ybor City, frequently producing a warm coffee scent that wafts across the downtown area.

Kahwa Coffee has opened up a half-dozen cafe locations in the central Tampa area, including one in a renovated space on Henderson Boulevard. Buddy Brew Coffee doubled the size of its cafe on Kennedy Boulevard, and the space is regularly packed. The Buddy Brew space within the Oxford Exchange has hosted “Espresso Art” contests in which baristas compete to form the perfect color and shape within an espresso cup.

The University of Tampa plans to build a mammoth-sized cafe on Kennedy Boulevard as part of a new multiuse building now under construction.

Brewing coffee with pressurized gas is by far one of the more experimental methods on the coffee scene globally. Stumptown Coffee Roasters in Portland and Cuvee Coffee in Austin are using the method, and some West Coast coffee shops are serving that company’s provisions, while others are experimenting with carbonated coffees.

For Davis, the entrepreneurship road literally started at the street level.

He has long worked with coffee, and was a barista for Buddy Brew when that company opened up in the Oxford Exchange.

Soon after, he broke off to begin his own company and came across a radically different method for making coffee. Rather than use hot water, or pressurized hot water, as is the standard across the globe, Davis and some friends wondered what would happen if they put coffee grounds and water into an aluminum pressure vessel like those used for whipped cream at cafes. It worked, without adding heat, and produced an effervescent froth that seems to “rain” down in a glass and ultimately settles into a near-black brew that has almost no bitterness. He tells customers to try it first without sugar or cream, as the brew doesn’t need it.

He experimented with different hardware, and ultimately found a system that worked. Rather than park at one location, he decided to make a one-man mobile cafe, and he commissioned a utility tricycle that carries a custom wood box with the keg inside and traditional beer taps poking out the top.

The first night he took it on a test drive around Ybor City, the police pulled him over.

“They thought I was driving around beer,” he said. “But I didn’t even have anything inside yet, not even coffee.”

Davis won a mobile food license from the city of Tampa and began cutting deals with local bars and restaurants to park his bike out front and found himself in business. Many days, he sets up in the Gaspar’s Grotto outside patio, or inside the new Ybor Daily Market, and promotes himself to the hipster/digerati crowd as a complement to their meet-ups.

❖ ❖ ❖

Then Davis had his big break.

He made a deal with the restaurant designer and now property developer Deborah Ramos to open a cafe in a historic, renovated, former gas station at East 15th Avenue and North 12th Street, just north of Ybor City.

“We’re excited about this because we’ll be bringing together very different groups,” Ramos said. “I was really looking for something to revive the property.”

Ramos is accustomed to unusual projects, as she helped design the new Ferg’s restaurant/bar on Channelside Drive that has a patio out back made from repurposed shipping containers. If construction on her site goes according to plan, the new coffee shop could be open by late spring.

Coffee is a big market to tap. Globally, the coffee industry ranks No. 2 in exports behind the oil industry, and the United States spends an estimated $18 billion each year on specialty coffees, according to the International Coffee Organization.

With his experimentation, Davis is part of a huge trend in coffee.

“It’s a compelling time because there are so many different kinds of methods coming out,” said Kevin Sinnott, a well-known expert in the coffee markets who now produces the CoffeeCon industry trade shows. “We’re entering an age of discovery where coffee is now a foodie item, a culinary art — and that’s after coffee brewing really didn’t change since the 1960s and the age of the percolator.”

❖ ❖ ❖

With wine, Sinnott said, the bulk of the cultivation and science is done by the time the consumer reaches for the bottle: simply pour and drink.

With coffee, however, the brewing and serving can completely transform the same bean into different flavors. There is the gentle “pour over” technique, where grounds are placed in a cone-shaped paper filter and hot water is poured over it, letting the brew drip gently into the cup, which produces a more sweet and mellow taste. And then there is a “siphon” method that vigorously mixes the grounds with near-boiling hot water that extracts far more elements from the grind and produces a more “aggressive” flavor.

Of course there is the boom in sales of “K-Cup” coffee makers, which helps people try more different varieties of coffee, and Sinnott notes more mainstream brand name coffee makers are starting to produce more upscale machines that can brew at different temperatures and styles.

Either way, Sinnott said, hot water tends to extract a bitterness from the grind that many people feel needs to be offset with milk or sugar. Cold-brew techniques, however, tend to draw out some of the flavor from the grind, and less of the bitterness, but tend to impart a less deep flavor.

Davis hopes building out a full cafe shop will help popularize his method of making coffee, though he’ll also have traditional styles such as espressos. But for those who take to the new cold-brew/nitrogen method, he has one other innovation: The Coffee Growler, a 32-ounce bottle he fills and sells for $15 apiece to customers to keep in their fridge at home. As with the craft beer industry, there’s a discount for bringing back the bottle for a refill. $3 off.

rmullins@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7919

Twitter: @DailyDeadline