.

Dick and Jackie Van Buren, who celebrated their 45th wedding anniversary last month, own Printnovation, www.printnovation.com, in Longmont. ( Matthew Jonas )

As far as Dick and Jackie Van Buren can find, they are the only ones in the United States that do what they do.

The couple, who celebrated their 45th wedding anniversary last month, owns Printnovation, printnovation.com, in Longmont. Although the product -- cloth bags with a printed image -- is not new, the concept is all theirs. They use a digital printing process instead of the traditional screen or rubber stamp printing. This allows them to provide custom orders of any size. They are willing to print one bag if that is what is needed.

"We pride ourselves on doing something that no one can or is willing to do," Jackie said.

They spent most of their marriage being transferred all over the country for Dick's job with IBM, and it was IBM that brought them to Boulder. Jackie had work as a substitute teacher as the moves made it difficult to teach full time. The couple began looking into opening a business and in 1996 started Bags Inc., which provided retail packaging. The business would eventually evolve into Printnovation, which focuses mainly on cloth or paper bags.

"Original concept was that we were trying to find a business that was sort of low tech industry and see if we could apply technology to a traditional low tech business," Dick said. Retail packaging seemed to fit that criterion.

Advertisement

At first, the couple worked part time at the new business while one of their two daughters ran it, but Dick grew tired of business travel as his position had him going to the Far East quite often.

"Everyone thinks it's so romantic; every Marriot hotel looks every other Marriot hotel," Dick said, "When you start to get personalized signed Christmas cards from the flight attendants, no, I'm not doing this anymore."

He retired in 1999 and worked for another company until 2002 before going to work full time at the family business. In 2008, they moved the business from Boulder to Longmont.

Jackie and Dick have grown used to working together. "We each have our strengths," Jackie said, "Working in a family business is different. He's not my husband here, he's my boss."

"It's like everything else, I guess the good news and the bad news is I can't fire them if I get upset," Dick said.

The couple, like many in the area, has had to relocate due to the flood. They had moved to Lyons in 2011.

"We loved the area, the people were nice, the weather was great. It was an all around good experience," Jackie said.

They now are leasing a little house in Frederick and right now the future is uncertain.

"I don't know what we are going to try to do, Dick's dream is to moving to Hawaii," Jackie said.