Re­pub­lic­ans love run­ning against Obama­care, and in the half-dec­ade since the law passed, they’ve rid­den that strategy to a host of con­gres­sion­al and gubernat­ori­al vic­tor­ies. They’ve been par­tic­u­larly suc­cess­ful in lever­aging the law to oust mod­er­ate Demo­crats from purple states. In that re­gard, as Ken­tucky Re­pub­lic­ans hope to re­take the Gov­ernor’s Man­sion this Novem­ber, the anti-Obama­care cam­paign strategy ap­pears ideal. But in Ken­tucky, it’s not so simple, be­cause in Ken­tucky, the law has had tre­mend­ous suc­cess in get­ting state res­id­ents in­sured.

More than half a mil­lion Ken­tucki­ans signed up for private in­sur­ance or Medi­caid through the state’s Obama­care ex­change. Since the ex­change—known as “Kynect”—launched in 2013, the state has cut its un­in­sured rate by more than 40 per­cent. And be­cause Ken­tucky, un­like many red and purple states, set up its own ex­change, the state’s as­pir­ing in­sur­ance buy­ers were spared the early fail­ures of Health­Care.gov. In exit polling from the 2014 Sen­ate race, 50 per­cent of voters said Kynect was func­tion­ing “well” or “very well,” com­pared with 37 per­cent who as­sessed the ex­change neg­at­ively.

The ex­change’s pop­ular­ity, however, didn’t stop Re­pub­lic­an Sen. Mitch Mc­Con­nell from at­tack­ing Obama­care en route to a massive vic­tory last year over Demo­crat Al­is­on Lun­der­gan Grimes. Mc­Con­nell, who has pushed re­lent­lessly for re­peal of the law, as the top Re­pub­lic­an in the Sen­ate, ad­ded a Ken­tucky twist for his state race: He at­tacked Obama­care as a whole, but said Kynect could sur­vive even if the fed­er­al law came off the books. (The claim was chal­lenged by Demo­crats, who noted that the ex­change de­pends in part on Obama­care sub­sidies and man­dates.)

It’s un­clear, however, wheth­er a Re­pub­lic­an gubernat­ori­al can­did­ate will ap­ply the same strategy, or if that rhet­or­ic­al line will sur­vive the party’s com­pet­it­ive four-way primary. Both the over­all law and Kynect are un­pop­u­lar among Re­pub­lic­an voters, and the race’s two un­der­dogs have already pledged to scrap the ex­change en­tirely. And therein lies the dif­fi­culty for the two fa­vor­ites. If they coddle Kynect in the primary, they risk los­ing the base and watch­ing the gen­er­al elec­tion from the couch. But if they pledge to do away with the ex­change, they risk drift­ing too far to the right of the state’s swing voters—and hand­ing a health care ad­vance to the state’s Demo­crat­ic can­did­ate, At­tor­ney Gen­er­al Jack Con­way.

So far, the two GOP front-run­ners—state Ag­ri­cul­ture Com­mis­sion­er James Comer and former Louis­ville Metro Coun­cil mem­ber Hal Hein­er—have been tight-lipped over what they would do with Kynect.

Hein­er’s cam­paign was re­luct­ant to of­fer much by way of com­ment on the top­ic. Spokes­man Doug Al­ex­an­der would say only this: “Hal Hein­er op­posed Obama­care from its in­cep­tion, and sup­ports ef­forts by Sen­at­ors Mc­Con­nell and [Rand] Paul to re­peal the law.” Al­ex­an­der wouldn’t re­spond to ad­di­tion­al ques­tions on wheth­er Hein­er agreed with Mc­Con­nell’s state­ment that Kynect could per­sist even ab­sent Obama­care.

In a state­ment provided to Na­tion­al Journ­al, Comer de­scribed Kynect as “just a tool to ex­pand Medi­caid.” In­deed, 80 per­cent of people who got in­sur­ance through Kynect did so by en­rolling in Medi­caid. (Ken­tucky’s ex­change is one of the few in which the in­sur­ance ex­change’s only portal can also be used to con­nect with Medi­caid.) But in­stead of re­peal­ing the pro­gram, Comer says he would call for re­forms, in­clud­ing a pro­pos­al “that Ken­tucky re­quires Medi­caid par­ti­cipants to reen­roll in Medi­caid every two years like every­one with private health in­sur­ance plans have to do.”

Former Ken­tucky Su­preme Court Justice Will Scott and Mc­Con­nell’s 2014 primary chal­lenger, Matt Bev­in, mean­while, have been un­equi­voc­al. Bev­in and Scott are call­ing for an end to the Kynect ex­change and the trans­fer of the pro­gram’s private in­sur­ance en­rollees to the fed­er­al ex­change. Scott’s lo­gic is this: “The only thing we are get­ting out of a state-run Obama­care ex­change is the priv­ilege of pay­ing for it. When we shut ours down, the feds will come in and pay for the whole thing.”

Ac­cord­ing to a spokes­per­son at the Ken­tucky Cab­in­et for Health and Fam­ily Ser­vices, Kynect cur­rently costs the state roughly $28 mil­lion a year to ad­min­is­ter. States were giv­en fed­er­al funds to set up their ex­changes, but they are now re­spons­ible for the costs of ad­min­is­ter­ing them.

Not­ably, no Re­pub­lic­an in the race has yet called for a re­peal of Medi­caid ex­pan­sion, sym­bol­iz­ing the lim­its of run­ning against a law that’s be­come in­creas­ingly in­grained. “If we start fol­low­ing the law, we’re stuck fol­low­ing the law. The apt ana­logy is a roach motel—you can check in, but you can’t check out,” Dav­id Adams, Scott’s cam­paign man­ager, said of the dif­fi­culties of tak­ing back Medi­caid ex­pan­sion.

The ques­tion of Kynect’s fu­ture is un­likely to go away be­fore Novem­ber. In the primary, it is one of the few is­sues that di­vides the GOP field, giv­ing Scott and Bev­in an in­cent­ive to ac­cen­tu­ate it as they try to make up ground. And, in the gen­er­al, it prom­ises to be a key is­sue: Ques­tions about Mc­Con­nell’s view on Kynect were largely hy­po­thet­ic­al—sen­at­ors don’t get a say over their state’s ex­changes—but after the Novem­ber elec­tion, the fate of the state’s ex­change will rest largely in the new gov­ernor’s hands.