If there were ever a time to join the fight for women’s reproductive rights, it is now. With abortion constantly under attack, leading to diminished access to health services, it is vital that we continue to put power behind the pro-choice movement. Luckily, there are countless organizations (and activists) doing amazing work to ensure that women’s reproductive rights are protected.

Take a look at the following 6 videos to inspire you to join the fight for reproductive justice:

1. Time to Act

Last fall the Center for Reproductive Rights launched the Draw the Line campaign calling on Americans to join together against anti-choice forces and sign the Center’s Bill of Reproductive Rights. The goal was to send a serious statement to Congress and the President that they must guarantee and protect reproductive rights as fundamental human rights and stop attacks by politicians who want to take those rights away. In that time the Center has gathered nearly 250,000 signatures in support of their Bill of Reproductive Rights.

This month the Center released a video in support of the campaign, asking pro-choice supporters to unite on September 25, 2013 and host events across the country to rally against fierce anti-choice opposition.

Watch the Center’s latest video, Time to Act, now. You can check out other star-studded videos from the Center here.

2. Vision 2020

Did you know that 222 million women and girls around the world still lack access to the contraceptives they want and need? Even here in the United States, women still struggle to get access to emergency contraception despite approval from the FDA.

International Planned Parenthood has a vision for a world where this would no longer be the case.

3. Dollars and Sense

If women around the world had access to modern contraception, the results would be astonishing.

In 2012 alone access to contraception could have prevented:

54 million unplanned pregnancies

26 million abortions

79,000 material deaths

1.1 million infant deaths

Does this make any sense?

Population Action International doesn’t think so. Take a look at their latest video, Dollars and Sense: The Case for Contraception, and find out more about their work here.

4. No Joke. Choice Matters. Everywhere.

Imagine needing to get your husband’s consent to get birth control or having to wait for hours on end to see a doctor, only to be asked to come back the next day or go to another clinic miles away.

It sounds crazy, but it happens.

Check out Pathfinder International‘s video about these harsh realities for women around the world.

5. 20 Condoms

If this video doesn’t pump you up, I don’t know what will.

This amazing video is part Forward Thinking‘s sex ed video series created by and for youth. I cannot wait to see what other videos they come up with because this one is too good!

6. HANDS OFF Dance for Reproductive Justice

Ok, no seriously. Why wouldn’t you be join the fight when you can dance it out and change the lyrics to Call Me Maybe?

These women make me so proud to be a pro-choice feminist! And really sad that I don’t live in Michigan.

Have you come across any inspiring videos for reproductive rights? Please share in the comments!

Photo Credit: Thinkstock