Health Congress Is Poised To Pass Significant Legislation To Help The Disabled CREDIT: AP Photo/Charles Dharapak House Financial Services and General Government subcommittee Chairman Rep. Ander Crenshaw, R-Fla., sponsor of theAchieving a Better Life Experience (ABLE) Act

In a rare show of bipartisanship, the House recently passed what’s considered “the broadest legislation to help the disabled in nearly a quarter century,” giving families and advocates a glimmer of hope in the ongoing fight to meet the needs of a vulnerable population.

The bill, titled the Achieving A Better Life Experience (ABLE) Act, would allow states to establish a program modeled after tax-free college saving accounts. If enacted, families would be able to deposit up to $14,000 annually in accounts at financial institutions with which they would pay for long-term needs, including education, transportation, and health care.

People older than the age of 25 qualify if they are diagnosed with a disability that creates “marked and severe functional limitations.” In all, ABLE account holders would be able to accrue $100,000 in savings without losing eligibility for Social Security and Medicaid, a significant jump in the current asset limit of $2,000.

“Today is a tremendous day for people with disabilities,” William Daroff of the Jewish Federations of North America, which co-chairs the Jewish Disability Network, told Reuters after the House approved the measure. “We look forward to working with President Obama and the 74 senators co-sponsoring the ABLE Act, and we urge lawmakers to move forward with this bill.”

If it passes through the Senate, ABLE will stand on the shoulders of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), a law enacted in 1990 that provides legal safeguards against discrimination for the disabled. A key part of the legislation required that employers accommodate the needs of their disabled employees, except in cases where doing so would cause “undue burden.”

Today, the ADA protects more than 56 million people — nearly one-fifth of the American population — with a disability, nearly half of whom have received a “severe” designation. In 2008, the scope of disabilities under the legislation broadened to include loss of vision, speech impediments, developmental and mental disorders, immobility, and debilitating health issues. Some contingent of disability advocates, however, argue that categorizing some conditions — autism and deafness, for example — enables discrimination and social prejudice against those groups.

Nonetheless, disabled people still face financial hardship, even with government programs for the group accounting for more than 12 percent of the federal budget. Although disability insurance replaces a portion of a disabled person’s income when they’re no longer able to work, it doesn’t cover the cost of medical care and long-term services, affecting populations older than the age of 65. Private insurance and Medicare also don’t do much in providing long-term care, with coverage for an extensive stay in a nursing home to require that a person be hospitalized for that condition 100 days prior.

Even with Supplemental Security Income, more than 70 percent of families with one or more disabled children have difficulty paying for food, housing, and utilities. Data compiled by the National Council on Disability shows that disabled Americans are three times as likely to live in poverty as their non-disabled counterparts.

For disabled adults, part of that income disparity stems from an inability of many to enter the workforce, often times as a result of their condition. Less than 20 percent of disabled people hold jobs, compared to more than two in three non-disabled people.

While the ADA has included the disabled among the protected classes, some people argue that the bill hasn’t been effective in holding employers accountable to creating more inclusionary hiring practices and paying their disabled employees fairly. For example, a special wage certificate under Section 14(c) of the 1938 Fair Labor Standards Act allows employers to pay their disabled workers significantly less than the minimum wage.

“This is the biggest labor scam in this country right now that nobody’s doing anything about,” former New York Gov. David Paterson, who is legally blind, told the Press & Sun-Bulletin earlier this year. “It reminds me of the attitude about slavery, where if you try to stick up for the workers they try to tell you ‘Oh they’re doing what’s best for them.'”

The bipartisan coalition of congressmen and women — 404 members in total — that voted for ABLE believe that the legislation would do what’s best for America’s disabled population by providing a means of financial freedom and stability. Earlier this week, Sens. Bob Casey (D-PA) and Richard Burr (R-NC) led a rallying cry among the lawmakers in their chamber to pass ABLE, which now has 74 sponsors.

While ABLE’s path to the White House looks clear now more than ever, it has its share of critics — including the right-wing think tank the Heritage Foundation, whose members argue that the bill could encourage Social Security fraud and abuse.