That officer happened to have a K-9 named Thor with him that hit on the car when he started sniffing.

Officers discovered over 34 pounds of meth, all wrapped up in 20 plastic bundles.

More than 30 pounds of drugs are now off the streets; discovered on an interstate many of us drive every day.

The major meth bust landed four people behind bars.

Police have identified the suspect's as Luis Samaniego-Pacheco, 20, Alma Pacheco-De La Cruz, 46, Bianca Samanigo, 17, Miguel Samaniego-Mendiaz, 53. Who knows where those four were headed with all that meth.

Arrest records show they claim to be from Arizona, but now they are all in custody at the Oklahoma County Jail.

Court records show they were driving eastbound along I-40 last week, when an officer with the drug interdiction team noticed them failing to signal as they changed lanes. The officer pulled over the blue Chevy Trailblazer near the Rockwell Ave. exit. But when he started asking questions, things just didn't add up.

"He started speaking with them, the driver started getting nervous," said Mark Myers with the Oklahoma County Sheriff's Office. "He didn't even have a driver's license."

That officer happened to have a K-9 with him that hit on the car when he started sniffing.

"After the deputy was able to secure everyone, he went ahead and searched the vehicle," said Myers. "And he did find a pretty large load of methamphetamine."

It was more than 34 pounds to be exact, all wrapped up in 20 plastic bundles.

"We're just glad he was able to get that off the streets," said Myers.

This seizure is just one of the latest drug busts done by the Central Oklahoma Metro Interdiction Team, or COMIT, which consists of officers from the Oklahoma City Police Department, Oklahoma County Sheriff's Office and Oklahoma County DA's office.

Myers says these officers specifically look for drug traffickers traveling along the Oklahoma interstates.

"We see a lot of drug trafficking coming up from the Mexico border, up I-35 north," said Myers. "And then east to west along I-40 that runs from California to the Carolinas. We do see a lot of drugs being transported along those corridors."

Right now all four of those people who were arrested are being held on a $25,000 bond, accused of aggregated trafficking. Two of them have a hold with Immigration.

The Oklahoma County Sheriff's office says the street value of all that meth is about $20,000 a pound, or around $680,000.