JACKSON, MI – Allegiance Health announced Tuesday it has signed a letter of intent to join Detroit-based Henry Ford Health System.

Under the plan, Henry Ford would become Allegiance's parent organization.

Here are some answers to questions:

How long will this take?

President and CEO Georgia Fojtasek said officials believes they can obtain all regulatory approvals in 120 days.

Does this mean cuts, consolidations and job losses?

Allegiance is planning on people keeping their jobs and is not anticipating closures. The focus is on serving the community, not consolidation, Fojtasek said. This is about growth. Henry Ford would make investments related to care in Jackson. It would look for efficiencies in areas such as purchasing and information technology, Chief Operating Officer Bob Riney said.

How will patients be affected? "We want to keep care local and expand ability to keep care local," Fojtasek said.

Why is this necessary?

There have been enormous changes in health care as the federal Affordable Care Act has been implemented. There are moves in the way services are funded and health care is delivered, and Allegiance will be better able to survive and weather these changes as part of a larger system, Fojtasek said. There are advantages to size. The systems can share resources. Throughout the United States, health systems are seeking affiliations and alignments with other health systems and physician groups to reduce the cost of care while advancing community health.

How is this different that Allegiance's failed plan to merge with the University of Michigan Health System in Ann Arbor?

The reasons the merger did not come to fruition have never been made clear and Fojtasek would not discuss them on Tuesday. "The discussions we've had going forward from that with other health systems, we were really focused on what our priorities were, community, community health, being able to keep care local and our commitment to our people." Those goals, Allegiance believes, can be met with this plan.

Will Allegiance maintain its identity and brand?

That is to be determined.

Was this a money-focused decision?

If it was, Fojtasek said, Allegaince would have selected the highest bidder. "That is not what we looked at." It is true, Allegiance authorities have to be "good business people," but they have to do that while being exceptional at care and investment in health.

What about leadership?

Allegiance will retain its leadership together with leaders from Henry Ford.

What is in this for Henry Ford?

Riney said Henry Ford believes it is in its strategic interest to diversify its portfolio and have greater influence in other parts of the state beyond southeastern Michigan, where they have a wide array of services, medical centers and hospitals.