America is livid over the government shutdown and that outrage is extending to celebrities in Hollywood. Numerous A-listers, including Rihanna, Adam Levine and Jimmy Kimmel, have all taken to Twitter to react to the second day of the government shutdown, which occurred as a result of Congress failing to reach an agreement on funding in the wake of Obamacare.

#governmentshutdown remains one of the top trending hashtags worldwide on Twitter and several celebrities are using it in their tweets related to the political crisis. Check out the celebrity thoughts on Obamacare, Republicans and the government shutdown below!

Adam Levine flashes his adorable smile while giving a performance for fans at NYC's Rockefeller Center.

Conan O’Brien: "Obamacare begins tomorrow, and you know what that means! Wait, actually, no, you probably don't know what that means."

Jimmy Kimmel: "Hey guys - I'm about to shut the government down on the west coast so if you need anything, ask MexiCanada."

John Legend: "I leave the country for a couple weeks and all hell breaks loose. I'm coming back Saturday, America. I hope there's air traffic control."

Rainn Wilson: "Places that work awesome without government: Somalia."

Michael Ian Black: "Now that the government is shut down, what time do you guys want to go loot Costco?"

Piers Morgan: "In 10 minutes, the Government of the world's great superpower is shutting down. How utterly pathetic. #governmentshutdown #CNN"

Jimmy Kimmel's parody video of Kanye West's recent BBC Radio interview got plenty of laughs, but the rapper wasn't smiling about it.

Russell Simmons: "The Tea Party needs to take a seat!! My thoughts on the #GovernmentShutdown…"

Mario Lopez: "Just landed in LA. And the #governmentshutdown .... Not a good look"

Judd Apatow: "@billeethekid: @JuddApatow what movies will u watch while govt is shut down?” JoJo Dancer Your Life is calling"

Adam Levine (to TMZ photographers): "Government needs to get their s*it together."

Rihanna: "Money on my mind #pouritup."

RuPaul’s Drag Race: "#government shutdown…sashay away…."