Paul Ryan seems to care little about deadlines. He largely ignored the big Dec. 11 deadline — the day by which he needed to fund the government. The speaker says he's more focused on getting things right than any specific date on the calendar. And he wouldn't commit to meeting next week's funding deadline. “Arbitrary,” he calls the formerly panic-inducing dates.

The negotiations between Ryan (R-Wis.) and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) are as secretive as they were under John Boehner. No one knows anything — not even appropriators, who are supposed to write these kinds of bills. When Boehner was speaker, this kind of stalemate would force the cable networks into countdown mode, and send lawmakers into a tizzy.

Story Continued Below

Instead, a calm has enveloped Washington because of a simple assumption: Ryan will, somehow, get this done. How? No one has an answer for that.

“I think there is more hope among most of my colleagues, but I'm sitting there listening to Paul this morning give his report of where they are and what they are doing and stuff like that, and I said, 'It sounds an awful like Boehner left the talking points in the top drawer of the desk because it's exactly what John would have said,'” said Idaho Rep. Mike Simpson (R-Idaho), a former Statehouse speaker and veteran appropriator.

Just months into his speakership, and facing the threat of a government shutdown, Ryan has managed to defy political gravity, keeping nerves calm, anger at bay and trust intact. Unlike Boehner, he’s managed to hold secret talks with Democratic leaders over government funding without incurring the wrath of his conservatives colleagues.

It doesn't hurt that Boehner did some of the heavy lifting for Ryan, muscling through a modest increase in spending caps to ease eventual passage of a larger omnibus deal.

But for roughly the past two months, Ryan’s operation has made a series of small, but conscious and strategic decisions to keep his conference tranquil, and give him enough room to get a deal. Case in point: On Friday, Ryan's House is nearly certain to pass a five-day government funding bill to allow for more talks. If Boehner were to suggest that, Republicans would assume he was cutting a deal with the devil himself.

But Ryan has been methodical in his approach. Ryan has explained to Republicans that there is no feasible way for the GOP to craft a bill that could pass without Democratic votes — the math, he said, wasn't there. Enough Republicans have vowed to not support any bill without an increase in defense spending, and another swath of lawmakers have said there is too much spending. Ryan’s message was meant to lay the groundwork for some sort of compromise with Democrats.

And many Republicans believe that Ryan inherited this budget deal — and complicated political environment — from Boehner, who only moved half of the 12 appropriations bills.

Although Ryan is operating in secret, refusing to divulge even the most basic details of the talks, he has satiated both appropriators and the rank and file by offering enough scraps of knowledge about the process behind the negotiations. For example, Ryan has played up the fact that Pelosi and Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) are in different places on several aspects of the bargaining. He’s explained that he is swapping proposals with Democrats, and has sometimes had to exercise patience in waiting for a reply.

“I think that he's keeping us updated on the process even though we're not updated on the particulars, and I think most of us understand this is not the way he intends to operate, he's still cleaning out the barn, so to speak,” said Rep. Matt Salmon (R-Ariz.), a member of the House Freedom Caucus. “The way the table was set before, there really wasn't a lot of alternatives for how this thing was going to play out.”

And instead of working around the appropriators, he has worked with them.

“Well, leadership is dealing with the policy things, like whether or not to tack on the tax bill, and that type of thing,” Appropriations Chairman Hal Rogers (R-Ky.) said. “We’re doing the rest of it.”

House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.) has helped, as well. He spearheaded the drafting of legislation that would overhaul the Visa Waiver Program, which many Republicans see as an important deterrent for keeping terrorists off of U.S. soil.

And, in a key shift from Boehner’s speakership, Ryan has not promised to fight Democrats until the bitter end. Boehner, on the other hand, oftentimes thought it wise to first pass a bill that, for example, defunded Obamacare, knowing full well that he would have to cave just weeks later.

“Here’s the difference,” said Rep. Tim Huelskamp (R-Kan.), who, with the help of Ryan’s vow of openness, won a seat on the same steering committee that stripped him of his seat on the agriculture panel in 2012. “Boehner would over promise and under deliver. This morning Paul Ryan was under promising and hopefully, he’ll over deliver.”

That’s still the big question: How will people react when Ryan returns to the gigantic 247-member Republican Conference without exacting a pound of flesh from Democrats. For example, inside the GOP leadership, there’s little hope for any language dealing with refugees from Syria and they have practically given up on stripping funding from Planned Parenthood. Republicans are likely to score a win by lifting the oil-export ban, but that's hardly enough to prompt a victory lap.

Ryan isn’t totally happy, either. As December has dragged on, Ryan has sat in meetings, and grown increasingly frustrated with the slow pace of the talks. He has cut deals in the past — big budget agreements, trade pacts — but Ryan has never been in leadership, and the back and forth with Democrats has irked him. The counteroffers have come too slowly, aides in leadership say, and the differences at this point seem insurmountable to many.

It’s already messed up Ryan’s plans. He had to scrap a fundraiser in New York Wednesday, and a speech in Wisconsin Friday.