Christine Appel with Project Greatest Gift sits by a stack of Christmas presents at her home in Erie on Thursday. ( JEREMY PAPASSO )

More than 90 children in Weld and Adams counties will have a very merry Christmas this year thanks to the members of White Fields Community Church in Longmont.

Members of the congregation have bought gifts for children of low-income foster families in the two counties for four years, but this year a miscommunication amplified the program.

Church member Christine Appel launched Project Greatest Gift in 2010 after adopting her 4-year-old foster son, Michael.

"We thought we knew what we were getting into, but you really don't know until it happens," Appel said. "There is a lot of grief and loss for these kids. They're being taken from everything they've known and maybe had to leave all of their belongings behind and those losses are amplified by the holidays."

Appel reached out to Adams County, where the Appels are registered, to provide gifts for children who were part of the county's holiday donation program for foster families. The church began including children from Weld County in 2011 and provided gifts for about 20 children each year. But when Appel contacted Weld County this year, she took on more than she expected.

"I asked for 20 kids but got 20 families," Appel said.

The congregation has stepped up this year, providing gifts for 91 children in the two counties, she said.

Now, that Appel knows her congregation will provide for the need, she plans to raise the bar and take on at least 100 children next year, she said.

Advertisement

White Fields does not have any names left this year, but the holidays have inspired other drives that are still seeking donations and support.

Here are a few local opportunities to give this season.

Share the Joy Christmas Decoration Drive

Longmont resident Lisa Truesdale will be handing out free Christmas decorations and fresh-cut trees to families affected by the September flood. Donations will be distributed at Twin Peaks Mall, 1250 S. Hover St. in Longmont, on Sunday from 1 to 4 p.m. next door to Fabulous Furnishings Consignment.

Ivy Hodge, 3, and her father, Nathan, find Christmas decorations they like Saturday. ( CLIFF GRASSMICK )

Mountain View Fire Rescue Annual Holiday Toy Drive

Mountain View Fire Rescue is collecting new, unwrapped toys that will be distributed in surrounding communities and to the Children's Hospital of Denver through Nov. 30. Drop-off locations include the Mountain View Fire Rescue stations at 8500 Niwot Road, Niwot, 50 Bonanza Drive, Erie, and 161 Perry Lane, Dacono, the administration office at 3561 N. Stagecoach Road, Longmont and Vista Ridge Community Center, 2750 Vista Parkway, Erie. For more information, visit http://bit.ly/18uDftC.

Boulder County Housing & Human Services drives

The Family-To-Family Holiday Program is seeking donations, gift cards or gifts for clients of the Child Protection, Adolescent and Adult Protection programs. For more information, call 303-441-1050 or email Debbie Ramrez at dramirez@bouldercounty.org.

Family Self-Sufficiency's Holiday Gift Sponsor program is seeking donations, gift cards and sponsors for clients and their families. For more information, contact Katie Frye at 303-441-3923 or kfrye@bouldercounty.org.

Boulder County Housing Authority Senior Services is seeking gift cards to local grocery or discount retail stores for clients. For more information, contact Kris Durso at 303-519-7152 or kdurso@bouldercounty.org.

The Casa de la Esperanza Learning Center is seeking donations of school supplies, winter clothing, grocery gift cards and presents for children. For more information, contact Carlota Loya-Hernandez at 303-678-6220 or cloya@bouldercounty.org.

I Have a Dream Foundation, Adopt-A-Center

The I Have a Dream Foundation is seeking donations for its Adopt-A-Center program that provides needed items from calculators to games to area organizations. For more information, contact Anna Archer at 303-444-3636 ext. 20 or aaf@ihaveadreamboulder.org.

The Well's canned food drive

The Well is collecting nonperishable food items that will be delivered to families in need the week of Christmas. Donations can be dropped off at The Well's new location, 1834 Main St., in Longmont on Wednesdays and Saturdays from 5 to 7 p.m. in December. For more information, contact Richard Honey at richardhoney20@gmail.com.

Anna's Farm for Jamestown Holiday Effort

About 20 neighbors in Lafayette's Anna's Farm neighborhood are collecting money to buy grocery gift cards for Jamestown resident affected by the flood. Checks should be made out to Donation for AF Jamestown Fund and mailed to:

Town of Jamestown

PO Box 20661

Boulder, CO 80308-3361

Longmont Rotary Winter Warmth Coat Drive

Rotary Club of Longmont is collecting used coats, hats, mittens, boots and blankets through Nov. 30. Drop-off bins are at various locations, including Silver Creek and Skyline high schools and in the lobby of the Longmont Times-Call. For more information, call Debbie Setlock at 303-931-5556.

Toy Drive, in memory of Christopher "Doc" Anderson

Longmont residents are collecting new, unwrapped toys in memory of veteran Christopher "Doc" Anderson who was killed in action in 2006. Toys will be distributed by the Longmont Police Department. Toys can be donated at the home of Debby and Rick Anderson, 2423 Frontier St., from 4 to 7 p.m. Dec. 4. For more information, visit http://on.fb.me/IkAfFB.

Foothills United Way volunteer connection guide

The Foothills United Way offers several volunteer opportunities in its 2013 holiday guide found at http://bit.ly/I9zekl.

Community reporter Whitney Bryen can be reached at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com.