It can be tempting to cut back on your company’s health costs. But it may costs you. (ISTOCK)

The Affordable Act, better known as Obamacare, has created challenges and opportunities for small business owners planning an exit strategy – and really, for any owner looking to maximize the value of their company.

On one hand, the law has led some small-business health insurance premiums to rise, which puts pressure on the bottom line. Many employers, quite naturally, have therefore looked to cut costs and pinch pennies on health benefits.

But this may be a shortsighted approach. To squeeze employees and pay only 50 cents on the dollar doesn’t help the employee who has to spend $800 a month on self and family coverage. This can cause employee dissatisfaction and turnover of a company’s tenured workforce – which is one of the most critical strategic assets for any small business.

By taking a more broad-minded and long-term approach to health insurance and other benefits, you can change the dynamic of how you compensate employees, how you retain talent and, most importantly, how that all translates into higher value for your company and maximize profit in a future sale.

The fact is, most small employers don’t understand the value of their employee benefit program. They constantly look to shave and reduce, when they should really consider enhancing, educating and holding people accountable. Offering a richer program – one that can benefit employees no matter how they plan to use those benefits – will set your company apart from the competition and enhance both employee recruitment and retention.

If you’re looking to raise the value of your company for a future sale, there’s one question you’ll need to answer right away: What is Your Time Horizon? If your horizon is at least two or three years out, using a combination of a comprehensive, employer-subsidized plan, in conjunction with a carefully integrated approach that meshes with the company culture, will support greater employee retention. Then, when the time comes to put your company up for sale, having tenured staff who are properly educated and motivated to get the most out of their benefit program will be far more valuable than an unstable, churning workforce made up of mostly new staff.

Here are some strategies to consider as you make your benefit decisions.

1. Stay away from low co-payment health plans, which are often too costly. Instead, think about moving toward a large deductible program that offers employee incentives to garner lower premiums and encourages employee awareness, accountability and more flexibility with how they spend their benefit dollars.

2. Consider using voluntary benefits, for life insurance as well as short-term and long-term disability, to lower your corporate costs.

3. Look into the advantages of dual dental programs that offer a low employer-subsidized employee premium coupled with an employee buy up program to a richer, more comprehensive offering.

4. Offer a 401(k) plan even if you don’t offer an employer match. Consider making it immediate entry, so that employees can get their tax-advantaged savings right away. Better yet, offer a 401(k) plan with a small contribution, even if it as small as 10 or 20 percent. This automatically affords a substantive gain on any amount employees put in, which can be a great tool for increasing employee satisfaction and retention.

5. Think about wellness programs as a benefit – not an expenditure. This may require a change in your mindset as a company owner, but it will help you build a healthier workforce in the long run. A wellness program not only can increase employee engagement, but also add to the positive experience each employee enjoys as part of your team.

Sure, the law has created challenges for many employers. But by using Obamacare to your advantage, you can change the dynamic and make a conscious shift by covering more of a consumer-driven healthcare plan that entices employees to be aware, accountable and stay as your employees. Remember, it costs significantly more to hire and train a new employee than it does to work with a tenured employee and attract them to stay.

An employer who creates a successful paradigm shift in this arena will build a stronger and more profitable organization. Having a company culture that exudes a healthy environment will benefit the organization time and time again, and it can ultimately add significant value to your company.

Joseph Appelbaum is founder and president of Rockville, Md.-based Potomac Companies, Inc., a full-service employee benefit brokerage and consulting firm in the Washington, D.C. region.