Was $6.2 million tax levy really necessary?

Lakewood students show their signs to board of education members during Lakewood Board of Education meeting at Lakewood High School. Lakewood,NJ. Thursday, February 11, 2016. Noah K. Murray-Special for the Asbury Park Press ASB 0211 busing meeting (Photo: Noah K. Murray, Noah K. Murray-Special for the A)

LAKEWOOD - The $6.2 million that residents were asked to pay to save courtesy busing for some 10,000 school children is millions more than is needed to cover the cost for the rest of the school year -- a fact that has angered some in the community, with one former official saying the district "lied to" residents.

But the revelations that the actual cost is only $3.5 million also means a deal is possible -- one where the Township Committee would provide the school district with $2.5 million in surplus funds, $1.5 million above its previous commitment -- in order to avert the busing crisis this year. The district would absorb the other $1 million in costs.





“It’s something we are considering,” Township Committeeman Meir Lichtenstein confirmed Sunday, saying that no deal had yet been reached.

But the proposed terms of the deal, and the actual cost of what was needed to pay for courtesy busing this year, has raised a host of questions about why taxpayers were asked to pay $6.2 million in the Jan. 26 referendum if the number was that much less. Many here believed that $6.2 million was the amount needed to cover the cost of courtesy busing through the end of the year -- not the amount needed to cover busing for an entire year.

Read more: Parents pack busing meeting, looking for answers

In emails obtained by the Asbury Park Press, Michael Azzara, the district’s state-appointed monitor, says the larger amount was used for “strategic and legal reasons.” He confirmed the $6.2 million represents courtesy busing costs for the entire year, not the next 3½ months.

“For a number of strategic and legal reasons, we felt raising the full $6.2 million cost of courtesy busing locally was in the best interests of the district's financial condition,” Azzara states in an email to Lichtenstein dated Feb. 11.

The decision was made with an eye toward seeking additional funds from the New Jersey Department of Education to help close the district's projected $12.4 million deficit, Azzara says. As a condition of providing emergency aid, the state would insist that the district first reallocate funds set aside for non-mandated services, including courtesy busing, to narrow the gap, Azzara explains.

“If the referendum had passed, it would have cut the deficit in half and allowed us to argue that courtesy busing was fully and expressly funded locally and not available for reallocation. This would have given us a stronger argument to request state assistance,” Azzara states in one of the emails. As it turned out, nearly 99 percent of those who voted rejected the proposal.

Read more: 99 percent say 'no' to $6.2M referendum

Whether the results would have been different had the referendum sought a much smaller levy remains an open question.

"The public was 100% convinced that the $6.2 million was an additional amount needed to complete the year - NOT the total for the year," Rabbi Moshe Zev Weisberg, the head of the Igud Hamasdos, said in an email to the Press Sunday. The group represents the interests of Lakewood’s nearly 100 private Orthodox Jewish yeshivas.

In an interview Sunday, Azzara stood by the explanation he gave to Lichtenstein in the emails and denied having misled the public about the amount the district needed.

"I don't think in the presentations we ever said we needed 6.2 to get through the end of the year. We said if we didn't get the $6.2 million we were going to end it," Azzara said.

"Obviously, these are complicated things," he added. "People are going to have their own interpretations."

Pressure mounting

Azzara's email proposal last week came after former school board attorney Michael I. Inzelbuch vowed to file suit to stop the district from cancelling all courtesy or non-mandated busing after Feb. 26. Inzelbuch said he represents at least 20 local children and four private bus companies affected by the pending service cut.

Read more: Courtesy busing deal reached in Lakewood

Through an open public records request last week, Inzelbuch received copies of the same emails as the Press obtained. On Sunday, he accused district officials of deliberately misleading the public, which Azzara denies.

“It was never 6.2 (million),” Inzelbuch said. “We were lied to.”

Read more: Inzelbuch back in the spotlight

The district is under additional pressure from the the Igud. The group announced last week that if courtesy busing is cut, their schools will no longer tier or stagger their schools’ start and dismissal times - a move that would completely unravel a complicated cost-savings plan negotiated in August. More than 7,100 yeshiva students and roughly 2,700 public school children are set to lose their busing at the end of the month.

Buy Photo Former Lakewood school board attorney Michael I. Inzelbuch speaks at a special board meeting on Feb. 11, 2016 about the pending cancellation of courtesy bus service. (Photo: Staff photo/Shannon Mullen)

Lichtenstein said he still needed to discuss the proposal with the rest of the Township Committee and the Igud's leaders. Weisberg called it "another band-aid deal to keep school buses on the road, our children safe and Lakewood’s roads moving for another few months." The broader problem of insufficient state funding for the district remains unresolved, he added.

"Isn’t it time to stop this torture and draw a roadmap moving forward?" he said in an email.

Shannon Mullen: 732-643-4278; smullen4@gannettnj.com

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Some 2,000 people packed a special school board meeting in Lakewood hoping to hear how the town plans to help them cope with the cancellation of courtesy busing for 10,000 Lakewood schoolchildren. Video by Shannon Mullen.

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1TjHWhw