Hillary Clinton has been in politics for decades, serving as U.S. senator, secretary of state, first lady of the United States, and first lady of Arkansas. Now Clinton is making history as the only woman left in the 2016 presidential race. Throughout this election season, Clinton has advocated for marginalized groups like the LGBTQ community , minorities, and women. Furthermore, Clinton has made clear that she doesn't want votes because of her gender but rather because of her qualifications and political experience. Here's a breakdown of where Clinton stands on 14 important issues.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Health Care

Clinton wants universal health care for all Americans, and she likes to remind voters that "Obamacare" (the Affordable Care Act) was originally "Hillarycare" back in 1993. Rather than changing or repealing the Affordable Care Act like other candidates have proposed, Clinton has promised to defend it while focusing on reducing out-of-pocket expenses. Clinton plans to build on the Affordable Care Act to do things like make the enrollment process easier, expand coverage to families no matter their immigration status, and broaden insurance options. Unlike Sanders, Clinton doesn't want a single-payer system for universal health care — she says trying to make that happen will end in political gridlock.

Reproductive Rights

Clinton is pro-choice and has gone on the record saying she supports some cases of late-term abortions when the life of the mother or the baby is in danger. She wants to make different forms of birth control, like Plan B , widely available to women, and ensure that women have access to safe, legal abortions and other services provided by Planned Parenthood. Planned Parenthood and NARAL have endorsed Clinton because of her long-standing commitment to supporting women's health.

Clinton has asserted that reproductive rights are "a fundamental human right" and she has said she would repeal the Hyde Amendment — a law first passed in 1976 that prohibits the use of federal funds to pay for abortion except in cases of rape, incest, or when the mother's life is in danger.

I'll take on Republicans or anyone who tries to interfere with women's health. Proud to have @PPact's support in this important election. -H — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) January 7, 2016

National Security

If elected president, Clinton has vowed to prevent Iran from ever acquiring a nuclear weapon, create partnerships with the Iraqi military to defeat ISIS, stand up against Russian President Vladimir Putin, and hold China responsible for human rights and trade violations.

As secretary of state, Clinton gained firsthand exposure to dealing with national security threats. Clinton was part of President Obama's team that made the decision to raid and eventually kill Osama bin Laden in 2011. During a campaign stop in New Hampshire in early December, Clinton laid out her national security plan , which directly addressed how she will confront ISIS. "We should be honest about the fact that to be successful, airstrikes will have to be combined with ground forces actually taking back more territory from ISIS," Clinton said. She also included three main elements that are integral to her stance on national security. "Defeat ISIS in Syria, Iraq, and across the Middle East; disrupt and dismantle the growing military infrastructure that facilitates the flow of fighters financing arms and propaganda around the world; harden our defenses and those of our allies against external and homegrown threats."

Jobs

When discussing her economic plan, Clinton has stressed the importance of bringing back manufacturing jobs and that she wants to increase the federal minimum wage . Clinton supports $12 per hour minimum wage nationally but also supports individual states, like New York, that decide to increase their minimum wage to $15 . Clinton plans to strengthen labor unions , provide tax credits for companies that offer profit-sharing to employees, and help working families with things like paid leave.