Topics: Christmas, Elf on a Shelf, Holidays, humor, Entertainment News

The Elf On The Shelf holiday tradition has grown in popularity since the children’s book was originally published in 2005. For the uninitiated – meaning people without young kids – the Elf On The Shelf is a stuffed toy that shows up after Thanksgiving and acts as Santa’s watchdog, observing the naughty and nice over the course of the holidays. Each household elf uses Christmas magic to fly back to the North Pole and report to Santa every night.

Since the age-old threat of “Santa’s always watching” is meaningless to the sophisticated, app-designing child of the 21st century, we parents perch this slightly creepy, apple-cheeked elf in a new place night after night as an extra layer of accountability to keep the little tyrants in line. And “better watch out” indeed — earlier this week a 7-year-old in New Jersey called 911 in a panic after she “accidentally” knocked hers over.

Retailing for $29.95, you get the toy and the book in a keepsake box. But many families aren’t able to justify squeezing the extra cost into their holiday budgets — not to mention the time investment. And since the Elf On The Shelf is a Christmas-themed intimidation device, what are the non-Christians to do? The following is a list of 6 alternatives designed to meet every family’s needs.

1. Mensch on a Bench

In 2013, the Jewish community answered with a storybook-and-stuffed-toy of its own. Unlike the Elf On The Shelf, the Mensch On A Bench was created for more educational purposes, teaching the story of Moshe the Mensch while also adding a little more “Funukkah” to Hanukkah. And like the Elf On A Shelf, there are rules meant not to be broken, and many families use their Mensch to motivate good behavior out of their little ankle biters. (Mensch On A Bench from Amazon, $25.95)

2. Troll in a Bowl

Christianity and Judaism are not the only religions that celebrate winter holidays. For everyone else, the Troll In A Bowl is a fun and affordable homemade option. You can find those fuzzy haired troll dolls pretty much anywhere. And they come in all sorts of colors – purple, pink, blue, green – to help promote diversity. Get yourself a troll, grab a cereal bowl out of the cabinet, and voila: Troll In A Bowl! This is also good for the atheists, because you can just make up your own story to further dangle the idea of not getting presents over your greedy children’s heads. Or take it a step farther and invent your own religion? The possibilities are endless. (Troll Doll from Toys R Us, $5.95; Fargrik Cereal Bowl from Ikea, $1.95)

3. Wreath on the Door

If money’s tight, but you want something similar to the Elf On The Shelf, why not double down on tradition and adapt your front door wreath? This non-denominational option works just like the Elf On The Shelf, Mensch On A Bench, and Troll In A Bowl, but you don’t have the stress of finding a new place to move it every night. Magically, it travels to the North Pole or ancient Israel or the Mystic Forests of The All and returns to the exact same spot on your front door the next morning. Your children wake up dazzled and will behave for weeks. (Fresh Wreath from Harry & David, $59.99; Artificial Wreath from Home Depot $9.99)