Not only can clients such as Karlene Shainline, right, get their eyebrows shaped at Cynthia Sass' Tru Skincare, they now can partake of a free valet parking service offered by Sass, left. ( Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer )

And then one day in mid-December, you wake up and realize, "Hey, wait, I'm a person."

It's easy to forget that, with all of the demands of the month. My shopping list reads like a long and scary financial death threat, and yet there's nothing in my fridge except a bottle of Sriracha and a stick of butter. Which, as a team, are not a half-bad meal.

As fuel for the second half of the holiday hustle, I've created my survival guide. Here are some things worth splurging on — for yourself.

If you feel guilty, pretend I bought them for you and you bought them for me, and our gifts for one another just so happened to be the exact same amount. Hey, thank you for the gifts! You're the best.

Glittery red lipstick

A stylist once told me never to wear glitter after turning 30, so obviously, I want to. There are two kinds of glitter: Claire's Glitter (the kind you find for children at Claire's in the mall, generally with bigger chunks of glit) and RuPaul Glitter (the kind that we all need more of in our lives, typically with smaller flecks that create a glimmering sheen of mystery and delight).

The holidays are the perfect excuse to get a little shiny. LipBar Custom Cosmetics, of Denver, makes a great glitter-infused lipstick, Missile with Bronze Foil. This reddish-mauve color is covered in bronze sparkles that go on subtly — for glitter, at least.

Order it for $42 for your holiday parties online at lipbar.com.

Valet spa services

Since my former home, the old Daily Camera building on west Pearl Street, has been turned into a construction site, its next-door neighbor, Tru Skincare (truskincare.com), has been hiding under scaffolding along the pedestrian path.

"The Pearl West development is literally up against my building, going on two years. It's been really intense," says Cynthia Sass, a professional makeup artist and esthetician who runs Tru. "In talking with people, I've been trying to figure out what I can do to make this experience better. Parking has always been a nightmare in downtown Boulder, so what can I do?"

Tru started offering free valet services through the new Blucar service (blucar.com), which is sort of like Uber, but for valet. Download the free app, drop a pin where you want to valet your car, leave your car with a licensed, professional valet driver and then drop the pin where and when you want to be picked up.

Blucar costs $10.50 for the first hour, which Tru covers (for clients getting an hour-long treatment), and $1.50 each additional hour, the same cost as a parking garage in downtown. Except you don't have to hunt for a spot.

"It's wonderful," Sass says. "It's something nobody is doing."

As an added bonus, Tru serves local snacks, such as Bhakti Chai with almond or regular milk, a weekly rotating plate from Piece, Love & Chocolate and vegan, raw, organic goodies from Thrive.

Tackle the cold weather with a new, free add-on hand treatment: a hand massage followed by a soak in heated mitts.

Massage delivery

Tomorrow is the launch of a new service in Boulder: Zeel, Massage On Demand (zeel.com).

Zeel delivers massage to your door within an hour or less. You know, like ordering Chinese delivery. But instead of picking wonton or egg drop soup, you pick between deep tissue and Swedish.

Zeel delivers massage 365 days a year, even holidays, from 8 a.m. to 10:30 p.m. So even on Christmas Day, if you realize you forgot to get yourself a gift from Santa, you can tap your app and have your gift knocking on the door before the rest of the gifts are unwrapped.

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay