The new guidelines emphasize skills such as knowing how to perform a physical exam on a patient.

For the medical industry, change seems to be the only constant. The federal government recently implemented the Affordable Care Act, a nationwide health initiative that's changing the health insurance market. Next year, the Association of American Medical Colleges will roll out a brand new MCAT, an admissions exam that helps determine who gets into medical school and who does not.

Another major change in the works will shape the way medical students prepare for residencies.

The Association for American Medical Colleges in June announced the creation of a new set of guidelines, known as the Core Entrustable Professional Activities for Entering Residency. Medical schools can use them to help students transition to a residency program. In residency, new doctors receive additional training for what usually lasts three or more years.

"There has been a growing literature that looks at the expectations of program directors versus performance of students or new residents on day one, and showing that there’s a gap there," says Bob Englander, the senior director for competency-based learning and assessment at the association. "What they expect and what they’re actually able to do on day one is not always the same."

[Find out how to avoid medical school pitfalls.]

The new guidelines aim to eliminate this gap. ​

They identify 13 activities that all new resident​s should be able to do on their first day, such as perform a physical exam on a patient, write a medical order ​ and form clinical questions and retrieve evidence, says Englander.

Those are the kinds of things that have a potentially big impact if people aren't able to do them on arrival, he says. ​

In September the association announced a pilot cohort of 10 schools that will help test the implementation of the guidelines by tweaking their curriculum and possibly establishing new ways​ to ensure that students can do the 13 activities. The cohort includes the School of Medicine at Vanderbilt University, ​the School of Medicine at New York University, the College of Human Medicine at Michigan State University ​and University of Illinois College of Medicine. It will last for five years, Englander says, and have its first group meeting this month. Schools have already started working on how to better prepare residents.