x of x Rick Sarmiento, center, embraces Karen Bingham, left, and Nancy Root, right, during a visit to the Flight 93 National Memorial on Wednesday in Shanksville, Pa. Karen Bingham's son, Mark Bingham, was a passenger on United Flight 93, and Nancy Root's cousin, Lorraine G. Bay, was a flight attendant. The memorial marks the spot where the plane crashed 13 years ago, some 75 miles southeast of Pittsburgh, after passengers fought back against hijackers. Gene J. Puskar/AP

x of x Port Authority police officer Donna Przybyszewski reflects on the colleagues she knew who lost their lives during the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, at the south tower memorial pool Thursday at the site of the World Trade Center in New York City. This year marks the 13th anniversary of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks that killed nearly 3,000 people at the World Trade Center, Pentagon and on Flight 93. Chang W. Lee/The New York Times/AP - Pool

x of x From left-center, President Barack Obama, first lady Michelle Obama and Vice President Joe Biden observe a moment of silence outside the White House Thursday. Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images

x of x Visitors at the Flight 93 National Memorial Visitor Center Complex in Shanksville, Pa., walk Wednesday along the wall bearing names of passengers who perished in the attacks. Jeff Swensen/Getty Images

x of x The World Trade Center's "Tribute in Light" and the Statue of Liberty are seen from Liberty State Park on Wednesday in Jersey City, N.J. Kena Betancur/Getty Images

x of x Sophia Demos sits with her daughter, Evniki Tsokanis, 4, among a sea of American flags during a memorial Thursday in Matthews, N.C. The 2,997 American flags represent each person lost on 9/11. Chuck Burton/AP

x of x A woman reaches out to touch roses on one of the benches at the National 9/11 Pentagon Memorial on Thursday. Each bench represents the 184 people killed at the Pentagon and onboard American Airlines Flight 77, which crashed into the building. Pablo Martinez Monsivais/AP

x of x People walk past the work of artist Mr. Brainwash as he creates a massive mural on the side of Century 21 across the street from the The National September 11 Memorial & Museum on Thursday in New York City. Timothy A. Clary/AFP/Getty Images

x of x People pay their respects at the Fire Department of New York Memorial Wall, located at the FDNY Engine and Ladder 10 station, on Thursday. Timothy A. Clary/AFP/Getty Images

x of x Norma Hardy, Port Authority police assistant chief, rings a bell signifying the collapse of the first tower during memorial observances held at the site of the World Trade Center Thursday in New York City. Chris Pedota/Getty Images - Pool

x of x Former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani stands at the edge of the north pool memorial at the World Trade Center Thursday. Justin Lane/AP - Pool

x of x A woman places flowers in the inscribed names along the edge of the north pool Thursday. Justin Lane/Getty Images - Pool

x of x A member of the military stands over the south pool Thursday. Chang W. Lee/Getty Images - Pool

x of x From left, former New York Gov. George Pataki, former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani, former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg, Mary Pat Christie and husband New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and his partner, Sandra Lee, stand in silence while bells ring to signify the planes crashing into the twin towers at the memorial commemoration Thursday in New York City. Chris Pedota/Getty Images - Pool

x of x U.S. soldiers participate in a Sept. 11 memorial ceremony Thursday at a military base in Bagram, north of Kabul, Afghanistan. Shah Marai/AFP/Getty Images