Buy Photo Ronald Gasiorowski, attorney speaks at Jackson Township Zoning Board hearing in June. Two residents opposed to a 312-unit apartment complex formed Friends of Neptune LLC last year and hired Gasiorowski to represent them. (Photo: Staff Photographer )Buy Photo

A controversial proposal to build a 312-unit apartment complex in the township is at a standstill.

The township Zoning Board of Adjustment met Wednesday to hear more testimony from attorneys representing the Tinton Falls-based developer Hovsons and Friends of Neptune LLC but did not reach a decision.

The hearing is expected to continue on Dec. 3 when the board likely will decide whether to approve the proposal, officials say.

Residents in Neptune Manor for the past 18 months have been contesting Hovson’s proposal to construct a luxury apartment community called Victoria Gardens on Route 33 and Hovchild Boulevard. They maintain that the three-story complex would tower over their neighborhood of mostly ranch-style homes and create traffic, noise and drainage issues.

Two residents, Christina Schuetz and Tom Argentieri, formed Friends of Neptune LLC last year and hired Red Bank attorney Ronald Gasiorowski to represent them.

Ocean Township attorney Jennifer S. Krimko is representing Hovsons.

“It feels like it’s never ending, but that’s the process,” said Schuetz, who lives on Oakcrest. “We never envisioned that we’d still be here 18 months later.”

The board has held at least nine special meetings most of which involved testimony from expert witnesses and cross examination. Members of the public and the board also had a chance to question the witnesses.

On Wednesday, both parties brought professional planners to the witness stand.

Hovsons planner Andrew Janiw addressed a number of questions from local residents dealing with the height of the apartment buidings and the demographics of potential residents.

Janiw insisted that three stories would not be too high for the neighborhood and that the developer had studied similar apartment complexes in Neptune such as the Avalon Tinton Falls.

He said the developer is targeting young professionals and empty nesters for the complex who are not likely to be a disturbance to the neighborhood.

Friends of Neptune LLC planner Peter Steck said during his testimony that the Victoria Gardens proposal should not qualify for a use variance, which the developer needs because the land is zoned for commercial use.

“This may be too big, too intense to be a variance,” Steck said. “This is really too big for an exception of the law.”

Krimko and Janiw declined to comment outside of what was discussed publicly during the hearing.

Martha Applegate, who lives in Roberts Drive, said she believes the land would be better suited for a low-level yoga studio or a health foods store.

“(The apartment complex) is going to tower and shadow over the neighborhood,” Applegate said.

Nicquel Terry; nterry@app.com; 732-643-4023

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1tEAi15