OAKLAND, Calif. — In less than a minute, two yearlings grew into full-fledged Broncos.

Bradley Roby, 22, and Cortrelle Javon Anderson, 23, saved what had begun as a dismal day by the Bay.

With halftime approaching and the discombobulated Broncos trailing the wretched Raiders 10-6 — “Just win once, baby” — the rookie Roby pulled off an acrobatic interception at the Denver 47-yard line. Seconds later, Anderson, an afterthought on a pass play, made a tough catch and broke out of five tackles and zigged, zagged and zipped for 51 yards and a touchdown that would transform a tense state of affairs into a stampede.

Wild, wild horses, the Rolling Stones sang.

“That’s what I play for, to make the big plays and help us win,” Roby said.

The initial guy, C.J., said: “I feel blessed. This is what I’ve prepared hard for. We all want to be like Peyton (Manning) and Wes (Welker) someday.”

This day.

The first-round cornerback of 2014 and the free-agent running back from 2013 — neither 18 hands high — are now joined at the tip and standing tall.

Manning called Anderson’s reception and run “as fine a play as I’ve seen so far this season. … It could have easily been a catch for minus-2 yards or something. The next thing you know, he breaks the tackle. I don’t know how many guys he made miss. Truly an incredible effort play.”

And Roby’s effort on the interception was equally remarkable. The pass from Oakland’s young quarterback was a Carr wreck. Derek’s ball fluttered and flapped.

“I don’t know if it was tipped or wobbly, but I mistimed my jump and had to try to stay in the air long enough and reach back past my shoulder. That’s a pick I’ve got to make,” Roby said.

Great hang time, I said.

“Yeah, I like that description,” he said. “I’m athletic. You have to be an athlete to play in the secondary.”

But cornerbacks would be wide receivers if they could catch the ball better.

“Wide receivers would be cornerbacks if they could defend and tackle,” Roby replied. “We must be better than receivers.”

Up until Roby’s interception, the Broncos looked as sorry as the Raiders, who haven’t won in their past 15 games. The Broncos were in hangover mode after the loss at New England.

PHOTOS: Denver Broncos vs. Oakland Raiders

Roby was beaten by Brice Butler for a touchdown early in the second quarter, and the Broncos were behind 10-6. Uh-oh.

But Roby made his third big play of the season. He deflected the pass on the Indianapolis Colts’ final play in the season opener. He intercepted a pass by Tom Brady a week ago.

“The Broncos showed so much faith by drafting me, and I’m doing everything I can to prove they made the right decision,” he said.

Anderson wasn’t drafted by anybody last year. He impressed everybody in Denver, though, in the exhibitions before getting hurt. This year he had virtually fallen off the radar. He was fourth on the depth chart until injuries to others gave him a chance.

“I practice every day as if I’m going to get a chance. I thought I might play some on third down in this game,” he said.

For that reason, he bought 40 tickets for family and friends in his town of Vallejo, Calif., 25 miles up Interstate 80. The folks from back home were in for a shock.

Anderson was inserted early and often and finished with 13 carries for 90 yards and seven catches for 73 yards, including that touchdown you normally only see in high school highlights.

“I don’t have the speed of Ronnie (Hillman) or the size of the other guys, but I make the best of what I’ve got,” he said.

He runs hard and fast, like a bronco.

On the reception he thought, because the linebackers had deepened, Manning might check down to him, but he hadn’t finished his route when the ball was on him like a mortgage payment.

“You’re not allowed to miss that one,” he said. “I couldn’t hear the crowd. I wasn’t thinking about anything except just keep running and hang on.”

“C.J. was sensational,” Roby said.

At the other end of the locker room, Anderson said his touchdown “wouldn’t have happened if Bradley hadn’t made such a great interception.”

Reciprocal admiration from two bright, clever, gifted players.

The Broncos’ future was present Sunday.

C.J. and Bradley, Anderson and Roby, are grown-up Broncos now.

Woody Paige: woody@woodypaige.com or twitter.com/woodypaige