Three years ago, the voters of Longmont overwhelming passed a ban on the dangerous, industrial practice of hydraulic fracturing. The oil and gas industry and Gov. Hickenlooper wasted no time in suing Longmont to overturn this bi-partisan, citizen-led vote. As the Court of Appeals recognized the profound consequences of this case, so did the Colorado Supreme Court in accepting the case. Oral arguments will be held at 9 a.m. Wednesday. The Court will have an opportunity to uphold our constitutional right to protect our health, safety and welfare from fracking.

The Longmont Public Health, Safety and Wellness Act safeguards our established inalienable rights. The opening line of the charter amendment directly quotes the Colorado Constitution, which establishes that all Coloradans have "the right of enjoying and defending their lives and liberties; of acquiring, possessing and protecting property; and of seeking and obtaining their safety and happiness." These constitutionally guaranteed rights have been Colorado's legal keystone since voters ratified the Constitution nearly 150 years ago. They supersede all other laws, including the Colorado Oil and Gas Conservation Act, an Act passed in 1951 that created the state agency that rubber stamps thousands of fracking wells next to homes, schools and public parks each and every year.

Advertisement

New York State banned fracking in 2014 based upon an exhaustive analysis — hundreds of pages of studies — that found the inherent health harms of fracking were too great to allow fracking to occur. In Colorado, researchers at the University of Colorado School of Public Health found an association between lower birth weights and the proximity of the pregnant woman's home to oil and gas operations, As the inherent harms of fracking become more apparent by the day, our constitutional right to protect our families from the effects of this highly industrial and extreme energy practice and the irresponsible actions of this industry becomes ever more essential.

In some cases property values have declined up to as much as 75 percent due to the proximity of fracking operations. Nationwide Insurance will not provide coverage for damage related to fracking. There are myriad stories from Weld County of cracked foundations due to earthquakes that are the consequence of fracking, a clear violation of the right to possess and protect property. Property values plummet along with the inability of homeowners to sell their homes when prospective buyers learn of the nearby fracking debacle.

As they did during the ballot campaign nearly three years ago, the oil and gas industry and Gov. John Hickenlooper continue to use intimidation tactics -—lawsuits, threats of lawsuits, and millions in dollars of paid advertising — to bully Coloradans into giving up our constitutional right to protect our families, health and property from fracking. Their most recent scare tactic is the unsubstantiated claim that we must compensate multinational oil and gas corporations for their mineral rights, mineral rights whose value fluctuates by the hour and are far from stripped of having no value whatsoever.

Fracking violates the inalienable rights spelled out in our state constitution. The Colorado Supreme Court should do right by the people of Colorado by giving us a fair opportunity to present the overwhelmingly growing body of evidence that shows the inherent harms of fracking to our health, safety and property. This case is much too profound for a preliminary and limited review of evidence. It rightfully should be remanded back to the district court for a full evidentiary hearing.

It is my sincere hope that the court will uphold our constitutional rights so that we can keep Longmont a great place to live.

Kaye Fissinger is president of Our Health, Our Future, Our Longmont.