Pharmacists bring their own fresh perspective to health care

LOS ANGELES — Jose Alvarez clutches a red drawstring bag as he hobbles into a small office. He leans his crutches against the wall and takes a seat in the corner. His seven pill bottles, of varying heights, create a miniature skyline of orange and white.

A heavyset man with a scraggly beard, Alvarez has diabetes, high blood pressure and asthma. He’s here at this clinic in East Los Angeles for his 2 p.m. appointment with Sangeeta Salvi.

“I was in denial for a very long time,” Alvarez, 42, says about his diabetes. Now he comes in every three weeks to discuss his medications, diet and exercise with Salvi.

Despite the white coat slung over the back of her chair, Salvi isn’t a physician, but a pharmacist.

Push to reduce costs

She’s one of a growing number moving out from behind grocery store pharmacy counters across the country and seeing patients in new ways, part of a push to reduce health care costs, address social issues that impede people’s health and ease a national shortage of primary care physicians.

Steven Chen, a University of Southern California clinical pharmacy professor, runs this pilot initiative at 10 clinics belonging to AltaMed, a nonprofit clinic network that serves largely low-income populations in L.A. and Orange counties.

In a health care system that often seems impersonal and intimidating, pharmacists can act as a much-needed sympathetic ear and source of advice, spending extra time with patients.

“That’s the reason why we’ve been very successful,” Chen says, “because someone is taking the time to sit with the patient.”

Team-based medical care, in which multiple health care professionals work together to treat a patient, is a central feature of the Affordable Care Act. But as different workers collaborate, there’s concern that pharmacists could overstep their bounds.

Not like doctors’ role

Pharmacists’ role is fundamentally different from doctors’; whereas doctors try to diagnose a root problem, pharmacists just try to make the symptoms better. Pharmacists are best trained to determine appropriate uses and dosages of medications to help patients with their problems.

Nearly 90 percent of patients with chronic illnesses take medication as the first line of treatment. In the United States, between a third and a half of patients don’t take their medicines properly, which — along with poor prescribing and diagnoses — costs the health care industry as much as $290 billion a year, according to the New England Healthcare Institute.

On average, clinical pharmacists in the USC program find 10 drug-related problems per patient — things such as taking the wrong dosage or missing a needed medicine.

But they also act as a sort of medical counselor, helping patients with a range of issues, including diet, exercise and stresses of all kinds. Many pharmacists taking part in the USC initiative — funded by a $12 million federal grant — also call insurance companies and drug manufacturers to make sure patients can get needed medications.

“Our patients need that,” says Rosie Jadidian, director of pharmaceutical services for Community Clinic Association of Los Angeles County. “They’re waiting on bus schedules, and their lives are organized in different ways. They need that one-stop shopping.”

Clinical pharmacists are part of a burgeoning number of recent medical interventions that aim to increase access to medical care. Across the country, patients can see a nurse or a pharmacist at new retail clinics, urgent-care clinics and kiosks. Some patients can also now talk to a health care professional on video chat.

Because these innovations often take care out of the hands of doctors, many of them also help with the shortage of providers across the country that worsened with the expansion of health insurance under the Affordable Care Act.

A California law went into effect last year that allows pharmacists to bill for medical care — seen as a step toward solidifying their expanded roles outside pharmacies. Congress is considering a similar bill, but critics say an already costly health care system can’t afford to pay another provider.