By ALAN SCHWARZ, The New York Times

Twenty years ago, more than a dozen leaders in child psychiatry received $11 million from the National Institute of Mental Health to study an important question facing families with children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: Is the best long-term treatment medication, behavioral therapy or both?

The widely publicized result was not only that medication like Ritalin or Adderall trounced behavioral therapy, but also that combining the two did little beyond what medication could do alone. The finding has become a pillar of pharmaceutical companies' campaigns to market ADHD drugs, and is used by insurance companies and school systems to argue against therapies that are usually more expensive than pills.

But in retrospect, even some authors of the study — widely considered the most influential study ever on ADHD — worry that the results oversold the benefits of drugs.

The study was structured to emphasize reduction of impulsivity and inattention symptoms, for which medication is designed to deliver quick results, several of the researchers said in recent interviews. Less emphasis was placed on improving children's longer-term academic and social skills.

Recent papers have also cast doubt on whether medication's benefits last as long as those from therapy.

"There was lost opportunity to give kids the advantage of both and develop more resources in schools to support the child — that value was dismissed," said Dr. Gene Arnold, a child psychiatrist and professor at Ohio State University and one of the principal researchers on the study.

Another co-author, Dr. Lily Hechtman of McGill University in Montreal, added: "I hope it didn't do irreparable damage. The people who pay the price in the end is the kids. That's the biggest tragedy in all of this."

ADHD narrowly trails asthma as the most frequent long-term medical diagnosis in children. More than 1 in 7 children in the United States receive a diagnosis of the disorder by the time they turn 18, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

At least 70 percent of those are prescribed stimulant medication like Adderall or Concerta because, despite potential side effects like insomnia and appetite suppression, it can quickly mollify symptoms and can cost an insured family less than $200 a year.

Comprehensive therapy is used far less often, largely because it is more time-consuming and expensive. Cost-conscious schools have few aides to help teachers assist the expanding population of children with the diagnosis, which in some communities reaches 20 percent of students. Many insurance plans inadequately cover private or group therapy for families, which can cost $1,000 a year or more.

"Medication helps a person be receptive to learning new skills and behaviors," said Ruth Hughes, a psychologist and the chief executive of the advocacy group Children and Adults With Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. "But those skills and behaviors don't magically appear. They have to be taught."

A subsequent paper by one co-author of the study, Keith Conners, a psychologist and professor emeritus at Duke University, showed that using only one all-inclusive measurement — "treating the child as a whole," he said — revealed that combination therapy was significantly better than medication alone. Behavioral therapy emerged as a viable alternative to medication as well. But his paper has received little attention.

"My belief based on the science is that symptom reduction is a good thing, but adding skill-building is a better thing," said Stephen Hinshaw, a psychologist at the University of California, Berkeley, and one of the study researchers. "If you don't provide skills-based training, you're doing the kid a disservice. I wish we had had a fairer test."