Local business owner one of the top chocolatiers in the country

For Robin Autorino, it started with pretzels.

"While I was in the military, to keep my son busy since I was a single parent, we melted chocolate chips and he dipped pretzels to give to our guests," she recalled. "We had about 30 sailors and their children coming to Christmas dinner while I was stationed in Spain."

Robin Chocolates Hours: 9:30 a.m. - 6:30 p.m. weekdays; 11 a.m. - 5:30 p.m. Saturday Where: 600 S Airport Road, Building B More info:robinchocolates.com

Autorino spent 14 years in the U.S. Navy before shifting to the world of IT with Sun Microsystems. That brought her to Colorado. While working for Sun Microsystems here, she took a cooking class at the Culinary School of the Rockies, and the lightning struck.

"This is what I wanted to do," she said.

Today she's the owner of Robin Chocolates in Longmont and one of the top chocolatiers in the country, making Dessert Professional magazine's Top 10 list for 2013.

Catering

In 2006, after a decade in technology, she left to study to be a savory chef and to work in catering. During an internship in France, she realized that desserts can taste as good as they are beautiful.

"It was eye opening," she said.

She worked in pastry departments for restaurants including the Flagstaff House and the Brown Palace.

"That's when I was starting to hone my chocolate."

"While I was at the Brown Palace, a florist was given my chocolates as a gift. And she called me, placed an order, and that was the start of Robin Chocolates," Robin explained.

"My first order was for Valentines Day in 2008, 12 boxes."

Since then there has been no stopping Robin and her crew.

Pastries and chocolates for a tasting session. (Vince Winkel / Longmont Times-Call)

At first she rented kitchen time in various places, such as at a caterer's house and at two bakeries. In the fall of 2011, she took a leap of faith and moved into a retail site and her own full kitchen at 600 S. Airport Road.

Precision

Autorino credits her time in the Navy for her skills as a successful, award-winning chocolatier.

"A lot of my precision I attribute to my years in the Navy," she said. "An eye for detail. You don't sacrifice quality for quantity. It's really paid off."

Autorino and Caroline Moore handle the chocolate and confections, while Jen Kahler is the pastry chef. Most popular pastries include flourless chocolate cake, caramelia mousse cake and ginger snap cookies dipped in chocolate.

A variety of chocolates at Robin Chocolates in Longmont. (Vince Winkel / Longmont Times-Call)

This year, Autorino and her crew were honored with several awards at Colorado's annual Colorado Chocolate Festival.

Robin Chocolate's Caramel Fleur de Sel, which is described as "caramel layered with chocolate caramel and sea salt in a dark chocolate shell," was named grand champion at this year's festival.

The company's Dulcey Blonde, which it describes as a "soft caramel blended with Dulce de Leche liqueur layered with blond chocolate ganache in a dark chocolate shell" was named "Best Traditional Truffle."

Kahler won for "Best Birthday Cake," for her Valrhona Caramelia Mousse Cake.

In 2013, Robin Chocolates won Grand Champion at the Holiday Chocolate Festival. They won for Best Molded Truffle and went on to win Grand Champion with their new Dulce Blonde molded truffle.

Passion

What is Autorino's key to success in chocolate and in business?

"Number one is passion. If you don't love what you are doing, your work is going to reflect that. I love what I do," she said. "Number two is a good palate. Number three, (be) willing to work long hours, no matter how tired you are."

Again, she also credits the U.S. Navy.

"The Navy gave me a really good base for troubleshooting," she explained. "Troubleshooting a satellite system is the same thing as troubleshooting a recipe."

She's also grateful to serve the community, and seems almost humbled by it.

"It's nice. I can give jobs to people locally. A lot of teenagers that start here, I get to see them grow up," she said with a huge smile on her face. "So there's this sense of accomplishment with my chocolate work, that is greatly satisfying."

Autorino employs 12, most of whom work part-time. And she's at the shop seven days a week, with one exception. She takes Christmas and the day after Christmas off. Then it's back to the shop to start making hearts for Valentines Day.

A chocolatier's work is never done.

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel