One of Justin Bieber’s bodyguards, who was subsequently arrested, allegedly put a man who took photos of the singer at Shipwreck’s Beach in Kauai, Hawaii, into a “headlock,” claims a witness.

The alleged incident happened Wednesday in Poipu, Kauai, at around 4 pm shortly after a crowd of bystanders and paparazzi watched Bieber jump off the famous cliff at Shipwreck’s Beach, one witness told a local outlet.

The singer, who took a short break in Hawaii after completing the Latin America leg of his Believe world tour, subsequently posted a photo and video of his jump to his Twitter account on Thursday.

“I went there to see if I could get a better look at Justin Bieber and his security choked out one of the picture guys,” witness Levi Lancaster told The Garden Island. “It wasn’t just some random guy. It was for sure Justin Bieber’s security.”

A second eyewitness, who has asked to remain anonymous, added,

“Bieber verbally said to go get that guy and get his memory card. He just sent his security to do his dirty work.”

Kauai County spokeswoman Sarah Blane said [Bieber’s security] Dwayne Patterson, was arrested at the scene on Wednesday for third-degree assault and fourth-degree criminal property damage.

Blane released an email statement, which read: “According to a preliminary investigation, a 29-year-old Hanalei man had been taking unsolicited photos of the group that Patterson was with at the time. Mr. Patterson reportedly approached the 29-year-old and requested that he delete the photos. Upon refusing to do so, Patterson reportedly assaulted the Hanalei man and damaged his camera.”

The Florida residing bodyguard, 32, was released after posting $3,000 bail.

Lancaster claims he saw Patterson and another bodyguard chase the man, who is reported to be a paparazzo, to his car. The witness claims Patterson “put him in a headlock and lifted him off the ground until he dropped his camera and keys.”

“He was really calling for help,” Lancaster said of the alleged victim.

The same witness claims Bieber screamed at the bodyguard to get the man’s camera and remove the memory card. “There was no remorse. How can you go out to Shipwreck’s and not expect people to take pictures?,” he said.

Lancaster continued, “It was so sad. There was a better way to handle that. It was just a trip, man. It was unreal.”

The second witness says Patterson let go of the unidentified victim when onlookers started pulling out their phones to record the fracas. The Hanalei alleged victim reported no injuries and refused medical attention and the incident is still under police investigation.

The pop phenom has now arrived in Brisbane, Australia ahead of his first show on Tuesday.

Justin took photos with Australian fans on Sunday night after arriving via private jet from a Saturday tour stop in Auckland, New Zealand.

Yesterday, the pop prince posted a Viddy of his New Zealand “Meet and Greet” with fans.

There has been speculation about ticket sales for the singer’s final concerts after resale websites reported high numbers of Bieber tickets being put up for sale in the wake of his controversial year.

The 19-year-old is due to play eight concerts in Australia, with his 15-month trek wrapping in Perth on Dec. 8.

As yet, Bieber’s publicist Melissa Victor has not commented on the alleged Hawaii assault, The Associated Press reports.

[Image via Just Jared]