SARATOGA COUNTY >> Congressional hopeful Elise Stefanik visited various stops throughout the 21st Congressional District to meet many of the district’s 26,827 registered Republican voters.

Stefanik visited the Milton Community Center in Ballston Spa on Tuesday evening before making a few more stops in Warren and Washington counties.

“This is exciting, we’ve worked very hard to build a strong network of volunteers in the district. We’re excited about the momentum and the support we have seen and what we continue to see almost hourly,” she said.

Stefanik, 29, of Wilsboro faces Matt Doheny, 43, of Watertown for the GOP spot on the ballot to represent the 21st Congressional District, a traditionally Republican district where the Democrat incumbent, Bill Owens, has chosen not to run. The winner will go on to face Democrat Aaron Woolf, a documentary filmmaker and Brooklyn store owner who is also new to the North Country political scene.

Advertisement

Doheny and Stefanik have expressed similar goals if they win the GOP seat, including repealing Obamacare, support of the resignation of Veterans Affairs Secretary Eric Shinseki over revelations of mismanagement, support of Fort Drum against defense department cuts and both join Democratic Sen. Charles Schumer in requesting for more money to combat the heroin epidemic.

The candidates, however, differ specifically on business.

“Washington is broken, I hear that not only from Republicans and Democrats but Independents and Conservatives as well, and to change that we need new candidates,” she said.

The race has been a fierce battle, with Doheny’s ads calling out Stefanik for leaving the Capital District after graduating from Harvard College and Stefanik hitting back by citing Doheny’s lack of small-business experience and his Wall Street influence.

“I have very close roots to this area,” Stefanik said.

The first ad, funded by American Crossroads, a political action committee co-founded by Karl Rove, came out with an ad against Doheny. The candidate responded, saying he would not combat the ad with anything negative. Yet, a few days later, he did just that.

The Super PAC, which supports Stefanik, then released another ad. The back and fourth has steadily continued, but neither contender has control over which outside groups released the ads, under federal law.

Doheny’s campaign also released negative mailers around the North Country, claiming Stefanik was involved in the creation of the Troubled Asset Relief Program, a federal program designed to bail out failing financial institutions.

Doheny lost by a narrow margin to Bill Owens, D-Plattsburgh, in two previous races and Stefanik is a first-time runner after working in Washington, D.C., as a former Bush staffer. Doheny has endorsements from Sens. Patti Ritchie, R-St. Lawrence County; Sen. Joe Griffo, R-Rome, Assemblyman Ken Blankenbush, R-Watertown; and Assemblywoman Janet Duprey, R-Peru.

Stefanik has received the endorsements of all 12 counties in the district, except Jefferson County, which endorsed no candidate, as well as Sen. Elizabeth Little, R-Queensbury. Doheny resides in Jefferson County. Stefanik received many other endorsements before Doheny entered the race, as well as the New York State Conservative Party Executive Committee and former presidential candidate Mitt Romney, after Doheny joined the ballot.

Polls closed at 9 p.m. Tuesday.