Buy Photo Marshfield Clinic is looking to build a $175 million-plus health care facility in Marshfield. (Photo: Megan McCormick/News-Herald Medi)Buy Photo

For years, central Wisconsin health care systems and hospitals have worked with each other to form mutually beneficial arrangements — even while competing over patients and their money.

In that context, it's no surprise that Marshfield Clinic recently announced that it might partner with Wausau-based Aspirus Inc. to build a $175 million hospital facility in Marshfield.

As each new partnership is formed, however, the relationships among these major local health care providers have become even more complex and harder to grasp.

To help bring these connections into clearer focus, Gannett Central Wisconsin Media compiled a list of notable partnerships among the area's hospitals and health systems. Here's how they work together to deliver medical care in our communities:

Marshfield Clinic and Ministry Saint Joseph's Hospital

For more than 80 years, Marshfield Clinic and Ministry Saint Joseph's Hospital, part of the Ministry Health Care system, have engaged in a working relationship, said Brian Kief, president of Saint Joseph's.

Marshfield Clinic, a health care system based near the hospital in Marshfield, is chiefly an ambulatory and financial services health system and Saint Joseph's is currently the city's only hospital.

The two organizations share a medical campus and most Saint Joseph's patients see physicians who work for Marshfield Clinic, said Dr. Sue Turney, chief executive officer of Marshfield Clinic.

"Nearly all of the active positions on our medical staff are employed by the Marshfield Clinic," Kief said.

Marshfield Clinic and Saint Joseph's have other close ties. For instance, Saint Joseph's contracts for lab services with the Clinic's Marshfield Labs. Also, the Clinic and Ministry Saint Michael's Hospital, in Stevens Point, established a partnership to form the Stevens Point Cancer Center at Saint Michael's.

Buy Photo Aspirus Inc. of Wausau will soon become the owner of Wisconsin Rapids’ hospital. (Photo: T'xer Zhon Kha/Daily Herald Media)

Aspirus Inc. and Marshfield Clinic

Aspirus Inc. — the Wausau-based health system that has seven hospitals in north central Wisconsin and Michigan's Upper Peninsula — does not yet have a formal partnership with Marshfield Clinic. However, the Clinic announced in late February it planned to create a $175 million-plus "hospital of the future" facility near its Marshfield complex and is in "active discussions" with Aspirus for partnerships. Still, some in Marshfield are concerned about how the new facility will affect Ministry Saint Joseph's Hospital.

So far, Marshfield Clinic has ownership of two hospitals: it owns Lakeview Medical Center in Rice Lake and co-owns Flambeau Hospital in Park Falls with Ministry Health Care.

Buy Photo Marshfield Clinic is looking to build a $175 million-plus health care facility in Marshfield. (Photo: Megan McCormick/News-Herald Medi)

Aspirus Inc. and Riverview Medical Center

In the next week, Aspirus Inc. and Wisconsin Rapids' Riverview Hospital Association are expected to finalize an affiliation, resulting in Aspirus' ownership of the city's only hospital. In the past, the two affiliations had joined forces on the creation of a hospitalist program and the UW Cancer Center Riverview, among other ventures.

Before the acquisition deal was reached, Aspirus announced in the summer of 2014 that it would create its own "hospital of the future" in Wisconsin Rapids. Later it rescinded those plans in favor of affiliating with Riverview.

Riverview officials have said they expect more health care services and more jobs at the hospital as a result of the affiliation.

Accountable care organizations: abouthealth and Integrated Health Network

Accountable care organizations, also known as ACOs, might also affect the reasons various organizations partner with each other, said Matt Heywood, Aspirus chief executive officer.

In Wisconsin, there are two ACOs: abouthealth, which is less than a year old, and Integrated Health Network of Wisconsin, also known as IHN. ACOs — a result of the Affordable Care Act — are partnerships among health care systems that seek to consolidate clinical services to cut health care costs, while also making care accessible to more people, Kief said.

Membership in an ACO is beneficial because the health systems share technology, services and information, Heywood said. If they're able to cut their own costs, the logic goes, the medical providers will be able to reduce patients' and insurers' expenses.

"If we get together in an ACO, we get the benefits of being in a bigger entity, but we don't necessarily have to merge," he said.

Aspirus belongs to abouthealth, while Ministry Health Care belongs to IHN. Marshfield Clinic is seeking membership in abouthealth.

Because of the collaboration and integration that occurs within an ACO, partnering with other health care systems that have memberships within the same ACO is a "logical" choice, Heywood said.

"Aspirus, as a system, is partnering with abouthealth members," Heywood said.

Melanie Lawder can be reached at mlawder@cwnews.net or 715-423-7200. Find her on Twitter as @mel_lawder.

Healthcare systems and local hospitals

HEALTH SYSTEM HOSPITALS Marshfield Clinic Plans to create its own $175 million hospital facility in Marshfield. Presently has a strong working relationship with Ministry Saint Joseph's in Marshfield. Owns two other hospitals in Wisconsin. Ministry Health Care Owns Ministry Saint Joseph's in Marshfield, Ministry Saint Michael's in Stevens Point and Ministry Saint Clare's in Weston. In total, has 15 hospitals in Wisconsin and one in Minnesota. Aspirus Will soon own Riverview Medical Center in Wisconsin Rapids. Own seven other hospitals in Wisconsin and Michigan's Upper Peninsula.

Wisconsin accountable care organizations:

ACCOUNTABLE CARE ORGANIZATION MEMBERS abouthealth Members include: Aspirus in Wausau; Aurora Health Care in Milwaukee; Bellin Health in Green Bay; Gundersen Health System in La Crosse; ThedaCare in Appleton; and UW Health in Madison. Integrated Health Network of Wisconsin Members include: Agnesian HealthCare in Fond Du Lac; Columbia Saint Mary's in Milwaukee; Froedtert Health in Milwaukee; Hospital Sisters Health System; The Medical College of Wisconsin in Milwaukee; Ministry Health Care; and Wheaton Franciscan Healthcare.

Read or Share this story: http://wrtnews.co/1BrCHTD