Mike Boyle

Macomb Republicans hope to gain seats on the county Board of Commissioners, perhaps even attaining a first-ever majority, as Tuesday’s election approaches.

While Democratic County Executive Mark Hackel holds the upper hand in the newly reformed county government, the GOP currently holds just four seats on the county board – the legislative branch -- compared to nine for the Democrats. But Republican Party Chairman Rob Montilla believes a wide swath of central Macomb is up for grabs in the final days of the campaign.

“Our goal is to get a majority on the Board of Commissioners. Anything between 14 Mile Road and Hall Road is in play,” Montilla said, referring to an area with five commissioner districts.

Democratic officials scoff at the prospect of the opposition reversing their 9-4 edge but they also concede that they are playing defense at this point, with little hope of adding any seats to their majority.

Advertisement

The Republicans cut their minority status on the board to a 7-6 margin following the GOP wave in the 2010 election – and managed to place Republican Commissioner Kathy Vosburg of Chesterfield Township as the board chair – but that momentum crumbled in the 2012 vote.

In the 2014 campaign, the Republicans have focused on two races where Democratic commissioners lost in 2010 and made a comeback two years later: the 10th District (St. Clair Shores and Harrison Township) where the incumbent is Democrat Michael Boyle; and the 5th District (northern Sterling Heights), tossup territory where incumbent Democrat Rob Mijac is trying to preserve re-election.

Boyle is a former St. Clair Shores councilman and a bus mechanic for the SMART transit system. Mijac is a small business owner.

On Tuesday, Mijac faces Republican Maria Grot of Sterling Heights; Boyle is head-to-head with the GOP’s Steve Marino of Harrison Township.

The GOP’s campaign strategy is to tag Democratic commissioners with Obamacare and taxes.

While the Affordable Care Act is clearly a federal issue, a resolution passed by the board in April calling for state approval of the Medicaid expansion plan associated with the ACA provided the GOP with a political opening, Montilla said.

“By passing that resolution, they were indicating their support for Obamacare,” he said.

In campaign literature criticizing Boyle and Mijac, the county GOP also asserts that Democrats on the part-time county board should have pushed for a new policy, with the commissioners casting aside their county-paid health care coverage in favor of insurance purchased on the ACA exchange.

Ed Bruley, chairman of the Macomb Democrats, countered that the GOP is out of step with the realities of health care reform.

“They’re criticizing Democrats for supporting what the Republican governor and the Republican Legislature approved,” Bruley said, referring to the expanded Medicaid program known as Healthy Michigan. “I would say that’s a pretty dysfunctional party.”

As for the prospect of the commissioners switching from county health care to the private insurance policies offered on healthcare.gov, the Democratic chairman said that argument makes little sense.

“The Affordable Care Act was meant to help those who could not get insurance,” he said. “It was not meant to displace what people already have.”

As for the tax issue, Republicans point out that a Democratic majority on the board in 2009 passed a 9 percent increase in the county property tax at a time when the commissioners were struggling with budget deficits.

That millage hike of five years ago remains in place. For a typical Macomb County family with a $100,000 house, the increase means an extra $29 per year.

Montilla also questions the board’s tentative decision to sell millions of dollars of bonds to repair and upgrade county buildings. Perhaps the most controversial GOP stand on the issues references a recent pay hike for county employees.

After enduring several years of wage and benefit concessions, the unionized workers recently received a negotiated $1,000 lump-sum payment several months ahead of schedule as the county’s accumulated budget surplus mounted. Montilla said those payments amounted to $2.4 million in “bonuses.”

A first-time candidate, Grot is the sister of Shelby Township Clerk Stan Grot, who unsuccessfully waged an expensive and aggressive race for state House in the August GOP primary. She has invested minimally into her campaign, relying instead on the party to make her case.

Marino, a campaign finance consultant, has put forth a far more aggressive campaign, which has been complimented by the GOP’s efforts. The young challenger has outspent the incumbent by a massive margin, $48,000 to $3,700, with nearly $44,000 in his war chest coming from his own pocket.

But the Democrats have responded with some heavy ammunition. Voting records indicate that, since Marino first registered to vote while living in St. Clair Shores in 2008, he has voted in just three of 13 elections – a 23 percent turnout rate.

Among the elections he missed was the August primary and November general election during the presidential year of 2008; the November 2009 vote on the Macomb County charter; the August and November elections of 2010; and the presidential primary election of 2012.

He stated the missed votes came while he was a student at Michigan State University, which he said he attended from 2007-12.

In addition, Marino’s specialty is aiding political candidates with filing their campaign’s financial paperwork, yet county records indicate he filed his latest campaign finance report five days late and paid the county a $75 fine.

Marino responded: “A mailing error was noticed and the Clerk’s office was notified in advance.”

In the new world of county government under a home rule charter – essentially a county constitution -- basic changes materialized: an elected executive oversees county departments, the executive branch, on a day-to-day basis; and the Board of Commissioners, the legislative branch, was cut in half from 26 to 13 members and put in charge of the “purse strings,” granting final approval to budget matters and county contracts.

Hackel, a Macomb Township Democrat who tries to maintain a bipartisan stance, has played no role in the commissioner campaigns as he focuses on his own re-election.

Other incumbent commissioners facing re-election are: Marv Sauger, D-Center Line; Veronica Klineflet, D-Eastpointe; board Chair Dave Flynn, D-Sterling Heights; Jim Carabelli, R-Shelby Township; Don Brown, R-Washington Township; Fred Miller, D-Mount Clemens; Kathy Tocco, D-Fraser; Bob Smith, D-Clinton Township; Joe Sabatini, R-Macomb Township; and former board chair Vosburg.

In the one open seat, in western Warren’s District 1, former Democratic commissioner Andrey Duzyj faces Republican Joseph Kozar.