DENVER--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Filling the unprecedented demand for qualified healthcare case managers will be easier with the launch of the first certification program for entry-level case managers, QPCM – the Qualified Professional Case Manager designation.

Case managers are healthcare professionals, usually nurses, who play a key role in coordinating the care of a patient, particularly those with complicated and/or costly medical diagnoses or conditions.

Demand for these professionals is growing dramatically due to the increasing number of aging Americans who need healthcare and changes in the healthcare industry due to the Affordable Care Act. For example, recently, more than twice as many healthcare companies (57 percent) said they will add case managers in the coming year, up from 27 percent in the previous year1. However, because nurses who are interested in this growing field cannot become certified without experience, and cannot get experience without a job, entering the profession is very challenging.

With QPCM, experienced nurses can demonstrate that they have the qualifications and knowledge to perform as entry-level case managers. Companies can hire these certified individuals knowing that they have the capabilities to perform at this entry level with less supervision and less on-the-job training.

For nurses desiring to become case managers, QPCM offers a fast track to this new career. By completing the QPCM certification, they can be in their new position within a matter of months, instead of spending years getting an advanced degree or trying to gain this experience on their own.

The QPCM certification validates that each successful certificant has acquired a working knowledge of core case management competencies. In order to be eligible for this entry-level certification, candidates must have a verifiable RN license (without restrictions), three years of clinical experience in the last five years and post-graduate case management training (from a pre-approved educational provider).

The QPCM examination was developed based on best practices in case management to produce a valid and reliable assessment instrument. The examination content was evaluated by a team of experienced subject matter experts in the field of case management and designed according to the ICE (Institute for Credentialing Excellence) and NCCA Accreditation Standards (National Commission for Certifying Agencies).

For more information on QPCM, visit http://qpcm.org/ or call 888-960-8999.

About QPCM

QPCM (Qualified Professional Case Manager) enables nurses thinking of a career change to obtain a certification for entry-level case management. With a QPCM certification, they will have the third-party validation that qualifies them to perform in this role. Companies can hire these QPCM certified professionals with the confidence that they are qualified to perform as entry-level case managers. Visit the QPCM website at http://qpcm.org/ for additional information on how to learn, evolve, and succeed in case management with a QPCM certification.

1 Healthcare Intelligence Network (HIN). Case Management in 2013: Achieving Results with Cardiovascular Disease; Long-Term Care Next Frontier for Embedded Case Managers. http://www.hin.com/library/registercasemanagement2013.html