When the Affordable Care Act became law in 2010, it ushered in a huge shift for hospitals that went far beyond the well-publicized insurance exchanges. The law placed a major emphasis on performance and outcomes, and it focused especially on an issue we’ve long been aware of: trying to prevent hundreds of thousands of infections acquired at U.S. hospitals each year.

Hospitals face significant challenges when it comes to preventing infections, so it’s more important than ever that we foster a culture of transparency, collaboration and adherence. An overdependence on antibiotics has led to a drastic rise in antibiotic-related or drug-resistant infections, and infections often have as much to do with what’s happening out in a community – whether a particular bacteria is more common, or if many patients are moving between different facilities – as it does with what’s taking place inside any one hospital.

These and other factors have led to a significant increase in some infections. Yet, despite the presence of these and other germs in any acute care setting, it’s still relatively rare for a patient to get a hospital-acquired infection.

And as more data about hospital quality and infections becomes available, the information should be understood in context. Looking broadly at a hospital’s outcomes over a period of time gives the truest sense of how a hospital is performing.

Many hospitals, including those in my system, St. Joseph Hoag Health, have made great strides, and Orange County hospitals are anything but “plagued” by infections, as a recent Register article suggested. Our hospitals (which include St. Joseph of Orange, Mission Hospital, St. Jude and Hoag) are at or below national infection rates in 100 of 106 measured categories. We know that the key to prevention is proactivity, which is why teams of infection prevention experts scour our units every day, searching for any link to infections and looking for ways to improve our procedures and practices.

That’s not to say that we can’t do better, and any patient who acquires an infection in our hospitals is one too many. Whether it’s centralizing our infection prevention and improving communication between hospitals and departments, or practicing adherence to protocols that sometimes have as many as 100 decision points, all hospitals have much work to do to bring infection rates closer to zero. We’re not alone – even some of the country’s most renowned hospitals have more infections than the accepted benchmark in some areas. While infections are a national discussion, we believe we have a duty to be clear about our local efforts to provide quality care to every patient.

So how can people in our community understand what’s really happening at their hospitals? What’s most important is looking at a hospital’s outcomes, as opposed to judging based solely on the snapshot captured by a regulator’s survey report or data on the government’s Hospital Compare website, which only tracks data from the latest quarter. While Hospital Compare is a good resource, so are other sites like Cal Quality Care and Leapfrog, which draw in a broader set of data from additional sources.

Hospitals operate in an incredibly complex and demanding environment, but looking at mortality rates, complications, readmissions, measures of timely and effective care and patient experience can give a fuller picture. Those are the areas the Affordable Care Act has emphasized, and by these standards many O.C. hospitals excel.

Richard Afable, M.D., MPH is president and CEO of St. Joseph Hoag Health.