Stock photo (Photo: Thinkstock.com) Story Highlights Good Samaritan Society will spend $2.5 million to expand Louisville facility.

Morning Pointe will build personal care residence, Alzheimer's center. Project will cost about $17 million.

Both facilities' construction will take more than a year to complete.

Residents in and around Jeffersontown will have additional long- and short-term assisted living options once a new facility is constructed and another expands.

Morning Pointe facilities owner Independent Healthcare Properties plans to build a new location on 8 acres off Hurstbourne Parkway near Watterson Trail, and the Good Samaritan Center plans to expand its facility off Watterson Trail east of Taylorsville Road.

Good Samaritan broke ground March 26, and Morning Pointe officials hope to start construction this summer. Both projects will take more than a year to complete.

Both facilities will offer long-term assisted living care but differ in additional services. Good Samaritan hopes to place a focus on short-term rehabilitation, and Morning Pointe will provide an Alzheimer's memory care center.

The Good Samaritan facility will spend $2.5 million to renovate its building and add more than 12,000 square feet, which will include a new therapy gym, activities room and sitting areas, director of marketing Carmen Combs-Wilkinson said. It will also convert 22 of its 98 rooms into private rooms for short-term residents.

Currently, residents have a roommate and share bathrooms. The new rooms will be for single occupants and have their own full baths, Combs-Wilkinson said.

Good Samaritan officials hope the changes will attract more seniors needing short-term services, since the facility has mostly been known for long-term care, Combs-Wilkinson said.

"This is a way to kind of highlight the things that we're already doing and the things that we already should be known for in a way that will be more attractive for those wanting to return home," she said.

Morning Pointe, to be built at 8300 Stillmeadow Drive, will consist of two one-story buildings: a personal care residence and the Alzheimer's center. The assisted living facility will be about 56,000 square feet and have 80 beds, while the specialty center will be 33,000 square feet and have 50 beds.

Independent Healthcare Properties/Morning Pointe president and CEO Greg Vital said the larger building will cost about $10 million and the smaller building about $7 million.

The company will offer traditional services in the personal care center and will expand upon programs for Alzheimer's residents in the specialized facility, including memory exercising with sensory stimulation and therapeutic interaction with groups.

Morning Pointe has seven locations in Kentucky but has not yet built in Louisville. Vital said owners saw a need in Louisville south of Interstate 64, where the population continues to grow and mature.

"That area continues to have large numbers of people who are underserved," he said.

Reporter Bailey Loosemore can be reached at (502) 582-4646. Follow her on Twitter at @bloosemore.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1nkad4J