KKR Co-founder Henry Kravis at a media briefing in Hong Kong in September. Bloomberg News/ Jessica Hromas

Questions about who will succeed Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. co-founders Henry Kravis and George Roberts, both in their 70s, have swirled for years, and the firm still isn’t giving any hints.

During a presentation today to the firm’s public shareholders at Keefe Bruyette & Woods’ Asset Management Conference, Chief Financial Officer Bill Janetschek said KKR’s management committee consists of 13 members in addition to Messrs. Kravis and Roberts. “Everyone is qualified to run the firm,” said Mr. Janetschek.

The co-founders, meanwhile, are very active, Mr. Janetschek said, adding that he and Mr. Kravis spoke on the phone several times the previous day, and that he and Mr. Roberts exchanged emails late into evening.

Messrs. Kravis and Roberts are “not going anywhere anytime soon,” said Mr. Janetschek. “But should that time come, it’s not going to be problematic.”

KKR’s management committee–its top executive echelon–includes such people as Alexander Navab, head of Americas private equity; and Scott Nuttall, head of global capital and asset management group.

KKR isn’t the only megafirm facing succession questions. The founders of Carlyle Group, Apollo Global Management and Blackstone Group are all still actively managing their respective firms.

But there has been movement in the inner circles of some of these shops. In March, Carlyle named Michael Cavanagh, a former J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. executive that was seen as a front-runner to succeed Chief Executive James Dimon, as the firm’s co-chief operating officer along with long-time Carlyle executive Glenn A. Youngkin.

That same month, Apollo President Marc Spilker announced his intention to step down. It was later reported that two senior partners in the private equity division were also planning to depart the firm.

While still uncertain, the succession path at Blackstone Group may be among the most clear. The Wall Street Journal reported in January that Jonathan Gray, head of the firm’s real estate business and mastermind of the lucrative Hilton deal, is said to be the top candidate to succeed President Hamilton “Tony” James as the firm’s No. 2 executive.

Of course Mr. Gray, or any other players from Blackstone’s bench, may have quite a time to wait. Similar to KKR’s top executives, Mr. James and Co-Founder and Chief Executive Stephen Schwarzman have shown no desire to retire anytime soon.

[CORRECTION: An earlier version of this post incorrectly identified the KKR executive speaking during a presentation as Craig Larson, head of investor relations. The person speaking was Chief Financial Officer Bill Janetschek.]

Write to Shasha Dai at shasha.dai@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter @ShashaDai1.