3K saved from losing health provider with Ochsner accord to treat UnitedHealth's 'Obamacare' patients

3K saved from losing health provider with Ochsner accord to treat UnitedHealth's 'Obamacare' patients

After weeks in limbo, UnitedHealthcare has reached a deal for Ochsner Health System to continue treating patients enrolled in the insurance company’s “Obamacare” health coverage through the end of 2016.

The agreement will provide relief for nearly 3,000 people in south Louisiana, many of whom faced being severed from longtime physicians and specialists and forced to travel an hour or more for hospital care.

The about-face was announced Friday, almost a month after the insurance giant notified customers that it was ending its public health exchange coverage program with Ochsner — Louisiana’s largest nonprofit health care system — effective May 15, only five months into the 2016 health insurance period.

The company had said the initial decision was part of a “routine renegotiation” of a contract.

“Patients enrolled in UnitedHealthcare’s Compass plan will be able to continue to receive their health care services from an Ochsner provider and at Ochsner hospitals without any disruption in care,” the two companies said Friday in a joint statement.

Still, it’s only a temporary reprieve: The nation’s biggest health insurer notified Louisiana Insurance Department officials last month that in January, it will end its participation in most of the public health insurance exchanges created under the Affordable Care Act, including in Louisiana. It said it was facing losses of more than $1 billion in 2015 and 2016.

In Louisiana, that decision will force about 29,000 people to find a new insurance provider under the federal health care law. Those customers will have to sign up with a new insurer during the 2017 open enrollment period, which runs from Nov. 1 to Jan. 31.

In a letter to its local customers last month, UnitedHealthcare said members of its so-called “Compass” program would have in-network care available elsewhere in the state. However, the six alternative facilities it listed were all at least an hour’s drive from New Orleans.

At the time, Ochsner said it was “unable to reach mutually agreeable terms” to remain with UnitedHealthcare’s public health insurance program, although it didn’t rule out reconciliation, saying it was “open to discussions with UnitedHealthcare should anything change.”

Even then, some industry observers expected the two sides to return to the bargaining table to hash out a short-term arrangement.

State-based health insurance exchanges were established as a result of the Affordable Care Act, as was a federal health insurance marketplace for states such as Louisiana that didn’t start exchanges on their own. Coverage was targeted at the uninsured and often offered sizable subsidies to make the insurance affordable for lower-income people.

UnitedHealthcare insures about 13 percent of the more than 214,000 Louisiana residents enrolled in the health insurance exchange. Nationwide, it covers 795,000 people under the exchanges.

Follow Richard Thompson on Twitter, @rthompsonMSY.