Two bald eaglets have been located high atop a PSE&G tower in Somerset County. (Photo: ~Courtesy of PSE&G) Story Highlights PSE&G identified a new eagle's nest on the Roseland-Lambertville transmission line right of way

In 1982, there was one bald eagle nest in New Jersey. Today there are nearly 150 nesting pairs.

The male and female birds each weighed about 9 pounds.

High atop a Public Service Electric & Gas (PSE&G) transmission tower in Somerset County, two bald eaglets are preparing to spread their wings and leave their nest for the first time.

When they do, they will sport colored identification bands on their legs thanks to the state's environmental experts and a number of helping hands from PSE&G.

Earlier this year, PSE&G identified a new eagle's nest on the Roseland-Lambertville transmission line right of way. Employees from the utility's Delivery Projects and Construction (DP&C) division and the state's Endangered and Non-game Species Program (ENSP) kept a close eye on the nest, confirming that eaglets had hatched.

Two eaglets hatched in a nest on a PSE&G transmission tower in Somerset County. (Photo: ~Courtesy of PSE&G)

"When the eaglets were about six weeks old, the ENSP biologists asked for our help with the banding effort," said Claudia Rocca, licensing project manager for PSE&G. "Banding typically occurs between 5-7 weeks old because there is minimal risk of adults abandoning the nest, the eaglets are still docile and less mobile, they have not yet developed use of their talons and their legs have reached full size for a proper band fit. We were only too glad to help."

With instructions on handling the eaglets, four skilled PSE&G towermen climbed the tower and successfully placed the eaglets -- one at a time -- into large cloth duffle bags, where they were gently lowered via ropes and pulleys to three teammates on the ground. ENSP staff and a veterinarian checked out the eaglets, took body and weight measurements, collected a blood sample and banded them.

The male and female birds each weighed about 9 pounds.

Two bands were placed on either leg -- a U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service federal identification band and a green New Jersey State band, indicating that the birds were born in the Garden State. These eaglets will take their first flights at about 11–12 weeks old at the end of June or early July, but will remain close to the nest until the end of summer or early fall.

"These eaglets do not yet have their tell-tale white head or tail feathers yet; they won't develop these until they are about 4-5 years old," Rocca said. "As a token of our appreciation, we left a fish in the nest for their next meal."

After a brief photo opportunity, the eaglets were carefully sent back up the tower and placed back into the nest.

"We quickly left the area so that the eaglets and their parents could go back to their normal activities," Rocca said. "This was a very special and unique opportunity provided by ENSP wildlife biologists. It is very important to never disturb nesting eagles or their young. People need to keep their distance and avoid making loud noises."

Although no longer listed as endangered federally, in New Jersey they are still listed as endangered (breeding season) and threatened (non-breeding season). In addition, eagles are still a state and federally protected species under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act and the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act.

Through the management efforts of ENSP and many other groups, bald eagle numbers have soared in New Jersey in recent years. In 1982, there was one bald eagle nest in New Jersey. Today there are nearly 150 nesting pairs.

For additional information on bald eagles, including NJ's annual eagle reports, please visit the ENSP website: http://njfishandwildlife.com/ensphome.htm

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1M7Oed0