For the first time since the Sept. 11, 2001, terror attacks compelled Congress to pass the USA Patriot Act into law, federal lawmakers have taken a significant step to reform the nation’s surveillance and federal law enforcement directives over privacy concerns.

By a vote of 67-32, the Senate passed the USA Freedom Act on Tuesday afternoon, a bill reauthorizing the Patriot Act but modifying provisions granted to the National Security Agency and Federal Bureau of Investigation in the October 2001 law. Both U.S. senators from Kansas, Jerry Moran and Pat Roberts, voted against the Freedom Act, albeit for different reasons.

“Senator Roberts voted against the USA Freedom Act because it will not improve the safety and security of the American people,” said Sarah Little, the Republican senator’s communications director. “The Act will damage our capability to protect Americans from threats.”

While Roberts argued the Freedom Act went too far in reforming the NSA, Moran suggested Tuesday that it didn’t go far enough.

“I am concerned with our government’s domestic data collection practices and invasion of Americans’ privacy,” Moran, a Republican, said in a statement. “Congress should provide the U.S. intelligence community with the tools and resources necessary to reduce national security risks, but the USA Freedom Act fails to provide the reforms needed to safeguard individual rights while at the same time not increasing the security of Americans.”

Moran said limited debate in the Senate “failed to yield meaningful reform legislation.”

“Effective intelligence gathering does not have to come at the expense of civil liberties,” Moran said. “Congress must stop waiting until the last minute to address the pressing issues facing our nation.”

The legislation was signed into law Tuesday night by President Barack Obama, who had voiced his support for the bill and had called on the Senate to approve it before midnight Sunday.

“Glad the Senate finally passed the USA Freedom Act,” the president said on Twitter. “It protects civil liberties and our national security.”

Before the final vote was taken, a cloture motion passed 83-14, despite nay votes from both Roberts and Moran. Cloture, which requires 60 votes for passage, is a procedural measure allowing senators to begin considering and amending a House bill.

What followed was a trio of failed amendments by Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., to roll back the reforms in the House bill. In each case, Moran voted against the amendments and Roberts voted in favor.

Tuesday’s action follows an uncommon Sunday session of the Senate that didn’t result in the last-minute reauthorization many Patriot Act supporters had hoped for, forcing an expiration of three Patriot Act provisions at midnight Sunday. Before adjourning Sunday night, the Senate passed cloture 77-17 with all 17 votes in opposition cast by Republicans, including Roberts and Moran.

In the House, the Freedom Act garnered an array of different opinions from the state’s four House members, all Republicans.

Reps. Tim Huelskamp and Kevin Yoder voted against the Freedom Act, arguing it didn’t go far enough to curtail the NSA. Rep. Lynn Jenkins voted in favor of the bill, saying it struck a balance between the dual needs of national security and civil liberties. Rep. Mike Pompeo, meanwhile, voted in favor of the Freedom Act but would have preferred a reauthorization of the Patriot Act that didn’t hinder the power of federal law enforcement and intelligence officials.

“People in my party are saying the government is reading emails and listening to phone calls without a warrant. That’s just not true,” Pompeo said this week. “They have misled the people of Kansas and the American people.”

The Patriot Act has faced flak in recent years from some Democrats and libertarian Republicans after Edward Snowden, a former NSA contractor, shed light on the NSA’s vast surveillance programs in 2013.