Members and advisers of the Crimes Stoppers Board of Directors (from left): Andrea Craparotta, vice-president; Gerard McAleer, chief of detectives, Middlesex County Prosecutor’s Office; Anthony A. Caputo, chairman and president of Crime Stoppers; Scott S. Sprengel, president/general manager of Suburban Transit; Middlesex County Prosecutor Andrew C. Carey, and Capt. Vincent Sabo of the New Brunswick Police Department. (Photo: Middlesex County Prosecutor’s Office) Story Highlights Crime Stoppers is a nationally recognized agency dedicated to helping police solve.

The program offers cash payments for information.

Suburban Transit is becoming a new corporate sponsor of the program.

Scott S. Sprengel, president and general manager of Suburban Transit, a locally based bus company will become a member of Crime Stoppers of Middlesex County Inc. Board of Directors effective April 29.

In addition, Suburban Transit will become a corporate sponsor of Crime Stoppers, according to Middlesex County Prosecutor Andrew C. Carey and Anthony A. Caputo, director of the New Brunswick Police Department and chairman and president of Crime Stoppers of Middlesex County, Inc.

In recognition of the partnership, Suburban Transit is placing Crime Stoppers stickers on all of its buses to remind residents there is an easy way to report crimes anonymously in Middlesex County and receive cash rewards for the assistance.

"Suburban Transit is pleased to become a corporate sponsor and will be dedicated to helping law enforcement track criminal suspects and help ensure the safety of all of the county's residents,'' Sprengel said.

Sprengel, a resident of Wall Township, began working for Coach USA, owners of Suburban Transit, in 2007 and also serves as the company's general manager of the Dillon Bus Service in Hanover, Md. He has been involved in the transportation industry for more than 25 years.

Crime Stoppers was created in May 2011 to offer cash rewards to people who anonymously provide information leading to the arrests of suspects in crimes committed in the county.

Caputo said Sprengel has long been involved in the community and brings a lot of integrity to the board. Board members volunteer their time to determine the amount of rewards given to anonymous callers.

He added Sprengel "is dedicated to the support of our emergency responders, both in the law enforcement and fire services, as well as our military and war veterans."

Prosecutor Carey said Sprengel has been a strong supporter of law enforcement in the past.

Crime Stoppers is a nationally-recognized agency dedicated to helping police solve crimes by offering cash payments to entice people to call a special phone number and anonymously provide information.

In Middlesex County, a phone number, website and text messaging system have been created for people who want to provide anonymous information about criminal activity.

The phone number is: 1-800-939-9600. The website is: middlesextips.com. Text messages may be sent to 274637 (CRIMES) with the keyword "midtip'' followed by a message.

Those who call are given instructions on how to collect cash rewards by using a numerical code that will be recognized by a local bank, which will pay the rewards that are approved by the board.

Other corporate sponsors of Crime Stoppers are: Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital, Johnson & Johnson, the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers Local 456, and Greater Media Newspapers.

Any corporation or business wishing to be a financial sponsor may contact Capt. Christopher Penna of the Middlesex County Prosecutor's Office at 732-745-4102.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1GnpewT