Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton ahead of an immigration discussion in Las Vegas on May 5. Mike Blake/Reuters

Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton said Tuesday that she would expand on President Barack Obama‘s executive actions on immigration—making a play to bind immigrant voting blocs to the Democratic Party.

Conservative Republicans can do much better than Mrs. Clinton’s proposal to expand eligibility to defer deportation.

There is latent but broad support among most leading House and Senate Republicans, as well as the GOP presidential candidates–underpinned by evangelicals–to offer citizenship to people who were illegally brought to the United States as children.

Mrs. Clinton understands that the GOP is divided on many immigration issues and that even those legislators in “safe” seats can face primary threats if they are perceived to be “pro-amnesty.” Meanwhile, U.S. demographic trends and past Republican performance make clear that the GOP must win 30% of non-white voters to be competitive in the 2016 presidential election.

House Speaker John Boehner and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell might consider immediately moving to pass a bill offering citizenship to “DREAMers.” Chief opponents of such an effort are likely to be Sen. Ted Cruz (R., Tex.), Sen. Jeff Sessions (R., Ala.), Rep. Steve King (R., Iowa), and Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker (R). But most in the GOP see the shortsightedness of reflexively crying “No amnesty!” whether the issue is H-1B visas, farm workers, or young people brought here illegally as children.

Many on Capitol Hill believe immigration reform should be a piecemeal process, with border security addressed first. A large bloc of conservative voters believe that any reform must first deter the flow of future illegal immigrants. Mrs. Clinton is baiting these conservatives, who understand the importance of deterrence and citizenship for DREAMers, with a proposal that could embolden an0ther generation of immigrants to risk illegally crossing our border.

Immediate GOP progress to grant DREAMers citizenship would send a strong, compelling message: Not only would children have the safe harbor of citizenship, but their parents and broader communities would appreciate the relief such an opportunity offers.

Mrs. Clinton said that legal status is code for “second-class citizenship.” For those who came here illegally through no fault of their own, second-class citizenship is effectively all President Obama has offered during his six years in the White House. Republicans may have other divides on immigration, but their majorities in the House and Senate should allow them to pass a narrow bill granting citizenship to DREAMers, transforming the lives of millions of immigrant children and their families and making a clear outreach to Hispanics, Latinos, Asians and Africans—important demographics in 2016.

Juleanna Glover is a corporate consultant and Republican policy and communications adviser who has served on the staffs of George W. Bush, Dick Cheney, John Ashcroft, and others. She has co-hosted fundraisers for former Florida governor Jeb Bush. She is on Twitter: @juleannaglover.

ALSO IN THINK TANK:

Jeb Bush and Common Core Misconceptions

Barack ‘O’Bama’ and His Irish-American Advisers

In Voters’ Distrust, a Catch-22 for Non-Traditional Candidates

The Real 2016 Role of Mike Huckabee, Carly Fiorina and Ben Carson

On Foundation Funding, Legitimate Questions for the Clintons