4864297

Sen. Lindsey Graham says that Sen. Ted Cruz is not a more acceptable nominee than Donald Trump.

Tuesday on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe,” Graham said Trump’s “message is not a good message for us. And it will catch up with us in general. So if you really want to make Hillary Clinton president of the United States, vote for Donald Trump. Dishonest beats crazy.”

Graham, who has endorsed Jeb Bush, was asked by NBC’s Willie Geist, “If Donald Trump is not acceptable candidate to you, Ted Cruz is close behind him in a lot of the polls. Leading him a little bit in Iowa, depending on which poll you look at. Would Ted Cruz be a more acceptable nominee to you then Donald Trump?”

“No,” Graham insisted. Host Joe Scarborough interjected, “You’re in trouble then my man.”

Speaking about Cruz, Graham said, “He’s going to get killed.”

“You’d rather have Donald Trump the nominee than Ted Cruz?” asked Geist.

Graham did not answer the question, instead arguing, “When I think of Evangelical Christians, the first thing in my mind is Donald Trump. No! When I think of problem solver, the first think in my mind is not Ted Cruz.”

“All I can say, I’ve learned one thing in 20 years. If a law is named after the president of the United States and they’re still president, you’re probably not going to repeal it,” Graham said. Cruz “took our party down a strange road of shutting down the government to repeal Obamacare and those of us who thought that was a bad tactical choice he said. ‘You’re actually for Obamacare.’ I’ll never forget that.”

Graham then compared Cruz to Joe McCarthy, the Cold War-era anti-Communist crusading senator, saying, “That’s Joe McCarthy stuff because you disagree with how to repeal Obamacare, you’re for the thing that you actually are against. I don’t like that kind of politicking.”

“They’ll tear him to shreds,” Graham said. “At the end of the day the next president needs to be ready on day one to be commander-in-chief and bring this country together. I don’t think Donald Trump and Ted Cruz are ready on day one to be commander-in-chief. They can’t bring this country together and Jeb Bush can. He will beat Hillary Clinton.”

WATCH:

Follow Steve on Twitter and Facebook