Nikki Boertman/The Commercial Appeal February 26, 2016 - GOP presidential hopeful John Kasich poses for a photo with Arlington High School student Ronald Young, 16, at the conclusion of his town hall meeting at the Holiday Inn on the University of Memphis campus.

SHARE February 26, 2016 - GOP presidential hopeful John Kasich listens to a question from Debbie Marie during a town hall meeting at the Holiday Inn on the University of Memphis campus. (Nikki Boertman/The Commercial Appeal)

By Ryan Poe of The Commercial Appeal

After a packed town hall meeting Friday night in Memphis, John Kasich scoffed at the idea his presidential campaign was winding down, calling the idea "way yesterday's news" and saying he's picking up "significant supporters."

But he lost one potential supporter: New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, who endorsed Donald Trump shortly before Kasich's town hall at the University of Memphis Holiday Inn, despite Kasich asking him for his support. Christie will reportedly join Trump for a rally in Millington Saturday, although Trump's campaign did not confirm that Friday night.

"He just went another way," the Ohio governor told reporters, referring to Christie's endorsement. "It happens. It's OK."

Kasich hinted that he could get a big endorsement soon, but declined to go into any detail.

Kasich drew a standing-room-only crowd of about 600 people, mostly white, who asked questions ranging from education to health care and to privacy concerns.

But the Republican candidate, standing near a "Kasich For Us" sign, weaved his replies through his theme: that people have to take responsibility for making America better than it already is.

"It's on all of us to make sure this is going to work," he said.

Kasich said he sees a pathway to the nomination by doing well in the northern and eastern states, but said that he expected to pick up some delegates on Super Tuesday.

Tennessee is one of 12 Super Tuesday states, and recent polls favor Donald Trump as the winner in the state. But the state's delegates are awarded proportionally to the votes, which opens the door for Kasich to pick up some of the state's 58 delegates.

Kasich said he's consistently performed better than expected, coming in second to Trump in New Hampshire. Talking about his next steps, he paraphrased a line from the movie "Everest."

"Just put one foot in front of the other and just climb to the top of Mount Everest," he said.

Kasich's message — wholesome and good-humored — resounded with the audience, including Stan Evans of the Chickasaw Gardens area. Evans said he pegged Kasich early as the "most presidential" — if not the most electable — candidate.

Several Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders supporters also were in the audience, including 21-year-old Michael Cortes, who spoke approvingly of Kasich as a candidate he'd consider if Sanders doesn't get the Democratic nomination.

"He's not a Trump. He's not a Rubio," Cortes said.

David White, who lives near the University of Memphis, said before the rally that he supported Kasich, but hoped to hear more about his views on limited government.

"We need a leader — not just a showman," he said, contrasting Kasich to other Republican candidates.

Kasich made his views on limited government clear, telling the crowd the U.S. can't "continue to spend like drunken sailors."

"Here's the dirty little secret: Democrats loved to spend; Republicans love to spend too, they just feel guilty when they do it," he said, one of several lines that generated laughter from the crowd.

The first question Kasich fielded was about education, from a man whose wife works as a teacher in Shelby County. Kasich said most of the local issues can be handled locally, but used the question as a springboard to say that America's strength is in people finding common ground, in being Americans before they're Democrats or Republicans.

"We haven't had that for a while," he said. "We need that."

Kasich also acknowledged how important health care is to Tennessee, bad-mouthing the Affordable Care Act but speaking approvingly of Tennessee's lack of an income tax.

Kasich was hit with questions on several hot-button, national issues. Asked about his response to the Islamic State, Kasich said he would form a coalition and "destroy" ISIS in the air and on the ground, and in the dispute over whether Apple should share some user information with the FBI, Kasich said he wants a "balance," possibly by requiring a court order to unlock some data.

In closing, Kasich referenced the Biblical book of life, saying that God is watching and it's everyone's responsibility to fill the ledger with good deeds.

"We've got to build it from where we live," he said of his vision for America.