Schools, businesses shut down in Boulder in Nov. 1963 to mourn Kennedy

A portrait of John F. Kennedy in 1961 (AP)

Boulder resident Louise Geil, like many Americans, remembers exactly where she was when she heard the news that President John F. Kennedy had been shot.

Geil, then a 19-year-old sophomore at the University of Colorado, was walking back to her sorority house, Kappa Alpha Theta, after class that Friday, Nov. 22, 1963.

Now, 50 years later as the anniversary of Kennedy's death approaches, Geil still thinks about the weekend she and the rest of America spent glued to their televisions, watching as the saga of Kennedy's death and its aftermath unfolded.

"All anybody wanted to do was watch the news," said Geil, 69. "We were literally holding our breath. It was the kind of thing that no one ever even considered as a possibility. It was a violation of a kind no one could imagine. Suddenly, nothing else became important. Absolutely nothing."

Boulder mourns Kennedy

Major Gen. Robert H. Warren, then superintendent of the Air Force Academy, called off the football game scheduled for Nov. 23, 1963, between Air Force and CU. The send-off for the U.S. Olympic ski team scheduled for Nov. 23 at Lake Eldora was also canceled.

The university, other schools and most businesses shut down Monday, Nov. 25, as Boulder paid tribute to the fallen president. President Lyndon B. Johnson proclaimed the Monday after Kennedy's death a day of mourning, and many Americans watched Kennedy's funeral on television that day.

Church bells in Boulder rang for three minutes the hour the president's funeral began in Washington, D.C., on Nov. 25, 1963.

Advertisement

According to archived copies of the Daily Camera from 1963, students at Fairview High School organized a torchlight memorial service on the day of the funeral. Fairview students also sent a telegram quoting Abraham Lincoln's Gettysburg Address to Jackie Kennedy.

It read: "It is difficult to choose words to express our sorrow and grief at this grave time, 'for the world will little note, nor long remember what we say here, but they will never forget what was done here.' Our feelings as well as those of the nation are with you. The student Body and Staff of Fairview High School."

Then-Boulder Mayor John P. Holloway also sent a telegram to Jackie Kennedy, and he recounted in the Daily Camera how he had worked on the security detail team for President Kennedy's visit to the U.S. Air Force Academy in June 1963.

The only time Kennedy ever visited Boulder was in November 1959, during his campaign to be the Democratic Party's nominee for president. According to a Nov. 23, 1963, Daily Camera story, Kennedy watched a 15-7 CU victory against the Air Force Academy. He watched with Byron "Whizzer" White, CU's "first All-American gridiron great," according to the story, whom he named to the U.S. Supreme Court in March 1962.

Camelot ripped away by assassination

As Geil remembers it, people from all political parties mourned in the days following Kennedy's death. CU history instructor Marty Babicz said that's because no matter their political views, many Americans grieved for a president they felt they knew personally.

Before being elected, Kennedy debated Richard Nixon in the first-ever televised debate. Kennedy used TV throughout his presidency, Babicz said, and Americans often felt like he was speaking to them directly in their living rooms.

"People are getting a sense that they know this guy, that he's almost a friend or a relative because they're seeing him in a way that they had never seen any other president before," Babicz said.

In many ways, Kennedy's death changed the course of 46-year Boulder resident Jan Demorest's career and life goals.

She was 22 and living in Evanston, Ill., at the time as a graduate student at Northwestern University when Kennedy died. Demorest said she also credits Kennedy with laying the groundwork for America to elect an African-American president in Barack Obama in 2008.

"I was more focused on community and trying to make a difference than I would have otherwise," Demorest said of Kennedy's impact on her life.

John Windsor, who was 10 at the time of Kennedy's death, remembers being sent home from school early that day in Phoenix, Ariz. He also remembers an old comedy record that his family used to own, which parodied the president and his family.

After Kennedy's death, someone in the family smashed the record out of respect for the president, Windsor recalled.

Looking back with 50 years of perspective, Windsor wondered if that day in 1963 marked the end of innocence in America. Windsor remembered thinking that 'Camelot,' the name given to the Kennedy family's time at the White House, was perfect.

"Was it an end of an innocent period for us?" Windsor said. "In a way, it was the whole idea of Camelot. Looking back, it wasn't perfect, but it's easy for a young, handsome president who's murdered to get idealized and lionized."

Contact Staff Writer Sarah Kuta at 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta.