This column is not about Obamacare, same-sex marriage or whether or not voters in a state can assign the task of redrawing legislative districts to an independent board — in order to minimize gerrymandering — even if the state legislature goes crying like babies to a federal court to stop it. (They can! Take that, state legislatures!)

It is rather about one of our most important – and overlooked – founding fathers. (I do apologize for perpetuating the sexism but “founding parents” lacks the clever alliteration we have come to expect.)

This founding father is utterly unique. (I know that “unique” is not supposed be modified but I needed a clever alliteration. You were expecting it.) Though he never intended to establish a new nation, he was so important that America might not have had its strong commitment to personal freedom without him. He died over 100 years before the American Revolution began and he never even visited the new world.

His name was John Milton.

“Wait,” some of you are saying, “Do you mean the very same John Milton who wrote Paradise Lost?” I do indeed.

Before he wrote Paradise Lost, Milton had already lived a very full and interesting life. By 1640, Milton had thrown in his lot with the Puritans and published his first political pamphlet, which condemned corruption in the both the Anglican Church and the court of King Charles I. The next year, while his co-religionists in Parliament were launching what would come to be known as the English Civil War, the 33-year-old Milton married the 16-year-old Mary Powell. If the age difference had not been enough, her family was also staunchly Royalist – supporting the King that Milton’s party would soon defeat and arrest. She found the poet cold and their life together miserable. She left him about a month after the wedding and did not return for three years. Shortly after this (if not entirely because of this), Milton published The Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce. In it he argued that divorce, then unlawful for ANY reason, should be permitted not only for adultery – the single justification set out by Jesus Himself in Matthew 19 – but also for lack of “spiritual compatibility.”

As you can imagine, everyone was outraged. For a brief moment, he had succeeded in uniting almost all of England’s warring religious sects. He was denounced in print and from pulpits and was charged with violating the Licensing Act, which required that all materials be submitted to a government agent before publication. In response, Milton published Areopagitica; A speech of Mr. John Milton for the Liberty of Unlicenc’d [sic] Printing. It was defiantly addressed to Parliament, even though it was controlled by his own political party.

Areopagitica sets out the fundamental arguments in support of freedom of speech and freedom of thought. For Milton, no external authority – church or state – could take away the right of the individual to exercise his own judgment in the search for truth. That search depends on absolute freedom of speech and freedom of inquiry because parts of the Truth might be found anywhere. Milton invents the following parable to illustrate this (the original spelling and grammar have been retained):

“Truth indeed came once into the world with her divine Master, and was a perfect shape most glorious to look on: but when he ascended, and his Apostles after Him were laid asleep, then strait arose a wicked race of deceivers, who [...] hewd her lovely form into a thousand peeces, and scatter’d them to the four winds. From that time ever since, the sad friends of Truth, [...] went up and down gathering up limb by limb still as they could find them. We have not yet found them all, Lords and Commons, nor ever shall doe, till her Masters second coming [.] Suffer not these licencing prohibitions to stand at every place of opportunity forbidding and disturbing them that continue seeking.”

Put another way, the individual possesses greater authority than the state because God has given the individual both Conscience and Reason. She is a genuinely free moral agent in a way that a state can never be. The individual is eternal, the state only temporal and temporary.

Paradise Lost, published long after Milton’s party had been overthrown, still retains its author’s distrust for authority. His portraits of Adam and Eve are sympathetic; his Eve is Adam’s superior in intellect, if not in moral strength. The representation of Satan is so compelling that the Romantic poet William Blake claimed that Milton was “of the Devil’s party without knowing it.”

Whether or not Milton intended the epic to be taken as a statement in favor of democracy, it was certainly read that way. The first American edition of Paradise Lost was published in 1777, just one year into the American Revolution. Thomas Jefferson considered Milton to be the greatest of English poets and there is no doubt that Milton’s beliefs about individual rights echo in the words of the Declaration of Independence and the Bill of Rights.

So the next time you are celebrating the Fourth of July, most likely next July, raise a glass to John Milton: English poet-laureate of the American Revolution.