In the midst of the Crimean crisis, Dick Cheney saw fit to undermine the commander in chief. "I also think he hasn't got any credibility with our allies," Cheney said Sunday on a CBS News broadcast, speaking of President Obama.

That's unseemly, to say the least, in a foreign policy crisis. A once-high official simply does not say such things about a sitting president, by protocol; George W. Bush is scrupulously silent these days. It's just Cheney's latest outrage; keeping track is like counting cattle.

[See a collection of political cartoons on the Republican Party.]

Who asked him, anyway? Charlie Rose, hosting Bob Schieffer's Sunday show, "Face The Nation." Rose apparently had not heard of a famous declaration by a Republican senator, one swell Arthur Vandenberg, that "politics stops at the water's edge." Cozy with his Southern charm, Rose did not challenge Cheney's bald, ugly assertion about President Obama, laced with an edge malice. Old pro Schieffer, my favorite CBS Newsman, wouldn't let an unpatriotic line go by so easy.

Why wasn't Cheney back home on the range in Wyoming, where the deer and the antelope play -- all the better to hunt? Let him leave us in peace and spend more time with his family.

The country knew of Cheney's glaring influence inside the Bush White House and its wars of choice. Less known is that the former president and Cabinet colleagues had grown weary of Cheney's sharp style and he eventually lose his place in the power scheme. The man who ducked every chance to serve in uniform during the Vietnam War seemed to see himself leading "on the field of battle" in a dark shadowy conflict. He took the tragedy of September 11 into other spheres as well and masterminded scaring us into surrendering our civil liberties.

[See a collection of editorial cartoons on Vladimir Putin and Russia.]

Yet Cheney's star began to wane about six years into the Bush presidency, according to Peter Baker, the author of "Days of Fire." This was about the time Bush himself fell out of public favor.

By then, the nation was weary of war, especially the empty grounds for the Iraq War. At home, Bush's cavalier reaction to the 2005 Hurricane Katrina drowning of New Orleans awakened the nation out of a slumber. So, of course, not all the failings of his presidency had Cheney's fingerprints on them.

But back home on the Texas ranch, Bush himself wrote in his memoir that Cheney had "become a lightning rod for criticism from the media and the left. He was seen as dark and heartless -- the Darth Vader of the administration."

Cheney has not lightened up since.