Dr. Fredric Brandt is an unnervingly ageless-looking personage, a man intimately familiar with the trick mirrors of society.

At his art-filled New York office, the 64-year-old physician acts as the syringe-wielding wizard responsible for using techniques like his signature Y lifts -- in which fillers are injected below the cheekbones -- to hold back time for supermodels, trophy wives, celebrities and industrial titans of either sex.

To travel the benefit circuit in New York and Los Angeles is to encounter a Brandt creation, a person whose skin is smooth and yet not freakishly taut, whose cheeks possess the firm curvature of a wheel of Edam, whose unblemished flesh calls to mind a Jumeau bisque doll, a baby's bottom or, perhaps, Madonna.

"If I have nice skin," the performer said recently in an email, "I owe a lot to him."

Former CNN anchor and "Today" show correspondent Laurin Sydney was moved to consult Brandt after recognizing that if she wanted to blur the signs of aging the camera was noting, she had to ask for stronger lighting on the set.

"I saw Fred and lasted 18 more years on the job," Sydney said. "And in my business, that is way past your use-by date."

And there is Brandt himself, who has experimented over the decades with self-administered injections of Botox and an Perlane, Juvéderm, Voluma -- as each new substance gained approval of the Food and Drug Administration and entered the marketplace. The result is a mask of serene immobility, a face with a creaseless brow, a square firm jawline, lips feminine in their puffy fullness. His skin is impressively smooth and so pale as to lend him a lunar aspect. Strangers often inquire, Brandt said, whether he is from Sweden.

"Actually," he replies, "I'm a Jewish kid from Newark."

It is easy to forget that little more than a decade ago, the medical means for staving off aging involved scalpels and a long recovery. Once facial fillers appeared, traditional face-lifts lost ground to rejuvenating treatments achieved with numbing cream and a simple injection.

Brandt is quick to concede that his practice, like that of thousands of other physicians and practitioners in a multibillion-dollar business, is predicated on the principle that there is something inherently wrong with allowing nature to take its course.

There is a tendency among Hollywood stars and countless others increasingly plagued by the cultural obsession with youth and beauty, Brandt said, to cut too soon, to overfill, to go too far.

"When there's too much pulling, too many procedures, you lose the softness" along with the personality of the face, its old familiar landmarks, he said. Asked whether he felt his experiments on himself had produced that effect, he replied, "People think I look pretty good."