Buy Photo John Gribbon, CEO of CentraState Medical Center, joined the Freehold Township hospital in 2000. (Photo: Tom Spader/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo

FREEHOLD TOWNSHIP – If you take the time to read it, you can see the future of health care unfold in a 242-page binder that is sitting on the conference table in John T. Gribbin’s office at CentraState Medical Center.

It spells out the rules of a new Medicare program that penalizes hospitals for not providing high-quality care for patients who get elective knee and hip replacement surgery. It is supposed to go into effect in January. And putting it into practice is a nightmare.

“I do think it’s a good direction for all of us, but it’s enormously complicated to do,” said Gribbin, CentraState’s chief executive officer.

CentraState Healthcare System includes the Shore’s last remaining independent hospital, and Gribbin wants to keep it that way.

Since joining the hospital in 2000, Gribbin has shifted its course, making up for a decline in revenue from acute care that’s provided in the hospital with new revenue from outpatient services, senior living facilities and health and wellness programs.

The medical center’s annual revenue rose from $270.1 million in 2012 to $281.9 million in 2013, according to Moody’s, which gives it a bond rating of Baa1 – moderately risky – and a stable outlook in its most recent report.

Buy Photo John Gribbon, CEO of CentraState Medical Center, said he has no plans to merge the Freehold Township hospital with larger rivals. (Photo: Tom Spader/Staff Photographer)

Not like its neighbors

It has bucked the trend. With the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, rewriting the rules of the industry, CentraState’s competitors Meridian Health and Barnabas Health both have announced recent mergers that would create giant health care networks that own every hospital in Monmouth and Ocean counties except CentraState.

Driving the consolidation are looming changes like the upcoming Medicare program. Rather than pay fees for individual services, insurers are beginning to pay a set amount for the entire care. Hospitals will need to deliver the service efficiently. And they will need more consumers, said Mark Claster, president of Carl Marks & Co., a New York investment firm.

It will be a challenge for CentraState. “If the cost of care exceeds what you’re being paid, the hospital bears the cost,” Claster said. “They’re trying to gain population so when there are those outliers that run amok on cost it gets spread over a much wider base.”

Gribbin, 63, lives in Millstone with his wife, Debi.

He sat down with the Asbury Park Press recently and explained what’s next for CentraState, what it will take to slow down health care costs (hint: not technology), and how the new Medicare program is a sign that the industry has just begun a generational change. The interview was edited for space.

Your competitors have announced plans to merge. Is CentraState next?

That’s what everybody wonders. No, we have no plans to merge. I think it’s important for people to understand that our leadership here understands very well that independence does not mean isolated. They’re very different concepts. The form that we pursue and look for are effective partnerships and services the community needs. These can be provided through a variety of methods. Merger is only one of these methods. What you’re trying to do, and the way we approach it is, the issue is not the organization’s structure. The issue is the scale and relevancy. In other words, how do you create the scale you need that provides the resources you need to grow?

By merging?

The research literature shows in markets where there’s high concentration, prices go up. That’s what happens. It’s not always the answer. It works for some places. Some places need to have a big brother or to have someone to take them under their wing. This is not a condemnation of merger activity, but it’s not right for everybody in every situation.

At CentraState Medical Center in Freehold Township, nurses Regina Kemper (left) and Polly Hay route patients to one of three adult treatment areas or a pediatric emergency department in this file photo. (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF CENTRASTATE MEDICAL CENTER)

How do you control costs if merging isn’t the answer?

You control costs by doing good care management, having strong analytics so you understand what you’re managing, and you have strong relationships with your medical community and getting them on board. There’s clearly money that could be pulled out of the health care system. There’s no debate about it. New Jersey is particularly onerous. ... You’ve heard the term ‘bending the cost curve?’ There are five ways to bend the cost curve. Four of them come out of the hospital. It’s as simple as that.

What are they?

Reduce admissions, reduce readmissions, reduce duplicate testing, reduce emergency room use. The fifth one is pharmaceutical use, and half of that comes out of the hospitals, too.

Is it weird being an executive trying to make less money?

We have to figure out a way to make this transition and make it such that this resource for the community remains on the other end. It’s going to happen. There’s no question, it’s very schizophrenic now. I can’t think of an industry that works harder to make less money. And that’s the schizophrenia that’s occurred in American medicine.

Despite the mergers, health care employment in New Jersey is as high as ever.

I’ll give you a scenario. Here’s another way we differ. In other industries, technology is a substitution for labor. Right? In health care, technology creates demand for labor. When I first got into business, take radiology. It’s a good example. We had an X-ray technician. One job. And that person did basically everything in the department. Today, there are no less than five separate, not transferable, skills in radiology.

Nurse Kathleen Dempsey readies one of CentraState’s pediatric emergency department rooms for a young patient in this file photo. (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF CENTRASTATE MEDICAL CENTER)

Shouldn’t it make workers more efficient?

That is a great debate in health care, and candidly, it’s questionable. I will tell you this: I don’t think any hospital would survive without it now. In that sense, yes. But IT (information technology) in medicine creates demands that we’ve never dealt with in the past. Now you can say that wasn’t very good in the past; we should have been documenting things that we weren’t. That’s an argument. And today the computer forces you to document. But that’s also time that we didn’t spend in the past. Now we have to spend it. ... So you add all these things together, I don’t see health care employment going down.

What if the cost of care was more transparent?

I can give you a list of charges. You just don’t know which will apply to you until your physician finishes. And that’s a dilemma for all of us. I think that’s not going to be solved until we figure out ways to do things like bundled care for some of that. (Providers would receive one payment for the entire treatment – from the surgery to the rehabilitation – instead of a payment for each service). That binder right there is the regulations published by Medicare to force hospitals into a bundled product for total joint replacements, hips and knees.

Will that start to slow costs down?

Yes, I think it will. I think it will. But it’s a very, very difficult transition. It’s just not easy to do. Just the logistics of it. just measuring and doing it are very, very difficult. And it’s not like there’s a methodology out there that you can plug and play. You’ve got to build some of these systems, build relationships. You’re dealing with multiple parties. ... But I think it’s a good direction for us to move in. I’m not against that whatsoever. It’s a good direction because I think it will enhance transparency. And I think it will take some cost out of the system. And I think it has the potential to improve care.

How long will this transition take?

I think the process we’re in is generational, in all candor. I really do.

Michael L. Diamond; 732-643-4038; mdiamond@gannettnj.com

CENTRASTATE HEALTHCARE SYSTEM

Headquarters: Freehold Township

Founded: 1971

Services: In-patient hospital, health and wellness center, senior living communities, family medicine center

In-patient beds: 284

Employees: 2,400

Source: CentraState Healthcare System

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1SZyUa9