Phil Smith, MD, medical director of the biocontainment unit at The Nebraska Medical Center, and Angela Hewlett, MD associate medical director of the unit, spoke about the patient’s progress, both medically and personally. Rick Sacra was transported to The Nebraska Medical Center Friday, after contracting the Ebola virus while treating patients in West Africa.

On whether he’s turned a corner:

“I believe that’s too soon to say at this point. We’re encouraged by his progress, but we also have to remember that he’s still very sick.” --Hewlett

“This disease, the Ebola virus, is something that can have phases. He can start out and improve and then later have some medical complications. It’s far too early to relax and say we’re out of the woods, but we’re encouraged by what we’ve seen.” -- Phil Smith

“We really have to take this day by day. We’re monitoring him as we would with any sick patient, our critical care parameters, checking viral signs and watching him. We have to keep in mind that although he has a disease like Ebola, he also is a patient and we as healthcare providers treat sick patients every day. So we’re doing the same things for him that we would for any other sick patient.” -- Angela Hewlett

On the personal side:

“I’ve been in his room for several hours every day, and he’s a very fine person. Very humanistic. He’s got a good sense of humor and we’ve chatted about a number of things.” -- Smith

“He said he was from Massachusetts and he’s a Red Sox fan. I said I have bad news for you, I’m a Yankees fan. He said ‘uh oh, this could be tough!’” -- Smith

More on his treatment:

“It’s virtually the same strain. And I’ve been on the phone with people from Emory every day and people who have treated Ebola every day. The professional community has been very helpful. Dr. Hewlett had a conversation with some physicians in Liberia and they’ve all been able to share bits of information that are very helpful.” -- Smith

“As with any patient we’re taking into account other concerns, not just his medical care. His spiritual and non-tangible issues when we take care of patients who are this ill. And I think talking to his family and going back and forth with them has been helpful and we’ll continue to encourage him to do this.” -- Hewlett