UPDATE: May 11, 5:30 p.m.

Courtesy: Linda Cope

The Warrior Beach Retreat made national headlines this spring, after several of their veterans were reportedly harassed by a group of college students.

This weekend retreat's founder Linda Cope named Emerald View Management Company as the group that pulled the plug on the retreat.

Cope told NewsChannel 7 that she received a text from an employee of Emerald View Management Company that said, "I want to be the first person in this town to let you know that you are no longer welcome at any of our properties."

But Emerald View Management Group is now speaking out, and representatives say the text wasn't from any of their employees.

They sent NewsChannel 7 the following statement, "Emerald View Management is a company that employs veterans and their families. We have always supported and will continue our support of Wounded Warriors and our Military. We are shocked and appalled that our many years of support of Veterans are being questioned. No text message was sent by any representative of Emerald View Resorts regarding our support of Warrior Beach Retreat. Emerald View Management chose not to pass judgement on anyone until the investigation was complete. After an intense evaluation of the latest incident and the way it was handled, Emerald View Management has decided to direct our contributions to other veteran charitable organizations. Emerald View Management is proud to support all organizations that assist our Military and Veterans."

Claire Pease, the owner of Emerald View Management, told NewsChannel 7 the situation has caused the company a lot of stress. We will continue to follow this story and provide updates at they become available.

Cope also said she's in the process of finding a location for this fall's Warrior Beach Retreat.

----------------

Previously, Warrior Beach Retreat Founder Linda Cope said one of the retreat's biggest supporters pulled the plug on the event, but she didn't feel comfortable naming the management group.

Cope told NewsChannel 7 Sunday an employee from "Emerald View Management Group" sent her the following text stating, "I want to be the first person in this town to let you know that you are no longer welcome at any of our properties."

Panama City Beach's Warrior Beach retreat was in the national spotlight this year, after Cope said several of their veterans were harassed by a group of college students.

Cope says it was the negative publicity that caused the company to cut off its support, but despite that, most of the community has stood by her.

"This community does not want me to stop hosting Warrior Beach Retreat," Cope said. "They're the ones that have made it the success that it is and it's part our community on the map as a community that brings hope and healing to the nations finest from all across the country. So no I will not stop."

Cope says she is currently working on finding a location for the retreat for this fall.

NewsChannel 7 reached out to Emerald View Management Group, but representatives were not available for comment Sunday.