GRETCHEN TEGELER is president of the Taxpayers Association of Central Iowa. (Photo: Special to the Register )

There’s much attention and excitement in central Iowa around the Nov. 4 elections.

One local race that should not get lost in the shuffle is the Broadlawns Medical Center board of trustees. While in the past it’s sometimes been hard even to find candidates for these positions, this year there are six people running for just two seats. The outcome definitely matters to central Iowans who pay property taxes.

For background, Broadlawns is a publicly owned “safety net” hospital responsible for providing care to any resident of Polk County, free of charge if necessary. Broadlawns receives about $57 million in support from property taxpayers in Polk County each year to cover charity care, making it the fourth highest supported public entity in Polk County.

Broadlawns is not part of Polk County government. Rather it is governed by its own independently elected board of trustees.

Broadlawns Medical Center was formerly considered the “county hospital,” where only the poorest went for care. Its facilities were run down and it operated on the brink of financial insolvency; at one point it had only four days of cash on hand.

Today, after eight years under CEO Jody Jenner and backed with strong board leadership and support, Broadlawns has become financially stable and the care system of choice for many low-income and other central Iowans. Its facilities (including outpatient clinics in addition to the hospital) and equipment are up-to-date, and its quality of care is highly rated. It operates much more efficiently, having reduced the cost per adjusted patient day by 40 percent over the past seven years.

Broadlawns emphasizes primary care and has become the region’s largest outpatient mental health provider. It continues to offer the largest family practice residency in the region, with two-thirds of the graduates remaining in practice in Iowa.

Perhaps most important for taxpayers, for the first time the share of total revenue coming from property tax payers in Polk County has actually dropped below the share funded by net patient revenues. This is important because the more paying patients (whether publicly or privately insured) a public hospital can attract, the lower its unit costs and the more patients it can serve.

Some of the changes that Broadlawns has had to make in order to become more competitive were neither easy nor popular at the time they were made. Layers of middle management were cut, and a new performance culture put in place that emphasizes productivity and patient outcomes. Today, the organization has become an employer of choice, and in 2013 turnover was 20 percent less than the national average.

It’s very fortunate the board of trustees had the foresight 10 years ago to see the necessity of changing the vision for Broad­lawns — from being a “last resort” provider of care to becoming a competitive provider of choice. With implementation of the Affordable Care Act, which theoretically extends open-market coverage to everyone, it will be a few years before the role of “safety net” hospitals becomes clear.

Meanwhile, with the public hospital no longer “assigned” a large share of the public assistance population (who may now choose where to be served), it very well could end up with fewer, sicker (or multiple-diagnosis) patients, plus those who remain uninsured.

Had Broadlawns not already positioned itself to be competitive in the marketplace, thus able to attract insured patients, these changes could have become very costly to local taxpayers. Instead, Broadlawns is positioned to be possibly even more successful in the future as the number of publicly insured patients increases.

What does the election on Nov. 4 have to do with all of this? The choice appears to be between those who support the direction that Broadlawns has been moving — making operations more efficient and emphasizing performance accountability — and those who seek to change the course or even undo some of the changes that have been made.

It will be important for all Polk County residents to ask the candidates where they stand on these changes, and vote accordingly.

GRETCHEN TEGELER is president of the Taxpayers Association of Central Iowa. Contact: gtegeler@taxpayersci@org.

LEARN MORE

A forum with candidates for the Broadlawns Medical Center board of trustees will be at 5 p.m. Wednesday at the Broadlawns Medical Office Building, 1801 Hickman Road in Des Moines.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1tDUAfF