The announcement last week that Sanford Health is offering $20,000 signing bonuses to nurses reveals the strengths and potential pitfalls that confront the health care sector. Spurred by accelerating demand for specialized acute care, Sanford adopted an aggressive stance to hire highly qualified RNs. The size of the bonuses is an indication that the pool of such nurses is relatively small and competition to hire them is fierce.

Secondly, the increasing patient load at Sanford (and other health care providers in the region) is a function not only of an aging population but also a result of Sanford’s strategy to add services and medical specialties that previously were not offered in the Fargo-Moorhead region. Patients with acute conditions who had to travel to other facilities now can obtain world-class treatment in Fargo.

The upside of demand is that more people are seeking good care, in part because of the extension of health insurance via Medicaid and the Affordable Care Act. If patrons who previously deferred initial care because they were not insured now go early to a clinic or hospital, more expensive treatment can be avoided. In the long run, that factor is a cost-saver for the entire system.

Sanford’s role in making Fargo-Moorhead-West Fargo a world-class regional health care center cannot be minimized. The additions to the cities’ medical and health care sector are unprecedented in North Dakota history. The multifaceted focus on primary care, wellness and high-tech, high-skills surgeries and other procedures has changed the health care landscape – to say nothing of construction of a half billion-dollar, state-of-the-art hospital on Fargo’s southwest side.

But it’s not all about bricks and mortar. It’s about hiring highly trained medical professionals. It’s about attracting the best people in their professions, whether physicians, technicians, support staff or nurses. It’s about delivering the best possible services to patients. That’s what the Sanford nurse bonus program is all about.

Forum editorials represent the opinion of Forum management and the newspaper’s Editorial Board.