Shelburn's Keith Mattox, seated second from left, smiles for a photo with his family and Lainey Kelley, far right. Kelley helped save Mattox's life in February. The two met in person Saturday in Brazil. [Click to enlarge] [Order this photo]

Keith Mattox had just cleared snow from the drive of a vacant Brazil home when he and a co-worker hopped into a truck and were off to their next assignment.

But that's when the workday took a near tragic turn for the 59-year-old Mattox.

Without warning, he slumped over the wheel of the moving vehicle, forcing his passenger to stop the truck and call for help.

That co-worker, Andrew Siglin, was able to pull the lifeless body from the truck and lay him on the street, per the instructions of a 911 operator, and then attempted CPR.

Just a few minutes earlier, local school teacher Jim Latta picked up his bride-to-be, Lainey Kelley, after she finished paperwork at St. Vincent Clay Hospital. She had asked for a ride to and from work on that snowy and icy Saturday, Feb. 15.

"We normally take U.S. 40 to (SR) 59 to come home, but that day he felt compelled to make a right on Vandalia (Street)," Kelley recalled.

And, at the intersection of Vandalia and Hendrix, they noticed a man lying in the middle of the road -- it was Mattox.

"I told him (Latta) to turn right, he did and that's when I hopped out," Kelley recalled.

Mattox had no pulse, wasn't breathing and had turned gray, Kelley said. She immediately started chest compressions, and Mattox began breathing on his own about two minutes in. Another two minutes and local emergency responders -- firefighters, then ambulance personnel -- arrived to take Mattox away.

Later that day, Kelley learned from emergency room nurses that someone from the Mattox family wanted to speak with her. Phone numbers were exchanged, and, not knowing Kelley's name, the family member labeled her contact information as "Guardian Angel."

On Saturday, a walking and talking Mattox met that guardian angel for the second time, but, on this day, it was a moment both will remember for the rest of their lives.

"I have never been somebody's guardian angel before," a tearful Kelley told Mattox, just moments after the two met for what felt like the first time.

"I tell you it's a divine thing," Mattox replied.

It was exactly four weeks from the day of Mattox and Kelley's first meeting. The two families planned a get together at Pappy's Bar-B-Que in downtown Brazil.

There were hugs, tears and much laughter as the once strangers quickly became friends.

Prior to Saturday, the closest Kelley had been to talking to Mattox was by relaying messages through his son-in-law Justin at his hospital room bedside.

At that time, Mattox couldn't talk on the phone himself; however, she had Justin relay a message saying "hopefully the next time I see you, I won't feel the need to pound on your chest." Justin then relayed back saying "it's a good thing, because I'm already sore enough from the first time we met."

Mattox, a resident of Shelburn in Sullivan County, had a triple bypass heart surgery in 2006, and he wasn't feeling the greatest months leading up to the incident.

Without health insurance at the time, Mattox was waiting for his recently applied for coverage under the Affordable Care Act to kick in on March 1.

"I'll be darned if I didn't make it to March," he said.

Mattox remembers nothing the day of his massive heart attack. There was no pain, "kind of like I just went to sleep," he says.

He said if it weren't for everyone's actions on that day, he wouldn't be alive. From Siglin pulling him from the truck, to Kelley's quick response to the care at both St. Vincent Clay Hospital and later St. Vincent Hospital in Indianapolis, his outcome could have been very different.

"The sequence of events couldn't have been better other than me being at the hospital when it happened," Mattox said. "It could have been a disaster for me."

On his eighth day at St. Vincent Hospital in Indianapolis, he had a heart catheterization and stint put in. On the 10th day, he returned home.

"I still believe there was divine intervention," he said. "I thank God. God intervenes at times when it is according to His will. We don't know what His will is some times and some times it works out the best for us.

"It could have went the other direction so easily. I still think it was divine intervention and the people involved that He used to see that my outcome came out the way it did."

For Kelley, her training allowed her to jump to action, but, she, too, believes it was something else that put her in the position to do so.

Kelley's actions also speak highly of St. Vincent Clay Hospital, which is full of well-trained staff, she said.

"There's a perception in the community that we can't compete with the big city hospitals because we're so small," she said of St. Vincent Clay Hospital. "I want people to know that our size is our strength. We're all highly skilled professionals with an uncommon commitment to the welfare of our community because almost all of them are our friends and neighbors."