Craig Verm (center) sings the title role in Florentine Opera’s “Elmer Gantry.” Credit: Kathy Wittman / Ball Square Films Inc.

SHARE Katherine Pracht preaches to John Atlee in the Florentine Opera’s “Elmer Gantry.” Kathy Wittman / Ball Square Films Inc.

By ,

"Elmer Gantry" made its return to Uihlein Hall Friday evening, courtesy of the Florentine Opera.

Based on the Sinclair Lewis novel of the same name and written by Herschel Garfein and Robert Aldridge, the opera was last performed by the Florentine five years ago.

Stage director Frank Kelley brought a healthy dose of theater to the production. Friday's audience saw characters with depth, as well as complexity in their relationships with one another. They also saw a lively, engaged chorus.

A couple of chorus scenes took the theater just a step too far, making the denizens of the town of Zenith look a little too much like those of River City, inviting comparisons to "The Music Man."

Baritone Craig Verm captured the charm and foibles of the opportunistic Gantry, singing with character and power. Mezzo-soprano Katherine Pracht created a mesmerizing Sharon Falconer, believably balancing the character's religious conviction and human frailties while singing with a rich, focused sound.

Tenor Jonathan Boyd sang with a big, ringing sound as Frank Shallard and was riveting as he sang about craving a faith he'd never felt. Tenor Matt Morgan made the character flaws and actions of Eddie Fislinger thoroughly believable, singing with complete control while conveying a crumbling mental state.

Soprano Alisa Suzanne Jordheim gave a spot-on performance as Lulu Baines. She created a sympathetic character and sang with a voice that was pure, lovely, light in color and powerful.

Among the other performers, Jeffrey Beruan delivered a serious, paternal Reverend Baines, Kevin Burdette created tremendous energy with T.J. Rigg, and Vera Savage was a thoroughly intimidating Mrs. Baines.

Members of the Florentine Opera Chorus filled several ensemble roles with energy and great theatrical presence, if some uneven vocal power.

The Milwaukee Symphony Orchestra, led by Christopher Larkin, gave a polished, but sometimes awkwardly restrained, performance of a densely orchestrated, colorful score full of cultural and religious references from klezmer clarinet to hymns tunes.

Sets by Kris Stone made good use of the large Uihlein Hall stage, creating intimate space when needed. Costumes, some with lovely period detail, supported both the time and place in which the story was set.

IF YOU GO

This Florentine Opera production of "Elmer Gantry" will be repeated at 2:30 p.m. Sunday in Uihlein Hall at the Marcus Center for the Performing Arts, 929 N. Water St. For tickets, visit florentineopera.org or call (414) 273-7206.