People Moves of the Week: Perella Weinberg, Jones Walker, Corporate Resolutions

A partner returns to Perella; Jones Walker hires former senator's legislative assistant; Kenneth Springer joins Corporate Resolutions as senior VP

Bracewell & Giuliani LLP — Intellectual property litigator Alan Albright has re-joined the law firm as a partner. Based in the firm's Austin, Texas, headquarters, Albright returns after a year at Sutherland Asbill & Brennan LLP. The announcement comes on the heels of Sean Gorman's joining the firm's Houston office from Ahmad Zavitsanos Anaipakos, Alavi & Mensing PC. An energy specialist, Gorman previously served as managing partner of the Dewey & LeBoeuf LLP Houston office.

Brown Rudnick LLP — Didier Bruère-Dawson and David Malamed joined the Boston law firm's Paris location as partners in the bankruptcy and corporate restructuring practice. Bruère-Dawson was previously head of the insolvency practice at de Gaulle Fleurance, while Malamed has been a partner in the banking practice of August & Debouzy.

Corporate Resolutions Inc. (CRI) — The New York-based due diligence services provider brought in Kenneth Springer as senior vice president. The move marks a return to CRI for Springer who had spent nine years at Goldman Sachs Group (NYSE: GS). He was previously an intelligence analyst at CRI for two years prior to joining Goldman Sachs in 2005. While there, he became vice president in charge of the securities middle office and settlements operations groups for the Americas. At CRI, he will focus on business development and strategy to help strengthen the firm's service offerings. CRI was founded by Springer's father, a former FBI agent.

Houlihan Lokey — The Los Angeles-based investment bank brought in Jon Pritti as a director in the health care group. Pritti will work out of Houlihan's New York office, primarily within the shop's health care group. He was previously a managing director at Cain Brothers, where he advised on M&A and capital raising efforts. Prior to that, Pritti was a member of the health care investment banking group at Goldman Sachs.

Jones Walker LLP — The New York law firm added Brad Davis to the Jackson, Mississippi office as special counsel and a member of the public finance team. Davis previously served in the office of Sen. Thad Cochran (R-Miss.). He was the senator's legislative assistant and counsel from 2005 to 2007, and he served as state office director and general counsel from 2008.

Perella Weinberg Partners — The financial services firm hired Christopher Williams as a partner in London. Prior to joining Perella Weinberg, Williams was an executive vice chairman within the global financial institutions group at Credit Suisse.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: