WASHINGTON — Sign up for ObamaCare and get a sleazy hookup.

Colorado has launched a new ad campaign that attempts to entice young women to sign up for the new national health-care program with the promise of free contraceptives and carefree sex.

In one of the print ads, a flirty young woman holding a package of birth-control pills and leaning against a young man says: “OMG, he’s hot! Let’s hope he’s as easy to get as this birth control.”

She continues her steamy monologue: “My health insurance covers the pill, which means all I have to worry about is getting him between the covers.”

“I got insurance. Now you can too,” she says. “Thanks ObamaCare!”

The ad, which is dripping with lusty sexuality, dubs the young couple “Susie and Nate … Hot to Trot.”

To be on the safe side, there’s an added warning: “The pill doesn’t protect you from STDs; condoms and common sense do that.”

The ad is part of the “thanks obamacare!” campaign targeting young Coloradans — and underscores how the law’s backers will say just about anything to lure young people to sign up for the new mandatory health coverage, an outcome that is critical to ObamaCare working as planned.

The entire health-care overhaul relies on the young and healthy buying insurance to offset the cost of covering Americans with pre-existing conditions and other new benefits.

An earlier “Got Insurance” ad in Colorado titled “Brosurance” featured a young man doing a handstand on a keg of beer as his two “bros” each hold up one of his legs with one hand and grasp a red plastic cup in the other.

“Keg stands are crazy. Not having health insurance is crazier,” reads the caption. “Don’t tap into your beer money to cover those medical bills.”

Colorado officials defended the ads, admitting they were provocative by design.

“It’s been fun to watch how it all plays out,” said Adam Fox, the director of strategic engagement for the Colorado Consumer Health Initiative.

“We’ve seen both positive and negative reactions, but if people are seeing the ads and purchasing health insurance, that’s a good thing.”

Traffic to the Web site that features the ads exploded so much on Tuesday that the site went down for a few minutes.

The depiction of young women as bubbly sexpots stirred outrage in some quarters. Conservative talk-radio host Dana Loesch in a tweet called it “The ‘You’re a whore’ ad for ObamaCare” and said, “So basically, hosurance.”

“Liberal ladies you have lost the right to call anyone a misogynist again,” tweeted Denver-based political blogger Kelly Maher.

Another ad in the series shows a young lady holding a package of birth-control pills and leaning against a cardboard cutout of hunky actor Ryan Gosling.

“Hey girl,” says the caption. “You’re excited about easy access to birth control and I’m excited about getting to know you.”