All around the world, child obesity rates are rising. In the Americas, 31 percent of children are now overweight or obese. In Europe, that number is closer to 40 percent.

Is there a collection of popular things that parents should stop feeding their children so often?

Researchers at Duke National University of Singapore took a closer look at types of food associated with overweight and obese children. Using the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children, of nearly 4,500 children in England, they tracked what the kids ate and what happened to their bodies over the course of three years. They found convincing evidence that certain foods might be causing disproportionate harm.

Specifically, the kids who regularly ate potato chips tended to gain the most weight.

“We found potato chips to be one of the most obesity-promoting foods for youth to consume,” the researchers wrote. “Potato chips are very high in energy density and have a low satiety index, yet they are commonly consumed as snacks.”

French fries, fried chicken and fish, processed meats, and fatty spreads performed poorly. As did just about anything with added sugar. And refined grains, found in most processed foods. Foods cooked in oil were linked to weight gain, too.

But there’s also a nuance to the things that appear to make kids fat: They pack calories, but don’t fill anyone up.

“Just because a food has more calories doesn’t mean it results in more weight gain,” said Eric Finkelstein, who teaches at the Duke Global Health Institute and is the study’s lead author.

“There are foods, like potatoes, which aren’t inherently bad for you because they fill you up,” he said. “But when you turn them into french fries and potato chips, they tend to result in weight gain.”

The problem is likely that fats are more energy dense, but no more filling — so kids eat the same quantity, but in doing so consume more calories.

Finkelstein adds that calories from liquids are particularly problematic, because they’re less satiating. Sodas and other sugary drinks are doubly harmful.

Many of these foods are not only delicious, but also cultural staples. Understanding the consequences of celebrating them too much or too often, especially for children who don’t have the same control over what they eat, is an important step.

Fish and chips, for instance, a much adored English meal, might not be the right thing to regularly feed children. Nor are Cheetos, Doritos and other popular snacks in the United States.

Or sodas, which, the researchers concluded, is important for parents to understand: “Reducing the consumption of these beverages in the United States is likely to have a greater positive impact on weight outcomes than in the United Kingdom.”