Sparks flew on Tuesday night when the heads of the Democratic and Republican parties met face-to-face on CNN’s “Crossfire” for their first joint appearance in over a year.

During the heated exchange, RNC chair Reince Priebus defended the GOP and claimed that Obamacare has led to millions of people losing their insurance, while DNC head Rep. Debbie Wasserman-Schultz (D-FL) lashed out at Republicans and claimed that her opponent doesn’t understand how the health care system works.

The two traded barbs on-air, repeatedly speaking over one another and clashing on a variety of subjects.

The debate heated up after host Newt Gingrich said that Obamacare is ”a war on people with critical diseases.” Priebus followed up these comments by warning about what might happen if businesses decide to drop coverage.

“Just wait until the employers start having the option of dropping the insurance coverage,” Priebus said, going on to decry the fact that ”millions of people are (already) getting their insurance dropped.”

Wasserman-Schultz shot back, though, defending Obamacare and noting that she hasn’t heard any viable reform ideas coming from the GOP.

“I have yet to hear, nor has anyone in the Republican Party said, what is the solution to ensuring that everyone in America has access to affordable health care?” she responded.

From there, the debate intensified, with the two political leaders lambasting one another’s knowledge about America’s health care complex.

“You obviously do not understand how the health insurance system works,” Wasserman-Schultz charged.

But Priebus responded by claiming that it is Wasserman-Schultz who is confused.

“You’re the one that promised that people would keep their health insurance and you promised that people would keep their doctor, but it turns out that it’s not true — so maybe you are the one that needs to learn what the effects are of Obamacare and this health care system,” Priebus said.

Watch the clash below:

The two also debated electoral politics, with Wasserman-Schultz claiming that the GOP is out of touch with mainstream Americans. Priebus, of course, disagreed.

“You keep it up running on Obamacare, we’re going to do just fine,” he said.

Watch that dialogue below:

(H/T: Mediaite)

–