HIGHLANDS RANCH — It can be lonely being a Democrat in Douglas County, where few if any party field offices dot the suburban landscape. But a temporary operation sprung up Saturday morning in Don and Barbara Hall’s garage at the end of a subdivision cul-de-sac.

At the start of a final-weekend push before Tuesday’s election, congressional candidate Andrew Romanoff’s campaign returned to the Highlands Ranch home that hosted its first house party in the area, in early 2013. This year, two staffers (one for the Romanoff campaign, the other here to help U.S. Sen. Mark Udall’s re-election) are staying in their basement. The Halls, led by Barbara’s Democratic activism, long have helped out campaigns.

“And we’re going to be ready for Hillary,” said Don Hall, 62.

As about two dozen or so volunteers prepared for door-knocking or phone calls to encourage voters to return their mail ballots, Barbara Hall, 63, said there was no question she’d offer her home to help Romanoff’s bid to defeat the three-term incumbent, U.S. Rep. Mike Coffman in the highly competitive district, which also includes more-Democratic Aurora.

“I love Highlands Ranch,” Hall said, “but I do not like the fact that it’s so heavily Republican that we do not have a voice,” with Republican registrants in the county outnumbering Democrats more than 2-to-1.

“In Douglas County, we’ve had so much trouble with the school board, and it’s just so important to let people know that there’s another choice out there,” she said.

The couple’s yard was the only one on the block with a campaign sign, for Romanoff. They said this was the first year they could remember their lonely Democratic signs not being stolen.

Watch Romanoff video.

Romanoff showed up just after 10 a.m., midway through his morning schedule of canvassing kickoffs across the district, and was greeted with enthusiastic applause. Inside the garage, next to a table with snacks, he opened in Spanish, then mentioned Thursday’s all-Spanish debate with Coffman on the Univision affiliate, a first for Colorado candidates.

“Turns out, Mike Coffman’s record doesn’t sound any better in other languages,” Romanoff deadpanned.

Also on hand were Bette Davis, a state Senate candidate, and Henry M. Barlow, a state House candidate, both Democrats aware they’re running against the odds to represent the heavily GOP area.

Later Saturday, I visited Coffman’s campaign office in Aurora and blogged separately about his activities here.