LOUISVILLE, Ky., Jan. 3, 2014 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- Kentucky Health Cooperative, Inc. is addressing higher call volumes and Kentuckians' interest in enrolling in health plans by extending call center hours and by adding call center staff.

(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130903/DC73073LOGO)

"Kentuckians – many of whom may not have had health insurance before – have lots of questions, and are spending lots of time on the phone with our Member Services staff," said Susan Dunlap, Director of Communications and Development, Kentucky Health Cooperative. "With call volumes and wait times increasing, we want to make sure that consumers know what to expect. We also want to emphasize that care is being taken to keep telephone wait times as brief as possible."

Call center hours have been extended through Wednesday, Jan. 8, from 8 a.m. - 8 p.m., Eastern Time. Additional member services personnel have also been added to help consumers.

Thousands of new enrollees have sought help following a late December enrollment surge of over 8,000 persons, Dunlap said.

"We are pleased with public response to affordable health insurance coverage, and we are working as quickly as possible to answer questions, process applications and payments, and get ID cards in the hands of members," Dunlap said.

There are 5 options for paying the first month's premium, including making a one-time payment. Consumers who have their member ID may visit the Kentucky Health Cooperative member portal at https://portal.mykyhc.org to choose the one-time payment option.

Enrollees may also call 1-855-687-5942 for assistance. Callers should be aware that wait times continue to be long.

Consumers who have not yet enrolled in a Kentucky Health Cooperative plan may call 1-877-334-1726 to speak with a licensed agent, who can assist with selection of one of the issuer's Affordable Care Act-qualified health plans. Consumers who did not enroll before the Dec. 23 deadline have until March 31, 2014, to sign up for coverage before they are subject to a penalty.

Visit www.mykyhc.org for information about additional payment options.

Kentucky Health Cooperative

Kentucky Health Cooperative, based in Louisville, is dedicated to improving health outcomes by providing member-focused, accessible, cost-effective and quality-focused health care coverage to individuals and small groups living in the Commonwealth of Kentucky. Kentucky Health Cooperative was identified by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to receive loans to create and operate a Consumer Oriented and Operated Plan, or CO-OP. CO-OPs are nonprofit health insurance companies that will be member-governed in 2015. Kentucky Health Cooperative gained approval in March 2013 from the Kentucky Department of Insurance to operate as an insurer in the Commonwealth. Kentucky Health Cooperative began offering health plan benefits on Jan. 1, 2014.

More information: www.mykyhc.org or on Facebook.

Contact:

Susan Dunlap

Kentucky Health Cooperative

(502) 498-5539

SOURCE Kentucky Health Cooperative