MONTREAL — His humbleness Joe Sakic is heading to Quebec City, where he played the first seven years of his Hockey Hall of Fame career, as the top day-to-day executive for the franchise formerly known as the Nordiques.

Predictably, the retired No. 19 said the homecoming is more about someone else — Avalanche coach Patrick Roy — than himself.

“It’s fun, but I think especially for Patrick,” Sakic said before Thursday’s preseason game against the Canadiens, who will also face the Avs on Friday at the Colisée Pepsi in Quebec City. “He played for Montreal and is now the head coach, and was head coach of his junior team for eight years in Quebec, and won the Memorial Cup championship (2006) in that building. (Friday) will definitely be about Patrick. Such a big name, big presence in Quebec City. It’s exciting for me to see the reaction for Patrick coming home.”

Sakic made his Quebec City homecoming as a player in 2002, the first time the Avs played a preseason game there. He has fond memories of coming back onto the ice in that game and taking a curtain call along with Avs teammates Peter Forsberg and Adam Foote, who both also played for the Nordiques.

Sakic and his youngest son, Chase, also participated in an international peewee tournament in Quebec City a couple of years ago. Sakic was the coach.

“It’s going to be nice — not as nice as going back and playing,” he said. “It is where I started so it will special, but like I said, the best time was in 2002 with Peter and Adam.”

Roy, who gathered in front of a Peyton Manning-sized media scrum Thursday morning at the Bell Centre, spoke in French and English about his Montreal/Quebec homecoming. He began his Hall of Fame career as a Canadiens goalie, winning the Stanley Cup twice, before being traded to Colorado in 1995. Roy said his players are probably as excited about this trip as himself, and he didn’t leave any healthy veteran at home.

“When all the guys saw that we had two exhibition games in the province of Quebec, all the vets wanted to be a part of it,” Roy said. “They all want to come to Montreal and Quebec. They’re excited about these two games.”

Avs captain Gabe Landeskog missed Monday’s first preseason game and Tuesday with a minor back ailment. But he wasn’t going to sit out these games.

“With Patrick’s history here and the history of our team in Quebec City, that’s certainly a trip you want to be on,” Landeskog said. “Lot of history and looking forward to it.”

Footnotes. Second-year Avs goalie Reto Berra played well in the 3-2 overtime loss to Montreal, and defenseman Ryan Wilson (plus-2) led Colorado in ice time. … Montreal’s Alex Galchenyuk won it 3:28 into overtime, two seconds after the Avs’ Nick Holden was released from the penalty box. … Colorado killed a 5-on-3 disadvantage in OT. … Nathan MacKinnon assisted on both Colorado goals, by defenseman Tyson Barrie and Landeskog. … Veteran forwards Jarome Iginla, Alex Tanguay and Daniel Briere did not play Thursday but will be in the lineup Friday, Roy said. Defensemen Erik Johnson, Jan Hejda and Brad Stuart are also scheduled to play in the Quebec City rematch. … The Avs have 28 of 40 players on the trip, and prospects Ben Street, Bruno Gervais, Dennis Everberg, Daniel Maggio and Borna Rendulic played Thursday. Among those, Everberg looked the most poised and might have a chance to make the team out of camp, particularly if injured third-line forwards John Mitchell (migraines) and Jamie McGinn (back) aren’t ready for the Oct. 9 season opener. Neither player is on the trip.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers