Buy Photo (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

This is the day when readers might expect an editorial celebrating America's independence that was declared on this day in 1776. That historic event is worth celebrating, but it is hard to feel good about the condition of the national government of the United States 238 years later.

It is fair to say Congress has ceased to be a meaningful governing body. In place of legislative action we get budget stalemates that shut down the government or threaten default on the nation's debt obligations.

The president has taken to issuing executive orders to further his agenda, and in response House Republicans are contemplating a lawsuit against the president for exceeding his authority.

It is no wonder polls show the American people have almost no respect for the president or for Congress these days.

The stand-off in Washington reflects a deepening partisan divide in politics today, but some students of government and law place the blame at least in part on the Constitution. Some of these critics say the Constitution established a government of elites, not a true democracy. Others say it has allowed government to run amok though excessive taxation, regulation and activist federal judges.

An objection often cited is the makeup of the U.S. Senate, where Montana (population 583,000) has the same number of senators as California (population 38 million). Senators from a few small states (including Iowa) have veto power over democratic majorities in the House. Another is the Electoral College, which has put five presidents into office who did not receive a majority of the popular vote.

Then there are questions about the president's power to unilaterally rewrite laws, or to authorize secret and open-ended collection of phone records, or to order drones to target suspected terrorists (even an American citizen or two). Meanwhile, a few members of the Senate can hamstring the executive branch by refusing to confirm presidential appointments.

Some would amend the Constitution to make government more effective. Others aim to throttle bloated government. It's hard to see how the dysfunction in Washington would be improved by these changes, however. Besides, what some may see as flaws were put in the Constitution for a reason. Provisions that prevent majority rule, for example, protect the minority from a tyranny of the majority. And there will always be battles for dominance between presidents, Congress and the courts, which also is by design.

Imperfect though it may be, the U.S. Constitution is still a marvelous piece of work that has endured for nearly two and a half centuries.

One of the beauties of the American Constitution is its brevity and the fact that the words the authors used suggest a general course rather than dictate precise details. The founders surely intended that the Constitution be a living document and left the blanks to be filled in by future generations. That is done through actions of the legislative branch, the executive branch and the courts, not by tacking on page after page of amendments.

The structure of our government today is the product of historic and bloody struggles. And short of more bloody struggles it is unlikely to be radically changed. Whether our government works or doesn't work is not the fault of a document written by the founding generation but how well later generations use the tools of governing they inherited.

A tale is often told of Benjamin Franklin leaving the Constitutional Convention in 1787. He was asked what the convention created. "A Republic, if you can keep it," Franklin is said to have replied.

That is the challenge for the American people today, as well.

Happy Fourth of July.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1lYw83i