Torin Halsey/Times Record News Community Healthcare Center in Wichita Falls is one of very few options for primary care for those whose Preferred Provider Organization health plan through Blue Cross Blue Shield will change to a health maintenance organization plan.

By John Ingle of the Times Record News

Community Healthcare Center in Wichita Falls is ready to take on more patients as a result of non-grandfathered Affordable Care Act health insurance plans through Blue Cross Blue Shield switching from Preferred Provider Organization to health maintenance organization plans.

A database search on the BCBS website shows the only federally qualified clinic serving a 14-county area is located at 200 Martin Luther King Blvd.

Allen Patterson, CEO of the clinic, said physicians at CHC saw 15,000 unduplicated patients in 2014, resulting in 45,000 patient visits. He said come Jan. 1, the clinic should have the capacity to take on an additional 7,000-8,000.

The number bantered about has been as low at 4,000, he said, and as high as 21,000 patients who could be affected. Somewhere in between lies the truth.

"The good new is that a community health center — just by the nature of being a community health center — they are ideally situated," Patterson said. "In fact, it is the mission of health centers across this great country to increase access to and reduce the disparities in the provision of primary health care services.

"That's what health centers are all about."

People affected by the plan are placed in a category Patterson called "vulnerable."He said it doesn't necessarily have anything to do with economic status, rather they will have difficulty finding providers in the area, much like Medicare patients often have dilemmas finding a physician to take care of them.

This is an opportunity, Patterson said, for Community Healthcare Center to "step it up" and show that they are a "great" solution. He said federally funded community health centers tend to outperform private practices in quality measures.

The National Association of Community Health Centers reported that health centers do just as well or better than private practices in 94 percent of the quality measures. The organization also reported health centers were more accessible, had lower costs, provided comprehensive services and reduced disparities.

Patterson said despite negative connotations associated with being seen at the clinic on MLK Boulevard, he wants potential patients to realize all of the services CHC offers in addition to patient care, including an on-site lab, pharmacy, dental, OB/GYN and X-ray, to name a few.

"It's a one-stop shop for your health care, and it's primary care. Of course, primary preventive care like we do is going to save community dollars," he said. "If you can get people in; if these folks that are losing their insurance coverage from Blue Cross Blue Shield, if they can get in to see their provider — especially a ... federally qualified health center like us — we can do a lot for them to keep them from needing the specialty care."

Celeste Montanaro, a nurse for 40 years in Wichita Falls, said she is one of those BCBS clients who will have her health insurance flipped from a Preferred Provider Organization to a health maintenance organization. She said her preference is to not go to CHC for her own reasons, and is finding it difficult to find another provider or get a different plan.

She spoke with two out-of-area health insurance agents recently, she told the Times Record News Tuesday afternoon, and the cheapest PPO plan she could find was through Humana and would cost her about $878 monthly. An Exclusive Provider Organization — a hybrid PPO and HMO — through United Health Care would run her about $795 per month.

The BCBS HMO plan, she said, would cost $588 a month, but there is very limited coverage in the Wichita Falls area.

"It's a problem," she said. "It's really, really bad.

Montanaro said she has not made up her mind as to what she will do regarding health insurance.

David Preston, director of marketing and outreach at CHC, said people need to keep in mind they have until Dec. 1 to declare a primary care provider, otherwise one will be appointed for patients on the HMO plans.

Open enrollment for federal exchange insurance began Nov. 1 for an effective day of Jan. 1. The last day to enroll and have coverage beginning Jan. 1 is Dec. 15. People need to enroll by Jan. 15 to have a Feb. 1 effective date.