FLETCHER - Republican Rep. Mark Meadows got some help kicking off his re-election campaign Tuesday from two well-known congressional colleagues, Reps. Trey Gowdy and Joe Wilson of South Carolina.

Both men helped rev up more than 500 Meadows supporters during a “Faith and Freedom Rally” at the WNC Ag Center.

Meadows, who had no challenger in the May 6 Republican primary, will face Democratic nominee Tom Hill of Zirconia in the November general election. Hill's name wasn't mentioned during the two-hour long event, which raised more than $14,000 for Meadows' campaign, but Gowdy and Wilson had plenty to say about the Obama administration.

Wilson, who famously shouted "You lie!" during Obama's 2009 State of the Union speech, warmed up the crowd of GOP faithful by thanking them for “the political revolution in North Carolina. And thank you for electing Mark. He's making such a difference, standing up for limited government and expanded freedom.”

Gowdy, introduced by Meadows as “the best-prepared person in Congress,” returned the compliment, saying it takes a lot to get him to leave South Carolina.

“We live right beside a golf course and we have every ESPN sports channel that you can have, so there's no reason for me to ever leave South Carolina, except that I love Mark Meadows,” said Gowdy, a former federal prosecutor known for his grilling of Obama appointees at congressional hearings.

Gowdy joked that most freshmen in Congress “don't know anything... But your congressman, in a short period of time on the committee that I serve with him on, is already a leader. Watch the hearings, and he does all of that without having to spend three years of his life in law school. He's not a lawyer, but he questions people like one.”

What separates the United States from other world nations is “our respect for the rule of law,” Gowdy said. “It is the most and greatest equalizing force in our culture; it is the most and greatest unifying force in our culture. What else makes the richest person in North Carolina drive the same speed limit as the poorest person in North Carolina, but the law?”

But what is a nation of laws to do “when we have an executive that doesn't follow the law?”Gowdy asked. He cited the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services mandate requiring employer health plans to provide free contraceptives under the Affordable Care Act, which was struck down this week by the Supreme Court.

“That's not just the law, that's a constitutional principle,” Gowdy said. “And you're playing games with it for political expediency, perpetuating this mythological war on women that unfortunately some of our fellow citizens will buy into.”

And the HHS mandate isn't the only example of “executive branch overreach,” Gowdy said. There are the recess appointments, the “so-called Affordable Care Act,” Attorney General Eric Holder's rejection of mandatory minimum drug sentences and the deal to trade Army Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl for five high-level Taliban prisoners.

He said Republicans should be able to win in November and the presidential election in 2016 by simply emphasizing they can do better. But Gowdy said conservatives need to focus on how they communicate that message, persuading through the use of “facts, evidence, credibility, authenticity, a relationship.”

“I come from a really conservative district,” he said. “Jim DeMint held the seat once removed before me. But we've got to find a way to communicate in California and New York, because let me tell you where the other side is headed – Texas. And if we lose Texas, there is no electoral map under which we can prevail. So instead of playing defense, I think we ought to start playing offense.”

Meadows, who has gone on the offensive seeking to repeal Obamacare and uncover IRS mistreatment of conservative groups, closed the rally pledging to continue fighting “to reclaim our country and take it back once and for all.”

___

Reach Axtell at than.axtell@blueridgenow.com or 828-694-7860.