Do you agree that private businesses should invest more in the health of their employees?

CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Only private businesses, not the federal government, can solve America's epidemic of obesity, chronic disease and runaway health care costs by investing in the health and fitness of their employees.

That was the closing remark by Cleveland Clinic CEO Toby Cosgrove during a pre-Republican-debate panel on the Affordable Care Act. The event was held at the law offices of Jones Day in Cleveland.

Cosgrove was not critical of the law, otherwise known as Obamacare, but he was clear that it is going to take a much broader effort to tackle the underlying drivers of health care expenses.

"We are not going to begin to control the cost of health care until we deal with things that cause chronic disease," Cosgrove said, adding later that private businesses are best equipped to address obesity and disease by investing in wellness programs for their workers.

"The government is not going to do it," he said.

That idea is not particularly new or radical. But American employers have not bought in fully to the productivity and profit benefits of health and fitness programs, and the proof of that is on the scale: two-thirds of the nation's citizens are classified as obese, making them vulnerable to cancer, heart disease, diabetes and a host of other problems.

A 2013 study by the nonprofit Rand Corp. found that about 50 percent of the nation's businesses offer some form of wellness plan for employees. But only about half of the adopters had formally evaluated the impact of their programs and only 2 percent reported savings estimates.

The Affordable Care Act supports private health and wellness efforts by expanding financial incentives for employees who join workplace programs. But Cosgrove said it is up to employers to craft and promote offerings that will help their workers make healthy decisions.

Asked whether he supported Obamacare from the outset, Cosgrove said, "We knew health care had to change, and right now it is the law of the land and we are implementing it as fast as we can."

He added that the law will mean The Clinic will not "get paid as well" for the care it provides and will have to take "15 to 20 percent out of the cost of running" the hospital network.

On the health and wellness front, Cosgrove said, The Clinic has instituted its own program to encourage employees to exercise and adopt healthy eating habits. The Clinic has said it will no longer hire smokers, and it has banned trans fat from its cafeteria and inpatient menus.

The Clinic's wellness program includes yoga and fitness classes, as well as weight-loss support and smoking cessation assistance. All of those services are offered for free. Cosgrove said employees have collectively lost about 500,000 pounds since 2009. "Five million more to go," he said.



The panel discussion at Jones Day also included two of the firm's partners, Michael Carvin and Ben Ginsberg and was moderated Kathleen Parker, a columnist for the Washington Post.



Carvin previously argued the two ultimately unsuccessful challenges to the Affordable Care Act before the U.S. Supreme Court. On Wednesday night, he said most experts are predicting 20 to 40 percent increases in insurance premiums next year.

"In October of 2016, a lot of people are going to be affected in a very important way...when they are going to be paying more premiums for a plan with a very high deductible and narrow range of doctors to choose from," Carvin said.

He warned that if health care costs are not brought under control, the increases are going to erode funding for other critical public services and programs.

"I don't think this is an ideological issues, it's just arithmetic," Carvin said. "If we don't get on top of the health care costs in this country...it's going to stop us from investing in anything else we want: more education, more missiles and across the dynamic."

Ginsberg, who previously served as national counsel to the Bush-Cheney presidential campaigns, said it is wise for Republican candidates to continue to push for the repeal and replacement of the Affordable Care Act.

"It's an unpopular program," he said of the law. "It's a program that's not working terribly well with the inflationary costs that are coming. It will provide an awfully good platform for Republicans to be able to contrast themselves."