ALBANY — The Obama administration has signed the death certificates of three struggling Brooklyn hospitals and jeopardized the success of Obamacare in New York, Gov. Cuomo charged Tuesday.

Cuomo, in his annual budget address, blasted the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services for dragging its feet on a state request to reinvest $10 billion of the $17 billion the state saved the feds through Medicaid reforms.

Eighteen months after the state submitted its request to use the funds to restructure New York’s outdated health care system for the poor, the feds have still not ruled.

Three teetering hospitals in Brooklyn — Brookdale Hospital, Interfaith Medical Center and Long Island College Hospital — will close if approval is not granted soon, the governor said.

Cuomo referred to the situation as a “crisis” and noted that Brooklyn has more people combined than San Francisco, Boston and Washington.

President Obama's health care reform could be negatively affected in New York by delaying approval to use $10 billion to bolster the state's health care for the poor, Gov. Cuomo contends. (Carolyn Kaster/AP)

Cuomo has been under pressure from community members to save the hospitals. He said Tuesday that the ball was in the federal government’s court.

“We need HHS to act on our waiver now as we have no alternative,” he said. “The size and scope of the problems defy state solution.”

Cuomo made a similar plea in May in a letter to Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius.

Federal officials could not be reached for comment.

Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn is one of three facilities that face closure if approval isn't granted to use federal money to save it, Gov. Cuomo says. (Mark Bonifacio/New York Daily News)

State Health Commissioner Nirav Shah said Health and Human Services approved similar requests from Texas and California in far less time.

He said the state’s implementation of Obamacare could also be affected by the delay.

Sources said Cuomo has been discussing the matter with the state’s congressional delegation. He met Tuesday with Brooklyn state legislators at the governor’s mansion about the issue.

Cuomo in his budget plan proposed a $1.2 billion capital program for struggling hospitals.