Welcome to Monday, the 110th day of 2015 and the fifth year since an explosion on board the Deepwater Horizon oil drilling platform in the Gulf of Mexico killed 11 men and unleashed an estimated 200 million gallons into a sensitive ocean ecosystem. Some businesses and tourism have rebounded but nature hasn’t, with oil-poisoned fish and waterfowl washing ashore. Yet while the oil industry has developed technologies to tap once-unreachable reserves far deeper than BP’s two-mile floor, safety has stayed right where it was in 2010 – meaning no new ways to prevent a blowout or contain a spill up to five miles down. Here is your Three-Minute Briefing, all the News You Can Use in less time than it takes to order shrimp étouffée at a New Orleans bistro:

Party of One Percent: Hillary Clinton, the Democrats’ most powerful – and only – contender for the 2016 presidential nomination, makes her way to New Hampshire this week, selling her fresh, newly-launched 2016 presidential persona as The People’s Champion. Just in time, a Republican-affiliated super PAC pushed the start button on a Granite State ad campaign painting her as a Wall Street wolf in blue-collar clothing. Also, Benghazi and private email server.

[READ: Why Hillary Clinton's Campaign Rollout Worked]

Reagan Told Us To: Last week, several Republican 2016 contenders went to New Hampshire themselves to drum up support ahead of the nation’s first primary. Strictly observing the letter, if not the spirit, of President Ronald Reagan’s unofficial (and errantly attributed) Eleventh Commandment – criticize no other Republican – they instead conducted a Hillary bash-fest. Because the only way to look like the front-runner is to attack the GOP’s favorite target?

Take That: Yet for all the hatin’ on Hillary by the boys on the right, a new CNN/ORC poll shows Madame Secretary still puts the hurt to all her potential Republican challengers. She leads each one by double digits, ranging from 14 points (Marco Rubio, the GOP’s current It Boy) to 17 points (Jeb Bush, the narrow Republican front-runner) to more than 20 points (Ted Cruz, Scott Walker, Mike Huckabee and Ben Carson, among several).

Your Morning Video(s):

Clinton’s campaign has posted a cool video documenting her post-announcement Iowa road trip in 100 seconds:

Hey, Big Spenders: Having seized power in the 2014 midterms, Capitol Hill Republicans declared a new era of fiscal responsibility and congressional productivity. Last week, the GOP passed two items of legislation – the Medicare doc fix and a rollback of the estate tax – that will staple a half-trillion dollars to the federal budget, as well as ending budget sequestration that’s still in effect. Seems to be a tacit admission that “reining in spending” and “getting things done” go together like ice cream and horseradish, and hypocrisy is just a state of mind.

Gifted Hands, Running Feet?: Retired neurosurgeon and rising GOP presidential star Dr. Ben Carson is going to Iowa after what’s being billed as a major speech May 4. Wonder what he’s got on his mind? Probably nothing all that significant, if the polls are to be believed (see above).

Lynch-Mentum?: Perhaps responding to President Barack Obama’s remarks that Republicans’ shelving of attorney general nominee Loretta Lynch is “embarrassing,” the GOP reportedly is going to schedule a confirmation vote for her this week. Sen. Bob Corker, a Tennessee Republican and chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, says he’s confident his party can cut a deal with Democrats over anti-abortion language inserted in an anti-human trafficking bill – the latest of many reasons Lynch’s confirmation has been side-tracked – and get her a confirmation vote within two to three days.

[ALSO: Harry Reid Could Force a Vote on Loretta Lynch Confirmation]

Today in the Second Amendment: It’s the 16th anniversary of the massacre at Columbine High School in Littleton, Colorado, a horrific event that arguably ushered in the era of American spree shootings. Although the killings reached a crescendo with the slaughter of 6- and 7-year-old children at a Connecticut elementary school three years ago, the gun control debate has moved towards even crazier laws. Exhibit A: Cruz, the GOP presidential candidate, wants to allow U.S. service members to carry concealed weapons on highly-secure military bases.

Stat of the Day: Number of the 23 health insurance co-ops created under the Affordable Care Act that reported losses last year: 22 (courtesy of Harper’s Index)

Duly Noted: On this date in 1861, Col. Robert E. Lee resigned his commission in the United States Army. Lee went on to command the Army of Northern Virginia, and eventually became general-in-chief of the Confederate forces. Boston's Fenway Park hosted its first professional baseball game in 1912, while Tiger Stadium (nee Navin Field) opened in Detroit. The Ludlow Massacre took place in 1914 when the Colorado National Guard opened fire on a tent colony of striking miners; about 20 (accounts vary) strikers, women and children died. In 1945, during World War II, allied forces took control of the German cities of Nuremberg and Stuttgart. In 1972, Apollo 16's lunar module, carrying astronauts John W. Young and Charles M. Duke Jr., landed on the moon. Ten years ago: President George W. Bush signed a bill making it harder for debt-ridden people to wipe clean their financial slates by declaring bankruptcy.