Former Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley slammed Donald Trump Donald TrumpWhy superdelegates shouldn't support Sanders Young Turks host offers M for Trump, Sanders debate An all-female ticket? Not in 2016 MORE as a “carnival barker” Saturday at the second Democratic presidential debate as he bashed the GOP front-runner candidate’s immigration rhetoric.

ADVERTISEMENT

“The fact of the matter is, let's say it in our debate because you’ll never hear this from that immigrant-bashing carnival-barker Donald Trump, the truth of the matter is, net immigration from Mexico last year was zero,” O’Malley said.

“If we want wages to go up, we have to get 11 million of our neighbors out of the off-the-books shadow economy and into the full light of the American economy.”

O'Malley, who sits miles behind competitors Hillary Clinton Hillary Rodham ClintonWhy superdelegates shouldn't support Sanders Young Turks host offers M for Trump, Sanders debate An all-female ticket? Not in 2016 MORE and Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersWhy superdelegates shouldn't support Sanders Young Turks host offers M for Trump, Sanders debate Puerto Rico debt relief faces serious challenges in Senate MORE in current polling, balked at the prospect that Democrats need to compromise with Republicans on privileging border security before immigration reform.

“If more and more deportations were going to bring our Republican brothers and sisters to the table, it would have happened a long time ago,” he said.

“We must protect our borders, but there is no substitute for comprehensive immigration reform with a pathway to citizenship.”

The comments on Trump drew a quick counterattack from the GOP presidential frontrunner on Twitter.

Hillary and Sanders are not doing well, but what is the failed former Mayor of Baltimore doing on that stage? O'Malley is a clown. — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) November 15, 2015

O’Malley has repeatedly sought to use immigration as a wedge issue between him and the rest of the field. He bashed Clinton, the former secretary of State, and Sanders, the Vermont senator, as representing “the failed thinking of the past when it comes to our immigration policies” during an immigration candidate forum earlier this month.