BOISE, Idaho — As the Colorado State Rams filed quietly out of the visiting dressing room beneath the south end zone stands at Albertsons Stadium, picked up boxed meals and headed to the buses, it was nearly 1 a.m. Sunday.

In fact, for a while, the two major questions during its game against Boise State was whether the Broncos could name the score and whether the Mountain West game would end before early mass Sunday at nearby St. John’s Cathedral.

Boise State roll to a 30-10 halftime lead and cruised to a 37-24 victory.

“The one thing I didn’t see was any quit,” a somber CSU coach Jim McElwain said. “You could see them scrapping to the end.”

McElwain, though, wasn’t trying to fool anyone after CSU dropped to 1-1, 0-1 in league play. The Rams were overmatched, which has become commonplace against the Broncos. CSU is 0-4 against Boise State in the past four years and has been outscored 184-81.

The Broncos ran up 676 yards of total offense, including 219 yards on the ground from running Jay Ajayi, plus 432 yards of total offense from quarterback Grant Hedrick — 352 through the air and 80 more rushing.

“They took it to us,” McElwain said. “And I really think what we need to do is we have to be the attackers. We do at times and we’re aggressive and the guys get after it a bit, and yet other times, maybe they’re reading a little bit too much, I don’t know.”

Running back Dee Hart suffered a finger injury late in the game, and had just 16 yards on 10 carries. The Rams ran for just 28 yards.

“They took him in and X rayed it, and he’ll be OK,” McElwain said. “We just didn’t have that spark out of that position this week and a lot of that had to do with the guys in blue were hitting us. . . But when you simply can’t run it, bad things are going to happen. And we just couldn’t run it.”

The Rams’ retooled offensive line was missing its only returning starter from a year ago — senior left tackle Ty Sambrailo, out with a sprained knee.

“Their linebackers were shooting some gaps and we were hanging on some blocks a little bit, some double teams,” McElwain said. “We were getting beat at the point of attack. It’ll be a great lesson for those young guys.”

With the Rams forced to rely on the passing game, Garrett Grayson threw for 434 yards and three touchdowns — one each to Joe Hansley, Steven Walker and Jasen Oden Jr.

“That’s fun, but in a loss?” asked McElwain. “For us to be good, we have to be balanced. But I did see the receivers take a step in the right direction from last week. They competed, they showed a little bit of their speed. . . Yeah, I don’t think we’re built that way to throw it every down. I really don’t.”

CSU was rallying late when Grayson was picked off, ending any hope of a miracle comeback. “That’s something I can’t do,” Grayson said. “I take the blame on that.”

The Rams play their first home game of the season Saturday against FCS opponent UC Davis of the Big Sky Conference.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei

Eye on… The Aggies

UC Davis at Colorado State, 1 p.m. Saturday

For the record: UC Davis is 1-1 after getting shellacked by Stanford 45-0 in its opener and beating Division II Fort Lewis of the Rocky Mountain Athletic Conference 52-17 at home. The Aggies are in the Football Champ- ionship Subdivision’s Big Sky Conference, along with Northern Colorado, among others. But through three games, they won’t yet have played an FCS opponent.

Streaking: Dating to last season, the Aggies have won three of their past four games. Who’s hot: Jermale Jefferson, a freshman from Los Angeles, rushed for 122 yards and two touchdowns against Fort Lewis on only five carries. Who’s not: Place-kicker Grady Stuart missed two field-goal attempts against Fort Lewis. Not that it mattered.

Key stat: The Aggies have allowed 528 yards passing. FYI: Ron Gould, a former Oregon defensive back and longtime assistant at California, is in his second season as the Aggies’ head coach. A year ago, they were 5-3 in the Big Sky and 5-7 overall.

Terry Frei, The Denver Post