It was an obvious display of strength in numbers, a need to inject courage in the faithful followers of Bayonne Mayor Mark Smith and his City Council.

Thursday evening at the people-laden Chandelier catering hall, Smith and company worked hard to bolster a sagging spirit after the soul-crushing results of the May election that forced a June 10 runoff with Police Capt. Jimmy Davis and his pirates - for the hearts and minds of the Peninsula City.

When it was his turn to address his backers, and visitors, the mayor, who started in even voice, quickly entered into a crescendo.

He told everyone that they were not dead (who said that?) and that everyone would “fight right until the end.”

Once again, the mayor brought up images of a city, a hometown, “from Bergen Point to the city line, from the east side to west side.” Then he offered depictions of diverse city residents, including a tale about meeting a young Polish couple who had just arrived in this country, “to create their American dream in Bayonne.” Smith was on a roll and it was as if he hardly took a breath.

“They understand the promise,” he shouted. “They understand the promise of America, the promise of tomorrow, the promise and greatness of Bayonne!” It ended with Smith leading a chorus of “four more years, four more years!”

With apologies to The Bard, you could almost envision the mayor hoisting a banner with the city seal and urging, “Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more …”

But will they? Is there enough of an urgency in the Smith camp to match the bravado?

They claim there is a big difference between the first election campaign plan and the new runoff strategy. Last time, they relied heavily on a big campaign war chest buying political literature and video. There was little face-to-face with the public. The word “arrogance” was used by many opposed to the administration and those still waiting to see improvements in Bayonne. Now, in a fight for their political lives, Smith his and council members – minus the 1st Ward that is now Davis territory - are expected to go door-to-door and embrace residents ("I feel your pain.").

It’s time for the personal touch. What do they call it - old school or the Davis method?

The campaign seems more and more like reality TV. Thursday evening, when they were announcing people in the Chandelier crowd, it was explained that 3rd Ward Councilman Ray Greaves was not present because he knew the importance of the election and was walking door-to-door. So naturally, there were “rumors” and high Hudson County Democratic Party sources said that there had been some friction between Smith and Greaves on the evening the May election results were announced. They reported that the councilman, who was about 300 votes behind and received 30 percent of the vote, while ex-Councilman and Davis candidate Gary La Pelusa garnered 38 percent, may have felt Smith cut his votes for fear that Greaves may one day want to be mayor.

Reached by phone, Greaves denied any friction exists with the mayor and that he left the Chandelier early because AFL-CIO members arrived ready to walk. The union backing of Greaves and the Smith campaign is a big bonus, although I thought they were there last time. The councilman believes problems arose in his race because his name was hard to find on a ballot that had five others on it but that in the runoff, there will only be two in his ward.

It is very difficult, not impossible, for an incumbent that was forced into a runoff, to come away with a victory. The Smith camp has come up with many excuses for finding themselves in this position. Much of it has to do with the premise that people did not come out to vote for them – even though there were some 10,500 votes cast, a good turnout – because people thought the administration was a shoo-in. People were shocked by the results, it was said at the Chandelier and now they are taking the election serious. Well, serious enough to seek help from Hudson County Democrats and workers from Jersey City (not Mayor Steve Fulop’s minions) and other places.

The danger is that there is the feeling that Bayonne locals don’t like election intrusions from outsiders, even if nearly half of today’s Peninsula City residents probably have Jersey City roots.

Now here’s the telling moment that may reveal the administration’s urgency of the moment. After the election, I believe it was on May 19, Smith declared an emergency meeting of his troops where he pumped them up with a need to fight to the death before giving up control of City Hall. He was emotional then as well. And here’s the kicker. With the nearly 270 troops all gung ho and ready to take to the streets, Smith says they’ll meet again next week and get to work. Say again.

Of course next week was on Memorial Day Weekend and time to fire up the grill. No one was ready to “Then imitate the action of the tiger.”

To be fair, it is a short campaign. Can anyone rebuild lost momentum in such a short time?

What Smith is learning is that even the most powerful politicians always run for re-election with a real fear of losing.

INSIDER NOTES:

-- The Bayonne Tenant Organization hosted a meet and greet for Davis Wednesday evening. The running joke is that they're planning a Going Away Party for Smith.

The fear the challenger has is that so many in the city believe the police captain is a sure winner in the runoff that they forget to go to the polls.

Could there be more votes cast in the runoff than there were in the May regular contest? Could be, when you remember that this is Hudson County

Davis held yet another meet and greet last evening at the Zapata Retaurant. He seems to target the stomach. If you recall, he showed up at a senior citizens building (where he is not allowed to enter) with an ice cream truck, drawing out the potential voters. Like money, food is an incentive.

-- Council candidate and college student Daniel Herrera, who ran with defeated mayoral candidate Anthony Zanowic, followed the head of his ticket and endorsed Smith. Herrera is on Facebook and set off a bit of a storm when he wrote: "The Peninsula City Tribune 'newspaper' is one of the most disgusting, vile, and racist things I have ever seen. I strongly believe that this horrible political attack literature is part of the Davis campaign."

Welcome to politics 101, young man.

-- Then there's the letter making the rounds in a Peninsula City weekly that trashes Davis and makes the sans contract local teachers boil.

Make no mistake, I'm looking for a teaching job with the Bayonne Board of Education. If Mayor Mark Smith is re-elected, I might get an 8 percent raise over current rates, whereas if Jimmy Davis heads to City Hall I'm looking at a bump up of 17.9 percent. As a man of considerable cultural attainment I am entitled to a life of leisure and bourgeois comfort. You needn't be as bright as Hans Urs von Balthasar to know how I'm going to vote in the runoff. With a Davis-enhanced salary I'll be able to afford both a cottage in Belmar and a rustic retreat on leafy Greenwood Lake. Does Assemblyman Jason O'Donnell really expect me, with my fair Irish-American complexion, to spend every weekend and personal day under the direct glare of the sun at the Jersey Shore? I need to alternate those getaways with sick days and such in a green and shady grove. Does Jason want to give me skin cancer? And don't carp to me about the $1,100 average increase that Bayonne property taxpayers will have to pony up. The handful of academics clustered around the Smith campaign prattle on about the bonum commune, the common good. How antiquated. They're living in the Middle Ages with Thomas Aquinas. They fail to realize that in postmodernity all their cherished metanarratives have collapsed. We cutting edge thinkers know that the only bonum left standing is the bonum particulare, the individual good. To those cheapskates who would begrudge me my ticket into the fair courts of life, I say count your blessings, think of the poor folk in Africa. And if you can't follow the above philosophical reasoning in Latin, well, go get yourself a Master's Degree, and then come back and talk to me. It may just be that you're one of what socialite Leona Helmsley called "the little people."

And did you see where former mayoral candidate Anthony Zanowic endorsed Mayor Mark Smith? Zanowic is a notorious conservative whose middle name is frugality, the opposite of big- government types like former Governor Jim Florio and President Obama. With him whispering into Mayor Smith's ear the bottom could conceivably fall out of local property taxes. How vertiginous would that be? Taxes going down? The last thing I need is to be shelling out my Obamacare deductible to purchase some drug to combat vertigo. As the good nuns used to tell us, "A word to the wise is sufficient."

MERRILL C. JACOBSON

Professional Educationists for Davis

INSIDER NOTES:

-- We'll get back to the rest of the county next time around. I haven't forgotten about Jersey City Mayor Steve Fulop's shindig this week that attracted a number of important Dems from around the state -- including Hudson County's Robinson Crusoe, better known as Union City Mayor and Sen. Brian Stack, who doesn't realize what a big mess he has walked into and how there will be anything but stability among Hudson's Dems. Gotta take a breath after that sentence. Watch, now I'll get the phone calls.

-- Before I leave for primary night, I have to mention that this week Hudson County Freeholder Bill O'Dea held a meet and greet, with what I guess were about 30-to 50 people. Guess where? The Astor Bar in Jersey City in what must have been a night of nostalgia.