Maybe it’s fitting that fact-checking stories about the Affordable Care Act are continuing at what can only be called a feverish pace. Our own daily round-ups here at PolitiFact Oregon are no exception.

But that’s hardly a bad thing, given the long-term political and social stakes involved. Which is to say that today’s scan around the country includes two claims related to health care and a third, in which the Rev. Al Sharpton, responding to a fact-check that we reviewed earlier this week, falls flat.

The White House, after a tough couple of weeks trying to defend what can politely be termed the balky rollout of Obamacare, gave itself a pat on the back, tweeting, “Thanks to #Obamacare, more than 500,000 Americans have already signed up for health coverage.”

The Washington Post’s Fact Checker, Glenn Kessler, wanted to know whether that half million figure was correct, given everything we’ve read about broken websites and rampant confusion among those trying to sign up for coverage.

The actual numbers, released Wednesday, showed that only 106,185 people had selected a plan by clicking a button on the Web site page. Another 396,261, according to a tweet graphic from the administration, are getting coverage through Medicaid or the child’s health program (CHIP).

While Medicaid expansion was certainly part of the Affordable Care Act, Kessler wrote, Medicaid enrollments were not part of the original 500,000-person estimated disclosed by the Associated Press. The figure, according to the story, is “a bit squishy.”

Administration officials have also sought to distance themselves from a prior statement by Kathleen Sebelius, Health and Human Services secretary, who predicted that “success” will equate to at least seven million people having signed up by the end of March 2014.”

When the AP story came out this week, in fact, administration officials suggested that number was merely one way to measure the rate of enrollment. They then pointed to Massachusetts, which created the first health-insurance law with an individual mandate, saying that Obamacare could likely match that state’s enrollment rate.

The Fact Check story, however, found that Obamacare so far is fully 75 percent off that pace. Kessler gave the White House credit for publishing the raw data showing how many people have signed up to date, but concluded, “Happy talk can only go so far. The first month’s enrollment figures are nothing to crow about. The administration got One Pinocchio (out of a possible four) for its tweet.

For some needed perspective in the health care debate, PolitiFact National took a look at a claim by Rep. Steve Israel, D-N.Y., who compared early problems with Obamacare to the sluggish rollout of the Medicare Part D, President Bush’s prescription drug benefit plan.

Israel told MSNBC on Nov. 6 that Medicare Part D had plenty of problems of its own in the early going, but is now, eight years after it went live, widely popular among the seniors who use it.

A check of facts surrounding the launch of the respective programs showed them to be eerily similar.

Both, for instance, faced difficult political battles. Both got low poll ratings in the early going. And both experienced numerous technical troubles.

The Medicare site, meant to help seniors pick drug benefit plans, was supposed to debut Oct. 13, 2005. It didn’t go live until weeks later in November. Even then, “the tool itself appeared to be in need of fixing,” the Washington Post reported at the time.

The PolitiFact item went on to list the many differences between Medicare Part D and the Affordable Care Act that make the challenges facing the exchanges different.

It concluded, “Israel said, "Things went wrong with the Medicare prescription D plan that George Bush rolled out." There definitely were problems, and in some cases, the parallels between the prescription benefit program’s introduction and the Obamacare marketplaces are strikingly similar. While we also found some serious differences in the laws, we can’t find fault with Israel’s fairly general statement.

“We rate his statement True.”

On a different note, the Rev. Al Sharpton used his MSNBC show to criticize former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin for recently likening the national debt to slavery. But in doing so, PunditFact found, he made the common mistake of confusing the national debt with the deficit.

“The debt has risen each year in terms of dollar amount and as a share of the economy since 2007,” according to the piece, written by Katie Sanders. And it will continue to increase this year, according to Jason Peuquet, committee for a Responsible Federal Budget research fellow.

Wrote Sanders: “What Sharpton likely meant to say is that the deficit "has been reduced every year for the last five years." The deficit is the difference between what a government collects in revenues and spends in any one year. The debt is the accumulation of annual deficits minus any annual surpluses.

“We’re not letting Sharpton off the hook for his words, especially because he should know the difference, but if he had said deficit he’d be closer to the truth.”

As it was, Sharpton’s claim was rated False.

– Dana Tims