If Ted Cruz is elected president of the United States, he might want to schedule a check-up with his cardiologist before beginning Day One.

Why? Because the initial 24 hours of a Cruz presidency would be a heart-stopper.

Related: Ted Cruz Has Four Weeks to Prove He Can Win

At the CNN Republican Presidential Town Hall in Greenville, S.C., the junior senator from Texas set himself a painfully busy agenda when he first steps into the Oval Office as Commander-in-Chief.

Here is a list of his promises for Inauguration Day, 2017 — and this is just what he said last night:

Empower the military. “Another one of the most shameful things that, I think, of the last seven years is that we are sending our service men and women into combat with rules of engagement that have their arms tied behind their back. That [has made] it impossible for them to fight and defend themselves and win. I think that is immoral, it is wrong, and I will tell you this, I give you my word as Commander-in-Chief, that will end on January 20th, 2017.”

Protect religious liberty . “And so when it comes to religious liberty, if I'm elected president, I intend on the first day in office to instruct the U.S. Department of Justice and the IRS and every other federal agency that the persecution of religious liberty ends today.”

Roll back President Obama’s executive orders. “That's why I pledged on Day One to rescind every single illegal and unconstitutional executive action taken by Obama. It's why I've pledged to instruct the Department of Justice to open an investigation into Planned Parenthood, and prosecute any and all criminal violations.”

Can Common Core. “I've pledged to instruct the Department of Education on Day One that Common Core ends today.”

Tear up the deal with Iran. “I've pledged on Day One to rip to shreds this catastrophic Iranian nuclear deal.”

Reset Mideast foreign policy. “And on Day One, [we will] begin the process of moving the American embassy in Israel to Jerusalem.”

Whew! A day like that is enough to make a man call up his wife and sing her some songs off-key just to relax for a bit.