Clean energy is what we need for a healthy and sustainable future, but how do we get there from here? Fresh thinking with real commitment at the community level will be step one. Passage of Lafayette's "Clean Energy Initiative" (Issue 2D) will provide dedicated funding to help our community reduce pollution, decrease water use, and take meaningful action on climate change. We can reduce our use of dirty fossil fuels and while we're at it, reduce our energy bills and increase comfort and safety in Lafayette homes and businesses.

Energy from coal and fracked natural gas is highly polluting, emitting carbon dioxide and many toxins into our air and water. Some of these poisonous substances (like mercury from burning coal) are known and some (like the ingredients of fracking fluid) are not. On top of that, fracking and the cooling of coal and gas power plants use tremendous amounts of water. Can we afford that?

So what's different about this approach? Free expert energy consulting and support for our residents and businesses will open the door and help people navigate the many clean energy possibilities, prioritize which actions to take, find vetted contractors, and evaluate financing options. The availability of free expert advice for every resident and business in Lafayette to help make the decisions that work best for them is one real difference in the approach behind 2D.

Advertisement

Whether you are living in a modern low-energy house or you are having a hard time affording energy saving investment, 2D is for you. We can only reach Lafayette's goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions 20 percent by 2020 by making this small 2 percent investment as a community. Programs would be available to ALL residents and businesses in Lafayette, but some need more of a boost than others. Lower-income households bear a heavier burden of high energy costs as a proportion of income, and tend to have homes that are leaking the most energy dollars. That's why enhanced subsidies on an income-based sliding scale, new financing, new payment options, and extensive outreach to these households will be a major focus of new programs.

The first step in reducing fossil fuel use is energy efficiency. Homes and businesses that are less drafty and better insulated, with more efficient appliances and lighting, substantially reduce energy use and energy bills. Once these kinds of improvements are made, it makes sense to bring renewable energy like solar panels or geothermal heating and cooling into the mix. Energy costs are increasing with no end in sight, while renewable energy has zero fuel cost once the systems are paid for and in place.

Other communities across the country have been working toward a clean energy future. Some things have worked great, some not so much. Lafayette will look carefully at others' programs to find the best, proven approaches to making a real difference. We will also develop new public/private partnerships to save energy and money, increase comfort and safety, and reduce pollution. We can build a new community awareness of the benefits and value of sustainable energy use.

The 2D ballot language states that its purpose is "acceleration of the adoption of energy efficiency, sustainability, and renewable energy by the residents and businesses of Lafayette." The City of Lafayette has already used its financial clout to save taxpayers over $130,000 per year in energy costs, with greater savings to come as fossil fuel costs increase. 2D will make the same kinds of solutions available for all of us!

Implementation of Lafayette's new energy sustainability programs will be guided by a commission of well-qualified volunteers and a new city staff member devoted to maximizing the clean energy benefits from our investment. 2D was placed on the ballot by the unanimous vote of Lafayette City Council with strong support from the Lafayette Energy Sustainability Advisory Committee and the Lafayette Clean Energy Stakeholder Group.

Lafayette is a can-do community. This small investment can make a big difference!

Please vote yes on 2D and let's get going! Visit LafEnergy.org for more information.

Jeanne Stratton, Larry Miloshevich, Robb Menzies live in Lafayette.