Topics: From the Wires, News

PORT GIBSON, Miss. (AP) — The body of a black man found hanging in a tree in Mississippi has been sent from a state crime lab to a funeral home, but the FBI said it will be days before autopsy results are complete. Until then, investigators are holding off on saying whether Otis Byrd was killed or took his own life, and they’re urging people to be patient.

“The community deserves answers. Specifically, the family deserves answers,” Don Alway, special agent in charge of the FBI office in Jackson, told a crowd Friday outside the Claiborne County Courthouse in Port Gibson. He said preliminary information about the cause of death is expected next week.

“We’re doing everything in our power to be transparent, to talk about what’s going on so far,” Alway said. “But we want to reiterate that individual, single pieces of information and bits of rumors, we’re going to hold off on speaking to those until we can collectively come to a conclusion and get you the truth that everybody deserves.”

The county coroner confirmed that the man found hanging from a white sheet Thursday was Byrd, a 54-year-old ex-convict who was reported missing by his family more than two weeks ago. Byrd lived just 200 yards from the spot where his body was found, in woods behind his house.

Alway said investigators are interviewing Byrd’s family and friends and searching his rental home and a storage unit for clues.

“We are trying to paint a picture of Byrd’s life. We are trying to find out what was going on with him personally and professionally,” he said.

Claiborne County Sheriff Marvin Lucas Sr. told The Associated Press earlier Friday that Byrd did not appear to have stepped off of anything in the area where he was found hanging by a sheet from a tree limb about 12 feet high. His feet were dangling about 2 feet off the ground, and his hands were not bound, Lucas said.

“Life matters,” Lucas told the crowd at the courthouse where he appeared with Alway. “I commit to you, as the sheriff of Claiborne County, that I will not allow the shadows of the past to cast a shadow on the future.”

Byrd’s body was released on Friday to a Port Gibson funeral home, said Mississippi Department of Public Safety spokesman Warren Strain. An employee at Rollins Funeral Home said funeral arrangements will be made early next week.