Pensions & Benefits 2015: Trends

Despite the stark differences in pension strategy and entitlement across the globe, greater public awareness among employees and an increasing life expectancy in many regions are driving change worldwide. With each jurisdiction at a completely different point in the pension spectrum, harmonisation for multinationals remains an elusive dream – meaning that lawyers well versed in the complexities of the pensions and benefits market in their jurisdiction are in high demand.

Below we take a look at the varying approaches taken by governments around the world, and analyse the key developments in the pensions and benefits market according to region.

The Americas

The US displays a mature pensions market and the legal market is accordingly specialised. While there is a distinct lack of boutique or specialist firms, lawyers in full-service firms tend to specialise, particularly in the ERISA litigation field. The vast majority of lawyers we spoke to highlighted health care as a particularly active area, especially following the introduction of President Obama’s Affordable Care Act (ACA). Despite the fact that preparations having been under way for some time, practitioners note that the true impact has not been fully realised until now. Given the tremendous implications for employers and the health insurance benefits they have to provide, lawyers are therefore spending large portions of their time helping employers who are still struggling to understand their obligations and potential liabilities under the act. Linked to this new legislation, several sources have also noted that the health-care aspects of collective bargaining are taking up more time and becoming more of a driving force over whether settlement can be reached. While the Republican opposition party have pledged to defeat the ACA, with an election not occurring until 2016 this is likely to remain an active source of work for the near future.

A further burgeoning field of disputes work is the misclassification of employees. As the economy improves following a period of higher unemployment rates, new alternative ways of working have come to the fore. Given the increasing variety of employment contracts and definitions of what counts as an employee, many predict an uptick in litigation around the edges of the classification. With the promise of more litigation, sources have observed an increasing number of new entrants on the plaintiffs’ side interested in exploring litigation under ERISA. While it used to be the case that the ERISA bar was relatively compact, the number of new players has led to increased competition. However, with many practitioners anticipating the level of litigation to continue rising, it is predicted that this will therefore complement the increase in entrants, meaning that competition will remain relatively stable in this particular sphere.

The Department of Labor (DoL) has also been noted for its increasing activity in conducting investigations. Sources perceive that, whereas in the past audits and investigations were often random, nowadays they are almost always targeted. The new landscape is one of increased scrutiny, meaning that lawyers specialised in controversy work have noticed the growth of this side of the practice in recent years. The DoL is also considering new regulations relating to fiduciaries which would broaden the test for fiduciary assets, meaning those specialised in the regulatory area are also likely to have a busy practice in the near future.

As in a number of jurisdictions across Europe, the pensions and benefits field is becoming increasingly complex in the US. With additional liabilities being created every year, clients are increasingly sensitive given the uptick in regulatory requirements and are therefore more conscious of which advisers to choose. Lawyers and law firms are therefore putting a lot more effort into strategising on transparency and best practice, as clients take care not to run afoul of the DoL, the IRS or even shareholder activists for public companies. This may lead to a changing emphasis in terms of department specialisation, as practices adapt to clients’ ever-changing needs.

Piecemeal change is afoot across Latin America, with many jurisdictions looking to make revisions to their benefit systems in order to increase coverage and efficiency. In Chile, President Bachelet proposed wide-ranging reforms, including a proposal for a state-run pension plan to compete with the strong private pension system currently in place. Similar reforms have either taken place, or are being considered, in jurisdictions such as Argentina and Uruguay, in order to ensure that the widest possible range of citizens is covered by some form of pension plan. In countries such as Bolivia, recent reforms have granted universal access to pension benefits, as the country aims to create a more sophisticated and inclusive pension system. According to the World Bank, “in Latin America there is a paradigm shift towards using pensions as a tool for inclusion and poverty reduction, the challenge now is to consolidate this shift and make it sustainable over the coming decades.” Despite the variety of change occurring across the region, the legal market does not appear to have reached the sophistication of its northern counterparts. That being said, our sources affirmed that despite primarily being first and foremost labour and employment lawyers, the growing number of changes may in the future lead to increased specialisation in the pensions field. Lawyers in this area of the world are therefore likely to remain busy preparing for whatever changes might be coming their way.

Europe

Systems vary wildly across Europe, with different qualifying criteria and various ways of calculating entitlement. Different approaches are also taken in relation to a state versus private pension, with countries such as the UK falling short on the state pension front, and others such as Spain and Germany performing strongly.

A large number of those jurisdictions which have established mandatory pension systems and robust legislation have not reported much change this year. That being said, voluntary schemes seem to be piquing the interest of many Scandinavian-based employers and lawyers expect these types of schemes to grow in popularity looking ahead. Additionally, costs pressure on employers is leading to additional requests for advice relating to the harmonisation of different types of benefits within the jurisdiction.

In the UK there have been significant changes in recent years with a move from defined benefit (DB) to defined contribution (DC) schemes across the board. From April 2015 individuals with DC pension savings enjoy greater flexibility in how they access their funds when they reach 55. As employers pay more attention to the defined contribution regulations, lawyers have been kept busy advising on the new changes and how it will affect employers going forward.

A particular growth area mentioned by the vast majority of UK-based practitioners was the prevalence of de-risking work. With corporates and trustees looking at quite substantial deficits, lawyers are increasingly required to advise on how to manage these smartly and efficiently. Greater creativity is required on the part of lawyers who must look for more innovative investment structures in order to spread risk around. Offloading risk completely or minimising liability are two of the methods lawyers have advised on in recent months and the insurance industry appears to be the primary recipient of these schemes. With this in mind, there appears to be more cross-practice work occurring, as specialist insurance expertise along with specialist pensions knowledge is increasingly required to ensure that clients are able to manage their risk in the most efficient manner.

With the election now passed and a majority government in power, the industry is waiting to see what additional changes the Conservatives may bring. However, in a system which was already one of the most complicated in Europe, its increasing difficulty has led to predictions of vast change in the legal landscape. One source suggested that “cases will become even more difficult to deal with if there is no critical mass available to handle all the different aspects”. As a result, some lawyers have suggested that this trend may lead to some firms choosing to withdraw from pensions work, or focus only on specific aspects of it looking ahead.

Reform in Europe is also on the way through the Institutions for Occupational Retirement Provision (IORP) II. The European Commission has published its proposals to reform its pensions directive in order to “improve governance, transparency and cross-border activity”. If the reforms are enacted, all member states will be required to transpose the provisions into national law by the end of 2016. A number of lawyers welcome these changes, given the Commission’s aim to remove inconsistencies between member states and therefore simplify the creation of cross-border schemes. If that is the case, then both practitioners and their clients will see a potentially whole new area of work open up as a different approach may now be required in an area which has until now remained largely domestic. Whether this is achieved through the creation of alliances, networks or simply case-by-case referrals remains to be seen. However, with international firms already gaining an advantage by their very nature, it will be interesting to see how domestic firms will adapt to this potential new environment.

Africa, Asia and the Middle East

As in Europe, the pensions industry varies wildly from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. While harmonisation across borders is still quite far away for many, harmonisation within borders is on the agenda for jurisdictions such as China, where the government has announced plans to create a standardised pension system by 2020. The same is true in Indonesia, where the National Social Security System is planning to implement a pension programme for all Indonesian workers from July 2015.

Contentious work is also on the rise in countries like Australia, where an increase in regulations has led to a smaller number of industry players in the market as the smaller outfits are increasingly required to merge in order to survive. As a result, the pensions regulator has intensified its scrutiny of the remaining funds as there are fewer to supervise and therefore more resources are available for allocation. This has led to the pensions practice moving a lot more into the contentious area and law firms having to adapt their practices – those who remain in the field have noted growing competition as firms attempt to procure work from a diminishing pool of clients.

Certain Asian jurisdictions such as Singapore are looking to widen the scope of their existing pensions and benefits provisions, in order to make it more attractive and efficient, particularly for the large number of expatriates residing in the jurisdiction. In others (particularly those with a less mature pensions market) practitioners note that education from the West is slowly filtering down, thus leading to the growing complexity of pensions law. That said, local law is a hindrance to the development of pensions and benefits as an area – for example, in the UAE difficulties are highlighted with share-based benefit schemes because of the necessity of 51 per cent ownership in any company, thus limiting an employer’s options. Across the region, however, increasingly flexible pension schemes are anticipated as the “next big thing”. While no rapid development is anticipated in what in some cases is a relatively immature area of law, the increasing internationalisation of work and the workforce means that many anticipate harmonisation to steadily grow in importance over the next five to 10 years.

While a number of African jurisdictions do not as yet have sophisticated or efficiently structured systems, there are a few countries in which lawyers are starting to take note of the increasing maturity of this area of law. South Africa is one of the few jurisdictions which boasts a more developed system; lawyers based here note that the industry is in fact consolidating in order to meet increasing governance requirements as well as rising costs. Jurisdictions such as Nigeria and Ghana have seen rapid growth in their pensions industries: a recent report by the Commonwealth, the Making Finance Work for Africa Partnership Secretariat and the Emerging Markets Private Equity Association, noted that the Nigerian industry has grown from $7 billion in December 2008 to $25 billion in December 2013, while Ghana’s is expected to expand by up to 400 per cent from 2014 to 2018. With growing private equity interest and infrastructure investment occurring across the continent, it is expected that many other nations will shortly follow suit. If this does indeed occur, it will open up a whole new practice area for many African law firms and may result in a number of new entrants or at the very least new expertise in various jurisdictions.

***

It is clear that change is afoot across the globe albeit to differing levels of complexity and sophistication. With numerous attempts at harmonisation on the cards, practitioners will face a changing landscape, requiring many to adapt their expertise to advise on international mandates as opposed to looking at purely domestic matters. Some jurisdictions will see the creation of a pensions industry, meaning that a whole new area of legal practice will be available. In others the key trend is increasing complexity, and so lawyers and law firms may have to adapt their strategy in this market, and consider whether to either increase their specialisation or opt out of the area as a whole. However, despite the global differences, what is apparent throughout the world is that pensions and benefits is a fast-paced, ever-evolving area and therefore one that law firms will be keeping in their sights for the future.

Back to top