CLEVELAND, Ohio – Happy Easter!

The terrorist attacks in Brussels dominated the news last week. And we have plenty of stories on that, including reactions from presidential candidates about the blasts that killed at least 31, and a look back at the other attacks that have rocked Europe in the last decade.

A look at the Brussels attacks

But we had plenty of other coverage. Grab your chocolate bunny and catch up on the news you may have missed this past week.

Want to feel inspired?

Four University of Akron students set out to Dubai this month to prove that a solution to poverty might be as simple as a small foam brick, Emily Bamforth reports. The pitch was part of the competition for the Hult Prize, which this year challenged college kids to try to double the income of people living in crowded urban spaces.

In Our Backyard is the positive, populist polar opposite of the nattering nabobs of negativism known as NIMBY, the suburban acronym of "Not in My Backyard." Chris Evans reports that the first Cleveland office of the New York-based nonprofit opened its first Cleveland office in the Buckeye neighborhood to champion cyber-fueled "citizen philanthropy."

Want to be perplexed?

A proposal by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to add other species of birds to what is known as the federal "duck stamp" is sending feathers flying. The $25 stamp, which serves federal waterfowl hunting permit, sends 98 percent of its price price to buy land for waterfowl in or around national wildlife refuges. Plenty of duck hunters don't want to mess with it. Stephen Koff explains, and shows a gallery of examples, too.

Want to feel angry?

A U.S. Senate subcommittee is reviewing allegations that the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers deliberately cut money budgeted for dredging the Cuyahoga River, so that it could avoid disposing of the toxic sludge safely, Evans reports.

More than a year after Cleveland State University sold the president's $800,000 home in Shaker Heights and began paying $3,600 a month for Ron Berkman to live in the luxury complex, The 9, a university organization is buying Berkman another house, this time in Cleveland Heights. Karen Farkas reports that officials won't release the price, or address until the sale closes.

Want to feel informed?

Nuns last week challenged the Affordable Care Act, which grants employees of religious groups access to contraceptives through third parties, Sabrina Eaton reports. That workaround violates those freedoms under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993, lawyers for the Little Sisters of the Poor and other charities, universities and hospitals argued Wednesday at the U.S. Supreme Court.

Elections officials testifying this week in a voting rights case said that in 2014 some legitimate ballots from Ohio voters were tossed out while others with obvious flaws under the law were counted. The testimony was part of a lawsuit challenging state election laws and their inconsistent application from county to county, Bob Higgs reports. The case has been ongoing since 2008.

Want to feel optimistic?

Tower City could return to its glory days, now that Dan Gilbert has bought the ailing Avenue mall. What would you like to see there? Bamforth collects ideas.