NEW YORK — Denver All-Pro linebacker Von Miller is among 20 NFL players suspended for the beginning of the NFL season.

Miller will be out for six games for violating the league’s substance abuse policy. He will miss Thursday night’s opener between Super Bowl champion Baltimore and the Broncos.

The league wanted a longer penalty for the third-year linebacker, but the sides agreed to less than half the season. It will cost Miller about $800,000.

“I made mistakes and my suspension has hurt my team, Broncos fans, and myself,” Miller said when the agreement was reached last month. “I am especially sorry for the effect of my bad decisions on others. I will not make the same mistakes about adhering to the policy in the future. “

Two players are suspended for eight games: Ravens defensive back Asa Jackson and Cincinnati defensive end DeQuin Evans, under the performance-enhancing drugs policy.

None of the 20 players has been suspended for violating the personal conduct policy, although Jets running back Mike Goodson was arrested in New Jersey in May on drugs and weapons charges and will miss four games for substance abuse. His case was sent to a grand jury.

Also suspended under the substance abuse policy for four games each were: Jacksonville receiver Justin Blackmon, Indianapolis receiver LaVon Brazill, New York Giants safety Will Hill, Washington linebacker Rob Jackson, Arizona linebacker Daryl Washington, and Baltimore safety Christian Thompson.

Also barred for substance abuse, but with lesser suspensions, were: Minnesota fullback Jerome Felton (three games), Cleveland receiver Josh Gordon (two), San Francisco tight end Demarcus Dobbs (one), Rams running back Isaiah Pead (one) and Chiefs offensive lineman Rokevious Watkins (one).

Suspended four games for using performance enhancers were: Seattle linebacker Bruce Irvin, St. Louis linebacker Jo-Lonn Dunbar, Oakland receiver Andre Holmes, Washington defensive lineman Jarvis Jenkins and Minnesota tackle DeMarcus Love.

———

AP NFL website: http://www.pro32.ap.org