LYONS — Last year, Bruno Ammann wound down the operations of Swiss Chalet Timepieces, a watch repair shop his father opened 41 years earlier in downtown Boulder.

Ammann was facing the end of his lease, preparing for his forthcoming nuptials and sensing the time was right to close the shop at 1642 Pearl St., a business he took over in 1974 at the age of 19.

The hope, he said last May, was to enjoy married life and spend his retirement hunting, fishing, skiing and riding the tandem bike with his soon-to-be wife.

But after six months of playing really hard, Ammann felt something was missing in his life. His wife could see it, too.

"She realized somewhere there was something ... I was lacking confidence," he said. "It's just who I am."

Bruno Ammann checks the balance wheel of a pocket watch in the workshop at his home in Lyons. Last year, (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

He fondly recalled times spent with his father, tinkering with various "basket cases" of unique and vintage timepieces.

And that's when Ammann added a "semi" to his retired state.

The longtime watch repairman added a 300-square-foot, Rolex-approved professional workshop to his house in Lyons and quietly resumed business.

On a recent weekday, Ammann was beaming as he stood in the home-based workshop that was filled with a combination of his father's old workbenches and tools, new cabinets and equipment and a calming soundtrack of ticks and tocks.

He's come full circle, in a way.

Ammann remembered when he was a boy and popping into the garage as his father meticulously worked on a watch. The 11-year-old Ammann, intrigued by the precision and the mechanisms, developed a fascination that would never falter.

"It feels like I'm that kid again," he said.

The home-based workshop allows Ammann to feed that passion at a calmer pace than the six-day-a-week retail world would afford. Here, he can pop in after an excursion, crank up the opera music and solve problem watches.

The commute isn't too shabby, either.

"I don't need a lot of business, just enough to keep me here 20 to 25 hours a week," he said.

While Ammann hopes to keep his work part-time and a one-man operation contacted only via phone and his watchbruno@msn.com email, it hasn't taken long for the word of mouth to spread.

In addition to retaining a couple of accounts from upstate New York, several of Swiss Chalet's longtime locals brought their business and that of others to Ammann.

It was a coworker of David Hixson's who pointed the Longmont resident in Ammann's direction. Hixson's gold-cased Hamilton pocket watch — a railroad-grade timepiece passed down from his grandfather — had landed in a state of disrepair.

Hixson, 49, who before was hesitant to place the family heirloom into just any pair of hands, spoke highly of how Ammann quickly diagnosed the problems, provided some details about the history of similar pocket watches and brought the piece back to life.

To have the memento in working order was touching, Hixson said, noting the inscription on the back of the watch.

Carved on the back were Howard William Bergner's initials. Resting above the "W" was an "A" for Bergner's wife, Anabel.

"It's just kind of cool to think about the people and history," Hixson said.

Alicia Wallace: 303-473-1332, wallacea@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/dc_alicia