A gift from the past is giving Texas Scottish Rite Hospital for Children a boost for the future.

With the oil boom, the hospital has received roughly $500 million in oil and gas royalties over the past four years, most of it related to a West Texas ranch donated to the organization in the 1960s.

Those royalties helped the not-for-profit hospital nearly double the value of its own investments — the institution’s endowment — to about $2 billion over the same time span.

Last year, Scottish Rite revealed plans for a multimillion-dollar outpatient care center in Frisco, the organization’s first satellite expansion from its central Dallas location.

“We are blessed,” said Lyndon Olson Jr., chairman of the board of trustees.

Olson, the former U.S. ambassador to Sweden, said the hospital’s goal is to increase that endowment to $3 billion or $4 billion, helping support an expanding mission and strengthening the institution “in perpetuity.”

“We can do a lot more to help kids out,” echoed Robert Walker, president and CEO.

Through its teaching and research programs, Walker said, the hospital’s reach extends far beyond Texas.

“The oil boom contributes to the lives of children all over the world,” he said.

Founded by a group of Texas Masons in 1921, Scottish Rite specializes in pediatric orthopedics. It has its own shop that makes custom artificial limbs and body casts that help treat certain conditions.

Hospital researchers have also discovered genes related to idiopathic scoliosis, the most common type of scoliosis, which causes the spine to curve or twist.

In its fiscal year ending Sept. 30, 2013, Scottish Rite reported $297 million in revenue, compared with about $115 million just three years earlier.

About $120 million of the 2013 revenue came from royalties and another $107 million from investments. Expenses were about $133 million and long-term debt totaled only about $20 million.

The hospital has not released its financial report for the year ending Sept. 30, 2014. But in response to questions from The Dallas Morning News, officials said the hospital will report nearly $150 million in royalty income for that period.

Investments in publicly traded securities — the hospital’s endowment — totaled $1.997 billion at the end of the period, the hospital said.

That’s a lot. Dallas-based Children’s Health, for example, reported $1.1 billion in revenue for calendar 2013 and $579 million in investments in publicly traded securities.

Because of the drop in oil prices over the past year, royalties for Scottish Rite will decline this fiscal year, hospital officials said.

The recent oil windfall coincided with the introduction of the Affordable Care Act, a period of radical change in the health care industry, including more people having insurance.

Until recently, Scottish Rite never billed patients for services. But after two years of board debate, Walker said, the hospital did start billing in 2012.

He said that third-party payers, such as insurance companies and government programs, accounted for about $40 million of the hospital’s revenue last fiscal year.

“I think this could grow over time,” Walker said.

Amid the changes, Walker and Olson said, a major concern is to preserve the culture of the institution, which depends on many generous donors and hundreds of volunteers.

“It’s all about helping kids,” said Walker, who has worked at the hospital for 36 years.

Scottish Rite has about 15,000 current patients and has treated more than 230,000 in its 94-year history. Patients are children, up to 18 years old.

The royalties, mainly oil, largely come from the 173,000-acre Rocker b Ranch west of San Angelo. It was given to Scottish Rite by the Blakley-Braniff Foundation in 1964. Another large ranch in New Mexico was donated at the same time, but the hospital sold it soon afterward.

Former U.S. Sen. William Blakley, who owned the ranches, was the personal attorney for Thomas Braniff, the founder of Braniff Airways. Blakley, often referred to in news stories at the time as “Dallas’ Cowboy Capitalist,” was also a large shareholder in the airline.

In 1974, Blakley had second thoughts about his donation of the Rocker b.

He told The Associated Press then that he “made a great mistake by giving a piece of operating property to a charitable institution.” He told The Dallas Morning News that the ranch should be sold, generating more money for children immediately.

“I think you ought to take care of crippled children now, in this generation,” said Blakley.

At the time, the Rocker b was appraised at $60 million, according to the AP. And its 570 wells earned about $4 million a year in royalties.

Blakley died in 1976. He had no business partners, according to news reports, and he and his wife had no children.

Whatever Blakley’s concerns then, there is no doubt his gift is helping ensure Scottish Rite’s future now.

Drilling and production have increased dramatically in recent years with new techniques, such as fracking and horizontal drilling.

For the year ending Sept. 30, 2010, oil royalties for the hospital totaled $52 million, the vast majority from the Rocker b. For the year ending Sept. 30, 2014, royalties totaled $148.5 million. There were 1,460 producing wells on the Rocker b, hospital officials said, an increase of about 50 percent from 2010.

“At the time nobody really understood the significance of that gift,” Walker said of the Rocker b.

Olson, a Waco native, is a longtime financial services industry executive. He is a member of the Baylor Scott & White Health board and has been on the Scottish Rite board for two decades.

Born with club feet, he underwent several surgeries as a child. Blood circulation problems, however, led to gangrene and both of his legs were amputated at Scottish Rite. He was fitted with artificial legs and taught to walk.

Now, next to his portrait on a wall in the hospital’s executive offices, is a small photo of him in his Little League baseball uniform. With his new legs, he was able to play.

Despite the “literal sea change” in the industry today, Olson said, Scottish Rite will never change its approach to patients.

“We treat the poorest of the poor and the wealthiest of the wealthy,” he said.

And the patients will get whatever they need, no matter how much or how little insurance may pay.

“We are here for the children,” Olson said.