SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

On September 8 Gun Owners of America (GOA) endorsed Senator Ted Cruz (R-TX) for President of the United States.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

In a press release issued with the endorsement, GOA chairman Tim Macy explained the reasons they chose Cruz:

Ted Cruz has promised gun owners that, as President, he will remove the United States as a signatory nation to the anti-gun Arms Trade Treaty — a U.N. treaty that would fully implement a system of gun owner registration if ratified by the U.S. Senate. [He] has promised gun owners that he will repeal anti-gun Executive Orders that circumvent Congress and veto anti-gun legislation if it reaches his desk. [And] as a U.S. Senator, Ted Cruz has demonstrated a willingness to fight for our Second Amendment rights. He is working with GOA on legislation to repeal the Obama Administration’s gun ban that is (and will) affect millions of military veterans and senior citizens.

Macy also pointed to the fact that Cruz “has cosponsored legislation to allow concealed carry reciprocity for law-abiding gun owners [throughout America].” Such reciprocity is one of GOA’s “chief priorities in Congress.”

He pointed out that it was Cruz “who led the filibuster fight in 2013 against funding the anti-gun ObamaCare law, which will facilitate the disarmament of millions of gun owners once the law is fully implemented.” Cruz has been clear in his determination “to sign a bill to completely repeal ObamaCare as President” and has already introduced legislation to repeal the massive government takeover of healthcare in America.

Macy concluded:

We need a stalwart defender of the Second Amendment in the White House, and Ted Cruz will help shoulder the burden of fighting against the gun grabbers dedicated to eviscerating the Second Amendment.

On April 9 Breitbart News spoke with Ted Cruz about gun rights and he told us the Second Amendment “is foundation to free men and free women being able to defend their homes, their families, their lives and liberty, and it also serves as a fundamental check on government tyranny.”

Cruz added:

Following the tragic shooting at Sandy Hook, President Obama could have sought bipartisan cooperation to target violent criminals and come down on them like a ton of bricks. Instead, unfortunately, he used that tragedy as an excuse to try to go after the Second Amendment rights of law-abiding citizens. I was glad to help lead the effort to stop President Obama’s unconstitutional assault on the Second Amendment. As a result, millions of Americans spoke up to defend our constitutional liberties, and every single Obama proposal that would have undermined the Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms was voted down on the Senate floor. In politics, lots of candidates talk a good game but voters are looking for a proven record. For two decades I have been proud to fight to defend the Second Amendment. Today is a time for truth, and we need leaders willing to stand and lead the fight to defend our constitutional liberties.

Follow AWR Hawkins on Twitter: @AWRHawkins. Reach him directly at awrhawkins@breitbart.com.