, CP Op-ed Contributor By Jeff Crouere CP Op-ed Contributor

After six difficult years under Barack Obama, the country is ready for a change in the White House. The President has delivered a continual dose of no compromise liberalism that has divided the races and polarized the political climate.

This has led the presidential campaign to start earlier than ever. Among Republicans there are a dozen hopefuls who may vie for the nomination. It is a perfect opportunity for the Republican Party to take back the White House and implement conservative policies that will undo the disastrous Obama agenda.

Unfortunately, winning the presidency in 2016 is no easy task. Despite his limited experience and liberal philosophy, Barack Obama was elected President in 2008. He retained the office four years later even though his signature legislation, the Affordable Care Act, was incredibly unpopular.

A major reason for his success was his unimpressive opposition. The Republican presidential nominees, U.S. Senator John McCain (R-AZ) in 2008 and former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney in 2012, were uninspiring moderates who were unwilling to defend the party's platform and attack the Democrats on the issues.

These defeats continued the losing streak for the establishment, wing of the Republican Party. History shows that moderate GOP presidential nominees lose in the general election to a Democrat opponent, for it occurred in the races of 1976, 1992, 1996, 2008 and 2012.

With this horrific track record, party honchos should be desperate to find a good conservative to win the presidential nomination in 2016. Instead, GOP party bosses are overtly supporting the upcoming presidential candidacies of the three major moderate candidates: former Florida Governor Jeb Bush, New Jersey Governor Chris Christie and Romney. This is an embarrassment of riches for party elites who can choose from among three candidates.

Too bad the establishment ignores political history, which shows none of these moderate candidates can win the presidency. If any of them receive the 2016 nomination, they will lose to Hillary Clinton or whoever the Democrats nominate.

The key reason for this result is that a moderate presidential candidate will not excite the conservative base of Republican voters who are the party's backbone and number in the millions. Conservatives are the chronic voters, who run the organizations and volunteer their time for the nominee.

Conservatives are tired of being overlooked and ignored by the GOP establishment wing. The grassroots cannot match the money of the establishment, but they certainly have more passion and energy and are a needed component for any GOP presidential candidate to win the White House.

It worked for Ronald Reagan in 1980 and 1984. He won 44 states in the first election and 49 states in his re-election, in other words, massive landslides. According to so-called political experts he was too conservative, a wild-eyed cowboy who was too threatening to the American people.

Instead of losing, he trounced his liberal opponents by offering a clear contrast to the Democratic Party. He stood on conservative principles and did not waver. This type of statesmanship appealed to not only Republicans, but also Independents and "Reagan Democrats," who were tired of the failed liberal policies of their party.

In this election, there is a great opportunity for the Republican Party. Voters are ready to seriously consider an alternative to the disastrous Obama policies. However, if the GOP offers only the "pale pastels" of another moderate loser and not the "bold colors" of a conservative, the party will surely lose again.

If Bush, Christie or Romney wins the nomination, millions of conservatives will stay away from the polls or vote third party. The days of holding one's nose and voting for the Republican candidate as the "lesser of two evils." are over.

Jeff Crouere is a native of New Orleans, LA and he is the host of a Louisiana based program, “Ringside Politics,” which airs at 7:30 p.m. Fri. and 10:00 p.m. Sun. on WLAE-TV 32, a PBS station, and 7 till 11 a.m. weekdays on WGSO 990 AM in New Orleans and the Northshore. For more information, visit his web site at www.ringsidepolitics.com. E-mail him at jeff@ringsidepolitics.com.