CAMP HILL, Pa. (WHTM) – Jim Lamancusa is a certified public accountant in Camp Hill. He talked to us about how to be prepared during tax season.

What are the hottest topics this year with taxes?

“The two hottest tax topics this tax season are the Affordable Care Act and preventing tax refund fraud,” Lamancusa said.

Now the big question is how does it affect your taxes?

“It can affect your tax return in two ways: taxpayers need to determine if they owe a shared responsibility payment or if they are eligible for a premium tax credit. Now, with the shared responsibility provision, taxpayers need to report if they had adequate health insurance for the entire 2015 tax year. If they were not covered during the entire year, then they will be subject to a federal tax penalty based on months not covered. However, there are hardship exemptions that may apply which absolve any liability created,” Lamancusa said.

What about the premium tax credit? How does that effect your taxes?

“The premium tax credit is available to individuals who purchase their health insurance through the marketplace,” Lamancusa said.

How do you know if you purchased insurance through the marketplace?

“If you don’t have health insurance through your employer, Medicare, or Medicaid then most likely you had to seek out coverage through the marketplace. By now, taxpayers should have received a Form 1095-A which confirms that a person received coverage through the marketplace,” he said.

Any other last minute advice for our taxpayers?

“It relates to protecting ourselves from tax refund fraud and identity theft. The IRS does not initiate contact with taxpayers by email, phone, text or any other social media channel to request personal or financial information. The IRS will contact you by mail and will not threaten you to make payment immediately. Keep all your personal information safe and be skeptical of those contacting you for this information,” Lamancusa said.

For more tax tips and information about tax season, visit Jim Lamancusa’s facebook page.

Share this: Twitter

Facebook

Google

Pocket

Email

Print

More

Pinterest

Like this: Like Loading...