COLORADO SPRINGS — Wrestlers around the world breathed a collective sigh of relief Sunday when the International Olympic Committee retained the sport in the Olympic program for the 2020 and 2024 Summer Games.

There was loud cheering and palpable relief at USA Wrestling’s headquarters when IOC president Jacques Rogge made the announcement after a presentation and vote in Buenos Aires, Argentina. About 50 of America’s top wrestlers live and train in Colorado Springs.

“I’m so relieved,” said Denver’s Adeline Gray, a reigning world champion who watched the IOC drama unfold with teammates via television feed. “It’s really exciting to know we’re secure for 2020 and 2024. To know that the younger girls coming up are able to have that dream of Olympic gold is unbelievable.”

In February, the IOC executive board voted to drop wrestling from its list of 25 “core sports,” forcing wrestling to fight its way back in as a “provisional” sport. The International Wrestling Federation (FILA) made its case Sunday before the full IOC, along with squash and a combined baseball-softball bid. All three sports knew only one would survive the vote.

To many, the retention of wrestling seemed like a no-brainer because it’s a sport that traces its roots to the ancient Olympics in Greece. FILA president Nenad Lalovic began his presentation to the IOC by saying it was “the most important day in the 3,000-year history of our sport.”

At USA Wrestling, that only served to emphasize what was at stake.

“I’ve had a lot of situations in life where things are a sure thing and they end up not being a sure thing,” said Gray, a Bear Creek High School graduate who will defend her world title this month in Budapest, Hungary. “It’s very exciting that it’s official. I’ve had a lot of support from USA Wrestling and social media, everyone just being positive about it. But at the same time, you never know. It’s nice to have this secure and know that we are going to be in those future Olympics.”

Joining Gray in her tense vigil were her parents and two grandparents.

“Now we can smile,” said Gray’s father, George, a Denver police detective. “It should never even have been on the table. But it kind of woke the sport up, and everybody’s changing their viewpoints, ‘Hey, we need to promote our sport even more.’ I think wrestling’s going to take off even more.”

Gray and other members of the women’s team leave Monday for training in Europe before the world championships Sept. 16-22. Gray, who wrestles at 158 pounds, competes Sept. 20. Men’s teams already are overseas.

“I am very relieved,” said women’s coach Terry Steiner. “Six months ago, things didn’t look so good, but I think it was a blessing in disguise for the sport, maybe the best thing that ever happened to us. We really did unite, got together and fought.

“They did what wrestlers do: They got together and they fought to the end. That’s why we’re feeling relieved today.”

Gray was relieved not only for herself but for Reese Larramendy, a 9-year-old girl from Reno, Nev., who made bracelets for all of the U.S. women going to worlds.

“Reese Larramendy was on my mind the whole time — now she can have that Olympic dream,” Gray said. “She did an Olympic tour with me, and she’s one of my biggest fans. I draw so much strength from her, it really is awesome.”

John Meyer: 303-954-1616, jmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jmeyer26