Us New Yorkers love brunch all year long, but when the standard menu is revamped with items like cornmeal pancakes with pecan streusel and Nutella French toast with maple-buttered bananas and spiced walnuts, well, it doesn't get much better than that. Here are the five brunch spots you absolutely must try while the autumn ingredients are still in season.

Louie & Chan, 303 Broome Street

Louie and Chan's breadpudding, Nutella French toast is one of the most popular items on their fall brunch menu.

Credit: Provided

If you wake up craving something savory, the wood oven baked eggs, tomato, buffalo mozzarella and Parmigiano cheese will hit the spot. Or for something truly decadent, go for the poached eggs, butter poached lobster, caviar, brioche, saffron sabyon and tarragon. Have more of a sweet spot? The French toast made with bread pudding, Nutella, maple-buttered bananas and spiced walnuts is one of their most popular fall items. louieandchan.com

L'Apicio, 1578 First Ave.

Step up your French toast game with this savory Parmesan French Toast from L'apicio.

Credit: Mike McCarthy

L'Apicio got creative with their brunch menu for fall, adding cornmeal pancakes with blueberry, pecan streusel and creme fraiche and a savory Parmesan French toast with prosciutto cotto and fried egg. Still hungry? Add a side of polenta, broccoli rabe or Tuscan fries. lapicio.com

Awadh, 2588 Broadway

Guests choose a vegetarian, meat or seafood option and the dishes arrive in a mini parade at the table.

Credit: Michael Tulipan

Autumn has us craving flavorful food so there's no better time to try the newly opened Indian restaurant, Awadh. The three-course menu focuses on northern Indian specialities such as an Indian egg curry or scrambled egg naan "burrito." The baked crispy lentil flour papadum with onion, tamarind and cilantro relish is also a standout. awadhnyc.com

Ducks Eatery, 351 E. 12th St.

Forget chicken and waffles. This ducks and waffle breakfast is a must-try.

Credit: Provided

East Village BBQ spot Ducks Eatery really outdid itself for fall. From the pumpkin waffles topped with pecan butter, praline syrup to the smoked brisket hash with red onion, there is no shortage of food on the menu to keep you warm, full and satisfied. The shrimp and grits with andouille sausage is also a must-try. duckseatery.com

Atrium Dumbo, 15 Main St., Brooklyn

This Brooklyn hot spot, which serves a mix of American Southern and classic French food has some killer items for fall. Share a side of corn biscuits with Vermont butter and housemade jam for the table, and keep the crispy potato and rosemary all to yourself. For a main course, don't miss out on the quinoa tagliatelle with lemon, cauliflower and cumin. For dessert, the brioche doughnuts with sour cinnamon sugar and Macallan butterscotch is the way to go. atriumdumbo.com



Follow Emily on Twitter: @EmLaurence