Sioux Falls, SD

At just 25 years old, Wyatt Pickner has accomplished a lot and his colleagues agree.

"Being able to use your experience at such a young age and your educational opportunities at such a young age to develop at the rate that he has, has been pretty impressive," Jen Prasek said.

Following graduation from the University of South Dakota in 2014, Wyatt was hired by Sanford Research.

"Right now we are in phase 3 of the study which is the intervention phase so we have done our date collection," Pickner said.

His role is to look into the quality of care American Indian children are receiving in hospital emergency rooms.

"Especially for children when the go into the emergency department it's already a pretty scary experience so how do we kind of work with them so that it's less scary and more welcoming and inviting," Pickner said.

Over the past few years they have identified some problems.

"There's definitely physicians on the reservations but there's not necessarily pediatricians that are available and sometimes that's where that lack of care comes in," Pickner said.

"The ultimate goal of this project is to improve the level of care that children receive in ER rooms and if this project has sort of any positive impact on that I think that itself speaks volumes in something that can be replicated," Prasek said.

A project that gives communities and reservations a voice and will make a difference in their healthcare for years to come.

"In 5 years we're able to make an impact on care that's being provided for American Indian Children and to me that's just absolutely amazing," Pickner said.

HealthBeat

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.