WATSONVILLE -- A planned $7.7 million renovation and expansion of Salud Para La Gente's downtown Watsonville clinic is aimed at meeting increasing demand, providing better service to patients and improving working conditions for employees.

The project also will transform the corner of East Beach and Marchant streets as three buildings are demolished to make way for a 7,028-square-foot addition to the clinic that provides medical, dental and vision care to more than 300 people a day.

Salud has secured a $5 million federal grant for the project, and will launch a capital campaign to raise the balance of the funding.

Construction of the addition could start as early as July, and would take about a year to complete, said Dan Sedenquist, director of business operations. A remodel of the existing 17,613-square-foot clinic will be done afterward.

"We're banging into capacity problems with the existing facility," Sedenquist said. "We need to hire more doctors, have more exam rooms."

Salud, founded in 1978 to serve farmworkers, is a federally designated safety net clinic, providing comprehensive health care to patients regardless of ability to pay. It operates three clinics in Watsonville, and one each in Santa Cruz, Seaside and Pajaro, as well as 12 school-based clinics in Santa Cruz and Monterey counties. Each year, its health professionals see close to 30,000 patients during 122,000 visits.

Salud officials expect demand for services to increase with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, better known as Obamacare, though Sedenquist couldn't say by how much. The expansion adds 13 medical exam rooms to the existing 16, and adds four dental stations for a total of 12. The added space will enable Salud to serve 10,000 more patients, Sedenquist said. The clinic, which now has 65 full-time staff, expects to add another 15.

In addition, the clinic's 12 restrooms will be brought up to standards spelled out in the American Disabilities Act, and a parking lot and new entrances off Marchant Street is designed to provide patients with safer, more convenient access.

The expansion comes as Salud moves to a delivery model envisioned by the Affordable Care Act, which focuses on overall improvement in health rather than fee for services.

Dr. Amy McEntee, Salud's chief medical officer, said the design is welcoming to patients and will allow staff to provide services more efficiently and to better coordinate care.

A new pediatric unit, for example, will have enough room to allow multiple children can be treated at the same time, improving the work flow, she said. New meeting rooms will give doctors and nutritionists the opportunity to work with groups of patients diagnosed with the same illness, such as diabetes.

"It's pretty exciting," McEntee said. "It's going to be improved access for our patients, more space to serve people, and a better working environment."

The planned upgrade comes two years after Salud's board was forced to consider layoffs due to a growing deficit. Sedenquist said the financial issue were based on two programs: Elderday and adult dental care, both of which took hits in state budget cuts several years ago. Both issues have been resolved, he said. In 2013, Salud handed off Elderday to nonprofit Community Bridges. California plans to restore funding for basic adult dental care in May.

Follow Sentinel reporter Donna Jones at Twitter.com/DonnaJonesscs

At a Glance

Salud Para La Gente



What: Remodel of 17,280-square-foot clinic includes 7,028-square-foot addition to house new pediatric unit, new entrances and parking lot, and renovations to 12 bathrooms.

Where: East Beach and Marchant streets.

When: Construction scheduled to start summer 2014, and take a year to complete.

Why: To meet growing demand for services and improve working conditions.

Cost: $7.7 million.