Aiden Spencer is a health IT researcher and writer at CureMD who focuses on various engaging and informative topics related to the health IT industry. He loves to research and write about topics such as Affordable Care Act, electronic health records, revenue cycle management, privacy, and security of patient health data. You can get in touch with him on Twitter @AidenSpencer15

One of the many great conveniences of urgent care clinics is that many have their own pharmacy, which eliminates the patient’s need to go to another location after a visit.

Antibiotics : If a patient is going to an urgent care clinic due to a possible infection, it is good to know that the doctors and physician assistants at the clinic are able to prescribe antibiotics. Urgent care centers stock all of the common antibiotics, and most will be able to fill a prescription for the patient before he or she leaves the appointment.



Short-Term Pain Medications : If a patient goes into an urgent care clinic with an injury such as a slipped disk or severe back pain, some urgent care clinics will be able to prescribe short-term pain medications. However, not all urgent care centers are allowed to prescribe pain medications, and there are some that will prescribe based on the patient’s condition.



One-Time Maintenance Medications : For patients in need of a maintenance medication because they ran out of refills, the urgent care clinic will most likely not provide them with a full refill, but can give the patient a one-time dose until he or she is able to get in touch with a doctor for a refill on that medication. Certain one-time medications available include cholesterol medications, blood pressure medications, and medications to treat diabetes.



Asthma and Allergy Medications : For patients visiting an urgent care clinic for allergies or asthma, the physician will be able to prescribe appropriate medications. Long-term allergy medication recommendations can also be made.



Antiviral Medication : Antiviral medications, such as those to treat the flu, are available at urgent care clinics. Patients who think they have the flu should get checked out as soon as possible in order for the antiviral medication to work properly.



Medications for Stomach Conditions : Patients who suffer with stomach issues, such as constipation or acid reflux, may be able to go to an urgent care clinic for a short-term medication for 30 days or less until they are able to see their primary physician or a gastrointestinal specialist.

One of the many great conveniences of urgent care clinics is that many have their own pharmacy, which eliminates the patient’s need to go to another location after a visit. Urgent care clinics also accept most insurance plans, which provides flexible, and affordable prescriptions.Doctors that work at these urgent care clinics are able to prescribe medications just as a primary care physician would. Certain medications require monitoring, which would mean additional follow-up appointments for the patient , or a referral to a primary care doctor. Patients can be assured that whether they are seeing a physician assistant or a doctor at an urgent care, the clinician will be able to prescribe medication, and get the patient treated as fast as possible by always keeping the patient’s health in mind.