Former Cincinnati Bengals defensive tackle Devon Still has announced that his daughter Leah Still is cancer free.

“Thanks for all the support and prayers! Just got the phone call that her scans showed NED (no evidence of disease)! #LeahStrong #StillKickinCancersAss,” Devon said via Instagram.

On June 2nd of last year, Leah was diagnosed with Stage 4 neuroblastoma and was given a 50/50 chance of survival.

Related Story: Devon Still Announces Daughter Leah's Cancer Is In Remission

Leah has won the heart of many with her bravery to fight through a terrible disease at the tender age of five.

In July, she earned the Jimmy V Perseverance Award at the ESPYs for her immeasurable strength. The award was created in honor of N.C. Coach Jimmy Valvano who died of metastatic cancer in 1993.

Leah was unable to attend the ceremony, so her father accepted the award on her behalf. In an emotional speech Devon said, “For every child that’s out there battling cancer, you know on TV I look like I’m the hero, I look like I’m saving the day, but honestly y’all are the real heroes. What I do is easy; I stand up here and tell them y’all’s story, but y’all are the ones that are actually battling cancer, going through rounds and rounds of chemo every day in radiation and y’all remain with a smile on y’all’s face and y’all never give up and that’s so inspiring.”

Later in August, Leah graced the cover of the Wheaties cereal box. "Thanks @wheatiescerealin the words straight out of Leah's mouth, this is so awesome!! #LeahStrong#StillStrong," Devon captioned his daughter's picture.

Through her battle, Leah has landed national support. Devon and his former team donated over $1 million, raised through jersey sales, to the Cincinnati Children's Hospital to help fund pediatric cancer research in her honor.

Devon was waived by the Bengals in September and is currently a free agent. The team originally kept him on the practice squad to help him pay for Leah’s medical expenses but later added him to the active roster where he tallied 19 tackles in 12 games.

Although he isn't on an NFL roster he has continued to raise money for pediatric research through the Still Strong Foundation.