Abortion activists claim pro-lifers are engaging in a “war on women:” by passing legislation to protect women and unborn children from abortion. But a new expose’ video catches a Planned Parenthood staffer engaging in her own war on women.

The pro-life group Live Action released the third installment today in its “SexEd” investigative series, showing a Planned Parenthood staffer in Portland, Oregon offering disturbing sex counseling to someone she thinks is a fifteen-year-old girl. The video clearly shows the counselor encouraging the young girl to allow herself to be victimized in violent sexual encounters with her partner.

The staffer tells the investigator that “it’s very common to experiment with different things,” including “being tied up” and “whipped” and “the baby thing, where they will put on diapers[.]”

Some girls like being “spanked,” “hit,” or “whipped,” said the counselor.

The Planned Parenthood staffer also encourages the 15-year-old girl to obtain pornography.

The Portland counselor tells Live Action’s investigator that there are “educational pornos out there” and recommends “female-oriented porn.” Planned Parenthood Columbia Willamette continues to operate facilities in six locations in Oregon, including three others in Portland and one in the capital city of Salem.

Live Action’s president, Lila Rose, commented that “no one can justify a counselor telling a fifteen-year-old girl that ‘some people like being spanked, or whipped, or hit.’ This is not sex education, but rather a disturbing and dangerous ideology consciously being pushed on our nation’s youth.”

Rose is particularly disturbed that Planned Parenthood clinics are receiving taxpayer dollars and dispensing such advice to young girls.

Planned Parenthood is poised to receive significant additional funding through ObamaCare, including via PREP (the Personal Responsibility Education Program), a $75-million sex education program funded by taxpayers through the Department of Health and Human Services. Planned Parenthood Columbia Willamette, the affiliate that runs the facility in Live Action’s latest video, has itself been allocated grants through PREP.

Additionally, Planned Parenthood nationally receives over $500 million annually in taxpayer funds, plus more to be an ObamaCare “navigator.”

The Portland video is the third in a series. Previous SexEd installments showed Planned Parenthood locations in Indianapolis and Denver offering similarly disturbing advice to investigators posing as minor girls. Planned Parenthood of the Rocky Mountains, under whose jurisdiction the Denver facilities lie, is now being sued for sending a 13-year-old abuse victim back to her abuser after aborting her baby.

“As our videos show,” Rose said, “and as more videos will continue to show, Portland is not an outlier. You’ll see the exact same institutional ethos of promoting destructive sexual activity in every other city and state where Planned Parenthood operates.”

“This is a bipartisan issue,” Rose commented. “Political ideology shouldn’t affect parents’ desire to protect their children. Whether you’re liberal or conservative, or even pro-life or pro-abortion, tax-funded ‘counseling’ sessions directing kids to porn sites and sex shops, and teaching them how to beat and choke each other, are completely unacceptable.”