Fire investigators have determined that an early morning blaze Friday at a Planned Parenthood clinic was arson. (Photo: KREM)

PULLMAN, Wash. -- Fire investigators have determined that an early morning fire Friday at a Planned Parenthood clinic was arson.

The fire started at around 3:30 a.m. along SE King Drive and caused extensive damage. Police said fire alarms and burglar alarms were tripped at the same time.

Tanya Riordan with Planned Parenthood of Greater Washington and North Idaho called the fire and damage "tragic." Investigators said a window was broken and flames were crawling toward the roof when they arrived at the scene. The building was later deemed unsafe to enter.

Around 4:45 p.m., Riordan said Pullman fire investigator Rich Dragoo informed them that the fire was arson.

"This is an appalling act of violence towards Planned Parenthood, but unfortunately a predictable ripple effect from the false and incendiary attacks that fuel violence from extremists," said Karl Eastlund, CEO, Planned Parenthood of Greater Washington and North Idaho.

The FBI and other federal agencies are involved because of the history of anti-abortion activists targeting health care providers offering abortion services.

"We are working with local and federal law enforcement to ensure a thorough investigation and determine the exact cause. Until the official investigation is complete we cannot speculate the cause or conclude if it was arson or not," said Riordan.

The arson follows Planned Parenthood protests that took place in Pullman a few weeks ago. But officers said those demonstrators were very peaceful and family friendly.

Riordan said Planned Parenthood's focus will be to identify options to continue providing services to Pullman and surrounding communities with as little disruption as possible.

On Saturday, Washington State Attorney General Bob Ferguson issued a statement, saying:

Yesterday evening, the Pullman Fire Department issued a statement indicating that arson was the cause of the fire at the Planned Parenthood clinic there early yesterday morning.



My office is reaching out to local and federal law enforcement to offer our assistance in bringing the responsible parties to justice.



This act of violence has no place in a free society. I urge everyone to join me in condemning this cowardly, reckless and criminal act of intimidation and public endangerment.

Gov. Jay Inslee issued a statement via Facebook, saying "I was disturbed to hear of the senseless act of violence directed toward the Pullman Planned Parenthood early Friday morning.

While I am extremely grateful that there were no injuries following the arson attack, it's deeply disappointing that we still see the kind of hateful rhetoric in our state that fuels this kind of violence.

Attacks such as this will not weaken my commitment to supporting Planned Parenthood and its mission to provide women, men, and families affordable health services.

It's heartening to know that Planned Parenthood will be resuming services in Pullman quickly, as they are an extremely important health provider for women, men, and families in Pullman and throughout Washington."