By of the

The Rev. Willie Brisco of New Covenant Baptist Church will be installed for an unprecedented third term as president of MICAH, the Milwaukee Inner-city Congregations Allied for Hope, at its annual meeting on Thursday.

Brisco is expected to lay out MICAH's agenda for the next two years. But the meeting, scheduled intentionally in advance of Tuesday's election, will likely be a de facto forum for Democratic gubernatorial candidate Mary Burke who — unlike Gov. Scott Walker — plans to attend MICAH's event.

"We moved the meeting... to make sure it captures the feel of this city as we move forward," said Brisco, who has been the face of MICAH and its social justice initiatives since 2010. "We want it to be a springboard to engage people in their civic responsibility with regard to voting and becoming aware of the issues and candidates."

Brisco said Walker, who is in the midst of a 10-day campaign tour of the state, has never accepted an invitation to attend a MICAH event and did not respond to this one. Efforts to reach Walker's campaign spokeswoman, Alleigh Marre, were not successful.

Brisco said MICAH does not endorse candidates. But he conceded that Burke's positions on many issues — from her support for the Affordable Care Act to the minimum wage and collective bargaining for public employees — more closely mirror those of MICAH members than do Walker's.

Still, he said: "We wanted it to be a forum where people could engage with both candidates. Our philosophy is, whoever is in office, we're going to have to work with them and hold them accountable."

As part of the annual meeting, MICAH will highlight its successes over the last year, including increased funding for programs that promote drug and alcohol treatment over prison, and the May settlement with the U.S. Department of Transportation that secured $13.5 million in additional funding for bus routes from Milwaukee's central city to jobs in the suburbs.

Over the next two year, Brisco said, MICAH will focus on initiatives aimed at central city youth and young black men, with the hopes of tapping into the White House's My Brother's Keeper program. And it will shift its education focus from battling expansion of the private school vouchers to ensuring that kids in all schools get a quality education.

He will also propose that the City of Milwaukee construct a new Bucks arena in the central city as a way to create jobs and stimulate much needed development.

"It's not realistic. But it's meant to make people think," said Brisco. "We need something that big, that huge to be built now, to be a symbol of hope."