For those looking to get a little help on their taxes, there are several free options in the Fort Smith area through volunteer organizations.

The AARP Foundation is once again offering help for seniors and low- to moderate-income taxpayers in Fort Smith, Alma, Van Buren, Ozark and Booneville. WestArk RSVP also has expanded services this year. The IRS also has a Free File system. The deadline to pay is April 18.

“If, for whatever reason, you cannot meet the April 18 tax deadline this year, you also can use Free File to submit an extension to file,” the IRS adds. “Just look for the companies that are offering free extensions. The extension will give you until Oct. 17. But remember, it’s an extension to file, not an extension to pay. If you think you will owe, be sure to make any payment by April 18.”

Through the grapevine, word has spread around Fort Smith that free services are available to a wider segment of the population than previously believed. Trish Walker, director of volunteer services at WestArk RSVP, 401 N. 13th St. in Fort Smith, said they will be working on taxes until the end of the day on April 18.

“We were always known as the free site for low income and people over 60 years old,” Walker said. “What the IRS classifies as ‘low income’ is $54,000 and under. We put that on our flyer this year, and we are seeing an increase. … Most people in Fort Smith, Arkansas, don’t make $54,000 a year.”

Walker has made accommodations for more tax pros this year, with eight volunteers in four screened areas on weekdays for the Volunteer Income Tax Assistant and Tax Counseling for Elderly programs. There is a ninth volunteer in a staff office on Saturdays. WestArk RSVP has averaged 98 to 100 tax filings a day.

1095 Forms Unfamiliar

New tax filing rules created by the Affordable Care Act are not as complicated as they may seem, she adds. But there has been some misunderstanding in regards to the 1095 forms.

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services announced a special enrollment period from Feb. 1 through March 31 for taxpayers who failed to file a federal income tax return and reconcile advance payments of the premium tax credit (APTC).

“This special enrollment period will only be available to taxpayers after they file their tax return and reconcile APTC that was paid on their behalf,” the IRS states. “Once the return has been filed, they can return to the Marketplace and update their application to explain that they have filed a return and reconciled their APTC. Eligibility for this special enrollment period is limited to those who have previously attempted to enroll in 2016 coverage.”

Walker said the tax filers only have to see the 1095 A form holders, those who ordered health insurance through the federal Marketplace and “were actually paid a premium for that insurance.” They do not have to see the 1095 B and 1095 C form holders, Walker said, for those who were approved for the expanded Medicaid program.

At the first of January the IRS put out information that all 1095 forms would be mailed out by the end of that month. In mid-January, the IRS announced it would postpone that mailing until the end of March. The 1095 B and C forms are for those who got insurance through an insurance company through expanded Medicaid or through an employer.

“People don’t need to be that scared of it,” Walker said. “If their income is low, if they don’t have a filing requirement, we can get them an exemption and they won’t have to pay a penalty. There are things out there that we can work.”

Walker went on to explain that an exemption can filed for someone who went without insurance for several months. And people who had income at 137 percent above the Federal Poverty Level are eligible for expanded Medicaid also known as the “private option” in Arkansas.

“We have sent a lot of people down to DHS to get signed up for that so they won’t have penalties next year,” Walker said.

Although Oklahoma did not expand its Medicaid program, residents of Oklahoma can also apply for an exemption from a penalty. The Oklahoma Tax Commission approved RSVP to file taxes.

As of last week, RSVP has filed $2.3 million in refunds. About half of that, $1 million, was through the Earned Income Credit, Walker said.

Education on the ACA’s requirements and penalties are still part of the tax filer’s job, she added. The IRS will catch up with those who say they had insurance all year and actually did not, Walker said.

“If you’re not telling us the truth on this, it’s one area the IRS is going to be doing data matching this summer,” Walker said. “They will find out.”

Volunteer tax filers at WestArk RSVP will be available Monday through Friday until April 15, and Saturdays through February and April. They will not be open Saturdays in March.

WestArk RSVP will be open 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. Monday and Tuesday; 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. Wednesday, Thursday and Friday; and 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. Saturdays through February. Walker said they will be open all day Monday, April 18. Due to most people’s schedules, the center sees its busiest hours after 3:30 p.m.

There are Spanish language interpreters available in the morning only on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Call (479) 783-4155 for more information.

Last year on April 14, the day before the tax filing deadline, RSVP filed 127 tax returns. They have averaged 98 a day this year since Jan. 25. As of Feb. 15 the volunteers have prepared 104 more tax returns than the same period last year, Walker said.

AARP Foundation Locations

The AARP Foundation, in conjunction with the IRS, will offer free tax assistance and preparation for taxpayers with low to moderate income through the AARP Foundation Tax-Aide program.

Through April 15, AARP Foundation Tax-Aide sites will provide free tax assistance on a first-come, first-serve basis. Although the program focuses on those 60 and older, officials urge anyone who needs tax assistance to utilize the service.

Like those at WestArk RSVP, all returns are filed electronically. Valid photographic identification and a Social Security Card, or a copy of last year’s tax return must be presented before filing a return.

The program provides six local AARP Foundation Tax-Aide locations in western Arkansas. Locations and service hours are:

• Fort Smith Senior Activity Center, 2700 Cavanaugh Road, Fort Smith, 648-9970. Service available 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. Tuesday, Thursday and Friday.

• Citizens Bank, 4 Northridge Drive, Van Buren, 410-5292. Service available 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. Monday and Wednesday.

• BancorpSouth, 17 U.S. 64 Business, Alma, 651-4700. Service available 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. Tuesday and Thursday.

• Bank of the Ozarks, 2011 W. Commercial St., Ozark, (479) 667-3358. Service available 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday.

• Logan County Library, 419 N. Kennedy Ave., Booneville, (479) 675-2735. Service available 2-6 p.m. Thursday and 9 a.m. to noon Saturday.

For a list of additional locations, visit www.aarp.org/findtaxhelp.

Free File Offers

The IRS says that if you make $62,000 or less, you qualify for free brand-name software offered through a partnership between the IRS and 13 leading tax software providers. Some of these providers offer free federal and free state return preparation and electronic filing. If you made more than $62,000, you can use Free File Fillable Forms, electronic versions of IRS paper forms best for someone experienced in return preparation.

Free File offers all federal tax forms for free. That goes for the Form 1040, Form 1040EZ and Form 1040A. For example, all forms are free if you have mortgage interest deductions, children in college or made money in the stock market, among other things.