National acts perform at Blossom Festival Queen's Pageant, will have shows this summer at Royal Gorge Bridge & Park

Aerial performer April Vollm opens the Cañon City Music & Blossom Festival Queen's Pageant with a sky-high performance Saturday at Cañon City High School. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

Magician Christian Augustine and his wife, April Vollm, an ariel performer, have put on shows across the country and the world — but they're gearing up to share their talents this summer right here in Fremont County.

Vollm performed a brief opening aerial show during Saturday's Cañon City Music & Blossom Festival Queen's Pageant, and the couple put on a magic show as the evening's featured entertainment.

Augustine performed at Buckskin Joe for 22 years before it closed in 2010. He took over from the original magician, Max Hapner, who was his mentor. He said knew he wanted to be a magician when he was only 8 years old.

"My dad took me to see a magic show — I can't explain, but it was like there was a glowing light behind the guy and angels were singing," he said. "I said this is it — this is what I am meant to be."

His favorite part of being a magician is seeing the instant gratification on the faces of the audience members.

Vollm met Augustine when she was working as a saloon girl at Buckskin Joe. While on national and world tours, they perform 1,500 to 2,000 shows a year and travel as many as 50,000 miles each winter. During non-summer months, the couple performs at school assemblies, fundraising events and in Las Vegas and other places.

Advertisement

Vollm has been a comedic actress for 15 years, and she traveled with Ringling Bros. and Barnum and Bailey as a circus clown for nine months. She most recently is learning to be an aerialist, and this summer will debut her comedic aerialist show as Marilyn Monroe at the Royal Gorge Bridge & Park. Her first performance as an aerialist was during Saturday night's pageant.

It was after the Ringling Bros. and Barnum and Bailey performances that Vollm learned how to do acrobatics.

Magician Christian Augustine, with the help of an audience member, performs a trick during the Cañon City Music & Blossom Festival Queen's Pageant on Saturday at Cañon City High School. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

"All the acrobats and everybody would stay after on the arena floor after the crowds left and practice and teach people," she said.

She is taking lessons from a coach in Colorado Springs, who also has worked with coaches from Cirque du Soleil.

The couple worked two summers at the Royal Gorge Bridge & Park and planned their year around performing there, until the 2013 Royal Gorge Fire closed the park for nearly two seasons. Their magic shop on the north side of the bridge was lost in the fire, but their equipment in the Plaza Theater was untouched.

Augustine and Vollm will perform at the Royal Gorge Bridge & Park — four magic shows and four aerial shows each day, seven days a week — Memorial Day weekend through Labor Day.

For more information, visit www.augustinemagic.com.or http://aprilvollm.com/April_V/Home.html.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com