A crowd gathers in Roanoke, Ind. just minutes before Rep. Marlin Stutzman makes a "major announcement" on May 9, 2015.

ROANOKE, Ind. (WANE) United States Congressman Marlin Stutzman, serving in Indiana’s third district, has officially announced his run for U.S. Senate following a “major campaign announcement.”

Stutzman supporters filled Main Street in downtown Roanoke for the announcement Saturday afternoon, holding signs bearing the “Marlin for Senate” logo before he even made the announcement. Stutzman said he chose the location for good reason.

“When we started to talk about where we were going to do our announcement, we wanted to do it in a place that reminded all of us about how great America is because of Main Streets like this all across the country that make America great,” Stutzman said.

Before Saturday, there was speculation that Stutzman would make the bid for Dan Coats’ seat in the U.S. Senate. Coats announced earlier this year he would not seek re-election in 2016.

An event created on Facebook for the announcement asked people to join Stutzman “if [they] believe that we need bold, decisive leadership, committed to securing our future and ensuring a strong America…”

NewsChannel 15’s Sara Wagner was at Stutzman’s announcement and was tweeting some of his campaign speech:

"I will never apologize for being a God-fearing, gun-packing conservative."- @RepStutzman says lawmakers must stand up for beliefs. @wane15 — Sara Wagner (@SaraWagnerWANE) May 9, 2015

In 2010, Stutzman ran against Coats for the Senate seat and was defeated by more than 51,000 votes. Five years later, he said he’s ready and more prepared than ever to make another run.

“You can see today we’ve got a lot of support already around the state. Our campaign in 2010 was something that we can build off of. We’ve got a lot of good relationships around the state, and people are excited about the opportunity again and we’re not going to take anything for granted. We’re just going to keep working hard and doing the things that it takes to win,” Stutzman said.

Stutzman spent eight years in the statehouse before heading to Washington as a Congressman.

“We knew that at the end of the day the root of the problems were in Washington, D.C.,” Stutzman said. “I think people are going to be looking for proven leadership in a conservative that’s already stood up that said he’s going to stick to his values and that’s what I’ve done.”

Now in his third-term, he said he’s ready for a new challenge.

“Right now, in this moment, we need tested, proven, conservative leadership with a vision for the future and a record of getting the job done. It’s time to give hardworking tax payers the strong, secure America that we deserve,” Stutzman said.

Stutzman said his previous experience in Washington and conservative voting record make him the right candidate.

“I work to unify. I want to bring people together because we agree on more things that what we disagree upon, and we shouldn’t be focused entirely on those small differences. We’re going to continue to talk about the fiscal irresponsibility in Washington, about Obamacare and what it’s done to our healthcare system, and we’re going to talk about the security of our country and the fact that we as Americans, we will unify together behind leaders that will protect this country,” Stutzman said.

The entire Stutzman family took part in Saturday’s announcement. His sons, Peyton and Preston, led the crowd in the Pledge of Allegiance. His wife, Christy, also thanked the crowd for coming.

Now that Stutzman has announced to run for Senate, that leaves his congressional spot open. Allen County Republican County Chair Steve Shine said he knew of two Indiana Senators who would run for the third district, Jim Banks and Liz Brown.

Brown confirmed Saturday she’s very interested in the position.

“To be honest, I don’t count my chickens so I wasn’t really sure if Marlin was going to make the run, and that’s pretty impressive that he is. So, yes, I’m very much interested in running for the third congressional district seat. It’s inspiring, and I would love to continue the conservative values and votes and issues that he’s led in the House side. It’d be great to partner with him as Indiana’s next senator on the other side. I think we could get a lot done together.” Brown said. “Like Marlin said, we’ve done great things in Indiana and if we can take those ideas and issues and show Washington, D.C. how government should really work, and I would love to be a part of that.”

Banks said he’ll announce his plans for the future soon.

“Everyone is here today to support a true conservative to send him as our next U.S. Senator back to Washington to fight the good fight. So, today is definitely about Marlin Stutzman. We’ll talk about our plans in the future, but today we’re here to show our support for him,” Banks said.

Back in March, after Coats announced he would not be running for re-election, former Indiana Republican Party Chairman Eric Holcomb announced his candidacy for the U.S. Senate spot. Other possible candidates include state Senator Mike Delph and former Congressman and former Senate candidate Baron Hill. Both have yet to announce, but said they are seriously considering a run for the seat.