Jeremy C. Welter (left) plays the creature and Nathan Danzer is Victor Frankenstein in Off the Wall Theatre’s production of “Frankenstein.” Credit: Dale Gutzman

By ,

Move over, Boris. There's a new monster in town.

In fact, as embodied by Jeremy C. Welter in the version of "Frankenstein" now on stage at Off the Wall Theatre, the never-named creature in Mary Shelley's novel is less monstrous and far more human than any you've likely ever seen, unless you've caught one of the National Theatre showings of the Nick Dear-Danny Boyle "Frankenstein" that took London by storm in 2011.

Although Dale Gutzman is a huge fan of campy horror flicks and monster movies — some of which Off the Wall has gleefully sent up over the years — it's this more nuanced 2011 adaptation of "Frankenstein" that he has elected to stage at Off the Wall, in a production he also directs.

Like Kenneth Branagh's 1994 film, this "Frankenstein" pays attention to Shelley's actual novel. Even more than Branagh's film, Dear and Boyle have been true to that novel — including its oft-neglected middle section, in which the monster gets to tell his own compelling story.

As a result, this "Frankenstein" is less about the creature's egotistic creator than the creature himself. Rather than being a horrific nightmare from which a genius named Frankenstein is trying to awake, here the focus is on the creature's own nightmare, as he sleeplessly tosses and turns through a world in which he is feared rather than loved.

Appropriately enough, we therefore begin with the creature's birth, moving rapidly through his bewildered efforts to make sense of menacing and hostile earthlings.

Although the staging is messy, Off the Wall presents this world as a steampunk-inflected menagerie of human animals, mixing recognizably 19th-century tropes of the Industrial Revolution such as a train with the regimentation of a 20th-century assembly line, through which human beings morph into masked automatons in nondescript dress; what comes to mind is Diego Rivera's Detroit murals.

Even as the actual humans in this world are reduced to things, Welter's creature — despite all the sutures — becomes increasingly human. He learns to speak and read; eventually, he quotes liberally from the likes of Milton, while wrestling with the meaning of his own banishment from paradise.

Welter might as well be tracing his own remarkable growth as an actor during the past dozen years.

Having now performed in scores of Gutzman-directed plays, Welter's always obvious raw talent — sometimes both inchoate and inarticulate in Off the Wall's earlier days — gradually has taken shape, resulting in an increasingly textured and wide-ranging actor who, here, conveys innocence and experience as well as rage, self-disgust and love.

He is, in short, fully human.

Gutzman's galvanic touch hasn't yet worked similar miracles with Welter's supporting cast, many of whom remain a work in progress. Despite some stagy overacting, one sees sparks of life and promise in Marann Curtis' Elizabeth; Robert Hirschi delivers in a small role as Frankenstein's father.

But the badly miscast Nathan Danzer is a milquetoast Frankenstein who has none of this genius' Byronic fire, which in turn undermines this production's focus on the creature as Frankenstein's doppelgänger. Gazing upon this overmatched Frankenstein, it's no wonder that Welter's creature eventually concludes that being human is monstrously overrated.

IF YOU GO

"Frankenstein" continues through Nov. 23 at Off the Wall Theatre, 127 E. Wells St. For tickets, go to offthewalltheatre.com.