Make the whole primary about being the most reasonable politician in the room. Jacquelyn Martin/AP

Memo to Hillary Clinton: Sen. Bernie Sanders is running for president. This is the best thing to happen to you since Chelsea had her baby. Sanders will remind voters what they love about the Democrats (the idealism and concern for the little guy) and also what scares the heck out of them (unions, big government and backward policy ideas).

Your job is to co-opt the former and distance yourself from the latter. If you play this gift right, Sanders will make it much harder for the Republicans to paint you as a raging liberal in the general election, as you will have spent the whole primary fending off the Democratic leftists.

Remember Bill Clinton’s Sister Souljah moment? (It feels weird to call him “Bill Clinton” in this memo, but “your husband” feels even weirder.) Anyway, back to Sister Souljah. In the 1992 presidential campaign, Bill Clinton criticized extreme remarks hip hop artist Sister Souljah had made about black-on-white violence during the Los Angeles riots, thereby distancing himself from the left wing of the party.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Hillary Clinton]

This moment was so important that “Sister Souljah moment” has its own Wikipedia page. It is defined as “a key moment when the candidate takes what at least appears to be a bold stand against certain extremes in their party.” And then this: "Such an act of repudiation is designed to signal to centrist voters that the politician is not beholden to traditional, and sometimes unpopular, interest groups associated with the party.”

Heck, Hillary, I am squirming with excitement as I sit here in this nondescript airport terminal. You have the opportunity to make the whole primary your Sister Souljah moment.

While we’re at it, let’s fold Sen. Elizabeth Warren into this process. She’s not running, but she’s going to be sniping from the left for the whole primary process. The folks over in polling are telling me that when you mention Bernie Sanders, you need to mention Elizabeth Warren, too.



[READ: For Hillary and Bill, What's Past Is Prologue ]

Some commentators have predicted that Sanders and Warren are going to force you to tack left during the primaries. (See how I mentioned them together there?) That would be exactly the wrong thing to do. Stand your ground and let them win 15 or 20 percent of the vote. Maybe even a state or two. Because it’s all about the general election. This is chess. Sometimes you have to sacrifice a piece or two to win the game.

Fending off Sanders and Warren will make you less scary for swing voters come November 2016. And let’s be real: 1) You are going to win the primary; and 2) people who voted for Sanders and Warren are going to turn out for you in the general election regardless of what happens between now and then. Are they going to sit out the election that could put the first woman in the White House? No chance.

This is a gift. You can emerge from the Democratic primary as a pragmatic problem-solving moderate, distancing yourself from both the starry-eyed populists in your own party and the out-of-touch Republicans on the right. Just get the messaging right.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

First, embrace the idealism. Sanders and Warren are right about a lot of things. Inequality will eat away at the fabric of our society. Climate change is a serious threat. College is obscenely expensive. Middle-class wages have to be sufficient to raise a family. And so on.

These are crucial issues that unsettle a wide swath of American voters. The Republicans are leaving the door open because their response to many of them, for reasons I do not fully understand, is denial.

But then trash Sanders' and Warren's policy solutions. (This is a confidential memo, right?) This is where the left wing of your party just falls apart. We can’t create more wealth by voting against trade agreements. We can’t help poor and minority children by pandering to the teachers unions. We can’t raise families out of poverty with a $15 minimum wage if workers are not skilled enough to justify that kind of money. You know all this stuff. Capture the heart of the left wing of the party while demonstrating that you’ve got a brain, too. (Seriously, you’re not going to leak this, are you?)



[READ: Bernie Sanders Is No Barack Obama]

Signal a willingness to reign in entitlements. Don’t get specific about it. Just point out the obvious: These programs are unsustainable. The best way to protect the social welfare programs that Americans care about is to fix them. While Sanders and Warren are promising to expand Social Security, you are going to come across as the responsible Democrat in the room by talking about the fiscal reality.

Support the Affordable Care Act and then talk about reining in health care costs. There are few people in America who know more about health care than you do.

Americans don’t trust the Republicans to protect these programs, and they don’t trust the Democrats to keep control of spending. You are going to steer a course right in between, all thanks to Sanders and Warren.

Best of all, none of this will compromise your ability to govern. If anything, it signals a willingness to compromise with Republicans: on trade, on entitlement reform, on school reform, on fixing Obamacare.

One last thing: Please tell me that you and the Friends of Bill are not secretly funding Sanders' campaign. Because otherwise, this is too good to be true. Do not squander the opportunity.