The sick have a lot more options these days. If you are looking for treatment to your illness or injury, you no longer have to rely on potentially long wait times in the emergency room. Or maybe your buddy, Steve, who has read WebMD and has a friend with the same symptoms as you and, “I swear, this treatment totally worked for him!”

Worcester is home to two major hospitals, Saint Vincent and UMass Memorial, but it still has its share of full waiting rooms.

In fact, according to projects.propublica. org, you’ll wait a little over an hour, 64 minutes, in the ER at UMass Memorial Medical Center. Your wait is shorter at Saint Vincent Hospital, 33 minutes. It could also be up to three hours before you are sent home from UMass, according to the web site, while a visit from start to finish at St. Vincent could take just as long.

More and more patients are turning to urgent care centers, which according to a 2014 Boston Globe story have been expanding around the state since 2012.

Ready Med is among them, a growing institution in the area. The clinics are run by the Reliant Medical Group, a nonprofit organization based in Central Mass. There are currently four locations in the immediate area: Auburn, Hudson, Milford and Shrewsbury. A new Ready Med Plus location will be opening soon on Shrewsbury Street in Worcester. Plantation Street’s urgent care clinic, also owned by Reliant, will close its doors once the new Ready Med arrives.

“My experience has been that typically when those types of centers open up, sometimes the ER volume that can be affected can be your non-emergencies that can be treated and sent home,” said Robert Ready, senior director of patient services and professional practice at Saint Vincent Hospital.

Dr. Raj Hazarika, chair of Same Day Services at Reliant, oversees operations at area Ready Meds when he is not busy with his own patients.

“Urgent cares in this part of the country are definitely a slightly newer concept,” Hazarika said.

The Shrewsbury location was the first to open up about six years ago. Hazarika has been in his position about three of those years.

There are a number of services offered at the clinics. While not meant to be used in lieu of an emergency room, their treatment capabilities are numerous. Physicians are able to handle anything from basic illnesses to stitching patients and dealing with fractured bones.

Urgent care websites make it known they are not emergency rooms and they are versatile, but they are not equipped to handle everything. They offer a middle ground between the emergency room and primary care physicians.

“A big advantage we have compared to traditional doctors’ offices, we’re open nights and weekends,” said Hazarika.

Urgent care centers are not equipped to handle some of the more serious problems, but can take some of the stress off of emergency room for the non-life threatening issues.

A March 2015 study done for the American College for Emergency Physicians (ACEP) showed an increase in emergency room traffic since the implementation of The Affordable Care Act in March 2010. Results came from 2099 ACEP poll participants, 61 of which were from Massachusetts.

Urgent care clinics seem to be a sort of response for this increased need for emergency rooms and emergency room alternatives. Despite their growing prevalence, the clinics do not actually appear to detract from emergency room visitors.

“In the last year, we haven’t really seen a change in our volume, though we certainly do pay attention to any change or trends,” said Ready. “Typically, on an average day, we see somewhere between 185 and 200 patients. I can tell you that St. Vincent’s ER sees approximately 70,000 [patients] a year. Some years a little less than that, some years a little more than that.”

Comparatively, Ready Med and the Plantation Street urgent care facility see a total of about 100,000 patients annually.

Both emergency rooms and urgent care clinics strive to improve customer satisfaction. Wait times are a large concern, in either case. With growing numbers of visitors to the ER, hospitals monitor patient walk-outs to make sure they stay below a certain number.

Ready said emergency rooms do their best to keep wait times down. They follow benchmarks set at a national level.

“Emergency departments look for there to be less than one to two percent of . . . patients leaving before they are treated,” Ready said, adding they generally hit the benchmark.

Few patients leave without treatment, he said. Benchmarks are provided by organizations like the ACEP.

According to Hazarika, Reliant employs a number of tools to make care easier and more accessible to patients.

“They can check online what our wait times are,” he said. “They can decide if they want to come in right away, or if they want to go to another site.”

Urgent care clinics may be on the rise, but patient numbers indicate they are catering to a different crowd than local emergency rooms. It is also possible people are just more willing to go to seek treatment now that they have insurance.

Considering the relatively short history of these urgent care centers, it might be a little early to see trends in how they affect hospitals, but you can bet both organizations will be watching those numbers closely.