In light of the deaths of unarmed black men by police, protests and demonstrations have erupted across the country, but from state to state their message is the same, "black lives matter." Saturday, a group held a demonstration at the Panama City Hall.

From the shooting death of Michael Brown to the choking death of Eric Garner, people across the country are taking a stand against police brutality.

"We just had some concerns over things going on in America right now and a lot of people want to find a way to vent their frustrations," said Giovanni Morrison.

One group is trying to spread awareness here in the Florida Panhandle.

"We wanted to come together and show some kind of solidarity to things going on in Ferguson, New York and things that young people black people face everyday," said Morrison.

Demonstrators held a die in in front of city hall, it was timed for four minutes to represent the 4.5 hours Michael Brown was left on the road after he was shot.

"We lay out and a moment of silence for the dead recently at the hands of police brutality," said Morrison.

Jamil Davis is one of the organizers of the demonstration.

"We decided that it was time for us to declare that black lives matter not just around the country but here in Panama City as well," said Davis.

For him, it's a cause that hits close to home.

"Me and my friend were walking up the road PCPD came around the corner and asked us what we were doing, I told them we just came out of church and that I can call my dad if you want, that's fine we'll worry about that later, can we see your ID, I always keep my wallet in my back pocket and as I was reaching for my wallet I started staring down the barrel of a nine," said Davis.

The group hopes to get more people involved in their cause.

"We've all been so vocal on social media everybody has opinions in the world and i think its time to start placing actions with your words if everybody does that in their own way the things that can be accomplished is immeasurable," said Morrison.

The group is planning another demonstration next Saturday at the Hathaway Bridge. They will hold a candle light ceremony for those they have lost to police brutality.