Local man credited with pushing flaming boat away from marina gas tanks

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

»

A boat fire at Boyd Lake marina early Friday evening left two people with minor injuries.

The boat was just launching from the dock when witnesses say they heard a "whoosh" sound and began to see smoke coming from the boat.

Five people nearby rushed to the boat to try to extinguish the fire as those in the boat began to jump out. The boat had to be unhooked from a trailer.

Henry Shepherd was one of the people who rushed to help. He and his family had just docked their boat. Shepherd said he heard the sound of the "explosion" on the boat and a dad telling his kids to "jump." He rushed over to help.

"I was just pulling towels and stuff, so it wouldn't catch on fire," Shepherd said.

He said he was getting ready to climb into the boat itself — it was just smoking at the time — when someone else quickly pulled him away.

Meanwhile, his daughter ran to alert marina staff members to call 911.

Henry's wife, Nancy, said she then saw a marina employee, Steve Deines, make a "James Bond" style move.

Deines jumped into one of the marina staff's shuttle boat, a dinghy, and started to try to push the burning boat away from the marina because it was headed for two large tanks of gas.

He said it took him two tries, but he got the dinghy to ram the other boat and deflect it. The dinghy also caught fire, and Deines jumped off of it into the water.

"That was my favorite boat," Deines said, with a laugh.

Advertisement

He said he acted fast when he heard there was a boat fire, especially after finding out there were children on the boat.

"I didn't want the marina to burn down," he said. "We have a long weekend coming up."

Nancy Shepherd said she saw this all happen as she was walking nearby and is thankful because "it could have been a lot worse."

When the boat starting moving toward the gas tanks, she said she felt like it was occurring in slow-motion.

"It was becoming pretty imminent," she said. "It was pretty scary."

Loveland Fire Rescue Authority, Thompson Valley Emergency Medical Services, Larimer County Sheriff's Office and Parks and Wildlife crews responded to the scene.

Fire Rescue Authority Battalion Chief Michael Cerovski said there were four people in proximity of the boat when it started burning, and two were burned, though the injuries were not severe enough to have them transported to a hospital.

Crews were cleaning up the unburned fuel from the boat that had spilled into the lake before other boats were allowed back in the water.

The process, Cerovski said, is called booming — items similar to socks are used to collect the gas that's floating on the water's surface and absorb it.

The lake supplies water to Greeley, so officials were notified of the spill, he said.

"Our biggest concern is no one else is injured," Cerovski said, adding that if a boat is just burning in the middle of the water and no one is in it, they just let it burn.

Cerovski said they're still looking into the cause of the boat fire, but it's likely the result of a mechanical failure.

Saja Hindi: 970-669-5050 ext. 521, hindis@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/SajaHindiRH.