The ultra-modern Wamakko Orthopaedic Hospital in Sokoto State will soon be inaugurated, Alhaji Bature Shinkafi, the state’s Head of the Civil Service, said.

Shinkafi made the disclosure at the inauguration of a privately-owned health facility, the Bone and Joint Orthopaedic Hospital, Sokoto on Sunday in Sokoto.

According to him, the Wamakko Orthopaedic Hospital, which is the first of its kind in Sokoto, Kebbi and Zamfara states is now a reality.

The hospital had been completed and equipped with the best, state-of-the-art facilities, to make it conform to international standard, he said.

He added that the state government had already recruited consultants and other paramedics for the hospital, from within and outside Nigeria.

The head of service noted that the state government established the new hospital to reduce the sufferings of accident and trauma victims who often had to travel to Kano or outside Nigeria for treatment.

He gave the assurance that the state government would partner with the new privtate hospital, saying its services would be made affordable.

Prof. Taofeeq Ibrahim, the Head of Public Health Department, Usumanu Danfodiyo University Teaching Hospital, Sokoto, stressed the need for increased public- private sector partnership to further provide the health needs of Nigerians.

He said “such partnership will reduce the menace of medical tourism. The private sector is key to national development in all aspects.

The Proprietor of the hospital, Dr Mohammed Oboirien, restated his commitment to delivering effective and efficient orthopaedic and trauma care to the people.

Oboirien, who is the Head of the Accident and Emergency Department, Usumanu Danfodiyo University Teaching Hospital, Sokoto, said “the burden of trauma is enormous, worldwide.

“Trauma has been known to be the commonest cause of death in people under the age of 44 years.’’

“The WHO dedicated 2000 to 2010 as bone and joint decade to create awareness on musculoskeletal diseases, world wide,’’ he added.

The Orthopaedic consultant said fracture and trauma management had become more scientific now.

According to him, the goal of modern fracture care is to ensure that patients walk as early as possible.

Announcing that the hospital had computerised its services, Oboirien said it had national and international collaborations.

He said “we are paperless in our operations and we have provided safe anesthetics gadgets to ensure patients safety, during and after operations.

“In the nearest future, we intend to set up a city ambulance rescue service to facilitate pre-hospital care,” Oboirien added. (NAN)