If you're still confused by what happened in America this week, it's probably because you've been told a story: "Barack Obama won in 2008 as a political messiah. Then, Republicans roared back in 2010 – but that was only because old, white, angry tea party men showed up at the polls. Luckily in 2012, the story continues, the American public reaffirmed that Republicans are, in fact, crazy Right-wingers, by granting Obama a second term."

That's one way of interpreting recent history, to be sure. But then, how do you explain what happened on Tuesday?

One plausible theory for what happened in the Midterms might be that voters were not so much approving a conservative mandate, as they were rejecting Mr Obama's policies, and that in the 2016 presidential elections, the electorate will be much more diverse.

However, it would also be a mistake for us to underplay the importance of what happened. Republicans crushed the Democrats, easily taking control of the US Senate – and adding a dozen, or so, House seats to their majority in the lower chamber of the US Congress.

They also won important governorships in ultraliberal states like Maryland, Massachusetts, and Illinois – and (at the state house level) will now control 67 of the 98 partisan legislative chambers in America. This was an across-the-board drubbing.

And if Republicans can avoid gloating over last Tuesday's results – if they can avoid overplaying the significance of what just happened – there is reason to believe they might have a real shot continuing this trend and winning the presidency in 2016.

Here's why: Though Republicans should not assume the 2016 electorate would look like it did in 2010 or 2014, neither should Democrats assume 2016 would look like 2008 or 2012 (when Obama was on the ballot).

Yes, the electorate will be younger and less white in 2016 than in 2014 – but one important and unanswered question lingers: Can Democrats turn out their base voters in such high numbers when Mr Obama isn't on the ballot?

Additionally, Republicans are making strides – in terms of catching up to the Democrats' data and technological advantage, and in terms of electing candidates who look more like the rest of America, a trend that continued on Tuesday. With Hispanic Republican Senators like Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz – and governors like Nevada's Brian Sandoval and New Mexico's Susana Martinez, coupled with Indian American governors like South Carolina's Nikki Haley and Louisiana's Bobby Jindal – the GOP already boasted a stronger bench of high-profile minority elected officials than the Democrats.

But Tuesday's election only increased this advantage. Sen. Tim Scott (who was previously appointed to the Senate) became the first black senator in the deep south since 1881 with his victory in South Carolina. Utah's Mia Love became the Republican's first black woman elected to Congress, and also the first Haitian-American. New York's Elise Stefanik, 30, became the youngest woman ever elected to Congress. And Senators-elect Joni Ernst and Shelley Moore Capito became the first women ever elected to the US Senate in their respective states of Iowa and West Virginia.

Perhaps most important, though, is the fact that the Republican Party seems to have matured. In recent cycles, tea party conservatives and establishment Republicans, alike, nominated candidates who ended up saying controversial things that cost them elections.

This time around, the GOP seems to have learned their lesson. They nominated a slate of qualified and serious conservative candidates, avoiding the kinds of controversies that might have made it easy to label them as crazy or "fringe" candidates.

Republican leaders went out of their way to support quality candidates during the primary contests, and to incentivise good behaviour thereafter.

What is more, many of the red meat hurling conservative candidates who arrived in Washington in 2010 and 2012 matured along the way – chastened by the government shutdown that damaged the Republican brand even further. No, they haven't turned into raging moderates or liberals, but they have become more pragmatic and sagacious. And on Tuesday, it showed.

Matt Lewis is a senior contributor at The Daily Caller website in Washington DC