Nancy Jean Beigel, one of those who appeared in the Rose Garden with President Obama recently as an example of someone who would benefit from ObamaCare, immediately encountered problems when she tried to enroll.

Beigel told the Washington Post she tried for two days to sign up before giving up for now. "It's a little confusing," she said.

Others, who have gotten letters from their insurance carriers telling them exactly how much they will pay, are upset for different reasons.

Tom Gialanella of Seattle, who is self-employed, told Fox News, "my premiums would increase approximately 61 percent. I went from $891 a month to $1437 dollars a month. And also my deductibles all doubled."

The letter from his insurer said his current deductible for his family of five would double from $4,000 a year to $8,000.

Even though that's for the Bronze Plan, the least expensive option under ObamaCare,he says his additional payment of$550 a month will give him a plan that is no better than what he already has. What’s more, it also it carries a benefit his family does not need: maternity and newborn care.

"My wife is 58 years old and our youngest child is soon to be 18," says Gialanella. "We'll be having no more children. That is not a benefit that we would ever purchase nor need or be able to use."

Gialanella is almost 60 and makes too much money to get any subsidies.

But those his age aren’t the only ones affected.

Young people, especially, young men, can face huge premium increases.

Chris Holt of the conservative American Action Forum says, "we said let's look at what the lowest cost Bronze Plan is and compare that to the lowest cost plan that I can buy today. And what we found is that it will go up about 260 percent for a 30-year-old male."

Recent reports from the Midwest indicated increases of more than 100 percent, but not as much as Holt found.

Part of the problem is that young people will be forced to buy more benefits than they might be willing to pay for, as a recent survey found.

"For young adults, Holt said of one recent survey, "if they saw 30 percent increase in their insurance premiums - these are the ones that already had coverage - 45 percent of them said they would drop coverage."

Only two states in the country, New Jersey and Massachusetts, showed rate increases for that age group lower than 30 percent.

But what about the subsidies in ObamaCare that are most generous at lower income levels?

For any young person making more than $20,000 a year, insurance premiums -- not even counting deductibles of several thousand dollars -- would cost more than paying the penalty for not getting insurance.

That raises the prospect of young people deciding the plan makes no sense for them.

That possibility could be critical, because the administration is counting on signing up enough young, healthy people to offset the cost for the older and less healthy.

If that doesn’t happen, the costs of ObamaCare could soar.

Jim Angle currently serves as chief national correspondent for Fox News Channel (FNC). He joined FNC in 1996 as a senior White House correspondent.