Cruz’n through the ‘Burgh: In foreground of Pa. primary, Texas senator draws support at Monroeville rally 0 April 26, 2016

4/26/2016 Cody Benjamin Editor-in-Chief C.J.Benjamin@iup.edu

MONROEVILLE – “God bless the Pittsburgh Steelers.”

It took Texas Sen. Ted Cruz all but 30 seconds to make that proclamation after taking the stage for a rally at Monroeville’s Gateway High School Saturday.

With three days until the Pennsylvania primary, the Republican presidential candidate wasted no time playing up to a receptive crowd, which wrapped around the school in anticipation of the event hours earlier.

Those in attendance varied in age and candidate preference – some, while waiting in line, acknowledged they were still undecided for Tuesday’s election.

But collectively, they welcomed Cruz with open arms, advocating for the senator’s stringent constitutionalist approach to restoring America.

Bobby Fleegle (sophomore, finance), 20, of Johnstown, traveled from IUP to see Cruz at Gateway. He said there’s a misconception among younger voters that Cruz, unlike, say, Democratic candidate Bernie Sanders, isn’t an appealing choice for the White House.

“When they become adults, their eyes will be opened,” Fleegle said of his fellow students. “Making everything ‘fair,’ it all sounds nice, but a lot of Democrats are more social, and Ted is more economical.”

Fleegle particularly liked Cruz’s proposed flat-tax system, which, as the candidate went on to explain, would allow taxes to be completed on a postcard-sized form.

Janice Stricko, 64, of Westmoreland County, wasn’t as adamant in her belief that Cruz could ultimately win a general election.

But Stricko, a Gateway graduate and teacher in the district for more than three decades, had no problem vouching for Saturday’s local celebrity thanks to conservative ideals.

“That scares me, beating Hillary [Clinton],” she said. “But you support what you believe.”

Recent polls, including an April 21 survey by Franklin & Marshall College, show Cruz trailing GOP front-runner Donald Trump in the upcoming northeastern primaries. In an election season where a contested July convention seems increasingly likely, however, that didn’t stop Cruz from drumming up interest in his conservative campaign.

Amid chants of “We want Ted” and “President Cruz,” the 45-year-old senator emphasized “jobs, freedom, security,” a slogan unveiled through onstage posters.

He reiterated his signature plans to repeal and reform the Affordable Care Act, colloquially known as Obamacare, limit federal power in favor of state governments and small-business growth, as well as stand against radical Islamic terrorism.

Through it all, he also highlighted his movement as a contrast to Trump.

“When Donald Trump was writing checks to Jimmy Carter over Ronald Reagan,” Cruz said, “I was still in grade school. Donald Trump is a Washington insider who has been supporting liberal Democratic politicians for 40 years.”

Despite his own congressional background, Cruz made it a point to lump Trump into the same category that his rival has been lauded for attacking: all-talk, no-action government.

Alluding to presidents who have compromised on positions, Cruz said too many candidates “talk good on the campaign trail, and then they get in office and betray us.”

“(But) I have to give Donald credit. He’s betraying us before he got elected.”

One particular example of Trump’s alleged flip-flopping stirred the Monroeville crowd, bringing the seated audience to its feet in Gateway’s auditorium.

“Two days ago, Donald Trump went on The Today Show, and he agreed with Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama that grown men should be allowed to use the little girls’ restroom,” Cruz said. “Now, that’s just nuts. Listen, this is not a matter of Republican or Democrat or conservative or liberal. It’s a matter of basic common sense.

“As the father of two young girls, I can tell you it doesn’t make any sense at all to allow adult grown men – strangers – to be alone in a bathroom with little girls. That’s just political correctness on steroids.”

Trump has since realigned his stance on contested bathroom laws, saying they should be left as they are.

“Haven’t we had enough of this nonsense?” Cruz asked, with applause erupting before he finished. “Do we want to nominate a candidate who is a phony? Or do we want to get behind an optimistic, forward-looking, conservative campaign with real solutions?”

One of three U.S. senators of Cuban descent, Cruz also drew ovations for comments on the Democratic presidential hopefuls, including former Secretary of State Clinton.

“We started with a young, diverse field,” he said. “It’s quite a contrast with the Democrats. The Democratic field consists of a wild-eyed socialist with crazy ideals, and then there’s Bernie Sanders.”

Before greeting fans, at the close of his rally, Cruz made the ever-important case for votes in Pennsylvania, identifying himself as Clinton’s chief competition, with mentions of head-to-head victories against her in polls from Iowa and Ohio.

“Here in PA and other classic battle states, Donald loses to Hillary,” he said.

“We’re coming back here in October and November, and if we stand together, we are beating Hillary.”