Rep. Marlin Stutzman's ad in the GOP Senate primary race accuses Rep. Todd Young of being bought by party leaders. (Photo: Bart Jansen, USA TODAY)

The ad: Rep. Marlin Stutzman is running as the Republican Senate candidate who stands up to Democrats and his own party leaders. In an attack ad released about two weeks before the May 3 primary, Stutzman accuses GOP Rep. Todd Young of having been bought by special interests and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky.

The ad shows a Young action figure being manufactured at “McConnell Industries” and put into a box stamped “Sellout Politicians” and “Does What He’s Told! Just Push Button.”

The narrator says special interests and McConnell have spent $1 million to buy Young a promotion to the Senate. The narrator also charges Young with having voted to raise the debt limit over $2 trillion and voted to fund “Obamacare and Obama’s amnesty plan.”

Analysis: McConnell is officially neutral in Indiana’s Senate primary. But two independent groups led by his former top aide are spending nearly $1 million on ads praising Young or attacking Stutzman. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce is spending $1 million on ads praising Young.

Rob Engstrom, the national political director of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, has called Stutzman hypocritical for initially seeking the group’s endorsement, and then criticizing the chamber when he didn’t get it.

Also, Young’s campaign notes that members of House Republican leadership have helped Stutzman raise campaign funds in the past.

Young voted in 2011 and 2013 for budget deals that increased the legal limit on how much debt the government can hold. But Stutzman voted for the the same 2011 deficit reduction and debt limit plan, which included increasing the debt ceiling by $900 billion.

Both Young and Stutzman have voted multiple times to repeal all or parts of the Affordable Care Act. Stutzman’s charge that Young voted to fund Obamacare refers to budget bills criticized by the conservative Heritage Action for America for not blocking all funding for the landmark 2010 health care law. But Stutzman, like Young, voted in 2015 for a budget blueprint that would’ve scrapped part — but not all — of the Affordable Care Act.

Stutzman’s claim that Young voted for Obama’s “amnesty plan” refers to Young’s 2015 vote to fund the Department of Homeland Security. Young had supported language in the bill to bar the administration from spending money to carry out Obama’s executive actions to provide work permits and protection from deportation for more than 4 million undocumented immigrants. But when that language was blocked by the Senate, Young continued to support the underlying bill, saying he wasn’t willing to risk shutting down the Department of Homeland Security “to make a political point about a distinctly different issue.”

Truth Squad: Stretching the Truth (Photo: Illustration)

Conclusion: Stutzman’s ad is correct that Young is getting substantial help from the Chamber of Commerce and from groups with ties to McConnell. But Stutzman would have welcomed the business group’s backing, and has a record of both fighting with — and receiving help from — House GOP leaders.

The Young votes the ad criticizes don’t tell the full story of either Young’s — or Stutzman’s — voting records. There’s not much difference between the two Republicans’ views on the Affordable Care Act, Obama’s executive actions on immigration and the debt limit. But there are differences in the extent to which the candidates are willing to engage in budget showdowns — including shutting down parts of the government — over those issues.

Overall rating: Stretching the truth.

Contact Maureen Groppe at mgroppe@gannett.com or on Twitter: @mgroppe.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1We8YHk