An American technology company with offices in Thunder Bay and Minneapolis, Minn. is hoping to add more to its roster.

Health E(fx) works to ensure American companies offer their employees medical benefits under the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obama care named after United States President Barack Obama.

Since starting up, the demand to ensure American companies provide medical benefits to employees has been a challenging battle. The management team, who are all from Thunder Bay, hopes to mitigate this by hiring an additional 27 employees.

Terry Smith, the technical implementation manager with Health E(fx), said when he first joined the company two years ago, they only had five staff members and three clients. That all changed a year later, when the staff numbers snowballed to 27 and more than 100 clients.

“We are the fastest growing tech company in Thunder Bay that you’ve never heard of,” Smith joked. “We are not just an American company who has set up offices here in Canada, we are Canadians providing a needed service for the American workforce and we are here to stay.”

Smith said there is a tremendous growth potential with hundreds of employees in each of these companies.

He mentioned they are taking applications from Thunder Bay.

No formal education or training is necessary.

Smith explained Obama care applies to companies with a hundred or more employees.

He said it is far more complicated than Canada’s health care system. He mentioned that only those working full-time at 30 hours per week or 130 hours per month qualify and each employee is re-evaluated yearly.

That’s not the case in Canada.

The company’s job is to issue IRS tax returns to every employee from every company they represent. When the forms are filled out, the company reviews the data and averages out the amount of hours worked in order to determine if the employee qualifies.

Heiko Voss, director of software innovation, said the founders of the company recognized an opportunity for the service after the law passed in 2010.

“It was only this year that the law has come into full effect meaning, the employer has to report through IRS tax returns on all of their employees,” he said.

Voss added the company began with two of the current six partners, who worked together at Wardrobe Engineering, got the ball rolling. The two partners initiated Health E(fx) three years ago, with one heading to the U.S. to set up shop in Minneapolis. A duplicate version of Thunder Bay’s Heath E(fx) exists in Minneapolis with another 27 American employees.

For more information about applying, email a resume to careers@healthefx.us.