More than 100,000 people submitted applications for new health insurance under Obamacare on the first day of the program’s second ever enrollment period, White House officials said.

The numbers, and limited reports of difficulty with the website, mark a staggering a turnaround for the trouble-plagued federal program — a development Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell on Sunday said bodes well for the future of Obamacare.

"The vast majority of people coming to the site were able to get on and do what they were intending to do," Burwell said on NBC's "Meet the Press,” adding that more than 500,000 people had logged on to the site since Saturday.

The news is a welcome development since the program’s first enrollment period, plagued by serious and chronic glitches to the website.

Republicans have seized on last year’s disastrous rollout to emphasize talking points that Obamacare was a failure — an argument propelled back into the news last week when MIT professor Jonathan Gruber, a paid consultant to the White House during the rollout, said that Congress only passed the law due to the “stupidity of the American voter” and a “lack of transparency.”

Conservatives have used video of Gruber’s speech to galvanize renewed opposition to the law.

Burwell, however, hit back against that point, stressing “how fundamentally I disagree with his comments.”

“Since I’ve been at the department, one of the things I’ve focused on is transparency, making sure that all our numbers come out whether they’re good or bad. And the other thing is that the law is based on the issues of transparency and belief in the American people and choices in the marketplace,” she said, stressing that the latest numbers tell a different story.

Burwell said Sunday that the White House expects “strong and healthy growth” to bring enrollment in 2015 to more than 9 million.

Even Obama himself weighed in on the comments, defending, during a speech in Australia earlier Sunday, his office’s marketing of his signature health-care law.

“The fact that an adviser who was never on our staff expressed an opinion that I completely disagree with in terms of the voters is not a reflection on the actual process that was run,” Obama said.

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? CLICK HERE FOR VIDEO.