Hancock (Photo: Prison Ministry Project)

In response to the ongoing investigation of alleged abuse of inmates at the juvenile correctional facilities at Lincoln Hills, Gov. Scott Walker made an astonishingly disingenuous statement.

Walker said he “doesn’t have reason to believe those problems exist at other prisons.”

On the contrary, he has every reason to believe that exactly the same kind of abuses are happening in solitary confinement units in prisons across the state. Those abuses have been extensively documented by the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, the Center for Investigative Journalism, the Progressive Magazine and the statewide interfaith group WISDOM.

Walker and Department of Corrections Secretary Ed Wall have refused to acknowledge these abuses and for two years have stonewalled all requests to meet with people who have knowledge of the situation inside the walls.

In November, the ACLU, WISDOM, the Wisconsin Council of Churches and others formally requested a meeting with Wall to discuss the need for an independent evaluation of the practices related to solitary confinement, and to recommend policy changes that would minimize future abuse. The secretary has not even acknowledged receipt of the letter.

The situation at Lincoln Hills is not an exception, and the investigation is a long-needed window into the operations of the Department of Corrections. It is an agency out of control. It is the largest agency in state government with a budget of more than a billion dollars a year. The governor and Wall have wasted our money. They have abused their power. They have broken faith with the dedicated employees of the department who know that treating people this way is wrong. And they have violated the trust of the people of Wisconsin.

For years, countless groups have presented well-documented evidence of other major structural breakdowns in other parts of the DOC. Judges around the state are deeply concerned about the way that parole-eligible prisoners are treated within the DOC. Thousands of men and women who have already served the time envisioned by their sentencing judge — and legally eligible to be released — languish in prison. The DOC has been given scores of examples. Again, Wall refuses to acknowledge the concerns, refuses to meet with anyone outside of his own administration, and claims that he has looked into the situation and has found nothing wrong.

Just like at Lincoln Hills.

Concerns about the uneven way that people are dealt with on Extended Supervision have also been ignored. Thousands of people are “revoked” by the DOC back to prison each year even though they have not committed a new crime. The Legislature even passed a law — called “Swift and Certain” — that directs the DOC to find better alternatives than a renewed prison sentence for crimeless revocations. More than 18 months after the passage of Swift and Certain, the law has not been implemented by the DOC.

Change is desperately needed. The root of the problem is the governor’s continuing misplaced belief in the effectiveness of mass incarceration. After 15 years, that misguided policy has led to dangerously overcrowded prisons that put both inmates and staff at risk. There are effective ways to cut Wisconsin’s prison population in half. Those strategies work in Minnesota, and they will work here. The Legislature must take back control of the prison system and make these changes before it is too late.

The Rev. Jerry Hancock of Madison is director of The Prison Ministry Project.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1YIIz2q