Buy Photo Chris Grace, left, and Christina Grace enjoy the Lazy River at Kentucky Kingdom’s Hurricane Bay on Saturday. (Photo: Photos by Aaron Borton/Special to the C-J)Buy Photo

J ames Gilmore and Anna Mason arrived at the front gate of Kentucky Kingdom before sunrise Saturday morning, eagerly awaiting the theme park's grand reopening.

"We got here at 6 a.m.," said Mason, 26. "Five hours may be a long wait for some people, but that's nothing compared to the five years we've been waiting for it to reopen. To say we are excited is an understatement. We are ecstatic."

They were among an estimated 3,000 people who rushed through the gates in the first hour. Many were greeted by King Louie the Lion, the park's ambassador, while others took pictures in front of the large "Kentucky Kingdom and Hurricane Bay" sign just inside the entrance.

MORE: Kentucky Kingdom reopening means summer jobs

MORE: View an interactive map of Kentucky Kingdom

Jason Allen and Melissa Simpson were among the first to ride the newest roller coaster, Lightning Run.

"It was awesome!" said Allen, who is from Nashville, Tenn. "I love roller coasters, so any time there is a new roller coaster out, I try to travel there. This was only two hours away and well worth the drive."

Sisters Brianna and Emily Berry were excited to see all the attractions — both old and new.

"We grew up coming to Kentucky Kingdom," said Brianna Berry, 19, a student at Eastern Kentucky University. "We had to be here for opening day."

The park was last open in 2009 under the name Six Flags Kentucky Kingdom. It was abandoned in February 2010 after the Kentucky State Fair Board rejected the bankrupt Six Flags' request to pay for use of the park grounds only if it turned a profit.

Several plans to reopen the park fell through before the fair board and local businessman Ed Hart struck a deal on a new lease last year.

MORE: Share your thoughts on the new Kentucky Kingdom

MORE: Kentucky Kingdom to have free visitor dropoff site

Hart, who owned the park previously, said his new ownership group trained about 800 youths for jobs at the park, sold more than 80,000 season tickets, implemented a solid security plan and renovated 50-plus acres at the Kentucky Exposition Center.

"This is five years in the making and it's not just me, it's a group of very dedicated people," Hart said Saturday. "It's great to be back."

Tisha Peak brought her five kids Saturday.

"I just love that Ed Hart took it back over," she said. "I can't wait to see what he has done with it."

Hart's ownership group spent $44.3 million to restore the park; it cost $1 million alone to renovate Thunder Run, a wooden coaster. The new Lightning Run coaster, with 2,500 feet of track and an 80-degree ascent, cost $7 million. Other major attractions include the new Fear Fall, a 13-story drop ride, and a renovated Mile High Falls, a splash ride.

The only issue that seemed to arise by midday was the long lines for those who had purchased season passes in advance and who did not complete the required information before Saturday.

"We are always concerned when we have long lines," Hart said. "We had 16 computers that do very quick processing. The problem is we have a few thousand people in line. We are trying to address that as best we can."

James Nelson was among those who had to wait about two hours before he got into the park.

"It was a little frustrating, but part of it is my fault," he said. "I should have uploaded the photo and made sure the pass was ready to go before opening day."

In all, the new Kentucky Kingdom and its Hurricane Bay water park have 48 rides, including 19 in Hurricane Bay, which was doubled in size. Twenty-five of the rides are new to the park.

Kentucky Kingdom drew its highest number of visitors, more than 1.3 million in 1998, under Hart.

He said he expects Kentucky Kingdom to draw between 600,000 and 800,000 visitors this year and to reach 1 million in 2016. Attendance was around 550,000 in 2009 under Six Flags.

A consultant hired by the Kentucky Tourism Cabinet estimated the park will provide a $3 billion local economic boost over 20 years and generate nearly $225 million in new tax dollars for state and local governments in that time. It also is expected to generate $500,000 a year in hotel room-tax revenue for the Louisville Convention & Visitors Bureau, according to the study.

Reporter Antoinette Konz can be reached at (502) 582-4232 or @tkonz on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1k5mllX