Between 2011-14, the Virginia Tech Police Department made seven arrests related to allegations classified by the federal Jeanne Clery Disclosure of Campus Security Policy and Campus Crime Statistics Act as sexual assault, which includes harassment and stalking. Charges were pursued in all seven cases. Here are the outcomes:

2011

Don McLean Harvey: Found guilty of sexual battery and sentenced to 12 months in jail, with eight months suspended. He was ordered to 12 months of probation and banned from the Tech campus.

2013

Renato Jesus Rodriguez Nunez: Charged with stalking. He stipulated the evidence was sufficient to convict, but the case was taken under advisement for 12 months. The charge was dismissed after Nunez had no further problems.

Brian King Cofie: Charged with abduction, but that charge was not prosecuted. Cofie was found guilty of assault and sentenced to three months in jail, with all suspended. He was also found guilty of trespassing and sentenced to three months in jail, with all suspended.

Devika Pennagaram – Charged with stalking and making a threat of death or bodily harm in writing. She did not appear for her court date after release on a $5,000 unsecured bond, and is currently a fugitive. Pennagaram is listed as having three graduate degrees and her home address is listed as India.

Trent Powhatan Parrish: Found guilty of stalking and sentenced to 12 months with 11 suspended. He was ordered to 12 months of supervised probation to include therapy and medication. He was banned from contact with the victim.

Justin A. Luu: Charged with rape and aggravated sexual battery of a minor. The charges were reduced under a plea agreement, and Luu was found guilty of assault and battery and sentenced to 12 months, with seven months suspended and 250 hours community service. Luu was also ordered to 12 months of probation and submission to a "psychosexual evaluation and after release [to] complete evaluation ... to include weekly counseling sessions with a sex offender component." He was further ordered not to consume alcohol or nonprescription drugs while on probation and was barred from unsupervised contact with anyone under 18 years old. Details of his arrest and original charges were not available from police or the Montgomery County Commonwealth’s Attorney.

Mohamad Mohamad: Charged with stalking. He stipulated that the evidence was sufficient to convict; the judge took the charge under advisement for 12 months. The charge is scheduled to be dismissed, barring any further misbehavior. He was barred from any contact with the victim.

SOURCES: Montgomery County Commonwealth's Attorney Mary Pettitt, Virginia Tech Police Department, Montgomery County General District and Juvenile and Domestic Relations court records.