By of the

What's the secret sauce to energy independence?

First, don't take no for an answer. Then, keep working at it, even when failure occurs along the way.

That's the recipe CEO Jeff Thompson came up with in leading sustainability initiatives that enabled Gundersen Health System, the western Wisconsin hospital and clinics, to reach a key milestone on its way to energy independence.

On 14 days last month, Gundersen produced enough of its own energy to meet the health system's needs. It took a lot of different pieces to do it — a combination of wind farms, bioenergy projects, some solar, and a large landfill gas project and geothermal heating system.

The project all started with Thompson and his team setting a goal to live up to the Gundersen mission statement by promoting a healthy population and healthy local community.

"Why should we care (about sustainability)? Because we do bad things to the communities and our environment," he said. "We're huge polluters. Health care is a huge polluter."

Making changes helped wean Gundersen off coal, and the energy savings that resulted help the health system keep costs in check.

Changes included:

■An aggressive investment in energy-saving projects to eliminate waste.

■Programs to cut waste, such as construction products and medical waste.

■An extensive renewable energy initiative.

The health system invested $2 million in energy conservation measures to reduce its energy use. For that investment, Thompson said, "I get back $1.2 million every single year in lower costs — with current energy costs. With energy costs rising, the investment will be better."

To generate its own power, the hospital tapped a variety of resources: solar panels, a wind farm it co-owns with Organic Valley Cooperative, a biomass boiler that burns wood chips and saw dust, and a landfill gas-to-energy project with La Crosse County.

The county had been flaring off methane — a potent greenhouse gas — from its landfill. Gundersen and the county worked together on a project that built a one-mile pipeline to Gundersen's second-largest campus, with 1,200 employees, where the gas fuels a generator that provides heat and power in the winter and electricity year-round.

"That whole campus is powered off of landfill gas that was being wasted. We save $1,000 a day, the county has $200,000 they never had before and less pollution," Thompson said.

Making a moral case

Gundersen's leadership is an example others should follow, said Tom Eggert, executive director of the Wisconsin Sustainable Business Council.

At a time when many are emphasizing how their sustainable business practices help their bottom line, Gundersen's message is tied to morality and public health, Eggert said.

Thompson is showing "the moral case for doing things right as a business leader," said Eggert, a professor of sustainable business at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

There have been some missteps along the way, Thompson said.

At one point, the hospital generated huge publicity through a collaboration with La Crosse City Brewery. A beer waste-to-energy project in Wisconsin generated headlines outside the state.

That was all well and good until the brewery shifted much of its production to hard lemonade after winning a big contract. That produced a much more acidic waste stream from the brewery, "and it started killing our engine," Thompson said.

The brewery-to-energy project had to be abandoned. Thompson, who will discuss the energy independence and sustainability initiatives at a health quality improvement conference this week in Florida, said it's still a work in progress.

Raising the bar

The company still needs to do more to cut energy use or to be energy independent even on hot summer or cold winter days when energy use is high.

But Gundersen is raising the bar for its vendors and employees. Whether that is asking contractors to recycle more construction waste, the pharmaceutical staff to reduce waste even further or an architect to hit energy savings targets that were deemed unachievable at first.

Such was the case when Gundersen began building its new hospital. The initial design called for energy use per square foot that Thompson said was too high and would leave Gundersen using 21/2 times as much energy as commercial buildings.

Thompson set an aggressive goal for energy use per square foot that the hospital's design team had to meet. They initially thought it couldn't be done. After incorporating a geothermal heating system and other features, the new hospital has nearly hit his goal. The building uses 45% less energy than the designers first proposed.

"Part of this was just putting a line in the sand and daring someone to prove that we couldn't get there," said Thompson.

The motivating factor for all this is patient health.

"We take great care of patients, and we're trying to take care of the environment before it gets any sicker than it already is," he said.

ThedaCare on board

Like Gundersen, ThedaCare is moving forward with programs that link understanding of climate change with public health. The Appleton health care system has joined the national Healthy Hospitals Initiative.

ThedaCare sustainability manager Paul Linzmeyersaid his management team and staff at the hospital center are engaged on the issues, whether it's cutting energy, cutting waste in the operating room, not putting pharmaceuticals down the drain or finding healthier food options for the cafeteria.

"What both Thedacare and Gundersen are talking about is, if our role is community well-being, how do we reconcile that with wasting energy and spewing particulates into the atmosphere?" said Kathy Kuntz, who runs the nonprofit consulting organization Cool Choices, which specializes in employee engagement on sustainability issues.

Kuntz, whose organization worked with Gundersen several years ago, said she was struck by the creativity and dogged pursuit by Gundersen to minimize waste.

"The blue wrap story says it all," she said.

Blue wrap is a sterilization wrap that too often was heading to the landfill. At Gundersen, the team enlisted a group of volunteers who turned the wrap into aprons or tote bags sold at the hospital gift shop.

"You've got this group of retired women who get to do all kinds of creative stuff with yards and yards of blue fabric," said Kuntz. "And it lets Gundersen feel that something good comes out of this, instead of just creating big bags that end up in the landfill."