Parents on President Street, in the shadow of Burke High, choose options that will give their kids a real shot at success

To read the original “Left Behind” series, go to postandcourier.com/school-choice.

Activity flares around 7 in the morning and about 3 in the afternoon on this part of President Street. That's when the children living here are taken to and from school.

Some parents walk their kids, some ride bikes, others hop in the car, tossing book bags into the back seat.

Melvin and Deborah Brown take their 9-year-old daughter Lillian to Mason Preparatory School on King and Huger streets.

Alec and Angel Brebner accompany their 4-year-old daughter Dorothy Louise to the private Sundrops Montessori on Simons Street.

Ian and Dee Ford send their sons Walker, 9, and Reilly, 7, to St. Andrew's School of Math and Science in West Ashley.

Ted and Julie Dombrowski's 10-year-old daughter Sophie is a rising fifth-grader at Buist, a desirable magnet school with strict entrance requirements.

For all of them, looming on the horizon is high school. The thought of it makes these parents nervous, uncomfortable, concerned. For they live in the shadow of Burke.

It's just down the block, a large building that should be the prescribed destiny of all these kids. Burke is the only public neighborhood high school on the Charleston peninsula, with a declining student population that is nearly all-black and an academic reputation that would frighten most responsible parents.

These families, a tiny cross-section of middle-class residents on the Charleston peninsula, say they would prefer their children attend public schools and the neighborhood high school visible from the sidewalk in front of their houses.

But judging by state rankings, news reports, Charleston County School District assessments and parent concerns, Burke simply isn't good enough.

Its high school student population of barely 300 isn't big enough or diverse, its test scores are not high enough, its academic offerings are not robust enough and its elective courses and extracurricular activities are not numerous enough. While parents all say they want Burke to improve so they might send their children there, they don't want their kids to bear the responsibility of turning the school around. They don't want them to be guinea pigs.

Burke is the elephant in the neighborhood, the problem many residents would rather not have to confront.

The Browns

Melvin Brown grew up in this neighborhood, moving to West Ashley when he was 14. His mother was a public school teacher. He attended West Ashley Elementary School, Porter-Gaud prep school and the Naval Academy. Debbie Brown spent her first 12 years in Japan, the daughter of an African-American Air Force father and a Japanese mother, then moved to North Charleston where she attended Morningside Middle School and Stall High School, experiences she does not recall fondly. She became a registered nurse but, lately, has been dealing antiques and jewelry while looking after the couple's two children, Lillian and 20-year-old Gabriel.

For 11 months, most of 2014, they lived apart. Melvin, an emergency room doctor, served in Afghanistan and returned home several months ago, leaving the big move from Jacksonville, Fla., to their house on President Street largely in the hands of his wife.

The Browns, a middle-class black family, value school choice, but are not sure which school Lilly should settle in.

They want an environment for her that's diverse racially and socioeconomically, so probably not pricey private schools such as Porter-Gaud or Ashley Hall, both of which have few minority students.

The Charter School for Math and Science is a possibility — if they can get her in. Buist would be ideal and possibly put her on a path for Academic Magnet. But, both schools lack diversity.

“Academics are important, but not everything,” Melvin Brown said. “Diversity and personal safety are just as important.”

The Browns love the idea of a public school education, but getting into high-performing schools such as School of the Arts and Academic Magnet, or lottery schools like Buist and Math and Science, can be hard.

Academics certainly are important to the Browns, but they realize a good education includes social and extracurricular opportunities.

“People have their priorities,” Melvin Brown said. “It's more important to be liked and work well with people than to say 'I have a 4.0 in high school.' ”

The Brebners

Alec and Angel Brebner moved to their President Street home in 2011. Alec is planning director for Dorchester County; Angel is chief operating officer for the Coastal Community Foundation.

The Brebners are urban dwellers and glad to see their neighborhood accommodate more restaurants and coffee shops. They think about their young daughter's future a lot and worry about which schools she should attend. Already, they've submitted applications.

Angel Brebner, who had a good public school experience in Orangeburg, said she has colleagues with older kids who are even more stressed out about the schools than she is. But she hopes Dorie Lou, 4, will go to public schools.

Alec had a bad public school experience in Michigan, attending a high school with limited academics that failed to prepare him for college. He thinks there is “pressure to be mediocre” in many public schools. He likes that the family has private school options.

They are zoned for Mitchell Elementary but worry about the school's academic reputation.

“If it had more of a mix — different incomes, backgrounds — it may not be a failing school,” Angel Brebner said.

They've secured a spot on the waiting list for James Simons Elementary, now a Montessori school, but demand is high and there is no guarantee they can get Dorie Lou in.

They even applied to the private Meeting Street Academy, which caters almost exclusively to low-income families, but there was no room at the very competitive pre-kindergarten level. They also considered Charleston Catholic.

The Brebners said the schools must raise expectations and college enrollment must become a default assumption among teachers and students.

High school is nine years away, but unless Burke, the neighborhood high school, improves radically, Dorie Lou won't be going there.

The Fords

Ian Ford is an attorney who specializes in health care law. His wife Dee Ford is a pulmonary and critical care doctor at Medical University Hospital. They both attended the University of South Carolina. Dee, an Anderson native, went on to Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine; Ian, who grew up in West Ashley, attended Columbia University Law School. As children, both went to neighborhood public schools that offered a variety of academic and extracurricular opportunities.

They've lived in this President Street house for seven years. Their 10-year-old son Walker is a fourth-grader at St. Andrew's School of Math and Science in West Ashley; Reilly, 8, is a second-grader at St. Andrew's. The Fords also have 1-year-old, Evan.

St. Andrew's isn't where the two boys started. First their parents enrolled them in a public Montessori program at Mitchell Elementary downtown where Walker and Reilly seemed to excel.

“Then they got tested,” Ian Ford said. Though they were at the top of their class, their scores were far from the upper range nationally. “What we concluded was, yeah, they were among the best there, but that didn't mean a lot. ... Where they were in the grand scheme of things was unacceptable.”

So the Fords are not opposed to public school choice policies.

“People want alternatives, that's very valid,” Dee Ford said. “I like, as a parent, having that choice, but for us it's not so much a choice as a necessity.”

At St. Andrew's they are doing better. Maybe Montessori, with its less-structured approach, isn't good for all children, and maybe the many non-academic challenges facing lower-income kids interfere with their school performance, the Fords said.

“Had the test scores improved, we would have stayed,” Ian Ford said. “The idea of the neighborhood school is fantastic.” And with Burke High School so close, it represents a goal the Fords wish they could strive for.

“In an ideal world, my children would be able to walk there, go to school for free,” Ford said. But Burke has performed badly for decades now, with no sign of a turnaround.

“We know 41 kids within two blocks of our house,” Ford said. “Every morning all of us get in our cars and drive to different parts of Charleston,” away from Burke.

The Dombrowskis

Ted and Julie Dombrowski live a few houses up the street from the Fords. Julie is a marketing contractor; Ted owns Ted's Butcher Block on East Bay Street. Their daughter Sophie, 10, is a fifth-grader at Buist.

They've been in the neighborhood for 13 years now, but it's during the last five years or so that they have seen an influx of new families. The mostly black old-timers, some on fixed incomes, increasingly are pulling up their roots, taking advantage of the booming real estate market and moving away.

But the demographics of low-performing neighborhood schools are not changing as fast as the area's demographics, partly because of the peninsula's concentration of low-income housing projects. Academic performance is not improving significantly, so the Dombrowskis are lining up their options, even as they hope for improvement at Burke.

“You want to support the schools, but you don't want your kid to be a guinea pig,” Ted Dombrowski said.

But the good schools now are getting overcrowded and increasingly difficult to get into, he noted. What's needed is a bold plan for comprehensive reform, though the Dombrowskis are not holding their breath.

As a city, “we don't like bold, progressive plans,” Ted Dombrowski said. “If Burke were to pull a Simons at this point (radically changing its curriculum and methodology), and we saw progress, then we would consider it. It's right down the street. Why wouldn't I?”

Instead, people at Burke feel devalued, Julie Dombrowski said. “And if people feel devalued, they're not going to care.”

“Nobody's skipping to school there,” Ted Dombrowski added. “I watch them (students) every day. It's a trudge.”

Sloan and Van Parys

Mark Sloan and Michelle Van Parys live across from the Browns and from Charleston County School District board member Todd Garrett. They moved to their house on President Street in 1994, when their son Andre was 1.

At first they assumed Andre would attend Buist, but his number did not come up in the lottery. They were at a loss until a friend insisted they sign up for St. Andrew's in West Ashley, which had just become a partial magnet and, as a result, enjoyed a small influx of new students and concerned parents.

In fourth grade, Andre transferred to Buist, where he remained through eighth grade. Then the family applied to the School of the Arts, Academic Magnet and James Island Charter High School.

“Burke wasn't on the radar,” Sloan said. “It was a failing school. We know that good things happen at Burke,” that there are good students and good teachers, but it isn't good enough. School district officials responded to such discontent by expanding school choice.

Now there is a “bewildering array of options,” he said. “You need a road map.” And the map is always changing.

The problem calls for bold thinking if schools like Burke are to be fixed, Sloan and Van Parys said.

“How do you change it from being a dumping ground to having a waiting list?” Sloan said. “Why aren't all schools magnet schools” in order to better equalize education opportunities across the district? Or, more to the point, why doesn't the district demagnetize itself altogether? Magnets such as School of the Arts require students to choose career paths too early, Sloan and Van Parys said. That can cause unhelpful peer pressure, quick burnout and low self-esteem among those who don't get in.

“It's a lot of pressure,” Van Parys said.

Waiting for reform

School officials are well aware of the challenges and have proposed various solutions, even as they acknowledge that the school district can't solve Burke's problems alone. Too many other factors, especially those related to poverty, interfere with a child's education. Until endemic issues of food insecurity, physical safety, health and hygiene, transience and access to technology are addressed, schools will always leave some students behind, officials said.

Burke Principal Maurice Cannon believes that public demand must grow louder and larger in order to move the needle and that real reform depends on a larger student body. More students mean more money and programming, and that in turn will attract more students.

At some point, someone will have to take a first step, he said.

“When you keep saying, 'When it's better, then I'll go,' then you're saying you don't want to go.”

Reach Adam Parker at 937-5902. Follow him at www.facebook.com/aparkerwriter.