Thousands of Omahans showed up Saturday for parades, carnivals and vendor shows to support their neighborhoods.

The summertime celebration of community played out this weekend at Dundee Day and Millard Days.

View a slideshow of the celebrations at Dundee Day and Millard Days.

Among those turning out were Melissa Prohaska and her grandsons, Jovan, 5, and Traevon, 6.

“This is a tradition,” said Prohaska of Dundee Day. “It’s just a fun time to get together.”

A big reason: pancakes.

By 9 a.m., dozens had lined up to eat pancakes. About 3,000 to 5,000 people attend the event each year, said Sarah Troia of the Dundee Day Committee.

The celebration, which organizers estimated began in the 1960s, also featured a parade, live music, yoga in Memorial Park and 68 vendors, including Chad Lebo, owner of Cure Cooking and founder of the Omaha Bacon Club. Lebo served up samples of fermented pickles, sausage and bacon to hungry runners who had participated in the Rundee 5K.

“We’re trying to support events that really develop that sense of neighborhood,” Lebo said. He added that Dundee residents seem to care about high quality food and where it comes from.

Other vendors included Honey Creek Creamery, the Dundee Community Garden, Benson Soap Mill and Live Well Omaha, which provided free bike helmets for kids, a bike rodeo and free bike tune-ups in partnership with Dundee Presbyterian Church.

“Omaha’s bike community is really growing, and the more we’re at events like this, the more we have a chance to grow,” said A.J. Moellenbeck, a volunteer.

Liem Doan’s 3-year-old daughter, Jayden, was able to score a new bike helmet to go with her tiger face paint. Doan said he and his wife live in west Omaha but grew up in a small town. Dundee Day reminds them of similar events they attended as kids.

“I want her to experience that culture,” Doan said.

Molly Romero, a Dundee resident of 37 years and co-owner of Marks Bistro, has been there to see the event grow. She said it all started as a way for neighborhood merchants to thank residents.

“It’s a chance for people to contribute, furthering the sense of community. Communities are the strength of any city,” Romero said.

Meanwhile, in Millard, hundreds lined Millard Avenue for a parade featuring local businesses and schools and then enjoyed a carnival and live music.

Lydia Tirrel brought her two toddlers to the parade. The Millard-area family planned to make a day of the celebration with a neighborhood block party, featuring a cookout, yard games and firetruck.

“Everybody brings a side dish. The kids are pretty excited,” Tirrel said.

Lesley Dewey, a former Millard resident, drove in from the Elkhorn area for the parade with her 8-year-old daughter, Charley, and 5-year-old son, Graham.

“I just think it’s a great sense of community,” Dewey said. “We come every year. The kids love it.”

It was Matt Williams’ first time with his family at the parade, but he remembers attending when he was a child.

While showing his three kids that community is important, Williams said, “It’s more important for us to spend family time.”

Millard Days will continue today starting at 10 a.m. with a car show, followed by a carnival, tractor pull, face painting and an ice cream social.

Contact the writer: 402-444-1414, paige.yowell@owh.com