Topics: Auctions, Christie's, damien lewis, London, The Weeklings, Life News, Entertainment News

This article originally appeared on The Weeklings



“FIFTEEN, SIXTEEN, SEVENTEEN, eighteen…” The numbers are not just in the teens, but tens of thousands. They tick up like seconds. “Do I have 19? Nineteen,” a man with a polished voice says. “Let’s round it up to twenty.” At which point I realize I need to record the proceedings or video them, but capture them in some way, definitely.

A woman whose face is not her face after so much work on it stands along the wall with a man in a sports coat. She raises her hand to buy a Peter Doig, a beautiful one of a burning sky and silhouetted pines, for GBP 550,000, and the way the money and numbers go up, I could be seduced into thinking if I had a spare twenty grand I should buy one of the more modest works for sale here. They seem like a bargain.

And what would you do with a spare $770K or so?

On a large screen at the front prices are listed in various currencies: British pounds and US dollars, euros, Swiss francs and rubles. The auctioneer leans forward conspiratorially on his pulpit. He wears a dark suit, his hair glossed and parted. His accent is impossible to place, maybe German, maybe English, with perhaps a Slavic roll and rumble too as if he comes from some unidentifiable Euro Zone country, maybe one of the tiny ones created from the fall of the Soviet Union, maybe one that doesn’t even exist. He keeps up a steady banter: “Looks like a Richard Serra to me and looking good,” or “Sarah Lucas with a wonderful show at the Whitechapel.”

Throughout, a low thrum of voices and the ringing of cell phones quiver in the air. It’s not impolite to talk or take a call here. You might be speaking to a client to place a bid on her behalf. A few feet away an American man with white hair and casual clothes that do not bespeak obscene wealth says to the person next to him, “I used to have a gallery; now I’m an art advisor.”

This is Christie’s Post-War and Contemporary Art Auction on October 19th in London. The only auctions I’ve been to are in upstate New York where everything from old farm implements to hunting rifles are auctioned off by men with barrel chests and pearl button shirts. Despite the scene at Christie’s today, this isn’t like the sales last month in New York where impossible records were set for works of art. This is a day sale, so comparatively small, and in the low light paintings blaze from the black baize walls. There’s not just the Peter Doig, but Yayoi Kusama (who recently had a retrospective at the Whitney) and Christopher Wool with one now at the Guggenheim, and Sturtevant, famous for her copies of others’ works. The air has the clarified feel of pure oxygen like casinos where it’s pumped in, and like Las Vegas, it’s impossible to tell if it’s night or day outside. The feeling is of high-stakes gambling, as if you might get caught up in the need to win. The scene lures me as I lean against the wall at the back, writing prices in the catalogue, holding iPhone in hand as if I too might be waiting to talk to some client in Hong Kong, or Rio or LA.

When the woman whose face isn’t her face in her leather pants and quilted ski vest (some designer fantasy of ski gear which will never see the side of a ski slope), bids on the Peter Doig, she doesn’t even raise a paddle, just two fingers and those not even high, not above her head, not even to her shoulder. The gesture is perceptible only to the auctioneer and me because I can’t help but stare. Does he know at the outset she’s here to bid for that one painting? As soon as she wins, she leaves with her companion in tow as if all she wanted was this image of pine trees set against a sky alight.

Long boxes line the front and side almost like an elevated orchestra pit with Christie’s name emblazoned in gold on the front. Men and women, specialists they’re called, talk on phones to bidders. The representatives smile and laugh as if sharing a joke with old friends, only I’ve heard rumors, not about this auction but auctions in general, that the specialists aren’t necessarily speaking to anyone but trying to make it look like they’re taking bids. Sometimes one will cup a hand to her mouth when something like price or money is discussed so nobody can read her lips. A woman in red smiles, her head cocked watching the auctioneer intently. Next she’s on the phone leaning forward, absorbed in whatever conversation she’s having. Finally she’s head down, hand to her brow in some sign of woe. Seconds have passed; a whole human drama unfolds. Meanwhile the auctioneer declares a painting is “small but beautiful” talking about a canvas of white latex and nails listed as “Property From An Important Dutch Collector” in the catalogue.

Life’s small dramas in red with Yayoi Kusama

I’m not here for the dizzying array of wealth and art but instead something conceptual, an auction of an auction. It’s the completion of a piece by artist and filmmaker Amie Siegel, being sold here today. Her movie Provenance traces the “trafficking” (her word—I couldn’t have picked one better) in furniture and objects from the Indian city of Chandigarh to the homes of the elite via auction, which in her handling becomes a meditation on price, value and consumption.

The film had its first showing this September as an installation in a New York gallery, Simon Preston on the Lower East Side, and is here at Christie’s a couple weeks later. The timing is compressed. Usually years pass between the show and the auction, and usually it’s a collector who puts a piece up for sale (often when an artist is having a museum retrospective and the work’s value peaks. Witness the sale of the Wool, say.) Instead Siegel put up the film as part of her piece, while the footage of today’s auction becomes the third element in any future exhibitions. The project now includes Proof, a printer’s proof of the auction catalogue, Provenance, and Lot 248, her actual lot number depicting the sale of the film about sales and value….Provenance the film is now forever tied to the market, both the one depicted in the movie and the one it partakes in, giving it much meta oomph.

Siegel slides from one camera to the next along the wall at Christie’s. She’s plainly dressed, her brown hair pulled back, and she ducks under and around the lenses careful not to get in frame. Later she says, “Auctions have reached a level of caricature these days,” with their stratospheric prices and the press both praising and lamenting (often in the same articles) the heady atmosphere. Contemporary art is the ultimate “luxury good,” as the New Yorker recently put it. Unhinged from any use-value, art is esoteric and incomprehensible to those without the right education. Nothing else establishes one’s place in the elite like dropping untold hundreds of thousands or millions at auction. And, any field that takes that much wealth and something where the value is so enormous and so hard to qualify, is fascinating.

Still, Christie’s was game. It was aware all along of the critique in Siegel’s very sale. “Simultaneously,” she explains, “I was speaking to two of the other big firms (which you can read as including arch-rival Sotheby’s) about working with them, but the head of sales at Christie’s was interested and generous. They know it’s to their benefit to embrace a certain criticality.” Provenance though, the original film shown as art and auctioned as art, is all about furniture.

It’s a 40-minute movie about armchairs with no voiceover, no music, just ambient sound, and it’s probably the best movie about chairs you’ll ever see. It starts in rich people’s homes in New York and London, Paris and on the open sea where yacht doors slide open as if triggered by some ghostly presence. In a Paris apartment a barefoot teen runs down stairs past a wooden chair. In a New York loft a baby plays near a table. In the yacht a glass elevator (itself bespeaking the owner’s wealth: the yacht so big it needs an elevator) opens and closes on a floor with one lone chair visible, and then on another floor with two. The gesture is suffused with deadpan humor. For each scene an establishing shot sets the place: a crescent of houses and Portland stone church in Notting Hill, a library in Paris, in New York a doorman polishing the brass outside an expensive address on the Upper East Side, and crashing waves for the Hamptons where the camera pulls back through the dunes to a house slung long and low against the landscape. Throughout, there’s one common element: languid, loving shots of furniture. The camera lingers on chair legs as if they were a woman’s. It’s almost furni-porn, and the furniture is blocky and modern, chairs with arms padded thick enough to be a falconer’s gauntlet.

Amie Siegel, Provenance (still) 2013

HD video, color, sound 40′ 30″. Image courtesy the artist and Simon Preston, New York. Amie Siegel, Provenance (still) 2013HD video, color, sound 40′ 30″. Image courtesy the artist and Simon Preston, New York.

We follow the chairs and the occasional desk or sofa to a scene very much like the one at Christie’s. Here the breathless exchanges I’ve just witnessed are played out again. People stroll around the pieces and sigh and nod at a sale preview. Two men with leather shoes and leather satchels, tweed jackets, sweaters and shaggy hair – all of which adds up to a look I’d call Euro intellectual as if out of a Bolaño novel – circle a set of chairs. Next, a woman in shiny high boots strolls past, arms crossed. Meanwhile in the onscreen auctions, the prices tick stratospherically upward, often as high as the art in London.