AFP

• Is the CIA behind the destruction of what’s left of Aryan civilization?

By Ronald L. Ray —

An astonishing report has arrived from the website of the Austrian news journal, Info-Direkt. An anonymous Austrian intelligence source alleges that the United States is funding the hordes of Africans, Gypsies and others overrunning Europe. That means billions of dollars are being poured into a demographic war, annually bringing a million or more foreign invaders to the continent west of Russia. As many as 800,000 are expected in Germany alone this year. With the ostensible “asylum seekers” come violent crime, mayhem, an overburdened welfare system and uprisings against the host peoples. A race war is being fomented, and European whites are the target of the intended genocide.

According to the whistleblower, whom Info-Direkt describes as an employee of the Counter-Intelligence Office (Abwehramt) of the Austrian Federal Army’s intelligence service, findings show that groups in the U.S. pay human traffickers to transport the “refugees.”

“Traffickers demand horrendous sums [of money], in order to bring refugees to Europe. The conditions [Bedingungen] are often very bad. Nevertheless, transport currently costs between 7,000 and 14,000 euros, varying according to region and trafficking organization,” the informant reports.







The journal notes that police circles dealing daily with asylum seekers are well-apprised of costs and conditions.

The article continues, “Few experts are willing to let reliable information seep through; no one wants to go public with his full name.”

Still, the suspicion is expressed frequently that the foreign invasion is part of U.S. geo-strategy.

The intelligence source continues: “Findings exist, that organizations from the U.S.A. have created a co-financing model and bear major portions of the trafficking costs. Not every refugee from North Africa has 11,000 euros in cash. Doesn’t anyone ask where the money comes from?”

But a news blockade exists about the whole situation. Even the Austrian Army Intelligence Office (Heeres-Nachrichtenamt), the Counter-Intelligence Office’s sister agency, “has received no information or is not permitted to share it,” says the whistleblower.

Indeed, an August 18 address given by General Martin E. Dempsey, chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, to the Irish Defense Force would seem to support views alleging U.S. involvement in creating Europe’s massive population upheavals. While he deplored the humanitarian crisis caused by what he says are 60 million refugees throughout the world—42,500 families displaced daily—creating “not just a near-term problem but . . . a generational problem,” Dempsey nevertheless demonized nationalists in dozens of countries who oppose this artificially instigated migration of peoples.

Falsely accusing nationalists of turning “to violent extremism,” America’s top general deplored alleged fringe groups seeking to preserve their nations and borders, who rapidly are gaining representation in parliaments throughout Europe.

Dempsey called the situation a 20-year problem: “This could affect stability and peace on the continent.”

He thereby places destroying nationalism and its adherents among the goals of the never-ending global “War on Terror,” calling them a “threat.”

The U.S. military thus has a strategy of eliminating patriots throughout the world, because these so-called “extremists” and “fringe groups” represent a danger to the internationalist New World Order.









Dempsey, however, passed over in silence the fact that it is the U.S. and Israel that have created almost the entire global refugee problem with their constant wars of aggression and government overthrows in countries across three continents, as part of the long-term strategy of establishing not just “Greater Israel,” but “Greater Khazaria,” from North Africa, through the Middle East, to Eastern and Central Europe.

Horrifying reports of the upheavals caused by hundreds of thousands of foreigners are rampant, from Calais, France, to southern Italy and Greece. While the merely softheaded and the malicious both bleat vague generalizations about accepting unlimited numbers of foreigners, regardless of consequences, the truth is far harsher.

Refugees in camps or running loose across the continent overwhelm local and national resources, to the harm of locals. The black and Gypsy invaders are responsible for astronomical increases in thefts, murders and rapes, consuming their hosts’ food and medical care and sometimes even receiving a government stipend. Efforts to escape camps occur daily, presenting safety, health and security risks.

Most tellingly, there are frequent, well-organized public—sometimes violent—demonstrations by the invading hordes, complete with professionally printed signs and banners, demanding “rights” for refugees. This has every hallmark of Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)-backed revolutionary activities for bringing down governments.

Info-Direkt’s well-informed source is extremely blunt: “It is the same destroyers [Brandstifter] at work, who a year ago thrust the Ukraine into chaos.”

The reference is clear. The CIA and its front groups, along with Israel’s Mossad, staged the bloody overthrow of Ukraine’s government and are responsible for the ongoing reign of terror there.

The survival of the Caucasian race is at stake. But the culture destroyers want whites to respond with force, so that they can impose martial law. Nationalists must regain control of their governments and stop white genocide.

Ronald L. Ray is a freelance author and an assistant editor of THE BARNES REVIEW. He is a descendant of several patriots of the American War for Independence.