As asylum-seeking refugees continue to flood into Europe, thousands are in need of shelter, food, and clothing. But Facebook is turning the spotlight on a less visible need: wireless Internet.

The importance of staying connected in a time of crisis is not lost on Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg. In a speech at the United Nations Private Sector Forum on Saturday, the founder of the world’s biggest social network announced that his company is partnering with the U.N. to help provide Internet access at refugee camps.

“Connecting the world is one of the fundamental challenges of our generation,” the 31-year old told a New York audience of international political leaders and business entrepreneurs. “More than 4 billion people don’t have a voice online.”

RELATED: Phrasebook for Refugees Aims to Ease Path to Asylum

The statistic is one of the findings of a report issued by Facebook last year as part of its push to bring Internet access to the developing world. The 2014 report also found that the majority of those 4 billion people who lack Internet access are disproportionately rural, low-income, elderly, illiterate, and female. The population is concentrated in 20 countries, primarily in the Middle East and Africa.

“When communities are connected, we can lift them out of poverty,” Zuckerberg told reporters. “We can and must do more.” The tech executive framed his new initiative as part of the United Nations’ broader goal to eliminate extreme poverty by 2030. Defined by the U.N. as living on less than $1.25 a day, extreme poverty affects more than 800 million people around the globe.

Zuckerberg’s efforts align with his Internet.org project—rebranded this week as Free Basics—to bring affordable online access to the two-thirds of the world that goes without it. But not everyone is on board with the global initiative. A petition signed by more than 60 organizations in May accuses the project of violating net neutrality and threatening freedom of expression.

His United Nations announcement, which did not specify which refugee camps would receive Internet access or when, came the same day as Zuckerberg and U2 frontman Bono penned a New York Times op-ed linking Internet access with global development.

Invoking the plight of refugees who have used the Web to communicate with loved ones across checkpoints, Guatemalan women who have accessed maternal health information on cell phones, and Ethiopian farmers who track inventory and pricing using mobile devices, the duo urged tech companies to take the lead in innovating on behalf of vulnerable populations around the world.

“Silicon Valley should look beyond itself and act more on issues like education, health care, and the refugee crisis,” they wrote. “We challenge the tech industry to do far more for those most marginalized, those trapped in poverty, and those beyond or on the edge of the network.”