On the heels of Walgreens announcing that it is going to close around 200 stores in the U.S., Stefano Pessina, an Italian billionaire, indicated that if the government continues influence on payments to pharmacies, America could see a consolidation of drugstores rather quickly. This could mean that Walgreens may consider an acquisition of competitor Rite Aid.

Pessina is the current top executive for Walgreens’ parent company, Walgreens Boots Alliance. Forbes reports that he saw government run health care systems in Europe after being with Alliance Boots before the merger with Walgreens. The Affordable Care Act expanded coverage to more poor American’s and uninsured people. According to Pessina, the government is likely to squeeze every penny they can, now that they are in the driver’s seat when it comes to the healthcare business. He said this is what has gone on in Europe for decades.

A form of consolidation has already begun, as CDA News reported yesterday, with the announced closing of 200 Walgreens throughout the U.S. While no specific stores have been named, the company wants to remove stores that are not bringing the expected return or profit. However, while closing stores is consolidating things, the company may open the same amount of stores in different locations where they feel there is a need that would make it financially sensible to have a location.

After Forbes reported that Walgreens might consider adding Rite Aid to their fold, UnitedHealth Group acquired Catamaran Corporation. The $12.8 billion deal resulted in the third largest pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) in the nation.

Walgreens competition, CVS acquired Caremark in 2006, and in 2011 Walgreens exited that market by selling Catalyst Health Solutions, which is now part of Catamaran. Walgreens focused more on the retail side than the pharmacy. By getting away from their own PBM, Walgreens and their customers who depend on the PBM’s, could suffer. With PBM’s consolidating, and CVS, partnered with Express Scripts Holding Co., control about 50% of the PBM. Walgreens has a deal to be part of the Express Scripts network, but they fall behind CVS without their own PBM.

While Walgreens could go after their own PBM, an acquisition of Rite Aid could assist in further expansion of the retail footprint. While it is not a PBM, historically, retail has been Walgreens’ growth strategy in the past.

The consolidation that could potentially lead to Walgreens considering an acquisition of Rite Aid is just one of the many things being considered to keep the company growing and strong. However, the announcement of 200 stores closing, has drawn out protests. The Herald Bulletin reported that in Anderson, Indiana, at the end of the month, the local Walgreens is set to close, as part of the consolidation. About a dozen people came out Saturday to protest the closing of the store. Many said that they hope that another pharmacy like CVS will come in to replace Walgreens. After the store closes, many seniors who relied on the pharmacy will have to ride the bus to the next closest pharmacy.

By Cletus Dillwood

Share On