Donald Trump is leading in the GOP primary polls. Criticize him, Matthew Tully learned, and you’ll hear from his fans. A lot of his fans. One of them agreed to meet and explain The Donald’s appeal.

Michael Gaskey of Indianapolis at the Illinois Street Food Emporium on Monday. (Photo: Matthew Tully)

I don’t get it.

Yep, I admit it, not only do I consider Donald Trump to be the most glaring example of all that is wrong with American politics, but I also don’t get what his supporters see in him. I’ve watched the debates, the interviews and the speeches, and I’ve read what would amount to several books about him.

Still, I don’t get it.

It’s not that I expect to come to an agreement with him on a policy level. Barring a series of severe concussions, that’s never going to happen. But I can usually understand a popular politician’s appeal, or see why so many voters consider a candidate to be presidential material. Not this time.

It can’t just be the bombast and the insults. There has to be more. I want to understand. I want to get it.

And that’s where Michael Gaskey came in.

Gaskey is a retiree who grew up in Pittsburgh, made a career in information technology, and now lives with his wife in a condominium in the Butler-Tarkington area. A onetime Kennedy Democrat, he became a Reagan Republican because of his dislike of big government and then “just kept moving further to the right.” He likes candidates who “say what’s on their minds,” believes there are too few of them, and sends $50 to the Trump campaign every month “just so he knows there are little people out here who support what he’s saying.”

“I just think the guy is a leader,” Gaskey told me, “and I don’t think there are many people who are running that you can say that about.”

Before I continue, here’s a little background to give you a sense of who Gaskey is: He’s 70 years old but works out most days and could pass for 60. He’s a NRA-supporting, Rush Limbaugh-listening, great-grandfather of eight who likes his diverse neighborhood and thinks Fox News can be too soft on President Obama. He opposes government handouts, but the night before we talked he was at his church wrapping gifts for low-income families; he talks tough but at home he makes sure that when his wife comes home from work each night the laundry is done, dinner is on the stove, and a glass of wine is on the table.

That’s Michael Gaskey. He’s a nice guy.

He wrote me Sunday to criticize my recent column on Trump and then, after a few emails back and forth, agreed to meet me at a Northside breakfast joint Monday morning to explain the allure of the front-running Republican presidential candidate that he supports.

As we started our first cups of coffee, Gaskey walked me back to 1980 and President Jimmy Carter’s handling of the Iran hostage crisis. He said he was embarrassed for his country and was quickly sold on Ronald Reagan — both by his conservative politics and by his way of communicating and leading that “made you hold your head high.”

Even though Reagan would not be conservative enough by today’s standards, Gaskey said, “His decisiveness and his ability to communicate could have kept me in his fold. Which is what I like about Trump. It’s the way he communicates. It’s decisive, and it’s from the heart. He says what he thinks.”

Trump has said millions of immigrants who came to this country illegally should be sent back to their home countries, and the United States should build a massive wall to protect the southern border.

“I absolutely love that,” Gaskey said.

Trump recently called for a temporary ban on Muslims entering the country. That backs up what Gaskey called his top concern heading into the 2016 elections: national security. He doesn’t believe there is an adequate vetting process for refugees and others, and he sees Islam as a dangerous force for evil. He dismisses arguments that Islam is at its core based on peace. “It is really about convert or kill,” he said.

As we talked, Gaskey and I couldn’t have disagreed more, and we have wholly different criteria for what makes a good president. Where I see recklessness, he sees truth-telling. Where I see hate and discrimination, he sees a leader who cares so much that he sometimes gets carried away with his words.

In Trump, he sees “someone who has made a career of negotiating deals. I believe he is a man who will say what needs to get done and then find a way to get it done, because he always has. Sometimes that requires a compromise, but he won’t fold. And that’s all Congress is doing.”

Like many Trump supporters, Gaskey’s support stems from a distrust of President Obama. It’s a distrust that is so deep-seated that, admittedly, many of us cannot fully comprehend it.

Gaskey bought a couple of guns and signed up for a lifetime permit after hearing Obama talk about gun control, and after hearing the NRA’s views about the president. When I mentioned that it seemed to me that Obama hadn’t really pushed any groundbreaking gun-control ideas, Gaskey said his concern was not what Obama has done “but what he looks like he would do.”

That goes beyond guns.

“I think Obama would clamp down on your freedom on behalf of some favored class of people,” he said. “I don’t feel like Trump would impact my ability to do something.”

But it’s not just Obama, of course. Like many others driving Trump’s poll numbers, Gaskey’s support can be traced to a frustration with a Republican Congress he thinks has not taken on the president with full commitment. He would like to see the government shut down, and kept shut down, until Obamacare is repealed. That sentiment drove recent elections that gave Republicans control of Congress, he said, and it should be driving policy.

“They are gutless,” he said of congressional Republicans, sounding a bit like Trump. “It’s irritating beyond belief to cast your vote for people who say they will do X, and then they get in and do Y.”

But why Trump, I asked? Plenty of other Republican candidates have run on similar platforms. His answer was simple. First, the establishment is broken and has sold out the conservative masses. Second, he thinks Trump has the tenacity to stick with his promises and to take on big fights without worrying about political decorum. Although he likes Ted Cruz, Gaskey said the senator from Texas, like most candidates, is relying on big-money interests to help fund his campaign.

“Cruz has someone paying his bills, and it’s more than my neighbor and me contributing $50. If someone gives you money, you have to give something back. Trump is losing money on this campaign. He’s sticking his neck out to do it.”

After a few more cups of coffee, I was still struggling to fully understand the Trump phenomenon, but I had a better sense of his appeal. The former reality show star has clearly tapped into an intense frustration with the politics of the day. At a time when so many candidates and so many campaign ads seem like they come out of a factory, he’s offering a blunt message that doesn’t fit into a typical political model.

Like it or not, his message is direct and simple at a time when our problems are frustratingly complex and global. Trump is offering hot passion after so many years of President Obama’s professorial cool. As much as I oppose what Trump has been saying, his views on immigration, Islam and what he calls a “stupid” political class have connected on a fundamental level with many voters.

Toward the end of our 90-minute chat, Gaskey perfectly summed up Trump’s appeal.

“When you see him with his rants, he’s basically saying what my wife and I just said to each other over dinner,” he said. “It’s almost like he has a recorder in our house and he’s been listening to what we’re saying.”

It’s a powerful thing when a politician can tap into what people are feeling and then amplify their concerns. Trump has certainly done that. And while I still consider his rise to be the worst thing to hit American politics in a long time, I do understand that many see in him their voices and their concerns.

You can reach me at matthew.tully@indystar.com or on Twitter: @matthewltully.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1QJGeTY