Buy Photo 15-year-old Gabe Feinn and his sister, Livvy, 11, raised $35,000 to help build a hospital in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, working through the North Carolina organization Samaritan's Purse. (Photo: Alton Strupp/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

Among all the new holiday gift catalogs out this season is one that pays tribute to two young Louisville bakers who decided to give the biggest catalog gift possible to people they had never met -- starting from scratch.

Gabe and Livvy Feinn have just returned from the Democratic Republic of Congo in Africa after seeing how $35,000 they raised for a Samaritan's Purse catalog project -- by baking more than 100 cakes and more than 2,500 cupcakes -- was used to renovate the maternity ward of a village mission hospital there.

The 7,100-mile trip with their mother, Vicki, was arranged in August by the Samaritan charitable and religious relief organization, which features Gabe and Livvy in its new 2015 Christmas gift catalog, along with a story about their fundraising project accompanied by photos of the hospital construction.

Gabe, 15, and Livvy, 11, raised the $35,000 for the Nyankunde Hospital project after seeing it listed as the most expensive "gift" in Samaritan's 2013 gift catalog.

“This brother and sister pair have shown how God can use anyone -- no matter their age,” said Samaritan head Franklin Graham, son of evangelist Billy Graham, in a statement from the Boone, N.C.-based group. Graham also commented on Facebook about their project and trip to see the hospital: "I call that having your cake and eating it, too! Actually, I just call it hard work and generosity from the heart. "

Back in Louisville, Gabe said they knew they could do the smaller projects in the catalog, but they "wanted to do something we knew we could not do alone."

So they prayed about it and resolved to go for the gold. "God gave us the idea," he said.

At first the brother and sister, who live with their parents and grandmother in Lake Forest and attend Southeast Christian Church, decided to raise $14 to send chicks to help a family in the Congo. But when they easily raised $35 by selling baked goods at a neighborhood garage sale, their aspirations escalated, and they decided to bypass the chicks, a goat for $70, medical supplies for $150 and even a water purification system for $10,000 that could have served a whole village.

Instead, they were determined to raise the whopping $35,000 for the hospital project. And they achieved their goal with help from big and small donors, including many children. Among them were summer campers at Southeast Christian's Country Lake Christian Retreat north of Henryville, Ind., who gave up snack tokens to make donations.

"We all knew if we had not prayed about everything, it would not have worked out," Livvy said.

Buy Photo With a little help from their mother, Vicki Feinn, 15-year-old Gabe and 11-year-old Livvy recently worked on a cake and cupcakes in their home kitchen. (Photo: Alton Strupp/The Courier-Journal)

They also relied on a Facebook page Gabe -- who became known as "Gabe the Cake Man" -- created to publicize the project, and they also wrote online about their experiences at gabesavestheday.blogspot.com.

Samaritan's Purse also set up a special website for donations to their project, and the two are pictured on the Samaritan website at samaritanspurse.org/gift-catalog/sweet-giving, which also features a video about the two.

In some cases, people gave money directly to the Feinns, but Vicki Feinn said she was "super diligent" about making a credit card donation to the website for the same amount that same day, Vicki Feinn said.

Gabe and Livvy, who started the project when they were 13 and 9, emphasized that they didn't "sell" any cakes -- they just made them as rewards or in conjunction with donations.

"A big part of their message is that anyone can do something to serve God and serve others," their mother said. "They thought, 'What can we do? We don't have $35,000, but we can make cupcakes.'"

During the trip to the Congo, her husband, Benjamin, stayed home to run the family business, the Koch Corp., a window and door company that specializes in government and historic restoration projects, that they bought eight years ago.

"Of course we’re really proud of them," Vicki Feinn said of Gabe and Livvy. "But I think it’s bigger than being proud of them. We’re just really grateful that Gabe and Livvy have caught the vision that anyone can glorify God and help others. That’s been their motivation right from the very beginning"

"We can't change the world on our own, but we want to encourage people to ask God what you can do," Gabe said.

On a recent morning at home in the kitchen, Gabe and Livvy talked about their experiences as they worked on a new cake creation, a three-layer affair iced with rose-shaped swirls applied by Gabe that was destined for a friend's 16th birthday party the next day. Amanda Colwick, who knew Gabe and knew about his project, had agreed to take $120 in birthday money from an earlier family birthday celebration and donate it to Samaritan's Purse, her mother, Kim, said.

Buy Photo 15-year-old Gabe Feinn adds rose designs to a cake in his home kitchen. He aspires to someday own a bakery of his own where he can employ the homeless and provide jobs and skill sets. Oct. 22, 2015 (Photo: Alton Strupp/The Courier-Journal)

"He's really touched a lot of kids," Colwick said of Gabe, calling it "a ripple effect."

Gabe and Livvy said their project took a lot of faith in God, not to mention giant tubs of icing, dozens of boxes of cake mix (especially triple-chocolate-fudge-flavored), time, effort and logistical, monetary and shopping assistance from their parents. In some cases, Vicki Feinn said she drove out to deliver cakes around the Louisville area and was one of the only people she knew with about 60 to 70 pounds of frosting in her kitchen at one time.

In the catalog, the Feinn siblings are dressed in white bakers' uniforms standing in front of a display of a cake and cupcakes.

"The Lord blessed their efforts, and Gabe and Livvy reached their God-sized goal," the story said. The headline reads: "With God, nothing is impossible."

Rather than hang up their spatulas and store their mixing bowls, Gabe and Livvy said their trip to the Congo has inspired them to continue baking to continue to encourage others to donate to Samaritan's Purse and to try to inspire everyone to help others in whatever way they can.

Online at the Samartian website, a caption underneath a photo of Gabe and Livvy holding babies in the maternity ward, reads: "One big question that people ask us all the time right now is, 'What is next?' Right now we are trying to help others see that anyone can do SOMETHING for God and others. Our big hope is that others will choose something from the Samaritan's Purse catalog because there are so many wonderful ways to help others in the catalog! We are not saying this because anyone asked us to say it. We really do pray that other children (and adults) will see that even a small act of kindness has a big effect!"

The trip to the Congo began with a flight to Boone, N.C., where Gabe and Livvy made about 400 cupcakes to serve to the Samaritan staff. Then the Feinns went on to Charlotte and Uganda and took a small plane from there.

Livvy said what struck her most in the village of Nyankunde was "definitely the poverty there and how they live with that every day."

Gabe and Livvy Feinn pose with some newborns in the hospital they helped renovate with their baking and donations. (Photo: Courtesy Samaritan's Purse)

Gabe, who would like to have his own bakery someday, wants especially to continue to work on supplying more fresh water in Nyankunde, after villagers began coming to the hospital to obtain water. That depletes the supply, and, "the water still runs out quite often," he said.

The area also is known for a severe shortage of doctors, and Gabe said doctors had been delivering babies at night by the light of their cell phones.

Over the summer, Samaritan’s Purse renovated the maternity ward with the $35,000 donation, making improvements that included a new roof, ceiling, concrete floors, operating room for C-sections, two private rooms, sinks and a solar-powered backup system. The hospital serves hundreds of mothers and babies each year, the catalog story said.

While in the village, the Feinns stayed with missionaries and cooked in a stone oven. They also bought out one store's whole supply of confectioner's sugar to make cakes and cupcakes. The villagers weren't used to eating that type of sweets, and parents "struggled every day just to get food for their children," Vicki Feinn said.

The Feinns don't eat cake much anymore either. "Now, we don't like cake, we've made so much," Livvy said.

Vicki Feinn, now in her 22nd year of home-schooling, also taught her other four children, now aged 27, 24, 20 and 18. Gabe and Livvy also go once a week to a Christian educational consortium that meets at the Indiana Weslyan University building near I-64 in Jeffersontown.

Gabe became interested in baking and decorating after taking a series of four, 10-week cake decorating classes his mother signed him up for through an educational enrichment co-op they participate in through Woodland Baptist Church on Pope Lick Road. He liked the artistic dimension of it and, "just kept doing it," his mother said.

She also had taken him to see television's "Cake Boss" in 2011 at The Palace theater downtown and bought him the Cake Boss cookbook.

"He started making every cake in there ... just to see if he could do it," she said.

Gabe also received cooking instructions from Sullivan University chef David Dodd when he and Livvy were tackling a three-tiered wedding cake and sheet cakes for their sister Abbey in 2014. The family met Dodd at a Christmas party at Sullivan.

Gabe and Livvy recently made a cake for a baby shower after donations were made to Samaritan for a goat and to feed a family for a week. Gabe recently posted about the shower cake on Facebook: "We love orders like this! ‪#sweetgiving‬ for Samaritan's Purse."

Buy Photo Livvy Feinn, 11, mixes ingredients for cupcakes in the kitchen at her home. (Photo: Alton Strupp/The Courier-Journal)

They also have been interviewed on TV, by K-LOVE contemporary Christian radio station and the Christian Broadcasting network since their return.

During their fundraising project, the children spoke to a middle school group at Southeast Christian and at Trinity World Outreach Center, among other places, to promote the project.

They also spoke before about 750 guests at the Muhammad Ali Center downtown for the Muhammad Ali Humanitarian Awards event in 2014. They made a cake for the event's silent auction and one for Muhammad Ali. They also posed for photos with Jesse Jackson at Jackson's request, their mother said.

Afterward, two girls aged 7 and 8 made wreaths out of pine cones they had collected and sold them to make $160 to donate for orphan care in a project that was unrelated to Samaritan's Purse, Vicki Feinn said. Inspiring that sort of effort "is exactly what Gabe and Livvy keep hoping" will happen, she said.

A donor, who wanted to remain anonymous in the audience at the Muhammad Ali event, heard Gabe and Livvy speak and also completed their fundraising goal with a donation of $12,000.

While that might be far beyond the means of many, "Anybody can do something for God with ordinary gifts and talents," Livvy said.

Reporter Martha Elson can be reached at (502) 582-7061 and melson@courier-journal.com. Follow her on Twitter at @MarthaElson_cj.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1MqeGgB