AUSTIN — Amid shuttle diplomacy and pressing deadlines, Republican leaders of the House and Senate raced Thursday to hammer out a session-ending compromise on tax cuts, guns, border security, ethics and making it harder for local governments to raise property taxes.

The private huddles took place in the Capitol’s back halls and alcoves, while on the House floor, a spectacle unfolded late into the night. There, outnumbered Democrats — and even some Republicans — spent hours taking maximum time to debate seemingly minor bills in a bid to kill scores more, including measures on gay marriage, abortion and Shariah law.

The practice, a tradition known in the Capitol as “chubbing,” imperiled the measures because midnight Thursday was the deadline for the House to tentatively pass its own bills.

On the big issues that could blow up the session, much of the action took place behind the scenes. There were outward signs, though, as four bills linked to a grand compromise became unstuck Thursday. Gov. Greg Abbott, who has monitored the negotiations, told reporters that he hopes for a tax-cut agreement within 24 hours.

Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick and Speaker Joe Straus have largely talked past one another all year, culminating in a blow-up at a weekly breakfast session late last month. So, the hard task of finding an exit strategy fell to two senators and two House allies of Straus.

They have spent days trying to end a weeks-long impasse on tax cuts and several unrelated issues, such as guns and law enforcement along the Texas-Mexico border. While the two chambers have some differences on those matters, the biggest obstacles to a deal appeared to be pride of authorship and bragging rights about whose bill eventually passes.

“If we can get some resolve on all those moving parts, I think we can get there,” said Sen. Kevin Eltife of Tyler, a moderate-conservative Republican from Tyler who has emerged as a lead Senate negotiator.

“We’re close to an agreement on tax cuts,” Eltife said after he and Senate GOP Caucus Chairman Kelly Hancock of North Richland Hills left a meeting on the House side of the Capitol. “It’s still in flux. … We’re working on all options, but we’re close.”

The chambers have been far apart on taxes for months. Both want to slash the “franchise tax” that businesses pay. But the Senate favored cutting homeowners’ property taxes, while the House has strongly backed cutting the state sales tax for the first time in Texas history.

The emerging compromise would give the House its slightly larger version of the business tax cut and the Senate part of its property break. The sales tax would remain unchanged.

Day of contrasts

The flurry of behind-the-scenes deal-making contrasted with the slow grind on the House floor, as Democrats tried to run out the legislative clock.

Rep. Ken Sheets, R-Dallas, described the Democrats’ chubbing tactic as the “practice of utilizing Texas House procedure, rules and the back mike to delay the clock.” The term’s origin is disputed, but it’s a point of pride for some.

“Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak On, For, and Against the bill,” Rep. Terry Canales, D-Edinburg, wrote proudly on Twitter with the hash tags “#chub” and “#billbutcher.”

Democrats’ chief target was a bill that would stop county clerks from issuing a marriage license to a same-sex couple or recognizing such a marriage from another state — even if the U.S. Supreme Court rules otherwise.

But they also were motivated by other bills down the calendar on human trafficking training for personnel at abortion clinics, limiting Obamacare exchange-issued coverage of abortions, making sure Texas courts don’t recognize Shariah law and letting clergy refuse to conduct gay weddings.

By 10 p.m. Thursday, with just two hours left, there were 35 bills on the House calendar ahead of Magnolia GOP Rep. Cecil Bell’s marriage license bill. By that time, the House was disposing of only four bills an hour.

Democrats weren’t the only ones stalling. Republicans also clogged up the process, wasting hours of debate this week on minor bills that ultimately failed.

Outside the chamber, though, negotiators were working assiduously to complete a deal, said Rep. Charlie Geren, a Fort Worth Republican who is part of Straus’ leadership team.

On Thursday, the Senate Finance Committee largely gutted but advanced a House-passed bill on taxes and fees dedicated to specific purposes.

That’s an important component of a grand compromise, as it shows continuing commitment to greater budget transparency, a House priority, said Rep. Drew Darby, R-San Angelo, the bill’s author.

By repealing $339 million of occupational fees, the House-passed bill also would help bring the price tag of the tax-cut package to about $4.2 billion, he noted.

Both the House and Senate passed costlier tax relief plans. But the compromise would shave $850 million from the Senate package’s two-year price tag of $4.45 billion. That’s because it would offer a more modest increase in homestead exemptions on school property taxes — taking the exemptions, now $15,000, to $25,000. The Senate wanted $33,250 next year and $34,913 in 2017.

Eltife and the House’s other lead negotiator, Ways and Means Committee Chairman Dennis Bonnen, would not discuss details of the tax deal.

“We are having positive conversations,” said Bonnen, an Angleton Republican. “Every time we have another positive conversation, we come closer to an agreement.”

Gun issues

On guns, there also were signs of a thaw.

The House Homeland Security and Public Safety Committee approved a Senate-passed campus carry bill to allow licensed Texans to carry concealed handguns in most state university buildings. Meanwhile, the Senate State Affairs panel scheduled a Monday hearing on the House-passed open carry bill. It would let Texans with the appropriate license carry handguns openly in a shoulder or belt holster.

Bonnen and Sen. Brian Birdwell, R-Granbury, huddled to work out differences on their border security bills, Eltife said.

Birdwell, who heads a Senate subcommittee on border security, scheduled a hearing on Bonnen’s House-passed bill for Monday.

Eltife said other issues that are part of the session-ending compromise include how to carry out the chambers’ agreement that a public corruption prosecutorial unit should be stripped from heavily Democratic Travis County and a Senate-passed requirement that at least 60 percent of a local governing body support any increase in property tax revenue.

The senator said plans to boost highway funding without raising taxes are a separate set of negotiations, though they are proceeding smoothly.

Bonnen said “there are no deadlines” for wrapping up the endgame talks. He acknowledged the movement on the bills on occupational fees, guns and border security.

“What those are, are signs of important bills making progress in the system,” he said.

Follow Robert T. Garrett on Twitter at @RobertTGarrett and Tom Benning at @TomBenning.