Photo

BIRMINGHAM, Ala. — When Mayor William A. Bell Sr. of Birmingham visited Washington this year, he took along what some of his fellow Democrats believed was a preposterous idea: Hold the 2016 Democratic National Convention in the largest city of one of the country’s most conservative states.

“They were being nice and kind to allow us to come and present,” Mr. Bell recalled in an interview. “As I walked into that room, I could see the skepticism on many of their faces.”

Birmingham remains on the Democrats’ official list of possible convention sites. But given the realities of presidential politics and the perceived limits of a city of 212,000, almost no one is expecting it to beat out the other finalists: Columbus, Ohio; Philadelphia; Phoenix; and New York City.

A local commentator, John Archibald, pronounced in June that the apocalypse would take place before Democrats would bring their quadrennial roadshow to Birmingham, the economic capital of a state that is approaching the 40th anniversary of the last presidential election in which it voted for a Democrat. And plenty of people here chuckle at mentions of the bid, which observers say allows Democrats to pay tribute to Birmingham’s history while broadening the list of cities under consideration by the party.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Yet for all of the gentle skepticism and outright mockery, supporters of the bid are adamant that the competition does not have a foregone conclusion. At minimum, Birmingham backers say, this city’s place in the national convention conversation has given it an injection of confidence. “The fact that we’ve had a unified effort and the community has challenged itself and tested itself to think big about something like this, it’s a better community for having gone through the process,” said Brian Hilson, the president of the Birmingham Business Alliance.

Well over a month after a panel of Democratic Party evaluators visited Birmingham, it is difficult to miss the signs of a campaign here. Throughout downtown, banners promote the city’s candidacy; two are positioned near the 16th Street Baptist Church, where four African-American girls were killed in a racially motivated bombing more than a half-century ago.

Photo

Birmingham’s civil-rights legacy is the foundation of what supporters often describe as an “earnest” pitch to Democrats.

“Were it not for Birmingham and the other events that took place throughout Alabama and the rest of the South, the Democratic Party would not look the way it looks today,” Mr. Bell said. “I think it would have a tone and character similar to the tone and character that existed back in the early ’60s.”

But skeptics are all but certain that Mr. Bell’s argument will not be enough to move Democrats away from more populous cities. Columbus, the next smallest city in contention, is nearly four times the size of Birmingham. “The Democratic Party does not have the luxury of accommodating this moral argument,” Glen Browder, a political scientist and a former Democratic congressman from Alabama, said of Mr. Bell’s pitch. “They’ve got a very tough election facing them, and they can’t let something like that sway them.”

Birmingham backers concede that Alabama’s political topography is less than ideal for a bid for the Democratic National Convention. But some note that the Republicans held their 2008 convention in Minnesota, which has not awarded its electoral votes to a candidate from that party since 1972.

“We’re a blue spot in a red state, so we get the limitations,” said Myla E. Calhoun, who represented Mr. Hilson’s organization when Birmingham presented its proposal in Washington. “But we’re unexpected, and we just want to share ourselves.”

The Birmingham that Ms. Calhoun and others are showcasing is not a downtrodden industrial city with little to do except watch college football. Instead, it has emerged as a city with an impressive array of restaurants, a respected medical center and a growing arts scene.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But many here remain skeptical that Birmingham, whose 2008 proposal to seek the Olympics remains something of a punch line, is ready to join the roster of cities to host Democratic conventions. Some say the bid distracts from the city’s troubles, including a poverty rate of nearly 29 percent.

Photo

“Would the energy and money and resources be better used to address the real problems we have in Birmingham — and the real opportunities that we have?” said Mark Kelly, a former municipal official who publishes Weld, a weekly newspaper, and has questioned the decision of city leaders to hire outside consultants to assist in the bid. “It was very easy for them to buy into this feel-good kind of stuff.”

Donald L. Fowler, a former chairman of the Democratic National Committee, said Birmingham’s bid gave party leaders the opportunity to consider a variety of choices before announcing a selection by early next year.

“I think they just wanted to make sure they did a full review of alternatives in style and size and region,” said Mr. Fowler, who was the chief executive of the 1988 Democratic National Convention in Atlanta.

Despite Birmingham’s long odds, Mr. Bell and other Democrats in city government have heard little criticism from Republicans, who plan to hold their 2016 convention in Cleveland.

The chairman of the Alabama Republican Party, Bill Armistead, has not concealed his delight at the prospect of Democrats’ holding their convention here.

“I can think of no better way for the citizens of our state to see the vast differences between the parties than to have the Democrats bring their radical leftist show here,” Mr. Armistead said in a statement in July. “It will be interesting to see if they try once again to remove God from their platform, right here in the heart of the Bible Belt.”

Mr. Bell said he planned to offer Republicans their own opportunity to gather in Birmingham.

“It’s my intent to go and tell the Republicans, after we have the Democratic convention, ‘You all need to come and protect your state,’ ” he said with a long, loud laugh.