Football fans looking to cut the cord from their cable or satellite service without missing their favorite NFL game will soon have a new alternative.

But there’s a catch.

Starting this season, the NFL is offering subscribers an updated version of its Game Pass service that will be available on a wider selection of devices, including Apple TV, Xbox One and Xbox 360 as well as smartphones, desktop computers, tablets and select connected TVs.

Game Pass will stream all 256 regular season games commercial-free in high definition, but only some preseason games will be live.

The service also will have older games from the 2009-2015 seasons and previous Super Bowls.

Game Pass will replace Game Rewind, which provides regular season games on-demand after they air live on television.

The NFL’s website doesn’t say when Game Pass will be available, but Game Remind is ending July 31.

Game Pass’ price hasn’t been announced. Game Rewind’s Season Plus costs $24.99.

The new service targets fans looking to watch replays or games outside of their home markets. Games played on Sunday mornings and afternoons will be available on-demand after all the 4 p.m. ET Sunday telecasts have concluded.

Sunday night, Monday night, Thursday and Saturday games will be viewable after each one ends on broadcast television. Game Pass will not air the playoffs or Super Bowl live.

Game Pass will have tools such as a “Scores On/Off’’ option for viewers who won’t know the outcome of a game, 30-minute condensed versions of entire games and full replays of every game since 2009 in HD.

Fans will be able to analyze games like a pro using exclusive end zone and All-22 angles and fast forward and rewind games with a DVR control.

Game Pass will have no effect on the NFL’s deal with Direct TV for live game streaming, which also will be available on more devices for the upcoming game season.

The new Game Pass service will mark the first time the NFL has provided access to entire games on Apple TV. Currently, its NFL Now channel on Apple TV has football news, historic videos and game highlights but not entire matchups.

Game Pass will be available to customers in the United States, Mexico, Bermuda, Antigua, the Bahamas and U.S. territories, such as Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, American Samoa and Guam.

Get Free Updates! Stay in the loop with a weekly newsletter, with all our news from the previous week. We will never give away, trade or sell your email address. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Please follow and like us:

Please Leave A Comment

comments