Re: “Sadly, state fair will need to leave Pueblo to be viable,” July 26 editorial.

Shame on the Denver Post editorial board for insisting that the Colorado State Fair must move out of Pueblo in order to survive.

I have lived in Pueblo for 30 years, and have never had a problem with traveling north to the greater Denver area to enjoy the myriad events, cultural institutions, and fine dining that is constantly offered. Quite often, we stay overnight, further supporting Denver area businesses.

Your editorial insinuates that northern Colorado residents are beyond traveling a bit south to something as wonderful as the state fair. Why should this be? After all, the fair does belong to the entire state.

If more residents of uppity communities like Denver, Boulder, Fort Collins, etc., could break away from their lives of luxury and bring themselves on down to Pueblo, not only would they be helping to “save” the fair, they could indulge themselves with a serving of humble pie the state fair has to offer.

Gerald Gallagher, Pueblo West

This letter was published in the Aug. 2 edition.

I vehemently disagree with your editorial’s conclusion that the only way to save the state fair is to move it to Denver from its home of 146 years in Pueblo. Denver’s population is indeed bigger than any other city in Colorado, but it is not the entire state. How is it more cumbersome for Denver metro area residents to drive two hours to reach the state fair than it would be for others to drive to Denver to attend? This is yet another example of the metro area’s hubris that they matter more than the rest of the state.

By all means, officials should discuss what changes in management, advertising and local support can make the state fair a more viable enterprise. Our state fair is not a business, and the sole consideration of cost should not outweigh doing what is right. For historical value alone, we should pay what it takes to keep this institution in its rightful home of Pueblo.

Karen Lest, Littleton

This letter was published in the Aug. 2 edition.

As we discuss the future of the Colorado State Fair in Pueblo (or elsewhere), would decision-makers please take the calendar into account? Denverites and other Front Range families aren’t driving to patronize the fair because of its poor scheduling. Pueblo unrolls the welcome mat far too late. Most metro area public and private schools are already back in session and some will have been in for weeks. Many of us start in early and mid-August. Schedule accordingly; we’d love to partake!

Dana Dunham, Highlands Ranch

This letter was published in the Aug. 2 edition.

Submit a letter to the editor via this form or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.