In 1993 Jamie Simpson was just 23 when the founder of MMO Behavioral Health Systems asked her to join the fledgling enterprise. “Chris [Nichols] believed in my abilities and talents long before I did,” Simpson says of her mentor. “She pushed my limits on a daily basis.” In the ensuing decades, MMO grew from a single-service agency serving the Baton Rouge area into a major provider of mental health programs and services throughout Louisiana. And Simpson’s role expanded in the process. “I learned early on in my career that in order to survive the health care industry, diversification of lines of service was necessary,” she says. “I took on different positions of increasing responsibility to assist our organization in diversifying and moving forward.” Today, as president and COO of MMO, Simpson is responsible for all facets of the business, though “compliance and revenue streams are on the top of [her] list.” In 2008 she became a co-owner of MMO, realizing, she says, “I was already invested as if the company were my own and MMO was a part of who I was as a person.”

45

Port Allen

I was involved in the development of MMO’s mission statement in 1993, which says: “Our organization is committed to assuring that our clients, employees, and business partners realize their maximum potential by providing an environment dedicated to innovation, growth and personal dignity.” I was one of the first four employees at MMO and take great pride in carrying out our mission each day.

I am passionate about the behavior health sector for many reasons. First and foremost, one of my family members was misdiagnosed with a mental illness and later died with thyroid cancer due to the misdiagnosis; therefore, appropriate diagnosis and treatment of mental illness became important to me at an early age. MMO serves many people who are vulnerable and unable to understand the symptoms they are experiencing and are often misunderstood by others. It has been and will continue to be my goal to reduce the stigma of mental health issues. While I do not participate in direct client care, it is very rewarding to know that lives are being positively impacted by our organization. Our industry employs many compassionate individuals who I have the opportunity to lead, and I always find it rewarding to observe their personal growth through the service of others.

First and foremost, being married to my husband Greg and having my children and granddaughter are my greatest successes. With that said, my definition of “success” is waking up every day with a life full of peace, riches and enjoyment. These three things can be defined many different ways by each person. For me, peace is realizing that you cannot control everything in life, but you can set out each day to make a difference where you can. Riches are my family and many friends, with whom I share happiness and disappointments each day. Enjoyment is living each day to the fullest with the ability to serve others in need. Lastly, professional success is having a career filled with purpose and the privilege of looking forward to going to work each day.

I cannot narrow this down to one piece because of the absolutely wonderful foundation provided by my family. As I grew up, the examples that were set for me cannot be expressed by one piece of advice. Both sets of my grandparents owned their own successful businesses and always put family first. I definitely learned my work ethic from my parents. I now understand the sacrifices and decisions made daily to set this foundation. My pieces of advice along the way were more of quiet examples.

After this foundation had been set by my family, I started working for my mentor, the founder of MMO, Christine E. Nichols, at the age of 23. I had been working in Jonesboro, Louisiana, and called Chris one day asking to come back home to work. At that point she said something that has been part of my decision making ever since. She said, “Do you want a job or a career?” I did not answer then; but 22 years later, with a successful career under her guidance, I think I’ve answered that question. At least I hope so!

I had the definite desire to serve people but cannot honestly say I had at that time the exact vision for what I would do afterward.

Prior to joining MMO in 1993, I had little experience in behavioral health care other than my internship at Parkland Hospital and two years with Evangeline Psychiatric Care, which provided mental health rehabilitation services. During my time with Evangeline Psychiatric Care, I became more aware of the great need for mental health services in our community.

MMO began with four employees with our founder, Chris E. Nichols, being one and me being another. Chris believed in my abilities and talents long before I did. She pushed my limits on a daily basis. We started as a single-service organization that could not withstand the many funding cuts we faced. I learned early on in my career that in order to survive the health care industry, diversification of lines of service was necessary to keep up with the many reimbursement and regulation changes. As we began to diversify, I took on different positions of increasing responsibility to assist our organization in diversifying and moving forward. I continued to have the opportunity to grow within the organization because I was willing and able to take on new challenges even if I was not sure at the time how I was going to accomplish these tasks. I was willing to take risks, and through these experiences I grew personally and professionally through my successes but equally through failures. As I grew through opening new lines of service, joining network and training organizations within the mental health field and learning to recruit and grow an effective leadership team through many leadership growth organizations, I noticed that often my failures provided me more opportunities for future success than my achievements. The most pleasurable leadership organization I had an opportunity to participate in was Leadership Louisiana class of 2012.

As president and COO of MMO, I am responsible for all facets of the business. With any health care organization, the regulations and funding are ever changing, and it is imperative that MMO stays abreast of these changes. Therefore, compliance and revenue streams are on the top of my list. However, I see my most important responsibilities as assuring that MMO provides a quality service, grows our employees, and educates our communities on available mental health services offered at MMO. With that said, it is my responsibility to support our leadership in accomplishing these goals and responsibilities.

As my responsibilities increased, the opportunity to invest in the company as a co-owner presented itself in 2008. It did not take me long to realize that I was already invested as if the company were my own and MMO was a part of who I was as a person. Therefore, I decided this was a step I wanted to take.

My most satisfying professional accomplishment is being an integral part of transitioning our business from a predominantly outpatient revenue business to now more than 70% of our revenue coming from inpatient business. When we took the biggest risk that MMO had ever taken and purchased our first inpatient hospital one month after Hurricane Katrina hit, and it seemed as though we had made our biggest mistake; however, in looking back, I realize it was one of our best decisions, and we overcame the adversity and started moving our organization in a new direction.

MMO has, according to its website, 16 facilities and serves clients in Louisiana and other states. What was your role, if any, in the acquisition of these facilities? How is it advantageous to the company to increase the geographical scope of its services?

I cannot stress enough the [significance of the] environment of endless change in the health care industry related to regulations and reimbursement. As a behavioral health–focused company, we have to continue to be agile and pivot with the changes. Our expansion into other areas has been a decision to grow and touch more lives rather than becoming very small with one facility and service line.

MMO’s growth in the past decade can definitely be attributed to our transition in revenue streams from primarily outpatient based to an inpatient/outpatient mix. We have also grown organically and through acquisitions. Our growth can also be attributed to our strategic planning process each year. We come together as a leadership team and clearly define our goals for the future, and then track our progress towards these goals on a monthly basis. We develop our vision for growth together and then hold each other accountable and focused on our strategic plan.

From 2010 to 2012, MMO repositioned all of its locations and strategies. At the end of 2012, three of our owned facilities became managed facilities, contributing to a slight decrease in revenue. While revenues decreased, the number of clients served continued to increase. This can be attributed to funding cuts and regulation changes. As of January 2014, we did not change any service lines or locations; therefore, we should see a slight increase in our revenues.

From an employer’s standpoint, the Affordable Care Act affects MMO as it does any other business about our size. The purpose of the act is to make it affordable for all to receive insurance, and this can be costly for employers. For our business, this should help to decrease the 20% of individuals we are currently serving in our hospitals each year who are uninsured. The 1986 federal Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act mandates that hospital emergency rooms turn no one away based on their payer source. This law also mandates that psychiatric hospitals accept clients from emergency rooms if the clients meet the hospitals’ criteria, regardless of payer source. Therefore, with the Affordable Care Act, we are expecting to see some decline in the number of uninsured clients we serve each year. The Parity Act that was passed in 2008 but has not really been enforced until now will provide access to mental health services to individuals who previously did not have mental health benefits included in their insurance plan. The Parity Act assures that mental illnesses are covered by insurance plans equally as they would physical conditions. This should allow us to serve more individuals who previously did not have mental health benefits.

We have several points of initial contact with our organization, from our website and Facebook page to our talented community relations team. That team serves to navigate individuals through our organization and link them with resources, whether they are within our system or not. We take every contact with someone in need of mental health services as a top priority, no matter what their need is. We therefore work to establish a strong network in every community we serve, from psychiatrists and internal medical physicians to private clinicians and other service providers. Our goal has always been to connect people with resources, and we do this inside and outside the MMO network every day. As a result, our own referral network consists of a variety of organizations and service providers in the community.

We are on multiple insurance networks at this time. The main point is, no matter what your insurance provider is, MMO can be a resource to you!

Though you don’t work directly in patient care, the quality of patient care is one of your primary concerns as president at MMO. What innovations or currents in mental health care assist you and your employees in ensuring that clients receive excellent, effective services?

Each of our hospitals are Joint Accredited. We schedule and conduct unannounced surveys at each of our programs on a regular basis, and we host quarterly meetings with staff representatives from each location to receive input from all staff assisting us, to increase quality of care and initiate changes when needed. We have an active compliance team that is focused on assuring that we are providing excellent and effective services.

Personally, I have learned to better manage the balance between my life as a wife and mother and my career. While I understand that my role as a wife/mother is the most important role of my life, I can still work passionately towards my personal goals and career.

Professionally, I have learned that you have to understand that your aspirations for other people may not be the aspirations or personal goals they have for themselves and that is OK. I now understand that sometimes we serve others by assisting them to grow where they are planted.

Teri Fontenot, the CEO of Woman’s Hospital, is someone I greatly admire. Though I have only met her a couple of times in passing, I have been a patient at Woman’s, and the services and level of excellence that are found at Woman’s speak to the effectiveness of her leadership. You don’t have to know her personally to know she is a role model for women in health care.

At the end of each day, I take time to review the day and plan for the next day. This assists me with getting my day off to a good start. With a good cup of coffee and a plan for the day, I am off and running.

I am reading The Power of Habit by Charles Duhigg, Predictive Revenue by Aaron Ross and Marylou Tyler, and Alcatraz #1259, by William G. Baker.

Pope Francis; Oprah Winfrey; and Sheryl Sandberg, the COO of Facebook.

I love working in my yard and spending time with my family and friends in the backyard, swimming and grilling and/or boiling seafood.

I love to watch any type sport or activity that my sons and granddaughter are participating in throughout the year. My sons have differing interests, and it gives me great pleasure to watch my son Landon perform in Playmakers productions and my son Chance play baseball and football, and my granddaughter dance.

Pay It Forward, Hope Floats and You’ve Got Mail.

I am of course most fond of MMO Behavioral Health Systems’ website, mmoinc.com.

I have to pick two spots: Tiger Stadium on a Saturday night and downtown Baton Rouge.

The revitalization of downtown Baton Rouge that has been done by the Downtown Development District is one notable change. We moved our corporate office downtown in 2000, and the positive changes that have been made since that time have been impressive. Until now I have only heard stories of downtown from my mom, about her shopping trips on Third Street and husband owning a restaurant in Catfish Town.

Family, friends, and lots of laughter and fun.