Roger Johnson sat comfortably in the easy chair Friday morning at the River Drive Surgery Center in Elmwood Park, chatting pleasantly with a doctor and nurses who had been buzzing around him.

It was impossible to tell that minutes earlier the 59-year-old Brush Creek, Tenn. man had his right eye stuck with needles and raked by a laser.

Johnson had undergone cataract surgery -- what these days amounts to a routine procedure -- but what he really experienced was a holiday miracle.

Roger Johnson had his sight back.

As if the miracle of modern sight restoration was not enough, Johnson also was able to experience a second great benefit: The surgery was free. The anesthesia was free. The doctors' and nurses' services were free. The office space was free, and all the post-operative care will be free.

It was all free, given to Johnson and 16 other patients through VisionHarvest, a charity established six years ago by East Hanover ophthalmologist Cary Silverman.

To patients like Johnson, it would be the only way he'd have the chance to resume his career as a regional truck driver. Johnson, like the other patients at the Elmwood Park facility on Friday, had no insurance.

And at anywhere from $3,000 to $10,000 per eye, cataract surgery was out of the question without donated care.

"We were running out of hope," Johnson said.

That was actually last year, when Johnson's sight was failing him badly.

Through some Internet searches, Johnson's wife found VisionHarvest. Patients have to be low-income, have no insurance and live in the United States. He qualified and had one eye treated last year. That alone changed Johnson's life.

"I don't know when the last time was I saw that good," he said, saying he had been struggling with his vision for five or six years.

Like Johnson, Michele Malinchak of Chatham also was back Friday for a second eye procedure.

Her vision was "pretty milky" before Silverman or one of his team of four other ophthalmologists operated on her last year.

Cataracts are breakdowns of the eye's lens, leading to a clouding of vision. With a typical surgery, the lens is broken up using a high-frequency ultrasound tool and is suctioned out. A new lens then is implanted in the eye, restoring vision to normal or something close to it.

"It was a godsend," said Malinchak, a 63-year-old part-time English language coach.

Malinchak said she depends on VisionHarvest because she cannot afford health insurance, even in the age of Obamacare. If the cost of monthly premiums didn't get her, she said, the other out-of-pocket costs would.

"I can't afford these outrageous deductibles," she said.

In fact, the number of patients served Friday was substantially down from previous years, when up to 50 people would be treated, Silverman said. "I'd like to think" that the Affordable Care Act had an impact on the number of people needing free care, he said.

It was for the obviously needy like Malinchak and Johnson that Silverman founded the non-profit organization, he said. Whether in wealthy New Jersey or rural Tennessee, holes in the health care infrastructure can trap the poor, he said.

"These are people that are falling through the cracks," he said.

VisionHarvest is funded through individual donations and support from the Operation Sight network, a charitable effort of the American Society of Cataract and Refractive Surgery Foundation, Silverman said. It takes about $100 in donations to cover a surgery, according to VisionHarvest's web site.

VisionHarvest intentionally schedules its annual day of free care during the holiday season, Silverman said, when it seems appropriate to offer the gift of free care.

Over the years, Silverman said he has heard story after story of patients who lost work because they couldn't see. Then, without an income, they couldn't afford to fix their vision. "It's a vicious cycle," he said.

That was the case for Richard Jenkins, a patient from Fort Washington, Md. He was a television producer whose eyesight got so bad, he couldn't tell the letter O from Q. His ability to distinguish colors diminished as well, he said.

"Basically, I was going blind out of a job," he said.

Having limited vision has other pernicious effects, said another surgeon, Nahndi Williams. Since cataracts affect older people primarily, and their balance can begin to fail, poor vision increases the risk of broken bones, she said. Other people may sink into depression, Williams said.

Having sight restored raises the spirits of the patients and family members who are largely relieved of the burden of care they had before surgery, she added.

"The ripple effect is probably as satisfying for the families as for the patients," Williams said.

The caregivers also share in their joy, they said.

"It's our favorite day of the year," Silverman said.

Staff members "beg" to be able to work on VisionHarvest days.

There is no shortage of cataracts to treat, and with Baby Boomers aging, there will be even more. According to the National Eye Institute, half of all Americans age 80 have had cataract surgery or have a cataract.

It's unclear what causes cataracts, doctors say, and there can be any number of causes, including exposure to ultraviolet light, alcohol abuse and chronic illnesses such as diabetes.

Since the disease is progressive, "most patients doesn't realize how impaired they are until that cataract is out and the lens goes in," said office administrator Nancy Lord.

Some patients' ability to distinguish colors is so poor that when they finish surgery, they don't recognize their coats by their color, she added.

Their color perception and other vision basics return almost immediately after surgery. On Saturday, the patients will get a post-op check-up and if everything looks good, they'll be able to resume their lives as if they never had cataracts.

"It is like a miracle to them," Lord said.

It is a miracle to them.

Jenkins, a part-time minister, will be able to read his regular-print Bible at Christmas services this year. By Saturday, Malinchak will be able to drive to a job if she wants.

And Johnson, the truck driver, also will be able to get behind the wheel.

"I'll keep on truckin'," he said.

Tim Darragh may be reached at tdarragh@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @timdarragh. Find NJ.com on Facebook.