Unthinkable as it may be given the tone of the current political debate, the stars may be aligning for bipartisan cooperation on a package of improvements to the Affordable Care Act. While some on both sides of the aisle in Congress continue to fight the battles of the past, and nearly all the Republican presidential candidates advocate for complete repeal, there is reason to believe that further compromise is possible.

With any newly implemented law, it makes sense to step back and take a look at which parts are working well, which need to be amended and which should be discontinued. The contentious debate over the future of the law has continued through two major Supreme Court decisions, three national election cycles and countless political fights that have occurred in the states. All this uncertainty has made it impossible to do a bipartisan review of the law and make improvements that could win majority support in Congress and be signed into law. That may be about to change.

Some improvements to the law have already been enacted, such as repeal of the burdensome small business 1099 reporting requirement and the actuarially unsound long-term care program Community Living Assistance Services and Supports, known as the CLASS Act. These programs were repealed because they proved to be simply unworkable, rather than because of political compromise to improve the law.

A more promising example is the recent change in the law's definition of a small employer group for the purposes of insurance regulation. This occurred as a result of negotiation among diverse interests in Congress and proves it is possible for both parties to come together to address the potential improvements to the health care law.



[READ: Prevention Is a Bipartisan Health Care Issue in 2016]

Although the new president will determine the tone and tenor of the post-election debate, he or she will still have to work with a Senate that lacks a filibuster-proof majority, meaning bipartisan cooperation will be necessary for success. In the House, new Speaker Paul Ryan has a history of leadership in difficult policy negotiations, such as his landmark bipartisan budget compromise with Senate Democrats in 2013. A similar bipartisan negotiation about the health care law is possible if both sides can withstand the extremes of their parties and form consensus derived from the political center. These evolving dynamics provide an opportunity to consider bipartisan changes that would help lower costs, resolve ambiguities and correct unintended consequences.

A trio of tax increases within the health care law are ripe for consideration. For example, if it takes effect as scheduled in 2018, the so-called Cadillac tax would impose a new 40 percent tax on the cost of high-benefit employee-sponsored health insurance. Repeal of the Cadillac tax is supported by business and labor groups that rarely see eye-to-eye on legislation, making this the most likely issue to be resolved.

The 2.3 percent excise tax on medical devices has been the focus of congressional attention since the health care law was enacted. The tax directly increases costs on device manufacturers – costs which are diverted away from research and development of new technologies, then passed on to consumers in the form of higher health care costs.



[READ: Eradicate America's Gun Disease]

Perhaps the most onerous of the taxes included in the health care law, the health insurance excise tax has the most direct impact on consumers and the cost of health insurance premiums. Initially phased-in at $8 billion in 2014, the tax increases to an overall annual cost of $14.3 billion by 2018. Repeal of this tax would be one of the most effective ways to address rising premium costs.

Another provision of the law that has received scrutiny is the Independent Payment Advisory Board, a 15-member government group that makes potentially binding recommendations to Congress about how to contain Medicare costs that increase above allowable thresholds. Opponents argue that this unelected group lacks accountability and might enforce unpopular cuts to Medicare.

The so-called family glitch, as it's popularly known, denies subsidies in the insurance exchanges to the families of some workers who themselves receive individual coverage through their employer. Although widely understood to be an unintended consequence of inexact legislative drafting, fixing the family glitch would result in an expansion of the subsidized population under the law, making political consensus more difficult to achieve.



[READ: Anti-Refugee Rhetoric Denies Immigrant Children the Support They Need]

Should a Republican be elected president, expect to hear more about section 1332 of the law, which allows states to receive federal waivers to enact their own state-based health care reforms. Waiving key elements of the law are possible under this provision, but only with the cooperation of the federal government.