He talked about liberty. He talked about spying. He talked about the bulk collection of data about U.S. citizens.He railed against the "sneak and peek" provision that allows law enforcement to enter a person's home covertly, search it and then leave without telling the homeowner. He talked and talked and talked for more than 10 hours. And even though Kentucky Republican Sen. Rand Paul knew he was likely just to delay reauthorization of key provisions of the USA Patriot Act, Paul kept talking, showing a rare visible passion about a topic he is very passionate about: personal liberty. Said Paul:



There comes to a time in the history of nations when fear and complacency allow power to accumulate and liberty and privacy to suffer. That time is now. And I will not let the Patriot Act, the most un-patriotic of acts, go unchallenged.



This, ladies and gentlemen of the U.S. Senate, is what a filibuster is supposed to be.(And Paul's office said it indeed qualified as a filibuster, even though Paul stopped for a scheduled vote.)



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

Filibusters have been abused and overused in recent years, as lawmakers have used the parliamentary tactic to hold up legislative items for reasons having nothing to do with those issues themselves. Republicans held up Obama administration nominees not because the picks were not qualified for the job, but because they didn't want the president to advance an executive branch agenda he was elected (twice) to do. There have been filibusters of such low-controversy appointments as U.S. marshals. There have been filibusters of bills just to force the other party to deal on something completely unrelated. Filibusters have been reined in since former Senator Majority Leader (now Minority Leader) Harry Reid executed the "nuclear option" limiting what sorts of things can be filibustered. But the fact remains that the filibuster, meant to be a tool to force the Senate to examine something more closely before rushing to a vote, has merely created a new standard for majority rule, with 60 lawmakers required to get anything done.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the NSA]