U.S. Air Force Airman 1st Class Spencer Stone, one of three Americans that tackled a heavily armed gunman on a Paris-bound train,is greeted by well-wishers after arriving at Travis Air Force Base in Fairfield, Calif., Thursday, Sept. 3, 2015. Stone, who has been undergoing medical treatment in Germany since he and his two childhood friends, National Guardsman Alek Skarlatos and Sacramento college student Anthony Sadler subdued the gunman on a passenger train Aug. 21.(AP Photo/Rich Pedroncelli)

UPDATE 10:39 P.M.: Stone, 23, was knifed three times in the upper body but was expected to survive after about two hours of surgery, said Dr. J. Douglas Kirk, chief medical officer at UC Davis Medical Center.



“This incident is not related to terrorism in any way,” Deputy Police Chief Ken Bernard said. “We know it’s not related to what occurred in France months ago.”

Kirk said Stone remained heavily sedated in the hospital’s intensive care unit. He declined to discuss any details about the surgery or whether any vital organs were damaged in the stabbing, beyond saying Stone had “significant injuries.”

The airman arrived at the nearby hospital conscious despite his wounds, the doctor said.

“I suspect given his history of recent events he is quite a fighter,” Kirk said.

He said Stone’s family asked him to convey “their deepest gratitude for all the expressions of concern for his welfare at this very difficult time for them.”

In August, Stone and two of his childhood friends from Sacramento, National Guardsman Alek Skarlatos and college student Anthony Sadler, were vacationing in Europe when they sprang into action aboard a Paris-bound passenger train and tackled Ayoub El-Khazzani, a man with ties to radical Islam. He had boarded the train with a Kalashnikov rifle, a pistol and a box cutter.

Stone, who is assigned to Travis Air Force Base in California, suffered a severely cut thumb and a knife wound to his neck during the struggle with the gunman.

President Barack Obama met with the three Americans last month, praising them for their quick thinking and courage and calling them “the very best of America.” They were also awarded France’s highest honor by President Francois Hollande. The three appeared on late-night talk shows and received a parade in their hometown.

Stone is the second of the three Americans to be shaken by violence at home since their return.

Last week, Skarlatos left rehearsals for TV’s “Dancing With the Stars” to rush back to Roseburg, Oregon, after a gunman killed nine people at the community college that Skarlatos attends.

“It’s honestly the strangest emotion I ever felt,” Skarlatos said in a taped segment that aired on the show Monday. “Even the train made more sense than this does. … There’s nothing you can do.”

The stabbing happened in a busy area of central Sacramento ringed with bars and restaurants that is a popular nightlife destination for young adults and is generally considered safe.

Skarlatos tweeted Thursday: “Spencer is one tough guy,” and “Everybody send prayers out to the Stone family today.”

UPDATE 4:23 P.M.: A UC Davis Medical Center spokesman said Stone is “heavily sedated” at this time after undergoing surgery.

The spokesman also said the condition of Stone is “serious.”

SACRAMENTO (KRON) — The hometown hero, Spencer Stone, is in the hospital in stable condition after being stabbed in the chest multiple times, according to police.

Sacramento Police Department received a call of an incident in the area of 21st Street and K Street Thursday morning at 12:46 a.m.

Stone was out with a group of friends at a Sacramento downtown bar when a physical altercation led to Stone being stabbed multiple times in his upper body.

SURVEILLANCE VIDEO OF ATTACK (Taller subject in white shirt is Spencer Stone)

In surveillance video obtained by KRON4, Stone is seen fighting off his attackers when one of the assailants stabs him from behind. At one point, the video shows a blood stain appear on his white shirt.

Sacramento police said the assault incident is not related to a terrorist act and that alcohol is believed to be a factor.

Stone is being treated for non-life threatening but very significant injuries in a hospital in the Sacramento area.

The Sacramento Deputy Chief said in a press conference that the suspects fled the scene immediately after the stabbing.

The suspects are two male Asian adults wearing white t-shirts and blue jeans. They fled in a 2009-12 dark color Toyota Camry.

Air Force Airman 1st Class Stone was among three men from Sacramento who stopped a terrorist attack on a train headed to Paris last month.

Stone was reportedly stabbed four times in the chest in Sacramento early Thursday morning and taken to a hospital where is in stable condition.

The three young men were on vacation on August 23, three weeks to the day, when a gunman entered their train in Belgium heading to Paris.

One of the heroes, Alek Skarlatos tweeted Thursday morning telling people to send their prayers to the Stone family.

Sacramento police said this is an on-going and active investigation and will not release any specifics regarding the altercation.

Everybody send prayers out to the stone family today — alek skarlatos (@alekskarlatos) October 8, 2015

The Associated Press contributed to this report.