Posted on December 11, 2014

MSNBC's Wagner Grills Earnest: You Call It A "Compromise Bill," Nancy Pelosi Calls It A "Blackmail Bill"

Please enable Javascript to watch this video

MSNBC host Alex Wagner grilled White House press secretary Josh Earnest on why the White House and Democrats like House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi can't agree on what is being dubbed the "CRomnibus" -- a bill that would fund the government through March 15, 2015.



Earlier today, Rep. Pelosi (D-CA) took to the floor of the House to voice her "disappointment" in the White House for pushing a bill she claimed is ransom "blackmail" by Republicans.



"I'm enormously disappointed that the White House feels that the only way they can get a bill is to go along with this and that would be the only reason they would sign such a bill that would weaken a critical component of financial system reform aimed at reducing taxpayer risk," Pelosi said Thursday afternoon.



"This is a ransom," Pelosi said of the bill. "This is blackmail."



"It's clear that we have a difference of opinion here," Earnest responded at the White House daily briefing.



Wagner laid into Earnest for calling it a "compromise bill" while Pelosi calls it "blackmail bill."



"Josh, I'm struck by the difference in adjectives here," Wagner said on the Thursday evening broadcast of her MSNBC show. "You call it a compromise bill; Nancy Pelosi calls it a blackmail bill. I mean, is the onus on House Democrats for not having their caucus together? I mean where does the fault lie? You guys say you gave the House Democrats running room to negotiate the best deal they cold. You guys are on board. House Democrats say, well, wait a second, this is blackmail."



Earnest called it a "pretty good deal" and pointed out that it doesn't gut healthcare reform or President Obama's executive action on immigration.



"Well, Alex, you'd have to ask House Democrats for their positions," Earnest said. "I think a lot of House Democrats agree with us that this is a pretty good deal. We're going to try to get some House Republicans onboard."





ALEX WAGNER, MSNBC: I guess my question is why is this only happening now? I mean, why weren't these calls made yesterday? How did it get to the point where Nancy Pelosi was on the floor of Congress saying she's enormously disappointed in the White House?



JOSH EARNEST, WHITE HOUSE: Well, Alex, what we are seeing right now -- we gave Democrats in the House multiple opportunities to try to negotiate the best possible bill they could get and the good news is they got a pretty good deal. It's a compromise proposal and it doesn't include anything that the president would like to see in there. Certainly if the president had a pen and he were writing this bill it would look quite a bit different.



It does include important funding for early-childhood education, it includes double-digit increases for some Wall Street reform proposals, like increased funding for the SEC and increased funding for CFTC (Commodity Futures Trading Commission), important regulatory organizations that will make sure that Wall Street is held accountable.



It includes important funding for agencies that will be responsible for implementing our climate action plan. Nobody would have ever thought that a Republican majority in the House would include funding for agencies that are going to implement our climate plans. So, this is a pretty good deal. It's a compromise proposal. We didn't get everything that we wanted but there are lots of reasons that democrats can feel good about supporting the legislation.



WAGER: Josh, I'm struck by the difference in adjectives here. You call it a compromise bill; Nancy Pelosi calls it a blackmail bill. I mean, is the onus on House Democrats for not having their caucus together? I mean where does the fault lie? You guys say you gave the House Democrats running room to negotiate the best deal they cold. You guys are on board. House Democrats say, well, wait a second, this is blackmail.



EARNEST: Well, Alex, you'd have to ask House Democrats for their positions. I think a lot of House Democrats agree with us that this is a pretty good deal. We're going to try to get some House Republicans onboard and, look, whenever we're in a democracy when we're working in a divided government and we're trying to build bipartisan cooperation around something, it's going to be a little messy and that's what we see here and what that means is it means there are reasons that Republicans are voting for this bill and there are reasons Democrats are voting for this bill. But neither side got every single thing that they wanted and the fact that the Republicans who started this process said they were hoping to use this process to put in place riders that would gut the president's ability to implement the Affordable Care Act and undermine his ability to take executive actions to reform the broken immigration system. They weren't able to do either of those things



WAGNER: Well, in fairness, Josh, there is no legislative mechanism to unwind the president's announced executive action on immigration. So to say that that's a win seems sort of unfair. I mean, to those of us who have looked at the contents of this bill it feels that the White House is trading the ACA for rolling back Wall Street, Dodd-Frank financial regulation, cuts to the EPA, and gutting campaign finance laws.



EARNEST: Well, respectfully, Alex, I disagree with you. I think in Wall Street reform there's a lot to like. We have double-digit increases for the CFTC, we've got double-digit increases for the FTC and we don't have any riders that gut the ability of the CFPB (Consumer Financial Protection Bureau) to continue to be an independent voice for consumers in Washington, D.C.



If you look at the whole impact of this bill on Wall Street reform, it's good for Wall Street reform. And again, that's another reason that the president is supporting this legislation. So, it's not perfect and we didn't get everything we wanted but there are a lot of reasons to be supportive of this.