Gov. John Hickenlooper and other officials from the state offered their condolences Sunday to the family of Claire Davis after the 17-year-old’s death Saturday.

Claire was the victim of a shooting Dec. 13 at Arapahoe High School in Centennial, at which the gunman took his own life.

“Claire Davis personified the love and kindness she learned from her family,” Hickenlooper wrote on Facebook and Twitter. “All of Colorado feels that. They are in our hearts.”

U.S. Sen. Michael Bennet and his wife, Susan, said on Facebook, “What a bright young soul gone too soon.”

U.S. Rep. Mike Coffman, who represents Centennial, said on Facebook he was “deeply saddened” by Claire’s death.

The Colorado Department of Human Services said on Twitter, “Our hearts are with the Davis family tonight, and we grieve the innocence lost.”

The Colorado Office of Emergency Management wrote, “Our hearts go out to the Davis Family and the Warrior Community.”

At the request of her family and friends, The Denver Foundation announced it had created a fund in Claire’s name on Dec. 16.

The foundation said the Arapahoe High School Community Fund honoring Claire Davis will support mental health care, anti-bullying programs and other community needs chosen by her parents, the fund’s advisers.

“Last week was truly a paradox in that we lost our daughter, yet we witnessed the wonderful love that exists in the world through the tremendous outpouring of support we received,” the Davis family said in a statement Saturday.

Littleton Adventist Hospital, where Claire was kept on life support for eight days before her death, will deliver to her family cards that can be left in the “Cards for Claire” box located in the main entrance to the hospital.

The parents of gunman Karl Pierson, Barbara and Mark Pierson, issued the following statement via e-mail Sunday:

“We are heartbroken to hear of Claire’s passing. Our hearts ache for her family as they deal with unimaginable grief. Our prayers are with Claire’s family & the entire Arapahoe community.”