A top health of­fi­cial un­der Pres­id­ent George W. Bush thinks that the Obama ad­min­is­tra­tion could do a lot uni­lat­er­ally to clean up the Obama­care mess that would come if the Su­preme Court rules against the gov­ern­ment this month.

That hasn’t been the po­s­i­tion of the White House or some leg­al ex­perts sym­path­et­ic to­ward the law. But Thomas Scully, who was Bush’s Cen­ters for Medi­care and Medi­caid Ser­vices ad­min­is­trat­or from 2001 to 2004, said Thursday that he thought the ad­min­is­tra­tion could largely mit­ig­ate the fal­lout of King v. Bur­well if the Court de­cides to in­val­id­ate the Af­ford­able Care Act’s tax sub­sidies for more than 6 mil­lion people in the 30-plus states that use the fed­er­al Health­Care.gov.

“The ad­min­is­tra­tion is go­ing to have the flex­ib­il­ity and take the flex­ib­il­ity to ba­sic­ally do state-based ex­changes in prob­ably 40 states out­side the Deep South,” Scully said at a pan­el hos­ted by The Wall Street Journ­al. “So if you’re in Pennsylvania or Illinois or Ohio, the gov­ernor is go­ing to come in and say, ‘I don’t want to blow my­self up. I want to turn my­self in­to a state ex­change,’ and the ad­min­is­tra­tion is go­ing to do everything in their power pos­sible to let that hap­pen.”

The im­plic­a­tion was that the Health and Hu­man Ser­vices De­part­ment would make it as pro­ced­ur­ally easy as pos­sible for states to es­tab­lish their own ex­changes and get the Af­ford­able Care Act’s sub­sidies flow­ing again—and most states would take the deal.

Hol­d­outs, Scully said, would likely be the deep­est-red states most in­trins­ic­ally op­posed to the health care law.

The ad­min­is­tra­tion hasn’t shown its cards pub­licly on what, if any­thing, it would try to do ad­min­is­trat­ively if the Court rules against it—but it has hin­ted that it couldn’t do much. HHS Sec­ret­ary Sylvia Math­ews Bur­well re­it­er­ated that Thursday at the Journ­al‘s event. (She did note, however, that Pennsylvania had already ap­plied to set up a state ex­change in case the sub­sidies are nixed, pos­sibly hint­ing to­ward Scully’s scen­ario).

“In terms of ad­min­is­trat­ive abil­ity, if the Court makes that de­cision, it’s lim­ited,” Bur­well said, while warn­ing about the risk of a “death spir­al.”

Scully was skep­tic­al about that.

“I un­der­stand where Sec­ret­ary Bur­well is. I would have said the same thing if I were her: ‘We have no flex­ib­il­ity.’ The real­ity is, if the rul­ing comes out the oth­er way, the ad­min­is­tra­tion has a lot of flex­ib­il­ity,” he said. “I think there will be a very big ef­fort by the ad­min­is­tra­tion if that hap­pens to do a quick work­around for most states that want to have a state-based ex­change.”

Some law pro­fess­ors like the Uni­versity of Michigan’s Nich­olas Bagley, who sup­ports the ad­min­is­tra­tion’s po­s­i­tion in King, have also in­vest­ig­ated the is­sue and ex­pressed skep­ti­cism about what HHS could do ad­min­is­trat­ively if the Court in­val­id­ates the sub­sidies.

“We’re quite pess­im­ist­ic. The op­er­a­tion­al, leg­al, and polit­ic­al chal­lenges here are im­mense,” Bagley said last year. “The more I’ve looked at this, the more alarmed I’ve grown.”

An ag­gress­ive ad­min­is­trat­ive strategy by HHS could also in­vite more lit­ig­a­tion from the law’s op­pon­ents. The ad­min­is­tra­tion is cur­rently fend­ing off a chal­lenge from House Re­pub­lic­ans over HHS’s de­cision to delay Obama­care’s em­ploy­er man­date and pay cost-shar­ing sub­sidies without, the House al­leges, the ap­pro­pri­ate fund­ing.