Renck: Frame Brock Osweiler’s season with those of inexperienced NFL quarterbacks, and he has been solid. He has thrown for 1,436 yards and eight touchdowns and tossed four interceptions. He is 3-2 as a starter. Again, serviceable. The problem is, the Broncos aren’t in the business of rebuilding or developing prospects. They have a championship-caliber defense. Osweiler is capable of leading the Broncos to victory if the offensive scheme is adjusted to create better options after his first read.

Jhabvala: Osweiler has proven he can do it in big settings. He did it in Chicago, in freezing temperatures on the road and against his former coaches. He did it at home, in snow against the then-unbeaten Patriots. Consistency has and continues to be the issue — for him and the Denver offense. Osweiler and the Broncos went 25 consecutive possessions without scoring a touchdown. Then they turned in four consecutive drives resulting in touchdowns in the first two quarters at Pittsburgh before going dormant again.

Renck: The Broncos’ second-half production has gone from puzzling to pitiful. Denver hasn’t scored in the third quarter in six games this season. The Broncos have been outscored 36-0 in the second half of the past three games. Osweiler has shown he can play well with a 15-play script. In the second half, he needs to counterpunch. This offense averages three shots downfield per game. Osweiler is 5-for-22 with one touchdown and two interceptions on passes of 20-plus yards. If he doesn’t connect on one Monday night against Cincinnati, Denver won’t win.

Jhabvala: This offense begins and ends with the running game. The Broncos gained 88 of their 104 yards rushing in the first half against Pittsburgh. And we know how the final two quarters unfolded. The Broncos had only 34 yards rushing in their loss to Oakland. Compare that with the previous three victories, in which they averaged 161 yards rushing, and it’s clear this offense thrives and survives on a balanced attack.

Renck: There is no guarantee that Peyton Manning will play again this season. My gut feeling is that his injured left foot will allow one more game, whether that’s against San Diego in the regular-season finale or in a playoff game. The Broncos can win with Osweiler. But he needs help. It’s time for veteran tight end Vernon Davis to stop alligator-arming in the clutch and deliver his first touchdown reception since the 2014 season opener. And it’s time for Demaryius Thomas to produce a signature moment this season, either on a score or a critical third down.

Jhabvala: The drops on crucial downs have been painful — and you would like to see Thomas, especially, have one big game, if only for a confidence builder. But the drops alone can’t be blamed for the offense’s inefficiency late in close games.