New York (CBS DC) — First Lady Michelle Obama was direct with donors at a Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee fundraiser on Monday.

“You can write a big old fat check … that’s what we need you to do right now,” she said.

Speaking at New York’s Sheraton Hotel, the women-themed fundraiser featured several female senators and Senate candidates. Sens. Heidi Heitkamp, D-N.D., Amy Klobuchar, D-Minn., and Jeanne Shaheen, D-N.H., were among those in attendance at the minimum $250 event, reports Capital New York.

She spoke with the crowd about the need for Congress to come together to pass the Fair Pay law, a future stimulus and to fully support the implementation of the troubled Affordable Care Act.

Then taking one of the president’s own tag lines: “But please, let us be very clear. Barack hasn’t done any of this alone, just sitting by himself in the Oval Office – so sad,” she said to laughter. “Fortunately he has not been alone.”

She expressed her frustration that the president has had to issue executive orders due to failures from Congress to unite on certain legislation, specifically mentioning the DREAM Act.

“The DREAM Act — an act that gives immigrant kids a fair shot, kids brought here by their parents through no fault of their own — this act failed.”

“Here in America, while we expect everyone to do their fair share, we also believe that we should give everyone a fair shot,” Obama stated. “We believe that everyone should have the basic security they need to provide for their families, give their kids a decent chance in life. And that’s the kind of security that I and I know so many of you grew up with.”

The first lady noted Congress’ failure to pass “common sense” gun legislation last spring by just six votes.

Moving forward, she reiterated the need to focus on the 2014 midterm elections and the financial support needed for Democratic support.

“So make no mistake about it, the midterm elections matter. They matter. And if you want to bring some change to Congress, then we can’t just sit around feeling angry or helpless or hopeless,” she said.

“Because there’s something that we and all of you can do right now, today, to make a huge difference and it’s simple: You can write a big old fat check,” she said to laughter. “That’s what we need you to do right now. Write a big check, big huge one. Write the biggest check you can possibly write.”