By Brigette Russell │ Watchdog.org

SANTA FE, N.M. — State Senate President Pro Tempore Mary Kay Papen, a Las Cruces Democrat, points to a photograph on a wall across from her desk.

“That’s my grandson,” she says of the tall man in a cowboy hat standing next to her in the photo, which Papen can always see over the shoulder of anyone sitting in the chairs facing her in her Capitol office.

Papen recently filed SB53, the Assisted Outpatient Treatment Act, which would authorize judges to order defendants to receive behavioral health services.

“It’s not forced treatment,” Papen told Watchdog. “They would have be a very severe danger to themselves or to others. People say it’s civil liberties, but you’ve got the civil liberties of the people they’re threatening, too.”

Papen hopes it can help many New Mexicans, including her grandson.

“He’s schizophrenic and bipolar and there have been times when he would have been eligible for this,” she said. “I don’t want him killed. I don’t want the police shooting him, and I don’t want him to shoot somebody else.”

Last year, Albuquerque police officers shot and killed James Boyd, a mentally ill homeless man. The video went viral, and Albuquerque gained national notoreity for its police shootings, with coverage in The New Yorker and Esquire.

Christopher Torres, also mentally ill, was killed by Albuquerque police in 2011. His parents received a $6 million settlement. Since 2010, Albuquerque police have killed 26 people and wounded 40, resulting in taxpayers shelling out $30 million in settlements payments so far, with more cases still to be settled.

“It’s well-intentioned,” said Sen. Gerald Ortiz y Pino, D-Albuquerque, “but we don’t have enough services now for people who want help. If you order people to get help, do they go to the head of the line?”

SB53 has been heard in Ortiz y Pino’s Public Affairs Committee three times, and goes to Judiciary next.

Judge Oscar Kazen, a probate court judge in Bexar County, Texas, testified as an expert witness for the bill in committee. “What amazes me is that in New Mexico, it’s like we’re dong something new,” he told Watchdog in a phone interview, “and the rest of the country is going, it’s a Model T, not a Prius.”

Currently, 45 states have AOT laws on the books. Only Connecticut, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Mexico and Tennessee do not.

“It’s that step between inpatient and completely walking out the back door. As opposed to letting them just disappear until the next headline appears,” Kazen said.

Brian Stettin, policy director of the Treatment Advocacy Center, told the committee the AOT program in New York had dramatically reduced both hospitalization and incarceration rates.

“It’s pretty simple,” Stettin told Watchdog. “We know from the studies that AOT leads to reduction of hospitalization and criminal acts, and people wind up getting treated in jails or prison for mental illness. There is no more expensive form of treatment than hospital care or care in a correctional facility. By reducing those occurrences we’re saving a whole lot more than we’re spending up front.”

Sen. Cisco McSorley, D-Albuquerque, thinks New Mexico should spend a lot more up front. “In other states where they’ve had effective Kendra’s laws instituted, it’s been backed up by tens of millions of dollars,” he told Watchdog. “In New York it was hundreds of millions. Here we have a bill that has no money attached.”

The bill as originally filed contained a $3 million appropriation, but the version currently on the table includes only $275,000 to the administrative office of courts for training and data collection, and $200,000 for a university evaluation of program effectiveness, with cost of actual services to be paid from existing sources of behavioral health funding.

“I think she’s trying to do the right thing,” McSorley said of Papen. “But we need to do the hard thing.”

By hard, McSorley means either raising taxes or using money from the permanent fund. He referred to a series of articles in the Wall Street Journal about two decades ago debating the efficacy of permanent funds versus spending as you go.

“Their conclusion was that in those states that wisely spend the money, you get a much higher return, a bigger bang for the buck than putting money in the permanent fund. But if you talk to anyone in New Mexico, that solution is off the table.”

Bills aimed at spending permanent fund money on early childhood education were defeated in past legislative sessions even with Democrats in control of both houses, because some Democrats voted with Republicans to block the proposals. This year, Republicans control the State House of Representatives.

Kazen doesn’t think money is a stumbling block. “We started off with one judge and one case worker chasing down several of the highest utilizers to make sure they kept their doctors appointments and were taking their meds,” he said. “We used existing sources of funding, and we reduced hospitalization between 70 and 80 percent. Ten years later, with evidence that it worked, our county has invested in expanding services.”

Roswell Mayor Dennis Kintigh called the criminal justice system “the concrete floor beneath the safety net of social services.”

“Catching them in the net is cheaper, diverting them out of the criminal justice system,” Kintigh told Watchdog. “We incarcerate people who are unwilling to comply with society’s rules. These are individuals who are unable.”