Art and Design

Hand-drawn: Richard Lewer's describes his Blake Prize-winning work Worse luck…I am still here as "lo-fi animation". Photo: Sahlan Hayes

Suicide pact: Richard Lewer's Worse luck…I am still here tells the tragic story of a Perth pensioner who murdered his partner in a mercy killing. Photo: Sahlan Hayes

Advertisement

Richard Lewer describes his Blake Prize-winning work Worse luck…I am still here as a "tragic love story".

Richard Lewer's with his Blake Prize-winning work Worse luck…I am still here. Photo: Sahlan Hayes

The Melbourne artist was awarded the $25,000 prize for religious art on Saturday for a hand-drawn animation that depicts the story of an elderly Perth man who survived a failed suicide pact with his wife.

"It was a story unfolding when I first moved to Perth and the beach where Bernie drowned himself, that was our local beach," he said.

Herbert Bernard Erickson pleaded guilty to murdering his disabled partner Julie Kuhn after he smothered her with a pillow in 2012.

The 81-year-old pensioner then killed his two dogs and suffered severe burns on his hands after he tried to electrocute himself.

Outside court, Mr Erickson said he did not want to go to jail, reported ABC online. He then drowned himself at Floreat Beach in Perth.

"I want to be with my partner really but I'm still here, worse luck."

Worse luck … I am still here was first exhibited at the 2014 Adelaide Biennial of Australian Art: Dark Heart, and depicts the story in a series of simple drawings narrated by the artist.

"The response to the animation's been incredible," he said. "Everyone knows someone either going through this or has a family member or a neighbour or someone in their life going through these extreme things."

Lewer, who was raised as a Catholic, said his artwork raised questions about euthanasia but he did not want to judge the morality of Mr Erickson's actions.

"Whether or not he would have been sent to jail I don't know because there were so many people who came out in favour of what he had done in life," Lewer said. "It's like a really tragic love story. It's so complex."

Lewer's work questioned approaches to euthanasia and challenged faith and belief systems, according to the prize's judges curator Alexie Glass-Kantor, artist Anne Ferran and religion scholar Alex Norman.

The chairman of the Blake Society, Rod Pattenden, said the winning work left it to the viewer to weigh up the issues.

"It's a beguiling work because it presents in simple story-like form a complex tale of love and death," he said. "It invites reflection and the format is really very beautiful and the soft compassionate voice of the artist leaves us with questions to consider."

Fairfax Media revealed last week that this year's Blake Prize may be the last if a major sponsor was not found.

"In approaching sponsors, many of them recognise that spirituality is a difficult, if not prickly, subject for consideration in Australia," he said. "Sponsors prefer their art to be popular and safe."

Mr Pattenden said the Blake Society, which administers the prize first awarded in 1951, had a "big hole" in its finances that needed to be addressed.

"We've had some contact of sympathy and support but certainly not a major sponsor as of yet."

Other prizes awarded on Saturday included the $5000 John Coburn Emerging Artist Award, which was won by Sydney artist Emily Sandrussi for Untitled (no.7) from the series Domino Theory, which was based on photos taken by her step-father as a soldier in Vietnam.

The Human Justice Award, also worth $5000, was given to Melbourne artist Hedy Ritterman for her image of a 96-year-old survivor of World War II concentration camps.

The $5000 Blake Poetry Prize was awarded to Dave Drayton for Threnodials, which the judges said used "the device of the anagram in an imaginative and compelling way to evoke a connectedness between earth, death, tradition, ritual and religion".

The Blake Prize exhibition is at UNSW Galleries at UNSW Art and Design (formerly COFA) until January 31, 2015.