Looking ahead to a new role as state legislator, Barbara Smith Warner says she's excited for the new challenge, and ready to use her experience as a community organizer to push for affordable health care and educational access in the state House.

The Oregonian caught up with Smith Warner Thursday evening, hours after Multnomah County Commissioners chose her to finish Michael Dembrow's term as the District 45 state Representative. Dembrow vacated the seat to fill an opening in the state Senate after Jackie Dingfelder's resigned to join Portland Mayor Charlie Hales' staff.

What specific goals would you like to accomplish in office?

I'm still figuring out the lay of the land, but right now, the successful implementation of the Affordable Care Act is the most specific thing I could tell you. To get into the whole healthcare transition conversation and expand the idea of wraparound services. It makes so much sense, from a prevention standpoint, that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. Spending 80 bucks to buy the person with congestive heart failure an air conditioner keeps her out of the hospital four times over the summer. Those kind of wraparound services can make a difference between successfully being able to help people and not.





Barbara Smith Warner Age: 46 Family: Husband Chris Warner, chief of staff for Portland City Commissioner Steve Novick; son Emmett, 10; Daughter Eleanor, 8 Hometown: Erie, Penn. Years in Portland: 14 Education: Gannon University in Erie, Penn. Background: Worked 10 years in grassroots and labor organizing in Washington, D.C. Ran the Oregon House Democratic Caucus, then became a labor liaison for U.S. Sen. Ron Wyden, D-Ore.

Before Jackie Dingfelder's resignation, had you ever considered public office?

I hadn't. I've been a Democratic precinct committee person as long as I've lived in Portland, and I've voted in this process before, but people would ask, "When are you going to run?" I always said "Oh no, I'd like to work in the background." Then when Jackie (Dingfelder) left and Michael Dembrow was going to be her replacement, my husband called me and said I should run. I thought about it a couple of weeks, then decided about two weeks later.





Why now?

I just realized, "Why not me?"





How does your background as an organizer inform your political views?

I've been around politics and campaigns and elected officials all of my professional life. I've always loved teaching people how to get more involved with their government as part of my role as a political liaison. We are a representative democracy. You elect people to represent you, and they need to be able to know what you're doing and hear from you to truly do their jobs well. I can do that.

Secondly, I have two school-aged kids. I think less than a dozen Oregon legislators have school-aged kids, and half of the budget is in education. Spending a lot of my time with kids, and being in schools and on parent groups, I realize it makes a huge difference what goes on in Salem. I know what the impact is.





-Do you see any issues not being addressed in the House that you'd like to take on?

Not that springs to mind, but I've got to say, the whole idea of addressing the state's revenue stream in 2014, I think is going to be important. It's a difficult issue and it needs to be addressed. We fall further and deeper every time there's a recession, and it takes Oregon longer to get out because we have a relatively unstable funding plan.







-How does your role as a Multnomah County citizen play into your role in the House?

It's important for everybody who's down in Salem to have the idea in their head that the counties implement the programs we create in the state legislature. That partnership is really how the state functions, and it's an important consideration when we're making policy decisions: How is it going to fit in with all the rest of the things that counties do?





-Will you run again when your term runs out next year?

Yes. Further down the road? We'll see. But I'll definitely be running next year.





-What do you expect to be the biggest challenge of your new job?

The reality that we have extremely valid and valuable demands competing for limited resources. There are a lot of things that should be done and you're never going to get the funding for all of them. It's always going to be a challenge, and all I can say is you've got to prioritize. But I'm a great believer that there are often solutions to problems that don't necessarily involve money.

--Kelly House