The 47 years since Martin Luther King’s death have not diminished his message.

“We know Dr. King’s dream was a prophetic dream, but we believe his dream is still alive,” the Rev. Michael Bowie said Saturday at the MLK Community Center in South Dallas. “We pray that we can stand in the gap for those who don’t have a voice.”

The pastor of St. Luke Community United Methodist Church was among about 40 people who gathered near Fair Park to pay their respects to the civil rights leader on the anniversary of his assassination in Memphis.

People who attended were given yellow ribbons to signify friendship and solidarity, and members of Madison High School’s JROTC placed a yellow-and-white wreath at the community center’s statue of King.

The service included prayers for health, employment, education and social justice.

The Rev. Joyce Campbell of Be Covered Texas, a grassroots campaign that helps educate people about health care, said King believed that access to medical services was one of the biggest issues for minorities. She said it remains a concern for many.

She praised the Affordable Care Act, calling it “the most important civil rights milestone since the Civil Rights Act of 1964.”

“Yes, my brothers and sisters,” she told the cheering audience, “change has come, but there’s still work to do.”

Before the service honoring King, the MLK center had a ribbon-cutting ceremony to mark the opening of a Little Free Library at Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard and Jeffries Street.

Patrick Jackson, the MLK center’s manager, said that it had taken nearly a year to open the library but that it already has distributed more than 200 books since it was installed earlier in the week.

“The education level is very, very low in our area,” he said. “This gives them a chance to have reading [material] without going into the library.”

Ora Hankins, manager of the Dallas Public Library’s MLK branch, also praised the Little Free Library.

“It’s going to be an asset to the community,” she said. “This is meant to bring the community together, and I’m sure it will.”

Follow Charles Scudder on Twitter at @cscudder.