No, there's no health insurance company named Land of Bait-and-Switch operating in Illinois. But we understand why people might think so.

Over the past few months, many people signed up with upstart insurer Land of Lincoln Health in part because it offered the University of Chicago Medical Center and affiliated doctors in its network. You'll recall that thousands of people here had to scramble to find coverage after the state's dominant carrier, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois, eliminated a popular individual market plan that included U. of C. and other top-flight academic medical centers in the network.

Blue Cross offered a replacement plan that had a much smaller network, which meant many people would have to pay more out-of-pocket costs or give up doctors with whom they had established trust and confidence.

The move by Blue Cross created a prime opportunity for the struggling Land of Lincoln to entice new customers. And generate good will. And build its business.

Or blindside its customers.

In late December, after many people had enrolled for 2016 with Land of Lincoln, the insurer dropped the U. of C. from its insurance network, effective March 1.

That was a shock for customers who had bought coverage expecting it would include U. of C. doctors and hospital care in the network. Those customers — individuals and some people in group plans — who want to keep their U. of C. physicians now face the higher costs of using out-of-network doctors.

"I burst into tears," Cheryl Mostowski, who relies on specialists at the University of Chicago to treat her autoimmune disease, told a Tribune reporter. "They shouldn't be allowed to bait and switch."

Who could argue?

Mostowski said she learned of the policy switch when she visited her doctor, weeks after she had bought her Land of Lincoln policy.

She and other Land of Lincoln customers bought a plan in the belief that it would include the University of Chicago in the network. The customers fulfilled their end of the bargain.

Then ... what happened? We asked Land of Lincoln on Thursday for an explanation, but the company wouldn't offer one.

People buy insurance based on promises made by insurers. They can't easily switch carriers in midstream if an insurer decides for whatever reason that it will no longer cover certain doctors or hospitals.

Yes, Land of Lincoln — any insurer — can drop hospitals or networks from coverage if disputes over payments or other terms arise. But typically those terms are negotiated for a year, and well enough in advance for customers to make an informed decision.

Even Blue Cross and Blue Shield gave its affected customers plenty of advance notice that it was changing its networks and would no longer include the U. of C., Northwestern Memorial Hospital and Rush University Medical Center. It didn't wait until after the Obamacare enrollment window for Jan. 1 closed to spring that surprise.

Land of Lincoln owes an explanation and an apology to its customers.

Don't lose sight of the broader issue, though. Land of Lincoln is one of 23 co-ops created under Obamacare to stoke competition with larger, more established insurers. More than half of those co-ops have already collapsed. In part, that's because the federal government pulled its own bait-and-switch, promising but not delivering federal funds to the co-ops.

Last year, Land of Lincoln limited sales of new policies to small employers. It had about 54,000 members in 2015 and says it expects to have as many as 70,000 by the end of 2016.

There are still serious problems with access to health care, some created by the law that was supposed to guarantee access to everyone.

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @Trib_Ed_Board and on Facebook.