Sen. Ted Cruz is steaming mad about this week’s Supreme Court decisions on Obamacare and gay marriage, and he’s not shy about letting everyone know it — or about proposing a solution.

The 2016 Republican presidential hopeful called the rulings “some of the darkest 24 hours in our nation’s history” during an appearance on “The Sean Hannity Show,” and proposed a constitutional amendment to rectify the problem of activist judges.

“Yesterday and today were both naked and shameless judicial activism,” he told host Sean Hannity. “Neither decision– the decision yesterday rewriting Obamacare … for the second time. Six justices joined the Obama administration, you now have Barack Obama, Kathleen Sebelius, and six justices responsible for forcing this failed disaster of a law on millions of Americans, and simply rewriting the law in a way that is fundamentally contrary to their judicial oath.”

He told Hannity the decision to strike down the marriage laws of individual states had no basis in the Constitution.

“They are simply making it up,” he said. “It is lawless, and in doing so they have undermined the fundamental legitimacy of the United States Supreme Court.”

Cruz also wrote an op-ed for National Review in which he called the decisions “judicial activism, plain and simple.”

He wrote that the answer is to have judicial retention elections to hold judges accountable for their decisions, a move that would require an amendment to the Constitution.

“Judicial retention elections have worked in states across America; they will work for America. In order to provide the people themselves with a constitutional remedy to the problem of judicial activism and the means for throwing off judicial tyrants, I am proposing an amendment to the United States Constitution that would subject the justices of the Supreme Court to periodic judicial-retention elections,” he wrote.”Every justice, beginning with the second national election after his or her appointment, will answer to the American people and the states in a retention election every eight years. Those justices deemed unfit for retention by both a majority of the American people as a whole and by majorities of the electorates in at least half of the 50 states will be removed from office and disqualified from future service on the Court,” he said.

The Constitution currently gives Supreme Court justices lifetime appointments. The idea of the founders was to appoint them for life so they wouldn’t be affected by politics.

Many people say recent decisions suggest judges are making decisions based on political ideology.

The Twitterverse showed support for Cruz’s idea of a Constitutional amendment.

We must not submit our constitutional freedoms, and the promise of our nation, to judicial tyranny http://t.co/ZInyN6JfLR #SCOTUS — Ted Cruz (@tedcruz) June 26, 2015

@hotzgeor @tedcruz You can say that again! No more Midnight Judges!!!!! — Pickle Pickle (@Sparkle_Pickle) June 27, 2015

@tedcruz ITS A GREAT WAY TO HOLD THE SUPREME COURT ACCOUNTABLE. NOTHING LIKE THE FEAR OF BEING UNEMPLOYED TO MAKE YOU FOLLOW THE RULES — dime bag (@dimebag5150) June 27, 2015

.@tedcruz @MichelleMeyer10 This is the beginning. When America FULLY REALIZES the truth of this, we will finally begin to heal our nation. — GloriaTalbert (@GloriaTalbert) June 27, 2015

@tedcruz I’m glad we have you in the Senate, but would have loved to have you arguing these cases before SCOTUS. Keep fighting for us! — David Hamilton (@Hamilton4TX) June 27, 2015

@tedcruz STAND YOUR GROUND or it won’t stop! #SCOTUS do NOT WRITE LAWS #Unconstitutional — Barbie (@baumsche) June 27, 2015