Russell P. Reeder is chief executive officer of icitizen. (Photo: Samuel M. Simpkins / The Tennessean.com)

More than three-quarters of the state supports Insure Tennessee, Gov. Bill Haslam's plan to use federal Medicaid funding to expand insurance coverage, according to a poll from a local civic tech startup.

Support for the program cuts across political party lines, with 78 percent of those questioned favoring the plan, according to icitizen. Ninety-six percent of Democrats, 76 percent of independents and 68 percent of Republicans support Insure Tennessee.

Icitizen offers a civic engagement app that lets people around the country follow and weigh in on local, state, national and international issues they care about. The idea behind icitizen is to give "people who care about what's going on in their communities ... a real-time connection to politicians," said Mark Keida, director of research and polling.

While app users can use polls, icitizen went off-platform to do the Insure Tennessee poll. It reached 513 people across the state who self-reported as registered voters and fit the state's age, gender and regional profile with party affiliation, education and race factored in.

"For this poll, we wanted to go off our app to get the most representative sample of Tennesseans," Keida said.

Results showed that eight in 10 women and 75 percent of men support Insure Tennessee.

Support was strong across the state from people earning less than $50,000, with 81 percent from East Tennessee in favor, 78 percent from Middle Tennessee and 75 percent from West Tennessee.

Keida said the company sent the results to House Speaker Beth Harwell, R-Nashville, as part of the company's mission to give politicians nearly real-time feedback on what voters think. Harwell is the target of a statewide billboard campaign that beseeches the speaker to bring the proposal to a vote on the House floor.

Buy Photo Kyla Waites, center, protests in front of House Speaker Beth Harwell's office at Legislative Plaza on Tuesday, April 5, 2016 in Nashville, Tenn. The protestors brought or mailed old shoes to Speaker Harwell's office with stories of working, poor residents who need insurance but cannot get it. Health care advocate Pamela Weston said "only by walking in the shoes of the uninsured will Speaker Harwell see the urgency of passing Insure Tennessee." (Photo: Mark Zaleski / For the Tennessean)

Haslam proposed Insure Tennessee, a tiered system, to use federal Medicaid funding to expand health insurance coverage. Two subsets of state senators killed Insure Tennessee in 2015 before the proposal made it to the floor for discussion and a vote. Much of the opposing rhetoric characterized the proposal as a further extension of Obamacare.

The poll's questions included one about opponents' argument that the program is an extension of Obamacare and would — contrary to the proposal itself — cost taxpayers, and possibly make it more difficult to repeal the Affordable Care Act.

The results indicate that 32 percent would be more likely to support the plan, while 38 percent said they would be less likely. Nearly one-third said it didn't change their stance. Icitizen projects that even if 30 percent of supporters decided to oppose Insure Tennessee, there would still be 55 percent of Tennessean voters in favor of Haslam's plan.

The Insure Tennessee poll is icitizen's "first big Tennessee" poll, although Keida said he expects the company to "start doing more."

The company will work with governments and organizations to structure and run online polling — often an expensive, time-consuming operation — but it does not work to get politicians elected and does not conduct campaign polling.

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 or on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1MZ53w4