Do you suffer from allergies? Millions do, and most of them were crowded into my yoga class last week. In addition to triangle, cobra and head stand, there was an abundance of sneezing, coughing, wiping and wishing there was something they could do to make their symptoms disappear.

Everyone had tried something, with mixed results. Some people get great results from over-the-counter meds. Others react poorly to all that manufactured dryness — “it feels like a bullet to the brain” — and are desperately searching elsewhere.

“You’ve got to try juniper,” I heard one yogi tell a fellow sufferer who'd just finished her third round of bee-venom therapy. “It’s the only thing that works for me.”

The only allergy remedy that seems to work for everyone is the Neti Pot. It’s an ancient way to gently wash your nasal passages, using gravity and clean water to flush out the stuff that is making your eyes run, your nose blow, your head miserable.

I used to fear the Neti Pot, even though I knew it was a smart thing to do. Every day — right up there with brushing and flossing. I imagined I’d lift the little pitcher to my nose, tilt my head to the side, pour warm, slightly salted water into one nostril . . . and before it poured out the other, I would gag, choke and drown.

But when all else failed and the pollen count was reaching heavenward, I decided to risk it. I’m tickled with the results. The sinus passages really are all connected, and once I relaxed my brain and got my head tilt just-so, in I poured, and out the water flowed, carrying all sorts of pink, yellow and basic black nasal gunk with it.

I don’t mean to gross you out. If I did, I’d tell you about another ancient method of nasal cleansing that involves a long thread and a man in a turban, but let’s stick to the Neti Pot for now.

The simple healthy lifestyle truth is: It’s extremely beneficial to wash away your nasal gunk on a daily basis. If you were to pick apart your mucus — interesting, but not required — you’d find all sorts of irritating agents inside: pollen, dust, pollutants, bits of engine parts, flecks of cheap water bottles and other forms of toxic ickiness that are better off outside you.

And that’s what the ancient Ayurvedic practice of nasal washing is all about, and why it’s so effective against allergies and sinus problems. It flushes that irritating stuff away, using gravity and common sense instead of costly and risky steroids, sprays and pills.

The Himalayan Institute introduced the Neti Pot in 1972 and now it’s become one of the superstars of self-care, widely available. It’s safe to try and a pittance to continue (think sea salt and water), and has none of the nasty side effects of some of the Big Pharma remedies famous for substituting one set of symptoms for another.

Could nasal washing help calm your allergies? Help you sleep better and breathe easier? You won’t know until you try.

But before you do, know this: It’s best not to wing it with the Neti Pot. You can learn how to do it in less than a minute, but if you don’t know what you’re doing, it won’t be fun or effective.

For divine video instruction, try the Himalayan Institute website.

And remember, it’s all in the head tilt. Look down, over a sink, keep your neck still while you gently rotate your head (about 35-45 degrees) until one ear is facing the sink and the other the ceiling. When you’ve reached a comfortable position, hold steady and pour. That way, the salted warm water will flow smoothly from one nostril to the other — up and around — and you won’t drown.

Breathe through your mouth. Enjoy the sensation. Long live the Neti Pot! Don’t worry if your doctor’s never heard of it.

Marilynn Preston is a fitness expert, personal trainer and speaker on healthy lifestyle issues. She has a website, marilynnpreston.com, and welcomes reader questions, which can be sent to MyEnergyExpress@aol.com.