There was a four-week span in the fall in which New Jersey saw law firm acquisitions at the rate of one each week. This followed two significant acquisitions earlier in the year.

Such a flurry of activity is unusual in New Jersey. This year's total already is more than the amount of law firm acquisitions from the past two years combined.

In fact, it already is above the total from each of at least the past eight years.

But if you ask David Garber, the head of a company that works with law firms that are actively looking to make moves, this type of activity may become the norm.

Garber, president of Princeton Legal Search Group, attested to certain shifts in the industry that have made acquiring practices and partners more common than bringing fresh attorneys up the ranks.

“(Attorneys would) spend a lot of time proving themselves before becoming a partner,” he said. “It happens less and less that way now. Growth for law firms increasingly is a result of lateral acquisitions.”

Procuring attorneys that are already heavily specialized experts — instead of spending time and resources trying to create them — is one of the most obvious drivers for these acquisitions.

Comprehensive changes such as the Affordable Care Act have generated entirely new areas of legal expertise virtually overnight. In the same way, future shifts — such as to the state's environmental regulatory scheme — could just as quickly alter demand for specialized lawyers.

Two recent acquisitions by Newark-based McCarter & English, one of the state's largest firms, reflect an industry-wide effort to stay a step ahead of developing legal spaces.

The largest — and, thus far, the year's most sizable acquisition in the state —was its October partnership with the 17-lawyer SorinRand of East Brunswick. The other was in February, when it absorbed the 14-lawyer Miller, Balis & O'Neil of Washington D.C.

The tech-focused SorinRand and the energy law firm Miller, Balis &O'Neil were folded into the 122 lateral partners McCarter & English has integrated in the past seven years.

Of those, 27 have been in intellectual property, 27 in corporate law and 15 in energy-related areas.

Howard Kailes, an M&A attorney who heads McCarter & English's corporate practice group, said those areas have been the predominant targets for its acquisitions.

“Those are going to be the three engines of the firm,” he said. “And we're not even close to being sated (in those areas).

“There's so many opportunities out there. It's unfortunate that no law firm can do everything.”

Kailes feels industry shifts are one cause of the rise of acquisitions, but maybe not the biggest one.

“It's hard to ignore — if I can speculate — the rebound of economic activity in the state and how that's reflected in the increased pace of law firm transactions,” he said.

Garber said talks are ongoing about acquisitions just as large as McCarter's purchase of SorinRand, but he wasn't willing to offer a prediction as to when they may occur.

What he did forecast was more New Jersey law firms targeting others in the state, which he believes will be more prevalent than firms looking past Garden State borders.

This year's only other out-of-state acquisition (besides McCarter's) belonged to Norris McLaughlin & Marcus of Bridgewater, a firm that on Oct. 20 grew its New York office by purchasing the boutique-sized Deutsch, Metz & Deutsch.

Two firms that already have a New York footprint, Javerbaum Wurgaft Hicks Kahn Wikstrom & Sinins in Springfield and Fein Such Kahn & Shepard in Parsippany, looked to other areas of the Garden State for their respective acquisitions.

Javerbaum Wurgaft Hicks Kahn Wikstrom & Sinins established a nursing home law practice under its name in South Jersey by acquiring the Saul Gruber Law Office in Mount Laurel. The two-attorney firm was the smallest to be acquired this year.

Meanwhile, the union of Fein Such Kahn & Shepard and Levitan & Frieland gave the former firm a presence in Florham Park.

The only other acquisition in the state to be revealed this year was done by Scarinci Hollenbeck in Lyndhurst.

It wouldn't exactly be anomalous for New Jersey to have a record number of law firm combinations, considering the country as a whole is on pace for some of its best years in recent memory. Nationwide, the amount of law firm acquisitions went from 39 in 2010 to 88 in 2013.

Garber thinks more are on the way.

“I can't give names, but there's a lot of interest and potential activity in this area,” he said. “You could see another announcement or two before the year's end.”

E-mail to: brettj@njbiz.com

Finding a fit

Law firms, with all the complexities that come with their operations, are something of a jigsaw puzzle.

Because of that, pieces of other legal practices don’t always make for a great fit.

For example, a law firm has to ensure that there are no conflicts of interest going into potential acquisitions or mergers. That’s something that often is problematic to this particular sector, David Garber said.

“If one firm has a financial institutions practice in which they’re representing big banks,” he said. “And if the other firm on the other side of the merger is averse to banks in clients or litigation — that could present a real problem.

“If firm A is representing Bank of America and firm B is consistently suing Bank of America, those two parties simply can’t work together.”

Another part of the puzzle is differences in cultures. A so-called Wall Street firm’s austerity wouldn’t necessarily pair well with a small-town law firm that tends toward levity.

“Law firms can be very different from one another,” Garber said. “At the outset, there’s a sort of get-to-know-you period to figure out whether you approach practice and develop clients in the same ways.

“Sometimes the answer to that is a resounding no.”