Bobby Grant, Union Heights resident, makes a quick stop to pick up trash along Arbutus Avenue before heading off to work in North Charleston. “I get out here to pick up trash everyday because I have pride in my community,” he said.

It’s been 50 years since Skip Mikell moved to his family home in North Charleston’s Union Heights neighborhood. But in a community where roots run for generations, he’s still considered something of a newcomer.

Mitigation budget LAMC’s first order of business in 2006 was to allocate dollar figures for a number of projects they aimed to tackle with more than $4 million in mitigation funds from the State Ports Authority: Education Endowment: $250,000 Wellness Centers: $500,000 Affordable Housing Trust: $1,000,000 Master Development Plan: $300,000 Maritime Training Institute: $600,000 Marketing and Promotions: $0 Economic Development: $350,000 Community Center Improvements: $300,000 Environmental Programs: $100,000 Professional Development/Travel/Training: $0 Supplies/Equipment/Postage: $0 Utilities/Telephone/Maintenance: $0 LEAP Grant Expenses: $0 Other Operating Expenses: $680,000 Real Property Purchase: $0 Total Use of Funds: $4,080,000 As of December, reported expenditures include the following: Education Endowment: $22,471 given to the community in scholarships, after-school programs, preschool programs funded using the interest made on the $250,000 Education Endowment Wellness Centers: $0 Affordable Housing Trust: $162,300 Master Development Plan: $325,186 Maritime Training Institute: $0 Marketing and Promotions: $55,783 Economic Development: $16,101 Community Center Improvements: $0 Environmental Programs: $4,172 Professional Development/Travel/Training: $1,341 Supplies/Equipment/Postage: $874 Utilities/Telephone/Maintenance: $14,715 LEAP Grant Expenses: $20,833 Other Operating Expenses: $1,827 Real Property Purchase: $282,005 Total Use of Funds: $904,926

“When I moved into this neighborhood as a kid, most of the people here were homeowners and everybody worked,” Mikell said one recent afternoon from his living room on Hugo Avenue, roughly a block west of Spruill Avenue. “They had pride in the community.”

LAMC neighborhood demographics 7,357 Residents lived in the LAMC revitalization area as of 2010. $12,836 Per capita income of each neighborhood, compared with the citywide average of $18,051. 67 Percentage who are renters, compared with the citywide 57 percent 1,538 Number of the area’s 2,525 households that are single-family homes. Source: LAMC Area Revitalization Plan

Now, however, when Mikell walks the streets of Union Heights and surrounding neighborhoods in the city’s southern end, he sees dilapidated homes, vacant lots littered with garbage, crime, extreme poverty, land made toxic by extended periods of industrial use and a community trapped for decades in an apparent state of stagnation.

The backdrop is the adjacent former Navy base, where plans for a new port are trumpeted by the city as a sign of pending development and prosperity.

While all can agree that growth is needed in the area, many who live there, like Mikell, can’t help but worry that imminent industrial advances will further erode surrounding residential properties.

To offset this, the State Ports Authority in 2006 offered more than $4 million in mitigation funds, provided in yearly $300,000 installments, to seven neighborhoods that were expected to bear the brunt of the impact: Accabee, Chicora-Cherokee, Howard Heights, Windsor Place, Five Mile, Liberty Hill and Union Heights. The neighborhoods, which are predominantly black, reported a per-capita income of $12,836 in recent years, records show.

Control over the mitigation funds was placed largely in the hands of a group of neighborhood presidents, known collectively as the Lowcountry Alliance for Model Communities, and the city to benefit the districts as they saw fit.

But nearly a decade later, little has changed. Most of those years were spent shifting gears from one promising solution to another without fully implementing any of the ideas. The $4 million that once seemed like a pot of gold when the mitigation agreement was reached now seems woefully insufficient to make a sizable dent in the redevelopment need, which one board member estimated was about $400 million. And no one seems sure just what to do about it.

The LAMC members, all unpaid volunteers, at the time lacked the experience or the know-how to take on such an endeavor, alliance President Rahim Karriem said. But they pressed forward, fueled by a love for their community, and looked to the city to supply guidance and resources to help bring their goals to fruition, he said.

But that partnership broke down over the years amid disagreements over how best to use the funds and growing frustrations over the lack of progress.

This growing disharmony is chronicled in roughly 600 pages of documents released by North Charleston in response to a Freedom of Information Act request by The Post and Courier. It details lengthy, years-long discussions between LAMC and a Mitigation Agreement Commission comprised of representatives from the city, the SPA, the Berkeley-Charleston-Dorchester Council of Governments and other state agencies.

The effort began in a cooperative spirit and an ambitious plan was hatched to improve the neighborhoods through a range of programs, from creating affordable housing and offering job training to awarding scholarships and building wellness centers. But when those plans failed to gain traction, the city shifted authority over the money from LAMC to the Mitigation Agreement Commission in April 2013. Then, just eight months later, the city announced its intention to abandon the MAC as well, the documents showed.

The slow pace of change has left both LAMC and the city pointing fingers at each other as to who is to blame. Meanwhile, much of the original money sits unused.

“They were supposed to give us guidance and establish areas where they could help us, especially with land that may come available that we could utilize for some of these projects. I think that once (the city) began to sever their relationship, progress slowed down,” Karriem said.

Mayor Keith Summey recently announced intentions to have more than $3 million in remaining mitigation funds transferred out of the city altogether to the Council of Governments — farther away from LAMC’s influence. Meanwhile, the North Charleston residents most in need of the help promised by the agreement have been left in limbo.

Summey denied a request from The Post and Courier for an interview to discuss the use of the funds, choosing instead to release the following statement:

“Due to their lack of progress and underutilization of the mitigation funds LAMC has received from the South Carolina State Ports Authority, we are currently reviewing our relationship with the organization. The body’s performance has been unsatisfactory, and the southern end of our city affected by the port and its operations deserves better. I intend to recommend to our City Council that the functions of LAMC and its remaining funds be transferred to the Berkeley-Charleston-Dorchester Council of Governments.”

The criticisms

A common fear among roughly two dozen Union Heights residents who gathered earlier this month at a community center in the neighborhood is a conceivable one.

With renewed interest in the land they’ve called home for decades came calls and impromptu visits from developers hoping to capitalize on the land surrounding the planned port terminal, they said. Already, actor Bill Murray’s development company, Yarrum Properties, last year purchased a 10,000-square-foot brick structure along with a neighboring 3,300-square-foot building on Reynolds Avenue, in North Charleston’s Chicora-Cherokee neighborhood.

“I’m not going anywhere,” one elderly man vowed, having battled repeated requests to purchase his property. “I’ve been here this long, I’m not leaving.”

Rather than see their family homes fall in the hands of outside investors, residents discussed their hopes to restore a sense of value in the community on their own terms.

One resident, Bobby Grant, said he walks the neighborhood’s streets early in the morning to clean garbage from trails that were considered an eyesore in the community. He alerted police to groups of young men loitering on street corners, apparently up to no good, to help drive crime out of the community, he said.

Grant and his neighbors had hoped that mitigation funds would help meet similar needs. A revitalization plan funded by roughly $325,000 of the mitigation dollars had served as a guideline to address affordable housing, gentrification, improving the neighborhood’s appearance, increasing parks and green space, preserving existing neighborhoods, redeveloping vacant and dilapidated properties, and other issues. But few of those proposals have come to fruition.

“When are we going to get rolling on this thing?” Union Heights resident Stanley Middleton asked a LAMC board member after hearing a report during the community meeting on the status of stated goals. “You can make baby steps, but it’s time to get moving on this thing.”

Local National Action Network President James Johnson, who works out of an office in the Accabee neighborhood, criticized LAMC’s use of the funds, alleging the neighborhood’s residents have suffered over the last decade as a result.

“There could have been a lot of people today who could have been alive if that money had been used the way it was intended to,” he said. “Helping young people get a trade, helping young people with scholarships. All of that is just down the drain at this point. Now nobody knows what to do. Nobody’s doing anything.”

Michael Brown, a North Charleston councilman and LAMC member, welcomed the opinions of LAMC’s critics, saying an open dialogue is needed in order to move forward.

“Those folks who have input, they’re welcome. They’re very much welcome,” Brown said. “We haven’t heard from them. We haven’t seen them. And they haven’t been on board when we were trying to push these initiatives in the communities. We welcome those folks to be a part of this. That’s the only way that we’re going to move forward — with common interest and unity to push for what the community needs. There is no ‘I’ in this. All of us are trying to make this thing happen.”

Stalled plans

As of December, $904,926 of the mitigation dollars had been spent, city documents showed, with the largest expenditures going toward the initial revitalization plan, office space on Dorchester and Commander roads, and to develop an affordable housing plan. The housing plan reportedly came to a standstill after LAMC learned it had no control over the property where the project was to have been built.

LAMC, in addition, agreed to hire an outside consultant to develop a feasibility plan for its intended Maritime Training Institute career center, meant to help residents learn skills needed to apply for jobs the port terminal would bring to the area. That plan also came to a halt in December 2013 when the city declared it did not want ownership over such a facility, the documents showed. The community members had also struggled to locate a site where the center could be located, among other issues, the board said.

An additional $22,000 was spent funding scholarships and after-school programs. But no dollars had been spent to build a planned wellness center, to break ground on the Maritime Training Institute or on community center improvements.

Herb Fraser Rahim, LAMC’s environmental chair, alleged many of the group’s efforts were hindered by the city reneging on earlier promises to provide necessary resources and support to see the projects through.

“They don’t see value in the community. They don’t,” Rahim said. “They have to answer the question of why they don’t see value in it.”

Grant, too, acknowledged that little progress had been made to enhance the community, but criticism from the city and other naysayers of LAMC’s handling of the funds were “unfair” in his eyes.

“We haven’t seen much growth here. We’ve had so many houses torn down in the area and nothing’s being rebuilt. ... LAMC has been our voice. They spoke for us when no one else did. The money has been allocated for these communities and LAMC has been the only one trying to get things done,” Grant said.

LAMC was passionate in its attempts to better the area, he said. If their efforts fell short, he said, it was because the city failed to offer an additional “push” to see their vision through.

Moving forward

The MAC board began meeting sporadically in the year since the city removed its support from the body. Questions relative to what’s next for the initiative remain largely unanswered.

A decision on whether the mitigation dollars would be transferred out of North Charleston and into the hands of the BCDCOG, of which Summey is an executive board member, has not been made.

Brown questioned whether the residents of North Charleston would benefit from a transfer.

“I think the community will say they don’t have any great assurance that the money should go to the COG. This is where the mayor says he would like it to go, but why should it go to the COG? Does the COG build houses? No. Do they do redevelopment of communities? No. What’s the environmental arm right now of the COG? Do they have one?” Brown asked.

North Charleston City Councilman Bob King agreed with Summey’s plan, saying a transfer of the dollars would offer LAMC “good, administrative support.” He maintained that if the funds are transferred to the COG, the dollars would still go toward North Charleston — “not anywhere else.”

When questioned about whether the COG has the ability to take on a revitalization project, the council’s planning director, Kathryn Basha, noted that it does manage and administer projects and it is involved in job training throughout its target areas.

“Our role is to kind of support the member jurisdictions and help them achieve what they want to achieve. Our position would be, if you want us to do that, that’s fine,” she said.

The Rev. Bill Stanfield, who lives and runs the nonprofit Metanoia Community Development Corp. in the Chicora-Cherokee neighborhood, commended the efforts of the LAMC board but added that in order for the revitalization project to be successful they must leverage additional dollars from area foundations and donors.

“Those guys really have worked hard. It’s not a matter of character or lack of hard work,” Stanfield said. “The worst-case scenario is that the remaining $3 million or so is squandered. It’s still there, so there’s an opportunity to move forward.”

A meeting Friday to discuss the future of the mitigation agreement ended with members of LAMC’s board vowing to evaluate options outside of transferring authority to the COG, including investing the funds or partnering with the Coastal Community Foundation to disseminate the dollars.

About 20 people attended the meeting, including members of LAMC, and representatives from the city, SPA, Environmental Protection Agency, Medical University of South Carolina and the S.C. Department of Health and Environmental Control.

Omar Muhammad, LAMC’s vice president, expressed frustration at the city “not having the decency” to discuss its concerns directly with the board before “walking away from its responsibilities.” He questioned Summey’s openness to communicate with LAMC given his absence from the meeting.

“The city takes the position that the money is theirs,” Muhammad said. “The money belongs to the community, and LAMC is the voice of the community.”

LAMC threatened to take legal action against the SPA if the terms of the mitigation agreement were violated.

“You better get some legal advice,” said King, the city councilman.

David Slade contributed to this report. Reach Christina Elmore at 937-5908 or at Twitter.com/celmorePC.