Worldwide YMCA conference hosted in Estes Park

Paul McDonald, of Ireland, left (kneeling), checks out part of a bee hive as YMCA Grounds Director Miles McGaughey explains it, Tuesday, at the Ed and Ruth Lehman YMCA of Longmont. ( Whitney Bryen / Longmont Times-Call )

The Ed and Ruth Lehman YMCA's farm in Longmont is usually filled with children, but Tuesday the gardens were filled with visitors from YMCAs across the world.

The Longmont YMCA showed off their farm and multicultural programs to about 50 YMCA staff and members from more than a dozen countries, who were part of the organization's 18th World Council.

The council, which began June 29 and is being held in Estes Park, occurs every four years and has not been held in North America since the 1980s, according to staff and the Longmont YMCA.

A German man shook hands with the director of a YMCA in Korea and taught one another how to say "good afternoon" in their respective languages.

Japanese and Irish visitors salivated over churros, also called Spanish doughnuts, that were offered as snacks when the visitors arrived.

Miles McGaughey, the grounds director and resident beekeeper for the Longmont YMCA, gave a presentation about beehives in Spanish to a group of visitors from South America.

Guests from the Philippines, Brazil, Uruguay, Vietnam, Zimbabwe and across the United States took home a sample of honey from the hives at the Longmont YMCA.

It was a rare opportunity for the Longmont facility to show off its farm, which is the largest YMCA garden in the United States, said President and CEO Noel Brendefur.

The tidier-than-normal garden had stations set up for visitors to hear about programs offered at the YMCA, like McGaughey's bee program or partnerships with community organizations.

Multicultural programs that cater to Longmont's Latino population were also on display during the presentations, said Board Chair Meca Delgado.

"We're one of 26 Global Centers for Excellence in the nation," a designation given by the YMCA to organizations that embrace diversity, Delgado said.

About 55 of the council participants also visited the YMCA of Boulder Valley Tuesday to learn about the center's summer camps and collaboration with area schools.

Andra Coberly, spokeswoman for the YMCA of Boulder Valley, said these visits give Colorado's YMCAs an opportunity to tout the attributes that make them unique within the global organization. And for Boulder Valley that is connecting with their neighbors.

"I think one of our goals is to show how much we reflect our community and how much we put ourselves into our schools and integrated into our community," Coberly said.

Staff from the Longmont and Boulder Valley YMCAs have been attending sessions in Estes Park since the conference began, searching for ideas about new programs and learning from other facilities around the world.

While YMCA programs were the focus of Tuesday's visits, staff and visitors said, spending time with the diverse group was an exciting and rare experience.

"It's not just about the presentations," Delgado said. "It's just incredible to be surrounded by so many different people. It's really a special experience."