CLEVELAND, Ohio - The cost of insurance in the new health insurance Marketplace depends largely on personal income for many, but what if you don't qualify for a government subsidy?

How much will insurance cost you?

The answer depends on the level of insurance you choose and the provider you pick. In Cuyahoga County, seven providers are taking part in the Marketplace, offering plans classified as catastrophic, bronze, silver and gold.

Plans and sample rates for Cuyahoga County

The Cuyahoga County providers listed by healthcare.gov are Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, CareSource, HealthSpan, Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Ohio, MedMutual, Molina Marketplace and SummaCare.

The sample rates are before information specific to individual households is entered to determine possible subsidies and other rate details. Most people are expected to pay less.

J.B. Silvers, professor of health care management at Case Western Reserve University, has done some research on the actual cost for the consumer.

A single person earning $25,000 a year would pay $144 a month for the baseline "silver" plan. That's regardless of age, Silvers said. Insurance is cheaper for younger people but, in order to level the premiums, older people will receive bigger subsidies.

Silvers calculated a 27-year-old earning $25,000 a year would receive a $60 subsidy to make up the difference of the actual cost, a 55-year-old would receive a $290 subsidy and a 62-year-old would receive a $415 subsidy. Subsidies would be greater at lower income levels. But the subsidies decline for higher incomes.

Silvers said the out-of-pocket premium for a 27-year-old making $40,000 a year would be $204 a month - the actual cost of the plan with no subsidy. Both a 55-year-old and a 62-year-old would pay $317, after subsidies.

Financial help for insurance There are three levels of potential financial help. 1. Households with income under these levels may qualify instead for Medicaid in states, such as Ohio, which are expanding Medicaid coverage under the Affordable Care Act: Single person: $15,875.

Two-person household: $21,404.

Three-person household: $26,954.

Four-person household: $32,499.

Five-person household: $38,047. 2. Households below these income levels, and not receiving Medicaid, may qualify for both reduced premiums on the Marketplace and lower out-of-pocket costs: Single person: $28,725.

Two-person household: $38,775.

Three-person household: $48,825.

Four-person household: $58,875.

Five-person household: $68,925. 3. Households below these income levels, and not receiving Medicaid, may qualify for lower premiums for a Marketplace insurance plan: Single person: $45,960.

Two-person household: $62,040.

Three-person household: $78,120

Four-person household: $94,200.

Five-person household: $110,280. Source: healthcare.gov

"I wanted to give real data to people," Silvers said. "That's what you would find if you were able to get onto the website and go through the process of being qualified based on income. It irritates me that there is all this debate without real information."

The rates included in the searchable database above from healthcare.gov are what someone would pay without a subsidy. Or, put another way, it's the actual cost of the insurance, combining the premium the individual pays with the taxpayer subsidy.

A single person under the age of 50 without a subsidy in the county could pay $120 a month for a catastrophic plan or $245 monthly for a gold plan, according to the website's estimates.

For a family of four without a subsidy, the lowest sample rate shown for a gold plan is $858; the cheapest of the catastrophic plans is just over $400. But catastrophic plans are designed for people under 30.

Healthcare.gov offers sample pricing at this link by picking a state, county and some basic family information. This portion of the website worked smoothly during several visits over the last few days.

Most households purchasing on the Marketplace are expected to pay lower premiums, the website states repeatedly before offering sample pricing details. See explanation in the box to the right.



All the Marketplace plans have maximum out-of-pocket costs of $6,350 for individuals and $12,700 for families.

Catastrophic plans are described as having "very high deductibles and essentially provide protection from worst-case scenarios, like a serious accident or extended illness."

Bronze plans are estimated to cover 60 percent of the total average costs of care, silver plans 70 percent and gold plans 80 percent.

The family situations cleveland.com searched did not show any platinum plans for Cuyahoga County. They would cover an estimated 90 percent of medical costs.