"When you look for what they stand for then I'm always going to get an F," said the term-limited lawmaker

Rep. Alan Williams legislative career ends with an F grade from AFP. He wears it as a badge of honor. (Photo: Rattler Nation) Story Highlights Halsey Beshears posts the Big Bend's only A

Bill Montford checked in with a B

Michelle Rehwinkle Vasilinda received a C

Rep. Alan Williams embraces his failing grade from Americans for Prosperity. Williams earned an F grade for his votes on 59 issues AFP tracked during the 2016 Florida legislative session. It’s the exclamation point on his eight-year legislative career. He said the things for which AFP advocates don’t resonate with the people he represents.

“We want pay raises for state employees and we want more funding for education. Whenever I vote for those types of items then I’m going to get an F from Americans for Prosperity,” said Williams. “They may have a great name, but when you look at what they stand for I am certain members of our community would give them an F if they even bothered to grade them.”

Americans for Prosperity is a political advocacy group funded by the Koch family. It has organized opposition to Obamacare, environmental regulations, and labor unions. It supports right-to-work laws and is credited with helping the GOP win the House of Representatives in 2010 and the Senate in 2014.

On Tuesday, the group awarded 36 Florida lawmakers an A+ for their performance in 2016. Lawmakers earned a point for each vote in support of a “pro-economic freedom issue,” or against an “anti-economic freedom issue.”

In Florida, the group supports expanding the charter school industry and tax cuts while opposing Medicaid expansion and a ban on fracking.

Rep. Halsey Beshears, R-Monticello, scored the highest among the Tallahassee area delegation. AFP gave Beshears an A. Next was Sen. Bill Montford, D-Tallahassee, who scored a B. Rep. Michelle Rehwinkel Vasilinda, D-Tallahassee, was given a C.

“A big part of our mission is to help Florida taxpayers hold their elected officials accountable,” said Chris Hudson, the state director of AFP.

Vasilinda voted with the group 75 percent of the time, Montford 87 percent and Beshears 96 percent of the time. The top vote getter was Sen. Jeff Brandes, R-St. Petersburg, who posted a score of 114 percent.

Williams dismisses the grades as irrelevant.

“Their philosophy is one that doesn’t connect with this community,” he said, noting that he lost points even when voting for Republican proposals. “They have no connection to our state other than to come here and spend millions of dollars attacking Republicans and Democrats whenever they start to work together.”

Reporter James Call can be reached at jcall@tallahassee.com. Follow on Twitter @CallTallahassee.

Read or Share this story: http://on.tdo.com/26PNnKb