Please enable Javascript to watch this video

Just one month before the Iowa Caucuses, the candidates for President are looking to get any advantage they can. For Republican candidate Sen. Marco Rubio, that approach may have a lot to do with his demeanor.

In the race to become President, candidates still try to find time for light-hearted moments. For Rubio in Burlington, Iowa, his moment was about the weather.

"We were supposed to do this even last week but we couldn`t land because it was snowing and ice. We`re glad to be back," Sen. Rubio said.

He put jokes aside to push ahead with his theme of a new American century. His plan to repeal the Affordable Care Act and address immigration issues are getting people's attention.

"I think he`s very bright. I think he has a lot of good things to say. None of them sound outrageous and that they could be done," supporter Tim Ferrell said.

"He`s not general, he`s got specific plans. He`s also enthusiastic and energetic," supporter Sue Dyer said.

For Dyer, she had a list of four candidates she thought could win, and Monday made up her mind to support Rubio.

"I think he can do it all. We need Republicans to unite and get behind him and I think he`s the one that can do it," Dyer said.

The way he is delivering his message, without attacking other Republican candidates, is one of the big things they appreciated the most.

"We come here to hear ideas, we don`t come to hear trash talk," Ferrell said.

"He says things in generalizations, we all know who he`s talking about so we can laugh about it and enjoy it without having to hear someone cut people down," Dyer said.

He's the youngest candidate running, and Rubio hopes his voice can peak through the noise in time for the Iowa Caucus.

"If we get this election wrong, there may be no going back for this country. This is an incredibly important election, and that`s why I`m running for President and why I hope I an earn your support," Sen. Rubio said.

Rubio is still looking to gain ground in the Republican race. An average of all Iowa polls on Real Clear Politics puts Rubio in third place, behind Ted Cruz and Donald Trump.