By AMANDA GHANNAM, Staff Writer

The Public Health Student Society of the University of Michigan-Dearborn hosted the 2013 Healthcare Expo in Kochoff Hall on Monday, October 14. Featured at the expo were dozens of student organizations and community partners, including representatives from the Biology Club, the Pre-Professional Health Society, Oakwood Healthcare, Blue Cross Blue Shield, ACCESS, and the Wayne County Health Department.

Robert Ficano, chief executive of Wayne County, was also present.

“Part of the new aspect of the Health Expo is the new national healthcare act. It’s mandated that by next March you have to have a policy… So we’re fortunate to have these companies here to help you sign up,” Ficano said about this year’s expo in comparison to last year’s. “We look forward to doing it again next year!”

While the Affordable Care Act, mandating that all citizens must choose from different qualified plans offered in the Marketplace, has been highly controversial, it’s important for students to learn about their options under the new mandate, even if they personally disagree with the government’s concept of health care.

In addition to information about how to sign up for a health insurance policy under the new Affordable Care Act, health services such as influenza vaccinations, blood pressure tests, glucose screenings, and confidential HIV testing were available at the event, which was attended by students from both UM-Dearborn and Henry Ford Community College.

Students also enjoyed healthy lunch options, frozen yogurt from Yogurtown, and a DJ from WUMD.

The expo took over two months of planning by students in the Public Health Student Society in partnership with the student organizations and community partners that attended.

Professor Larry Radine, director of Health Policy Studies at UM-Dearborn, outlined the importance of having a healthcare expo on campus: “The big issues in healthcare are access, cost, quality of care, and prevention of disease. Everyone we have here, the student clubs, the community partners of healthcare studies, all are working towards addressing these issues,” he said.

Through presentations by the local nonprofit ACCESS and the country’s largest nonprofit health insurers, Blue Cross Blue Shield, students learned about their healthcare options under the Affordable Care Act.

While many students will remain covered under the ACA, which allows young adults up to age 26 to remain on their parents’ healthcare plans, students over age 26 or that are not on family plans were able to find out about the 13 qualified health plans available in the state of Michigan.

While the expo was planned and sponsored by various health-related organizations, it was open to the public, and was attended by students from many different communities, cities, and backgrounds.

“I think it’s something wonderful our community does,” said Sareen Hider, pre-med student at UMD, who represented the Biology Club at the expo. “Right now there are people inside getting flu shots that otherwise wouldn’t be able to afford them.”

Representatives from Blue Cross Blue Shield summed up the real impact of the event: “We’re all here as part of the same mission—helping you learn about your healthcare options.”