Buy Photo Monday March 30, 2015, in Nashville, Tenn. (Photo: / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Twenty-six contenders. Five open seats. And Davidson County's entire 526 square miles to cover.

The Metro Council's crowded at-large election is a mad scramble to patch together votes to finish among the top five. And for the past few months, the candidates have had to fight for even a little recognition while most of the electorate follows the mayor's race.

Because of term limits, voters have a full slate of five at-large seats to fill this summer. Those elected to the countywide seats will replace some of the council's biggest voices over the past eight years.

On the way out are at-large council members who are well-known in Metro: Megan Barry, who is a current candidate for mayor; Tim Garrett, who is running for vice mayor; as well as Jerry Maynard, Ronnie Steine and Charlie Tygard. Each resides in a different part of Davidson County. Several have been staples in Metro government for decades. All have distinct bases and constituencies that range the political spectrum.

"You've got a major turnover in experience," said Jim Shulman, a former Green Hills-area district council member running for an at-large seat this election. "You've also got a new mayor coming on and new vice mayor. To some extent, we're campaigning on experience because I've been on the council before. I know how it works."

The at-large race will test name identification of council veterans versus others looking to enter public office for the first time. Few at-large hopefuls have the ability to pay for television advertising, giving those who do an advantage.

First-time council candidates like Erin Coleman, a civil engineer, attorney and military veteran, acknowledge the upcoming experience void as well. But she and others instead stress leadership qualities and perspectives they hope to add to the 40-member council.

"I think that they've done tremendous things on the council, and I look forward to following them and making Nashville even greater, which is the reason that I'm running," Coleman said.

What to watch

To win outright in the Aug. 6 election, an at-large candidate must collect more than 10 percent of the aggregate votes cast in the entire at-large election. There's a strong likelihood that most winners — perhaps even all five — would need to win a runoff in September that would take place among top finishers.

There are patterns and possible storylines to watch:

•Power of council experience? Nine of the candidates are term-limited district council members, and four others previously served in the council. Current council members running for at-large seats are Buddy Baker, Karen Bennett, Robert Duvall, Erica Gilmore, Frank Harrison, Jason Holleman, Walter Hunt, Lonnell Matthews Jr. and Sandra Moore. Former council members are Adam Dread, Ronnie Greer, Don Majors and Shulman.

•TV ad effect: Real estate investor John Cooper (younger brother of U.S. Rep. Jim Cooper) and attorney Bob Mendes appear likely to have the biggest presence on television advertising. Holleman and Matthews may also turn to TV in the final weeks or days of the race. Will the ads give this group a leg up?

•Black candidates: Maynard has been the lone African-American at-large council member for the past eight years. Several black candidates, primarily from North Nashville, are running this time: Gilmore, Matthews, Moore, Harrison, Hunt, Greer, Majors and Sharon Hurt, who is president of the Jefferson Street United Merchants Partnership. Might there be multiple black at-large members in the next council?

•Gender diversity: Only six women are running for at-large council seats. Barry has been the only woman at-large member over the past two council terms. How many women will get elected?

•Performance of conservatives: Most of the council's pack of conservatives is term-limited. A handful of conservatives, though, are eyeing the at-large seats. They include Bennett, Duvall and longtime Metro political observer Ken Jakes. Can one of them emerge?

Campaign game plans

There's also the Dread factor. Dread is the only one of the candidates who has served as an at-large member, from 2002 through 2007. He ran unsuccessfully as a Republican for General Sessions judge last year. In his latest run, he acknowledges that he is relying entirely on name recognition and would start truly campaigning only if he makes the run-off.

"I'm doing what I call a quasi-passive race in the general election," Dread said. "I'm only using my own money. I'm not accepting contributions. And I'm hoping to make the runoff, at which point we'll get into a different game plan.

"I'm not going to neighborhood groups, forums or anything. I'm not going to sit there with (25) other people and try to one-up each other," he said. "I'm relying on name recognition, absolutely."

Historically, most at-large hopefuls rely on their home neighborhoods as voter bases and seek to add support from there.

Matthews, who served as the most recent speaker pro tempore on the council, said his campaign approach is to first mobilize his North Nashville home as well as parts as southeast Davidson County. His goal is to then target neighborhoods that have historically high voter turnouts.

"I'm blessed to have a volunteer team and volunteer base that's working on my campaign that has the energy to really get a lot of visibility and exposure countywide — not having the amount of funds that some of my fellow candidates have," Matthews said.

Leading the at-large group in fundraising are Mendes and Cooper. Both have support among Metro's power base and are known in their fields. Mendes, a prominent attorney and chairman of the Nashville Electric Service Board, is former president of the Nashville Bar Association. Cooper, a real estate investor, is the lone candidate to begin airing television ads so far.

"I'm campaigning on the idea that I've got a combination of experiences with the way government works and an interest in making sure that Nashville continues to be more inclusive as we continue to grow," Mendes said.

Top issues

Issues that top the at-large race mirror those discussed in the mayor's race. They include mass transit, growth and development and affordable housing.

"Everywhere I go people are concerned that as we are definitely becoming a bigger city that we are manageable and that we can handle our growth as well as it can be managed," Cooper said.

Holleman, who is term-limited in his Sylvan Park-area council seat, said the concern over finding affordable housing in Nashville wasn't nearly as prominent during his previous council runs.

"As our city grows and prospers and we see infill come to our urban core, one of the unintended consequences of that is the rising cost of living in our city's center," he said. "One of the problems with that is so many of our social services and government services are in the center of our city, but more and more of the affordable housing is in the outskirts."

Hunt, a term-limited councilman from the Whites Creek area, said voters want more investments in residential neighborhoods after seeing a string of major municipal projects go downtown in recent years.

"We've got enough to last downtown for probably the next 30 or 40 years," he said, adding that the city needs to build more sidewalks and address other infrastructure concerns. "A lot of people in communities think they're being ignored because of downtown."

Duvall, an outspoken conservative and critic of current Mayor Karl Dean whose base is concentrated in Antioch, had a similar take.

"I think there's going to be an effort from voters to influence the people they elect to get more attention into the outlying areas," Duvall said. "Basically, if you really look at the taxpayers, that's where they live."

METRO COUNCIL AT-LARGE CANDIDATES

Buddy Baker: Term-limited current District 20 council member representing parts of West Nashville and The Nations neighborhood; retired Metro Fire captain

Jody Ball: Vice president of Cost Containment Solutions, which seeks medical claims for insurance companies; described as "defender of the constitution and a conservative" on his campaign website; lives in Donelson

Karen Bennett: Term-limited current District 8 council member representing parts of Madison; member of the Tennessee Republican Party's executive committee; outspoken advocate for animals and pets

Al Carota: Military retiree, ran unsuccessfully for council at-large seat in 2003; resides in Antioch

Erin Coleman: President and CEO of Yad Consulting, LLC, a firm that manages construction and engineering; attorney and military veteran; lives in Whitland neighborhood

John Cooper: Real estate developer and investor; founded PLC Properties, resides in the Woodlawn area, younger brother of U.S. Rep. Jim Cooper, D-Nashville

Elizabeth Dachowski: Professor of history at Tennessee State University; resides in Sylvan Park

Adam Dread: Attorney; former at-large councilman, 2002 through 2007; ran unsuccessfully for General Sessions judge last year as a Republican against Lynda Jones; former stand-up comedian and radio host

Robert Duvall: Term-limited current councilman of Antioch-area District 33 seat; immediate past chairman of the Davidson County Republican Party

Leroy Johnny Ellis: Attorney; lives in Old Hickory

Erica Gilmore: Term-limited current District 19 councilwoman representing downtown, Germantown area, as well as parts of Edgehill; daughter of State Rep. Brenda Gilmore, D-Nashville; professor at Nashville State Community College

Ronnie Greer, Sr.: Former District 17 Metro councilman who represented area near Tennessee State Fairgrounds and 8th and 12th avenues south

Frank Harrison: Term-limited current District 2 councilman representing parts of Whites Creek and Bordeaux; former District 5 councilman from 1991 through 1999

Jason Holleman: Term-limited current councilman from District 24 seat, which represents Sylvan Park and parts of West Nashville; private attorney, former city attorney of Mt. Juliet

Martin Holsinger: Former Green Party candidate for Tennessee House District 54; home address is in Joelton; retired

Phillip Hostettler: Works in jet fuel business, ran unsuccessfully in 2007 at-large council race

Walter Hunt: Term-limited District 3 councilman representing parts of Whites Creek; retired substitute teacher; former congressional assistant to U.S. Rep. Bill Boner

Sharon Hurt: President and CEO of the Jefferson Street United Merchants Partnership; president of the Nashville Women's Breakfast Club; lives in Bellevue

Ken Jakes: Owner of Jakes Produce; resides in Joelton; open government advocate; active in Stop AMP and Save Our Fairgrounds efforts; lost in 2011 at-large council race and 2007 District 1 race

James Keeton: Former candidate for mayor in 2011; website says he's running because Metro has gotten "too big, too unresponsive, and too totalitarian"

John Lasiter: Communications director for Vanderbilt University's Barnes & Noble; would be first openly gay at-large council member

Don Majors: Former councilman from 1995 through 1999 representing Maplewood area; former aide and constituent services specialist for U.S. Rep. Jim Cooper, D-Nashville

Lonnell Matthews Jr.: Term-limited District 1 councilman representing parts of North Nashville and Joelton; district executive director of YMCA Urban Services Youth Development

Bob Mendes: Attorney at his own firm Waypoint Law; chairs the board of Nashville Electric Service; former president of the Nashville Bar Association

Sandra Moore: Term-limited District 17 councilwoman representing area that goes from 12South to Metro-owned fairgrounds; in-home specialist in health care

Jim Shulman: Former Green Hills-area District 25 councilman, 1999 through 2007; executive director of the Tennessee Commission on Aging and Disability

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1M5gDkm