By Victoria Wasserman

This summer is shaping up to be a historically victorious season for health-care reform. With the Supreme Court's decision to uphold a major provision of the Affordable Care Act and the celebration of the 50th anniversaries of both Medicare and Medicaid, high spirits and optimism abound for the future of our country's health-care system. Steamrolling on the success and optimism of recent months, it's the perfect time to bring Medicare's forgotten cousin, the Older Americans Act, back into the conversation. Also celebrating its 50th anniversary, the OAA administers health-related programs to help America's elderly population age gracefully in the comfort of their own homes and communities. And there's only one item on the OAA's birthday wish list this year: reauthorization.

The OAA's most recent authorization ended in 2011, and since then it has been squeaking by on a relatively stagnant budget that has been appropriated by Congress to sustain its programming activities. While these appropriate funds are better than nothing, they do not reflect inflation or the rapidly aging population of this country. According to U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, there are approximately 45 million Americans over the age of 65, a number that has more than doubled since the OAA was enacted into law. It's a statistic that's easy to feel: we all probably have at least one friend or relative who may need these or similar services. Baby Boomers, for example, are entering older adulthood and dealing with the effects of aging themselves, while still trying to support their own aging parents, who are living longer on ever-diminishing pensions, often with multiple chronic diseases. The need for services is compounding, and, with the elderly population expected to reach 100 million by 2060, will only grow.

Currently, 11 million older adults rely to services such as Meals on Wheels, caregiver training classes, adult day care and senior citizen resource centers, benefits enrollment support, transportation services; the list goes on. In my work as a social work intern at South Mountain Healthcare & Rehabilitation Center, I refer my short-term patients to these and other programs on a daily basis. If the OAA did not exist, these patients would not be able to safely return to their homes, and their families would not be able to care for them. We also see the difficulties faced by our residents for whom these services are not enough. Entering a nursing home can have negative physical and mental effects on an individual's wellbeing, not to mention a financial burden of $80,000 per year or more. The OAA and its programs are the first and last line of defense for many individuals, and have been successful in keeping 85 percent of program participants out of long-term care facilities.

Luckily, it does seem like the momentum of this summer's health-care victories has helped to move the OAA out of legislative limbo. S. 192: The Older Americans Act Reauthorization Act of 2015 finally passed the full Senate without opposition on July 16. If approved by the House of Representatives, the Reauthorization Act would extend the OAA's authorization through fiscal year 2018 and amend many of its provisions to more effectively address the growing needs of this population. More important, however, than any of the Reauthorization Act's technical amendments or budgetary improvements, is the political and social will that its passing would symbolize. Reauthorization of the Older Americans Act would represent a willingness to make services for our nation's elderly population a priority, and the belief that our citizens should be able to age with grace and dignity a reality.

Victoria Wasserman is a graduate student at the University of Southern California School of Social Work, and an intern at South Mountain Healthcare & Rehabilitation Center, in Union, where she works to support the rights of older Americans on a daily basis.

Follow The Star-Ledger on Twitter @StarLedger and find us on Facebook.