Dr. John Calvin Davis III, a longtime internal medicine faculty member at the University of Nebraska Medical Center, will be remembered at a memorial service at St. Cecilia Cathedral, 701 N. 40th St., at 11 a.m. Saturday.

Davis died Oct. 29 in Estes Park, Colo., after a long illness related to heart failure. He was 82. One memorial service was held Nov. 2 in Estes Park.

The Omaha native was the son and grandson of Omaha physicians. He earned his medical degree from the University of Nebraska in 1957. He completed his residency training in internal medicine and infectious disease at the University of Illinois.

He taught at UNMC from 1961 to 1997. He was a revered clinician and teacher of medical students and residents, said Dr. Tom Tape, professor and chief of the division of general internal medicine for UNMC.

“Cal was an outstanding role model of the consummate academic physician educator,” Tape said. “He maintained an extensive personal library of medical literature. He also was a master clinician and taught me many clinical pearls.”

Davis was chairman of the department of preventive medicine from 1965 to 1971 and chief of the infectious disease section from 1969 to 1991. He held two other posts in the College of Medicine: assistant dean of admissions and students (1986-95) and assistant dean for student and minority affairs (1995-97).

He was named associate professor emeritus when he retired in 1997.

After retirement, Davis returned to campus several months each year as a volunteer teacher.

He loved the outdoors and enjoyed hiking in Rocky Mountain National Park near Estes Park. He moved to Estes Park in retirement.

“To me, his passing is equivalent to burning down a library,” said Dr. Anne Kessinger, professor of internal medicine-oncology/hematology. “He was such an intellectual. During a series of walks together, he discussed medieval history, botany and NBA basketball.”

Dr. Robert Wigton, retired associate dean of the College of Medicine’s graduate medical education program, said: “When I was his student in medical school, I valued his teaching and advice. When I joined the faculty, I found him a source of clinical wisdom and a mentor.

“He has always been an inspiration to me as a physician and teacher, and — throughout it all — a dear friend.”