Detroit-based Dickinson Wright PLLC has so far hired eight attorneys in March from Clark Hill PLC, one of its main rivals within One Detroit Center.

The moves follow a series of expansions by both firms outside the region, in recent months.

Dickinson announced this week that six former Clark Hill attorneys have joined its health care and behavioral health care practices at its offices in Troy and Phoenix. Two other partners with practices in real estate, corporate and complex corporate litigation practices joined Dickinson at its Troy office earlier this month.

Former Clark Hill health care practice co-chair Gregory Moore and fellow members Eric DeGroat and Mahesh Nayak will be based in Troy, along with associate Alexandra Hall and of counsel attorneys Serene Zeni and Peter Domas. Member Russell Kolsrud will be based in Phoenix along with associate Jena Grady, and he will co-lead Dickinson's behavioral heath care law group along with Moore.

Chief Business Development and Marketing Officer James Stapleton said Dickinson would not comment beyond announcing the recent hires. Clark Hill’s chief marketing officer, Don Lee, said he spoke with the attorneys making the move and the parting was “amicable” — and the firm has still gained more attorneys than it lost so far this year, with about 18 new hires in Chicago, Detroit, Lansing, Washington, D.C., and other offices.

“I would just say it’s just (natural) moves within the market. It’s a very competitive landscape, and I don’t see more to it than that,” Lee said. “Lawyers don’t have noncompete clauses, so they can go anywhere and bring their books of business.”

Moore also told Crain's on Tuesday he still feels fondly about Clark Hill, but that health care clients in his practice could benefit from DW Franklin Consulting Group LLC, a health care consulting venture that Dickinson Wright launched last fall in Tennessee to provide interim management, turnaround consulting, acquisition assistance and other consultant services to health care companies. He also said behavioral health clients need more than a traditional law firm can offer to adapt to new markets created by Obamacare.

“We had a very close-knit group in the Birmingham (Clark Hill) and Phoenix offices that work well together, and it was important to have that team," he said. "Behavioral health companies traditionally are in a market of primarily Medicaid, and other government program work, and with the passage of the (Affordable Care Act) it opens up a whole new commercial business line for behavioral health providers, who are not ready for this yet. This move lets us help clients prepare for new (payment sources) and new business lines… .”

Clark Hill in January acquired the attorneys and staff of Chicago-based Martin, Brown, Sullivan, Roadman & Hartnett Ltd., a business litigation, tax and governmental disputes boutique with seven attorneys, although a few retired following the move. The firm now claims more than 300 attorneys at 12 offices in Michigan, Pennsylvania, Arizona, West Virginia, New Jersey, Delaware and the District of Columbia.

Dickinson Wright claims about 400 attorneys at 15 law offices companywide in Michigan, Ohio, Kentucky, Tennessee, Arizona, Nevada, Ontario and Washington. It hasn’t made a merger or acquisition deal for a complete law firm since absorbing the 60 attorneys of Mariscal, Weeks, McIntyre & Friedlander PA in early 2013, according to data from legal management consulting firm Altman Weil Inc. But it has made several sizable expansions since then by lateral hires.

The firm picked up about 28 attorneys in 2015, from the former Lionel Sawyer & Collins in Las Vegas and from Gordon & Silver Ltd.’s offices in Las Vegas, Reno and Carson City, plus seven attorneys of Roylance Abrams Berdo & Goodman LLP in Washington, D.C. All of those firms were either winding down operations or facing a recent departure of other attorneys at the time.

Dickinson first opened a Nevada office in Las Vegas in 2010 and a Phoenix office in 2009.

Clark Hill also opened a Phoenix office in 2009, which has grown from 10 attorneys that year to about 20 today. Most recently it added three attorneys of the former Rayndon Law Group PLC in Scottsdale last year.

In other legal news

Oakland County Circuit Judge Cheryl Matthews upheld a lower court’s ruling dismissing Huntington Woods-based Mort Meisner Associates Inc .’s lawsuit against Alexandra Lewis, a television news reporter who the firm allegedly helped land a position in Dayton, Ohio-based WKEF/WRGT in 2013. The court found in part that Meisner “failed to plead or prove that it was properly licensed” for placement services — but Meisner responded that “someone can always find a way not to pay a bill by identifying a loophole.” Lewis has since moved on to a position in Seattle.

.’s lawsuit against Alexandra Lewis, a television news reporter who the firm allegedly helped land a position in Dayton, Ohio-based in 2013. The court found in part that Meisner “failed to plead or prove that it was properly licensed” for placement services but Meisner responded that “someone can always find a way not to pay a bill by identifying a loophole.” Lewis has since moved on to a position in Seattle. Foley & Lardner LLP won a finding at the Michigan Court of Appeals that a part of a Wayne County lawsuit from employment attorney Raymond Carey, alleging unjust enrichment, should be dismissed. But the court also found Carey was allowed to submit a revised complaint alleging retaliation. Carey, who joined Foley’s Detroit office in 2002, has brought lawsuits against the firm in state and federal courts and alleged in part that some women, minorities and younger attorneys at the firm were paid more on a billable hourly basis than he was.

Related Links