Delivery of flowers to seniors is priceless

With regards to Dorothy Smith’s letter to the editor (May 13), surely she must realize that besides supporting the Alliance on Aging (a very worthwhile organization!), there are other costs associated with the wonderful delivery of orchids and flowers to the dear women in convalescent facilities. My company donated 50 live flowering plants to the cause as I can’t imagine what it would be like to be in a nursing home with no visitors on Mother’s Day!

Alliance on Aging provides a wonderful service to our local seniors and the smiles generated by the delivery of flowers are priceless!

— Brandon Wiggins, Carmel Valley

Rocket Farms donates orchids for ‘Mama’

I, too, was thrilled to read the front-page story in last Sunday’s Herald about the delivery of plants to women in care facilities throughout Monterey County on Mother’s Day. My own mother was a recipient of an orchid as part of the “I Remember Mama” event coordinated by the Alliance on Aging.

However, I must speak up to help clarify a major misperception in a letter to the editor in which Rocket Farms is chastised for charging $35 for each plant. Nothing could be further from the truth. As a member of the board of directors for Alliance on Aging, I can tell you firsthand the overwhelming success of this event was largely due to the fact that once again Rocket Farms graciously donated all the orchids delivered on Mother’s Day by a corps of wonderful volunteers.

“I Remember Mama” supports the Alliance’s Ombudsman program providing advocacy for seniors in local care facilities. Donors pay $35 to sponsor delivery of a plant either anonymously or to a designated recipient. Kudos to Rocket Farms for their tremendous generosity in helping to provide much needed services to the senior population in our community.

— Robert Hedberg, Carmel

Volunteers step up in delivering flowers

I want to commend the Monterey Herald for the excellent article about local volunteers delivering beautiful orchids that brought smiles to over 1,200 senior women for our “I Remember Mama” event on Mother’s Day.

Despite being their busiest time of the year, Rocket Farms has, for the past five years, graciously donated the orchids (free of charge to the Alliance on Aging) to enable our volunteers to deliver them to 76 nursing homes and senior assisted living facilities in the county.

For the past 21 years, hundreds of volunteers from local churches, schools, colleges, fire departments and other groups took time to visit these women to ensure that they are not forgotten on that special day.

— Teresa Sullivan, executive director, Alliance on Aging

Advertisement

Students inspire others to embrace history

Congratulations to Los Arboles Middle School students Tara Smith, Gabriella Flanders and Gabriella Gallo-Rodriguez for their victory at the California State History Day finals in Sacramento. Their win represents a commitment on the parts of both teacher and learners to learn history by going into depth through project-based learning.

Other finalists represented International School of Monterey, All Saints Day School, Seaside Middle School, York and Stevenson Lower School.

I hope other Monterey Peninsula elementary, middle and high schools will be inspired to participate in Monterey County History Day in 2016, which has been produced by the Lyceum of Monterey County, in conjunction with the Monterey County Office of Education, for the last 25 years.

— Tom Nelson, executive director, Lyceum of Monterey County.

Secret ‘Obamatrade’ deal destroys American jobs

Well, hell just froze over! As a hard-core conservative Republican, I publicly state that I completely agree with Elizabeth Warren and the “liberal left” Democrats in blocking Obama’s secret “Obamatrade” Pacific trade deal.

Warren says, “Let America see the agreement” before a fast-track vote, and she is dead right. After boasting of his “transparency,” no president has ever concealed as many treaties and done as much to hide his vindictive strikes against his political enemies as Obama. His slimy financial favors for contributors, like the corrupt Clinton Foundation dealings, is easy to find and Warren and the Democrats correctly say this China trade deal harms the U.S.

Obama’s hidden agenda here can’t stand the light of day and my fellow Republicans are flat wrong to help Obama and Clinton hide it. Let’s not allow another secret deal like Obamacare, which is now bankrupting those states like California and Hawaii and Oregon. The “Obamatrade” deal destroys American jobs to favor China.

— Frank Louis Blair Koucky III, Carmel Valley