WASHINGTON -- President Barack Obama on Thursday poked fun at Republicans for their dire predictions about what will happen once his signature health care law is fully implemented.

During remarks at an event in Maryland, Obama laughed as he ran through Republicans' various warnings -- and false claims they have made -- about the effects of the Affordable Care Act.

One congressman called Obamacare "the most dangerous piece of legislation ever passed," Obama said, visibly amused. "Ever."

He was referring to Rep. John Fleming (R-La.), who made the comment earlier this month.

Other Republicans have warned the law will lead to "Armageddon," he said, and one state representative called it "as destructive to personal and individual liberties as the Fugitive Slave Act."

The latter comment came from New Hampshire state Rep. Bill O’Brien.

"Think about that. Affordable health care is worse than a law that lets slaveowners get their runaway slaves back. I mean, these are quotes," Obama said. "I am not making this stuff up."

Better yet, the president continued, one Republican said the health care law has to be repealed "before it literally kills women, kills children, kills senior citizens."

That quote came from Rep. Michele Bachmann (R-Minn.).

"I have to say that is from six months ago," Obama said. "I just want to point out that we still have women. We still have children. And we still have senior citizens."

He added, "All of this would be funny if it weren't so crazy."

Also on HuffPost: The Second-Term Curse The Second-Term Curse

1 of 9 President Barack Obama Obama's second-term agenda had to take a backseat after several scandals caught the media's attention in May. Republicans' continued scrutiny of the Obama administration's handling of the attacks in Benghazi was a significant distraction . Within the same week that the Internal Revenue Service revealed it had targeted tea party groups requesting tax-exempt status, news broke that the DOJ seized months of phone records of journalists for the Associated Press. Share this slide:

Getty Images