Buy Photo Shana and Jon Dowell with their sons Benjamin 2 weeks, Noah 6, and Simon 3, at their home in Nashville, Tenn. (Photo: George Walker IV / THE TENNESSEAN)Buy Photo

Shana Dowell decided to have a high-risk pregnancy, but she did not want to put the child at jeopardy for inheriting the same disease that required her to have a pacemaker.

She and her husband, Jon Dowell, underwent preimplantation genetic diagnosis, a series of medical procedures, to avoid having a baby with Brugada syndrome — a heart disease that her father and two brothers also carried in their DNA and one that probably killed her little brother as an infant. The PGD testing process allows families to avoid the tragedy of deadly and debilitating genetic disorders, but many people either do not know about it or cannot afford it.

"We are lucky that we have the means," said Shana Dowell, who is a physician.

In 2012, the last year for which statistics are available, genetic tests were performed on only 5 percent of the 165,172 in vitro fertilization procedures performed in the United States, according to the Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology.

Shana Dowell underwent two cycles of PGD procedures and attempted pregnancies before she gave birth to a healthy baby named Benjamin on April 25. That entailed having her eggs harvested twice followed by two series of in vitro fertilizations, genetic testing and embryo implantations.

The average cost for the IVF cycle is $8,158, while the average cost of PGD testing is $3,550, according to Resolve: The National Infertility Association.

Benjamin is the Nashville couple's third child. Shana Dowell gave birth to their first son, Noah, in 2007 before she was diagnosed with Brugada. She gave birth to their second son, Simon, in 2010 after she had an internal defibrillator implanted, but did not yet have the pacemaker. Brugada causes severe disruptions in heart rhythms that can lead to sudden cardiac arrest.

Genetic testing on Noah and Simon determined they did not carry the gene.

"It took about three weeks with my second son, Simon, to get the results back after he was born," she said. "Those three weeks were so terrible, waiting and wondering if he had Brugada."

Benjamin is named after the little brother she lost when she was 4 years old.

"It was kind of a nice way to remember him and how lucky we are," she said.

Reach Tom Wilemon at 615-726-5961 and on Twitter @TomWilemon.

GENE WARRIORS

Previous Coverage:: Franklin parents hunt a genetic killer after the deaths of their two children.

Preimplantation genetic diagnosis is the same procedure that John and Laurian Scott underwent after they identified the genes responsible for a rare disease that killed two of their children.

The Scotts had embryos tested before giving birth to healthy twins.

Buy Photo John and Laurian Scott with twins Ovid and Hattie, 3 months and daughter Aslan 15 July 19, 2011 in Nashville, Tenn. The Scotts children Thisbe, 3, and Noah, 1, died in 2007 and 2008 of a rare genetic disease. (Dipti Vaidya/Staff) (Photo: Dipti Vaidya/The Tennessean)

The Tennessean wrote about the journey of this couple, who formerly lived in Franklin, in an article in 2011 titled "Gene Warriors."

Later this year, they will be the first recipients of an annual award named in their honor by the Child Neurology Foundation, said Lindsay Ballew, executive director of the Thisbe and Noah Scott Foundation.

Read their story at Tennessean.com/genewarriors.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1nCLXdX