Florence senior placed for the first time in prep career

Lane Masar during the Class 3A state wrestling tournament Saturday at Pepsi Center in Denver. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

Lane Masar during the Class 3A state wrestling tournament Saturday at Pepsi Center in Denver. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

DENVER — Nothing like some sweet revenge. To make it a little better, though, Lane Masar claimed it when third place at the state tournament was on the line.

Masar pinned Salida's Nate Lowe at the 4:56 mark in the Class 3A state wrestling tournament's 182-pound third-place match Saturday at Pepsi Center.

The win was the first for Masar out of the three times the two have wrestled this year.

"It feels great you know. Our tourney it was a close match and everything, and that put me down a little bit in regionals," he said, "but I came back from it, and I was able to get revenge."

Masar finished the tournament 4-1 with four pins. His only loss was in the semifinal match.

"They always say that true champions come back and take third," Huskies coach Bob Masse said. "There's a lot to it because there's a long way to go."

It was the first time in his prep career that Masar had placed in the top six.

Masar trailed 1-0 entering the third period in his consolation semifinals match against Delta's Daniel Brown, but he scored a reversal to start the period then pinned at the 3:21 mark. It earned him his trip to the third-place match.

Masar also pinned Brown in the first round of the tournament at the 5:29 mark.

Dustin James was the Huskies' lone regional champion this year, but his state tournament took a step back from last year when he finished one match away from placing in the top six.

Advertisement

James won his first-round match but got caught and pinned in his quarterfinal match. He then lost in the second round of the consolation bracket to finish the year 1-2.

In his first state tournament, senior Kameron Parker was a period away from leaving Pepsi Center empty handed. He didn't though.

Known for his never-give-up style, Parker trailed 9-0 before he pinned Austin Albrighton from Platte Valley at the 3:17 mark in the first round of the consolation bracket. Parker lost his next match 12-3 and finished the tournament 1-2.

Lane Masar during the Class 3A state wrestling tournament at Pepsi Center in Denver on Saturday. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

Freshman Ty Addington also pulled a rally for his only win of the tournament. He trailed 6-3 in the third period against Eagle Valley's Raul Lopez but came back for a 7-6 win. He finished the tourney 1-2.

NOTES: Florence finished the tournament with 30 points and in 19th place. Last year, Florence finished 21st as a team with 30 points. They were mostly earned by Jacob Yslas and his trip to the semifinals. ... Florence has nine individual state championships.

Brandon Hopper: 719-276-7644, hopperb@canoncitydailyrecord.com