District of Columbia officials believe they may have found a way to make sure their voters had a voice last November, using a loophole to go around a Congressional attempt to block the legalization of marijuana in D.C.

Some Congressional Republicans quietly put a provision into the “Cromnibus” spending bill forbidding the city from using any funds to enact marijuana legislation, which passed in the district in the last election, back in December. This was touted as a way to prevent D.C. from being able to actually put the law in action.

But, the New York Times reported, the wording of the provision and its delayed timing might mean that D.C. officials can move forward despite the order.

“The marijuana law, lawyers here argue, had already been enacted and certified by the Board of Elections before Congress passed the spending bill, so there was no “enacting” for the House to prevent. “The issue becomes: What does enactment mean?” said David Zvenyach the city’s general counsel. Like other officials here, he believes that the city got ahead of Congress in enacting its law, which it intends to start carrying out this spring. “Their language was either careless or hasty,” said Eleanor Holmes Norton, a Democrat and the district’s nonvoting delegate to the House. “If you are working on an amendment to an appropriation bill, you better be really careful. They say we shan’t enact. Well, we don’t have to enact anything.”

If D.C. uses this loophole then Congress would have to do a “formal disapproval” of the law by March, according to the Times, which would require a joint congressional resolution signed by the president. This has only happened three times since the city was granted home rule in 1973.

President Obama’s budget plan also amended language in the spending bill so that it only prohibited the use of federal funds for enacting the marijuana law. This would free up the city to use its own dollars for their legalization efforts.

Rep. Rob Woodall (R-Ga.) told Red Alert Politics Tuesday that the reason Congressional Republicans have taken issue with the D.C. law is because it asks them to ignore federal law.

“If you don’t like federal law, let’s change federal law. The president has taken us down this road so many times. Where he has a law, he doesn’t like the law, but instead of changing the law, he just ignores the law. That’s true on marijuana. It’s true on the delay of the Affordable Care Act. It’s true on his recess appointments and it’s true on his immigration proposals. That is not the way the way this country is able to be run and it’s not what the Constitution allows,” Woodall said.

“Do I take seriously the Constitutional responsibility that Congress has to run the District of Columbia? I do. I would not expect Congress to abdicate that responsibility. Do I believe that we need to look at changing some federal laws? I absolutely do.”