Sunday editorial (Photo: Damian Dovarganes, AP)

We spent last Sunday in Santa Rosa County looking at the future of Milton. But news last week showed there’s reason to spend more time in the county.

On Thursday, Santa Rosa commissioners made the correct decision to change alcohol sales in Navarre to bring them in line with Navarre Beach. The board, by a 4-1 vote, approved changes to the alcohol ordinance in the south end of the county, equalizing hours of sale between Navarre Beach and Navarre.

Freshman Commissioner Rob Williamson brought the issue before the board. He points out rightly that it’s an unfair economic advantage between businesses on the beach and those along U.S. 98.

Conservatives should applaud the move because it levels the playing field for businesses who already compete with one another with price and location.

We believe this push for fairness should extend to the central part of the county — the bustling and growing Pace-Pea Ridge-Milton corridor — where sales are forbidden on Sunday. It hurts businesses, especially this time of year; today is the NFL opening weekend; and major league baseball is winding down. The playoffs start next month, with several games scheduled for Sundays.

We hope commissioners — and county residents — are swayed by James Sheib, general manager of Helen Back Again in Navarre. In a story about the board’s decision, Kaycee Lagarde quoted Sheib, who said changing the ordinance throughout the county would improve his business to the tune of about $30,000 in additional sales tax from his business and create at least eight new jobs.

“I think it also levels the playing field and brings about fairness to businesses that are operating within this tourist development district,” Sheib said, Lagarde reported.

To those who argue that more access to alcohol will increase drunken driving, we counter that those who drive to Escambia County via U.S. 98 or U.S. 90 and choose to drink then drive home are a bigger danger than someone traveling a few miles from a restaurant to home.

Few issues divide the county deeper than alcohol. Every time there is a vote, both sides make passionate arguments, some based on free enterprise and less government intrusion into our lives, while others cite moral and religious objections. We fall on the side that those who oppose alcohol not overshadow those who like to have a glass of wine with dinner or a beer with a burger.

Online comments to Lagarde’s story reflect that divide. Here are a few of their unedited words:

Michael Hyland wrote: “So, for those who use the Bible as the excuse to limit the freedom to partake in alcoholic beverages... You don't know the scriptures very well, otherwise you would be able to find the passage where Saint Paul advocates wine as an acceptable drink for ones good health and for relaxation. Also, the fact that Jesus and the disciples had bread and wine at the last supper is another instance where alcoholic drink is accepted. Drunkeness is not advocated in the scripture, but it certainly does not prohibit or forbid drinking alcohol. People who believe that alcohol is immoral also don't know history. In the days of Jesus Christ, wine was one of the ways that one could get a clean drink without worrying about parasites and bacterial growth. That's why wine and other forms of drink have been a mealtime staple since time immemorial.”

Someone hiding behind the moniker “The Association of Old Goats” wrote: “IF the registered VOTERS in Santa Rosa county say NO ALCOHOL sales on Sunday ... the drinkers can either stock up on booze or they can drive a few miles so they can swill beer with their meal. Geez..”

For nearly 40 years, the county has grappled with the alcohol issue. It’s high time to allow businesses that sell or serve alcohol to be able to accommodate those who choose to drink it.

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1F4EyS8