QUEBEC CITY — Patrick Roy freed Willie.

Ryan Wilson had much to do with his escape from the Avalanche coach’s doghouse, accepting Roy’s challenge and coming to camp in excellent shape, and it’s all coming together for the undrafted defenseman who worked so hard to reach the NHL before having everything but his salary taken away.

“At the end of last year Patrick challenged me to get back healthy, come ready and be hungry for the season,” Wilson said. “He pretty much said it’s up to me to get my spot back. When someone gives you that opportunity, you have to take it and work as hard as you can and earn it back.”

Wilson logged a team-high 25:42 of ice time in Thursday’s preseason game at Montreal and was one of two defensemen to also play against the Canadiens on Friday in Quebec City at Colisée Pepsi, the previous home of the Avs franchise formerly known as the Nordiques. Former Quebec/Colorado star center Joe Sakic, the Avs’ executive vice president and general manager, was given a rousing standing ovation when introduced during the first television timeout. The Canadiens went on to win 3-2, scoring three of the last four goals to drop the Avs to 0-4 in the preseason, including two simultaneous split-squad games against the Anaheim Ducks.

But it began as a special night for everyone affiliated with the Avs, and Wilson again played well on short rest.

In both games in Quebec, Wilson, 27, looked like the player the Avs signed to a three-year, $6.75 million contract in 2012, not the one who was demoted to the American Hockey League last season for a conditioning assignment.

Wilson played just 28 games last season and only 12 in the previous lockout-shortened season, and Roy said a year ago his injuries and demotions stemmed from not being prepared physically. That’s not uncommon for a gritty undrafted player after receiving a big contract and feeling he had won the lottery. Wilson enters this season in a contract year and surely won’t be re-signed by the Avs if he fails to return to form.

Is he the Ryan Wilson of old, the big-hitting, middleweight enforcer who plays a clean defensive game and can chip in offensively?

“I think it shows how I’m playing,” he said. “Haven’t felt this good in two, maybe three years.”

In Montreal’s 3-2 overtime win Thursday, Wilson was plus-2, had an assist, clanged a shot off the crossbar and had a combined 6:05 on the power play and penalty kill. Nick Holden, who did not play Friday, was the only Avs defenseman to play more than Wilson on special teams.

Wilson was paired with Stefan Elliott in Friday’s rematch with the Canadiens, and Colorado generally loaded up with a big-league lineup with 30-something forwards Jarome Iginla, Alex Tanguay and Daniel Briere joining the series along with four-of-six defensemen.

Also, No. 1 goalie Semyon Varlamov started and saw his first action of the preseason.

Defenseman Erik Johnson scored the game’s opening goal, and it was 1-1 after two periods.

Left wing Ryan O’Reilly scored on the power play early in the third to give the Avs a 2-1 lead, but Jiri Sekac tied it with a wraparound goal against Varlamov, who was caught in front of the opposite post.

Brandon Prust beat Varlamov on a semi-breakaway after collecting a three-line area pass and gaining a step on Johnson.

The Avs play Sunday at home against the Calgary Flames before visiting the Flames on Tuesday.

The Avs also play the Los Angeles Kings twice before their Oct. 9 season opener at Minnesota.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers