Denver police arrested three young men after a fellow officer who was patrolling closing hour early Saturday in Lower Downtown called over the radio that suspects had fired a shot at him.

Matthew “X” Herrera, 23, Alexjandro “XX” Herrera, 21, and Richard Saguilan, 23, were being held for investigation of attempted homicide of a peace officer, according to Denver police spokesman Sonny Jackson.

Police made the arrests about 1:15 a.m. after a short chase in which the suspects’ car ran into a light pole on 20th Street between California Street and Broadway, Jackson said.

The officer, identified only as a veteran Denver officer, was not struck by a bullet.

It’s unclear whether the suspects were targeting a random police officer or whether the officer had previously had some contact with the suspects. That is part of an investigation, Jackson said.

Criminal charges are pending, he said.

One of the suspects was injured, likely in the car crash, but his injuries were not serious, Jackson said. The man was taken to a hospital for treatment.

The officer was on patrol near 20th and Market streets when a gunshot was fired.

“The officer called that he was being shot at,” Jackson said.

Officers on duty for Easter weekend gave chase almost immediately, he said. After a short pursuit, the suspects’ car slammed into a light pole.

Two of them ran off, with police in close pursuit. The third suspect was arrested at the crash scene. Police officers caught up to the two who fled and arrested them, Jackson said.

“We have an active investigation,” Jackson said.

Matthew Herrera has an extensive criminal record, including assault in 2011; hit and run, driving under the influence and obstruction of a police officer in 2012; carrying a concealed weapon last year; and possession of a weapon by a previous offender on Feb. 4.

Alexjandro Herrera was charged with being a habitual traffic offender last year and underage possession of alcohol.

Saguilan, who does not have an arrest record, had a birthday Friday.

Kirk Mitchell: 303-954-1206, denverpost.com/coldcases or twitter.com/kirkmitchell