New York Post columnist John Podhoretz takes president to task

United States President Barack Obama will be out of office shortly. How will historians judge him? Not too well, according to New York Post columnist John Podhoretz. "After the failure of the Arab Spring, the collapse of Libya, the failure to act on his self-imposed 'red line' in Syria, Russia's seizure of Crimea from Ukraine and the terrifying rise and forward march of ISIS, the only unmitigated positive on his foreign-policy spreadsheet remains the killing of Osama bin Laden," he writes.

LOS ANGELES, CA (Catholic Online) - Podhoretz notes a recent interview with the president. About the potential deal with Iran regarding its nuclear program, the president took a historical perspective. "Look, 20 years from now, I'm still going to be around, God willing. If Iran has a nuclear weapon, it's my name on this. I think it's fair to say that in addition to our profound national-security interests, I have a personal interest in locking this down."



This concerns Podhoretz. Obama should be very concerned. "What if the desire to tip the scales of history's judgment in his favor leads a president to take dangerous risks?"





Podhoretz continues: "This 'opportunity' didn't just emerge organically - which is actually where "opportunities" are supposed to come from. It did not result from changing conditions that opened a new possibility of finding common ground."Iran's behavior didn't change, and its pursuit of nuclear weapons didn't change. Obama manufactured what Rhodes called an opportunity by pursuing a deal with Iran and dangling all kinds of carrots in front of the mullahs.". It will be up to his successors to bail him out in the eyes of history and make it appear as though his legacy wasn't the nuclear destabilization of the Middle East!Podhoretz then highlights Obama's key domestic policy and its abject failure. "Obamacare remains unpopular; far more Americans oppose than favor it.Podhoretz then points to the discovery of a series of talks by key Obamacare architect Jonathan Gruber in which he bragged, "it had been falsely marketed to the American people to take advantage of their stupidity."Its defenders say the program is beginning to work, in the sense that it's covering more people - but it's not covering as many as the administration said it would by this time."They tout the fact that the cost of the program is lower than it was supposed to be by now.But that's an inconsistent claim; it's only less expensive because it isn't meeting its target numbers, not because cost savings have suddenly materialized from the ether," Podhoretz writes.

---





Copyright 2016 - Distributed by THE CALIFORNIA NETWORKRespect for Women: That in every country of the world, women may be honored and respected and that their essential contribution to society may be highly esteemed.Holy Rosary: That families, communities, and groups may pray the Holy Rosary for evangelization and peace.