According to a new report from china, physicians were shocked to discover that a young woman who had lived a normal life for more than two decades was in fact missing a vital part of her brain.

A woman in china 24-year-old’s weird condition was noticed when she went to physicians because of sickness and nausea and she had also experienced vertigo her entire life. She told to the doctor that she didn’t start walking until she was four and had never been capable to walk quickly.

When the doctor started checking so they found no proof that the cerebellum ever presented within her brain, this thing indicates that she had not suffered any damage that resulted in its loss. This is an unusual situation, called congenital cerebellum agenesis, only notice in eight other reported cases globally and in these eight, now nine, cases the persons were born absolutely without a cerebellum. Though, this case is different, as the young woman has lived for 24 years with the situation without being identified. The further identified cases have all involved, immature children or infants who presented severe impairment and were quickly diagnosed, but unlike the young woman in China, only some of these cases survived into adulthood.

The cerebellum, commonly known as “the little brain” that is liable for proper motor movements such as stability, posture, motor learning (such as kicking a ball), and communication, it is comprised of about half of all neurons in the brain; however it represents only 10% of the volume.

The physicians are monitoring the case as an instance of neuroplasticity.

The brain is an extremely adaptive organ, frequently creating new ways to balance for damage or loss because damage to the cerebellum can cause troubles with memory and language, also created problems with balance and well motor control. The new case may indicate that the absence of a cerebellum may be a more regular incident than previously thought. In the past detected that the eight cases had very serious symptoms, resulting in early MRI and CT scans.

The doctors said that it is possible that more people are affected by this unusual condition but they don’t get analyzed or reported yet.