Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia was, by any account, a prodigious conservative voice from the bench. Boldly and frequently, he articulated his view that originalism was the only rational approach to Constitutional interpretation. People who knew and worked with him describe his powerful intellect, quick sense of humor, and delight in a good argument. As someone who started reading Justice Scalia’s opinions as a law school student, I quickly became able to identify his prose on style alone.

Conservatives will miss Justice Scalia. Progressives have honored his service to the country, but welcome the opportunity to change the complexion of the court. I am hopeful, however, that both political parties, and both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue, can agree that the next justice break from Antonin Scalia in one critically important way: tone.

ADVERTISEMENT

Putting aside whether his jurisprudence was good for the country – and I do not believe it was – we must admit that Scalia was pugilistic. His opinions not only argued points, they rubbed opponents’ noses in defeat. He didn’t just try to out-debate other points of view, he made fun of differing views and the people who espouse them.

In Glossip v. Gross, for example, a 2015 case that upheld states' use of a controversial form of lethal injection for administering the death penalty, Scalia caricatured his Supreme Court colleagues, saying "[a] vocal minority of the Court, waving over their heads a ream of the most recent abolitionist studies (a superabundant genre) as though they have discovered the lost folios of Shakespeare, insist that now, at long last, the death penalty must be abolished for good."

He called names. In King v. Burwell, which secured the legality of the Affordable Care Act, he sought to discredit the majority opinion by calling it “interpretative jiggery-pokery.” In his dissent in Obergefell v. Hodges, the landmark case that legalized same-sex marriage in all 50 states, Scalia argued against gay marriage on the grounds that a “Freedom of Intimacy” is phony, and that even if such a right did exist, marriage would be a limitation on it, not an expansion. “Ask the nearest hippie,” he advised.

This style of judicial debate is corrosive and self-defeating. Mocking opponents and treating their ideas with derision rarely defeats an idea. In my experience, just the opposite happens: instead of seeing your point of view, targets of derision dig in, and want to call names in return.

The judicial branch, of all places, must be protected from this temptation. The Supreme Court was instilled by the Framers with the ultimate say on the law, and because of that, it needs the trust of the governed. It is also insulated from popular opinion, so when a person or group loses a Supreme Court case, we want them to know it was well-considered, at a minimum. It is unhelpful in the extreme, therefore, for Supreme Court opinions (or dissents) to treat other points of view as unworthy of respect.

That’s not to say I don’t love a fierce argument – I do. And differences over the law and Constitution will rage on. But the country and the Supreme Court are well-served by justices, clerks, and attorneys who argue forcefully without resorting to biting and dismissive language. Rather than bring people toward a legal consensus, such a tone diminishes the institution and energizes opponents.

Retired Maryland Circuit Judge Steven I. Platt wrote that a judge’s temperament should consist of “[p]atience, open-mindedness, courtesy, tact, courage, punctuality, firmness, understanding, compassion, humility and common sense.” Whether one’s point of view is affirmed or overturned by a Supreme Court decision, an opinion that incorporates these qualities will be more credible and, I might add, more durable.

As President Obama considers his nomination, I hope he weighs tone. All presidents, and every senator, should place value not only on what a Supreme Court justice thinks about the Constitution, but how he or she will express it.

Papa works with companies and non-profits as the head of Global Strategy Group’s office in Washington, D.C. He served in the Obama White House as special assistant to the president for Legislative Affairs from 2009-2012.