Buy Photo Atty. Rick Esenberg, president and general counsel for the Wisconsin Institute for Law and Liberty spoke on "Liberty and the Constitution" during a Law Day program Thursday May 5, 2016 at the John Michael Kohler Arts Center in Sheboygan. (Photo: Gary C. Klein/USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin)Buy Photo

Attorney Rick Esenberg was perfectly blunt when he addressed a crowd of about 40 on Thursday, saying he might be an unusual speaker for Law Day as an “advocate at heart.”

“I don’t pretend not to have some very strong views about the way the world should be,” said Esenberg, who describes himself as a movement conservative with an emphasis on “individual freedom, limited government and a robust civil society.”

On May 5, the Sheboygan County Bar Association invited Esenberg as part of the program “Liberty and the Constitution” at the John Michael Kohler Arts Center.

Esenberg, president and general counsel for the conservative public interest law firm Wisconsin Institute for Law & Liberty, touched on what he believes to be an overreach of governmental power that was never intended to exist.

“I’m not one of those who claim there was some golden age of freedom, but I do worry that pervasive constitutional liberty has been substantially diminished,” Esenberg said. “A system that was at least intended to permit only islands of government authority in a sea liberty has been transformed to one that suffers only islands of liberty in a sea of state power.”

He offered examples of how the Affordable Care Act forces individuals to buy insurance and pointed to how President George W. Bush and President Barack Obama both used executive authority to take on congress and quoted Obama when he said, “I’ve got a pen and I’ve got a phone” in regard to his executive actions.

However, the major point of Esenberg’s presentation focused on the political divide in the country and how he believes it boils down to a disagreement over the definition of constitutional liberty, such as in cases of religious liberty claims versus equality claims.

He visited topics such as religious employers being pushed to supply contraceptives or abortion-inducing drugs in their health care plans and photographers not wanting to take photos of same-sex weddings.

“On one hand, you have this claim of religious liberty that people should not be compelled by the law to act contrary to their conscience,” Esenberg said. “On the other hand, you have an equality claim with people saying that not providing this service would constitute discrimination.”

Esenberg believes this is a tension that is constantly coming up in today’s debates concerning constitutional liberty.

While he said his own view tends to side more with liberty claims as opposed to equality claims, he wants to inform people that these are very real differences that cannot be readily dismissed as either “bigotry on the one hand or political correctness on the other hand.”

“They are part of a larger debate we have about the capacity of the government to intervene and make things well versus people like me who tend to be more skeptical of the government’s ability to do that and are more concerned with individual liberty,” Esenberg said.

He explained that too often we view the disagreement over the definition of constitutional liberty as “a battle between forces of light and darkness.”

Buy Photo Atty. Rick Esenberg, president and general counsel for the Wisconsin Institute for Law and Liberty spoke on "Liberty and the Constitution" during a Law Day program Thursday May 5, 2016 at the John Michael Kohler Arts Center in Sheboygan. (Photo: Gary C. Klein/USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin)

“But it is really a fundamental disagreement about how competing values ought to be resolved,” Esenberg said.

He stressed that the purpose of his speech was to highlight the complexity of today’s common political disagreements and prompt discussion on the topic, but one audience member was quick to ask, “How do we stop the erosion of liberty?”

In reply, Esenberg said, “We need to return to the idea of structural limitations on government” before turning to a broader scope.

“We also need to redevelop a taste for diversity, and by that I don’t simply mean diversity that turns on one’s race, gender or sexual orientation, but also a diversity of belief,” he said. “We have to understand that people who disagree with us are not misbegotten and evil, and sometimes they need to be permitted to persist in their disagreement."

Law Day celebrates the rule of law and recognizes the role of courts in our democracy and the contributions of the legal system to freedom. In addition to Esenberg’s presentation, Sheriff Todd Priebe was recognized as the Law Day Volunteer of the Year.

The event marked Sheboygan Circuit Court Judge James Bolgert’s final law day before he steps down from the bench at the end of July.

Reach Leah Ulatowski at 920-453-5134, Lulatowski@sheboyganpress.com or @Leah_Bekah on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://shebpr.es/1T1t1Xi