By Maryann Batlle of the Naples Daily News

A Florida Gulf Coast University survey found Lee business executives are starting 2016 with a little less spring in their step than they had last year.

Of the 97 executives who responded to the university's survey, just 48 percent expect to hire more people during the next year.

At the start of 2015, that figure was 57 percent.

The survey found 73 percent of the executives think economic conditions in Lee County are better than they were last year. About 81 percent thought so around the same time in 2015.

The confidence drop can be the product of timing, said Christopher Westley, director of the university's Regional Economic Research Institute.

The survey of local economic conditions and trends covers a period between Jan. 25 and Feb. 8.

"The stock market was just concluding one of the worst Januarys on record," Westley said. "That might have rattled many of the people who were responding the survey."

Their worries are shared.

The Federal Reserve raised interest rates in December for the first time since the recession, based on the strengthening outlook of the United States economy.

But more recent indicators, including a weaker measure of the country's gross domestic product at the close of 2015, has slowed the Fed's enthusiasm.

Still, Lee County's "economy tends to be fairly insulated from the negative things that happen elsewhere," Westley said. ""It will be interesting if we see a big jump (in the survey) next time."

The FGCU survey also measured employer attitudes about Southwest Florida's health care system and the Affordable Care Act.

Overall, executives are unimpressed with the ACA, dubbed "Obamacare" after President Barack Obama, but are satisfied with their health care coverage and their access to health care in Southwest Florida, according to the survey.

"That's kinda like when people say, 'I hate Congress, but I like my congressman,'" said Westley.

Some executives did point to rising health care costs as a burden on both their businesses and employees, according to the survey.

That added cost may factor into who gets hired.

According to the survey, about 36 percent of executives believe their employees receive health coverage through Medicare or Medicaid.

Westley said that suggests "a good chunk of the labor force" depends on government-funded health care.

That might be "normal" for Lee County because there are a lot of retirees who pick up part-time jobs, Westley said.

"That could also cause employers to favor those workers, too, because they bring less cost," he said.