According to a press release by the Red Lake Band of Chippewa (Ojibwe), The WNBA Atlanta Dream has selected Red Lake Senior High School in Red Lake, Minn., on the Red Lake Indian Reservation as this week’s recipient of the “Addie” Award.

The honor is presented weekly during the WNBA offseason to a girls high school basketball team that exhibits exceptional on-court performance, academic achievement and an unquestioned passion to advance the sport.

“The Red Lake High Lady Warriors have been a model of excellence both on and off the court this season and are a huge source of pride for the Native American community they represent,” said the release.

The Lady Warriors currently boast a record of 17-6 with a majority of their wins by a 25-point or larger margin. Red Lake leads their Section 8A (Minnesota Class 1A) and recently ended a season-best eight-game winning streak.

In the classroom, the team has excelled as well, boasting a team grade-point average of 3.0, led by Samantha Roy and Tanisha Beaulieu, who are on the school’s academic honor roll.

All students at Red Lake High take Ojibwe language classes and have the opportunity to learn Ojibwe traditions from community elders.

The Atlanta Dream’s Shoni Schimmel, a Native American, has visited the school and is among one of the program’s top supporters.

“In the community, the Lady Warriors assist with a number of events, including organizing and serving a Christmas dinner for the elderly, working the community soup line and decorating the reservation’s cultural center for community events,” said the release.

The release also included a statement from the Atlanta Dream:

“The Atlanta Dream would like to congratulate Sam Roy, Angel McCain, Danielle Seki, Alexis Desjarlait, Grace White, Averi Holthusen, Tanisha Beaulieu, Suanne Crowe and Sidney Beaulieu for their exceptional efforts and for earning this week’s Atlanta Dream Girls’ High School Basketball Team of the Week Award. Red Lake High School is led by head coach Randy Holthusen.”

The Addie award was inspired by Lakeview High School (Ohio) 2016 team captain and senior Addison Becker, who contacted the Dream about her concern for the lack of coverage and recognition for the accomplishments of female high school athletic programs regionally and nationally.

“I am writing because something has come to my attention that I feel can no longer be simply ignored,” Becker wrote.

“I play basketball for myself and for the love of the game. However I have noticed that less girls are picking up a basketball in our community. I feel this is due to the lack of attention, recognition and most importantly the support they receive. Female athletes are just as dedicated as their male counterparts and I feel it is time young people brought attention to this matter. I want to change this mindset and what is now a social normality, so I am reaching out for help.”

The Dream liked the idea and named the Atlanta Dream’s Girls’ High School Basketball Team of the Week Award as the “Addie,” after Becker.

The Dream will continue to honor one team a week during the high school girls’ basketball season. Each winner will receive 10 complimentary tickets to the May 22 season opener vs. Chicago and be recognized on-court at Philips Arena and the 2016 Atlanta Dream Girls’ High School Basketball Team of the Year will be recognized.

In addition, each weekly winner will enjoy a post-game meet and greet with a Dream player on May 22, as well as a visit to their school by Atlanta Dream mascot “Star.”.

To nominate your team for the honor, please visit AtlantaDream.net or CLICK HERE for the nomination form.

Follow ICTMN’s A&E, Sports and Pow Wows Editor and contributor Vincent Schilling (Akwesasne Mohawk) on Twitter - @VinceSchilling