Pete Andresen (Photo: Provided)

I'm sitting at my office, looking out of my window, and watching the rain come down on Gabilan Street on a cloudy morning. There's something ironic about watching water fall from Heaven when we are facing such a severe drought that people are considering letting their lawns die.

That's something to contemplate: tomorrow, or even the coming year or coming decade, is not the same as today. Yet we all tend to live as though tomorrow will be identical to the moment we are living right now. And yet things always change.

So far, the experience of 2015 in the financial markets is a case study for this phenomenon.

In the first three months of 2015, the European Central Bank found itself facing an oncoming continent-wide recession and elected to follow the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of Japan by growing the money supply. This decision by the ECB drove interest rates so low that 10 countries in Europe now have two-year rates that are actually negative. That's something for the history books.

Anticipating an economic recovery and greater exports from Europe, these lower rates also propelled European stock markets higher in early 2015, resulting in strong gains in international mutual funds. Those mutual funds had been somnolent and uninspiring lately, so we've been ignoring them. Yet, surprise, they're back.

So far in 2015, we've also witnessed at least the cessation of the collapse of petroleum prices. At this point a turnaround in oil prices is impossible to predict. However, the free fall of petroleum prices that we witnessed in 2014 isn't continuing.

As if to prove to us that sometimes it's helpful to be irrational, the financial bubble in health-care technology has continued in the first three months of 2015. This is a bit of a head-scratcher to me since some valuations are approaching levels that we witnessed in the 2000 tech bubble. Surely investors can't be so captivated with a herd mentality that they would repeat such a debacle. No, surely people are wiser than that.

Meanwhile, a slightly stalling employment rate and an uncertain Federal Reserve caused key large-cap indices, such as the Standard and Poor's 500 Index, the Dow Jones Industrial Average, and the NASDAQ, to move mostly sideways during the past three months. They all have done quite well in the past few years and were due for a pause. We seem to be witnessing a lull as large traders consider what might happen next.

From my perspective, the most amazing feature of the last three months was that the Federal Reserve was able to talk down U.S. interest rates yet again. The bond markets yielded a relatively paltry gain during the past few months, but given the economics of the world, most of the pros would have bet on a rise in interest rates and a resulting decline in bond prices. Most of the pros were wrong.

One result of such an unprecedented supply of money is that investment market valuations remain absurdly high. While nominal price/earnings ratios are only slightly elevated, the Shiller P/E Ratio, which relies on 10 years of earnings data, is saying that stocks are largely excessively priced. Our Value Line Median Appreciation Potential statistic is also suggesting that stock markets are deeply overvalued.

History tells us that these periods of overvaluation can go on for years and years. And valuations have always returned to normal, at least so far. History tells us that the global economy has seasons, like the weather. Unlike the weather, these seasons of boom and bust follow no natural calendar. Nevertheless, they persist.

Once again we are faced with the reality that the natural laws of economics, like the laws of nature, can often be suspended, but seldom ignored. With all these distortions rippling across the surface of the global economy, we should expect the unexpected.

Meanwhile, I'm enjoying watching it rain. I wish it could keep raining for a month. Unfortunately, my memory and my study of history tell me that an April filled with gentle rain in Salinas is very unlikely to happen. Wishing won't make it so.

The future is perhaps more unknown than we realize. With that in mind, history tells us that in the very long term, living below our means and anticipating challenging financial times, both as communities and as individuals, is wise for us all.

Pete Andresen is a Salinas financial adviser.

Read or Share this story: http://bit.ly/1FKn8ql