Stock photo (Photo: Getty Images/Creatas RF) Story Highlights Excellus, the Rochester region's largest health insurer, is seeking rate increases of 19.7 percent in 2015

MVP, the region's second-largest plan with subscribers in New York and parts of New England, is seeking state approval for rate increases averaging 17 percent

In 2012, insurers sought an increase of 12.4 percent, but the department was able to cut the increase to 7.5 percent

New York insurance companies are seeking to raise premiums 13 percent next year, with higher increases sought by the Rochester area's most popular plans.

The proposed rates from roughly 40 insurers to the state Department of Financial Services this week comes in the second year of the state's health exchange. Insurers cited growing costs to provide coverage as the reason why customers would have to pay more.

Excellus, the Rochester region's largest health insurer, is seeking rate increases of 19.7 percent in 2015 for individuals buying such plans either on or off the public exchange. For small groups, the off-or-on exchange premium increase would be 16.4 percent. The numbers are for the company's New York clientele, which is mostly upstate.

In dollar terms, that means, for instance, that an individual who bought a "silver" Excellus plan this year on the exchange is paying $470.42 a month. If approved, the monthly cost for the same plan in 2015 would be $550.51 a month.

Excellus spokesman Jim Redmond said community-rated plan enrollees comprise about 7.5 percent of the company's Rochester-area enrollment.

MVP, the region's second-largest plan with subscribers in New York and parts of New England, is seeking state approval for rate increases averaging 17 percent. The increases reflect caution in the face of uncertainty about costs, enrollment and other issues.

"As an industry, we're still learning about the medical needs of our newest members coming from the Marketplace," said Karla Austen, MVP's interim chief financial officer. "MVP's proposed rate changes are based on the continuing escalation of medical and pharmacy expenses, the needs of an aging population in our markets, and the exigencies of the Affordable Care Act, such as higher taxes and fees. In addition, we're absorbing sharp cuts in federal reimbursement for the highest cost patients."

Leslie Moran, executive vice president of the state Health Plan Association, which represents insurers, said the health exchange hasn't lowered expenses, such as the costs for drugs, hospital stays and doctors. She said the higher costs are similar for plans both in and out of the health exchange, which registered nearly 1 million in New York since Oct. 1.

"While premiums are regulated, those underlying costs are not," she said. "So until we really start to get at what the cost drivers are, we lose the focus on affordability."

The state Department of Financial Services stressed that the agency has taken steps in recent years to lower the final tab to consumers.

"These are the proposed rates that the insurance companies have requested, which are still subject to review and modification by the Department of Financial Services," agency spokesman Matt Anderson said. "Very often, the rates that insurers put forward are reduced as a result of that review process."

In 2012, insurers sought an increase of 12.4 percent, but the department was able to cut the increase to 7.5 percent. There are some companies seeking a decrease in rates.

The agency will decide next year's rates in August.

The health exchange in New York, which started Jan. 1, has led to a 53 percent average reduction in health-care premiums, the Department of Financial Services said. So any increase in 2015 would be based on that lower initial cost.

Insurers cited a number of reasons for the proposed rate hikes, including state and federal taxes.

In a letter to the department, Excellus stated the health plan lost money in the first quarter of this year, forecasting "a significant operating loss in 2014."

Excellus also argued that "an entirely new sales channel" had to be opened to accommodate subscribers gained off the state's public exchange. Previously, the company said it worked a "business-to-business" marketplace.

Health Republic, a New York City-based insurer launched this year, had the largest percentage of customers in the health exchange, roughly 19 percent of all enrollees in private insurance, or about 68,000 people.

Health Republic, which offers plans in Monroe County, proposed an increase of 15.2 percent in its individual health exchange plans, according to the company's filings.

"As a member-run, not-for-profit plan, we want coverage for our members to be as affordable as possible and we must be sustainable," the company said.

Some insurers are seeking a decrease in rates. Healthfirst PHSP Inc., based in Manhattan, proposed a 9.8 percent decrease for its roughly 7,400 members; Affinity Health Plan, a small New York City-based insurer, proposed a 12.6 percent decrease for individuals.

TTOBIN@DemocratandChronicle.com

Twitter.com/tobin3

JSPECTOR@Gannett.com

Twitter.com/gannettalbany

To learn more

To see the proposed rates for health insurers in New York, go to bit.ly/1kna6Tm.

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1lFKLDE