Each week HuffPost Gay Voices, in a partnership with blogger Scout , LGBT HealthLink and researcher Susana Fajardo, brings you a round up of some of the biggest LGBT wellness stories from the past seven days. For more LGBT Wellness visit our page dedicated to the topic here .

1 Some Good LGBT News About Indiana John J. Miller Photogrpahy via Getty Images

As Indiana was in the news a lot this week over signing what’s been called the worst LGBT legislation into law, we’re happy to report a bit of good news about the state. Their Department of Health contacted LGBT HealthLink and brought us out to train their tobacco and cancer staff in LGBT inclusion . We were more than heartened about the plans the staff came up with to enhance their work. We commend them for staying science driven in an environment which clearly isn’t as welcoming. ­

2 Federal Court: Obamacare Prohibits Anti-Trans Discrimination Buero Monaco via Getty Images

federal judge just ruled that under Obamacare health care providers cannot discriminate against trans patients! The ruling says that Section 1557 of the Affordable Care Act allows trans patients to sue if they are discriminated against because of their gender identity. This ruling will help trans patients get compensation if they are mistreated and could have widespread effects. Obviously, this isn’t a total fix but it’s a huge step in the right direction.

3 Today’s Great Idea: Office of LGBTQ Affairs daboost via Getty Images

Santa Clara County is moving to create an Office of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer Affairs. Their plan is to have the office tackle the county’s queer youth homelessness, discrimination in nursing homes, unequal medical treatment, as well as other problems that are unique to the local LGBT population. This all sounds like music to our ears. Can everywhere do this, please?

4 New Care Guidelines For Elderly LGBT Patients Bloom Productions via Getty Images

The American Geriatrics Society recently voiced their support for fair treatment of elderly LGBT patients and released guidelines for how to make that happen. These guidelines are meant for geriatric care, but really should be followed by all health care providers: respect patient rights, ask patient preferences, be open, don’t judge, and stay informed.

5 Bullying Causes More Suicidal Thoughts for LGB Teens Lisa Quarfoth via Getty Images

Everyone knows that bullying is straight up awful, but its effects may be worse for LGB teens. A new study found that although both straight and LGB teens were bullied, the LGB teens thought about suicide more than their straight peers. The researchers thought that dealing with stigma or a lack of social support on top of bullying is causing worse mental health for LGB teens. It’s worth repeating: being a teen is hard, but being an LGBT teen can be harder.

6 Is Being A Queer Ally Good For Your Health? Tim Macpherson via Getty Images

Researchers haven’t often studied the benefits of being an LGBT ally, but in an interesting new study they did just that and found that our allies reported a series of benefits, including: upholding justice and greater sense of community belonging. They conclude being an LGBT ally is rewarding and may enhance sense of well-being.

7 Several States Claiming “Irreparable Harm” From Our Health serggn via Getty Images