In era of health reform, retail clinics become part of the health care delivery system

Fast facts about retail clinics • 12 percent to 14 percent of all visits to emergency departments can be seen in retail or convenient-care clinics.



• Average treatment costs are lower at retail clinics ($60 per visit) than urgent clinics ($124), physician offices ($127) and emergency departments ($356).



• Services include acute care; immunizations; wellness and preventive services; chronic-disease care; school, camp and sports physicals; and minor office procedures.



• Quality is comparable to other medical locations. For example, retail clinics had 92.7 percent compliance with quality for children with pharyngitis (inflammation of the throat), compared with a HEDIS (Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set) average of 74.7 percent.



• Patient satisfaction scores are 93 percent for convenience and 90 percent for quality.



Source: Convenient Care Association, Philadelphia

A contract between Detroit-based Henry Ford Health System and MinuteClinic, a division of CVS Caremark Corp., is one example of how retail clinics are becoming a larger part of the health care delivery system in Southeast Michigan to meet an expected increase in patient demand next year under the Affordable Care Act.



Under the contract, Henry Ford provides at least five physician medical directors to 14 CVS MinuteClinics in metro Detroit to oversee clinical operations and supervise nurse practitioners. CVS plans to add three or four more MinuteClinics here and more than 150 nationally next year.

"Our physicians serve as medical directors to meet with nurse practitioners at MinuteClinics on a regular basis to review quality," said Paul Szilagyi, Henry Ford's vice president of primary care and medical centers. "They are a phone call away if the nurse practitioner has a question about a patient."

MinuteClinic locations Ann Arbor, Canton Township, Farmington Hills, Fraser, Grosse Pointe, Macomb Township, Milford, Northville, Rochester Hills, Shelby Township, Southfield, Walled Lake, Waterford Township, Wyandotte

The contract also allows patients of the Henry Ford Medical Group to use the MinuteClinics as if they were one of the 27 Henry Ford-owned medical centers and nine affiliated physician offices.



Two years ago, officials at Henry Ford Health System recognized they needed additional access points for patients and others seeking care from Henry Ford doctors.



"The only way to get into the Henry Ford Health System was through (hospital) emergency departments or our ambulatory care clinics," Szilagyi said. "We wanted to create more doors to enter the system."



Henry Ford considered creating retail clinics on its own, he said, but concluded it would be better to seek an established company.



Because Woonsocket, R.I.-based MinuteClinic already had contracts with more than two dozen other health systems and physician group practices, including the Cleveland Clinic — and evidence showed that MinuteClinic quality was high and medical malpractice incidents low — Henry Ford decided to join forces with the retail clinics.



"CVS had already made a commitment to Detroit, and we felt they had the same commitments to access, quality and connections (to primary care doctors) as we did," Szilagyi said.



Another bonus for Henry Ford patients, Szilagyi said, is that MinuteClinic offers expanded evening and weekend access to care and affordable primary care prices.



Sylvana Yalda, M.D., a family medicine doctor at Henry Ford Medical Center-Troy and a MinuteClinic medical director, said the delivery of care has been convenient and high-quality.



"The nurse practitioner sees the patient, and we do chart reviews," Yalda said. "They call me for consultations and a second opinion if they have questions about a patient.



"Nurse practitioners are very good at following (national clinical care) guidelines, but some situations require a doctor's point of view."



Since January 2012, when Yalda became a MinuteClinic medical director at the Waterford Township, Rochester Hills and Southfield CVS centers, some of her patients have been seen by nurse practitioners at MinuteClinics, she said.

Nurse practitioners fax patient encounter notes to primary care physicians, Yalda said.





Nancy Gagliano, M.D., MinuteClinic's chief medical officer, said retail clinics can take on a large range of basic primary care services. Those include treating strep throat, bladder infections and pink eye and offering vaccinations for flu, pneumonia, pertussis and hepatitis.



Gagliano said patients do a good job deciding the appropriate care location for their medical issue.



"We send patients to ERs every once in a while," she said, "but working with health systems like Henry Ford helps us deliver the type of care that patients need. Doctors are seeing MinuteClinics as a place to augment primary care."



Gagliano said retail clinics stay within the boundaries of what nurse practitioners and physician assistants can do.



Yalda, the Henry Ford doctor and MinuteClinic medical director, said nurse practitioners at the clinics are well-trained in established clinical guidelines and refer more complicated patients to physicians or hospital emergency departments.



"If there is a sore throat and it is complicated, they will be referred," she said. "They know if a patient is not appropriate for the guidelines. They refer them right away. I get calls from them."



Although MinuteClinics lack the sophisticated diagnostic equipment found in hospitals and urgent care clinics, nurse practitioners can perform diabetic evaluations that include simple foot examinations to check for circulation problems or infections and can conduct blood sugar and blood pressure tests, Yalda said.



Gagliano said 50 percent of patients who come to a MinuteClinic do not have a primary care physician, and 50 percent of those patients visit during evening or weekend hours.



"Patients tell us if it weren't for us, they would go to an emergency department," Gagliano said. "We are reducing overall health care downstream costs."



Jay Greene: (313) 446-0325, jgreene@crain.com. Twitter: @jaybgreene