Reducing Alaska’s health care costs, or at least limiting cost escalation, will require philosophical shifts from both patients and providers, according to the leaders of three of the state’s hospitals.

Central Peninsula Hospital CEO Rick Davis said the first step is getting providers on board with a wholesale change from the fee-for-service payment model that dominates Alaska to a payment-for-value structure.

Davis, Alaska Regional Hospital CEO Julie Taylor and PeaceHealth Ketchikan Medical Center Chief Administrative Officer Ken Tonjes discussed care models Oct. 9 at the State of Reform health care conference in Anchorage.

The fee-for-service model does not incentivize quality care; however, that’s not to say Alaska physicians are not providing good care. The value equation of care quality divided by cost simply is not emphasized, according to Davis.

“We compete on who can do the most surgeries, who can do the most MRIs, because we get paid for doing that,” he said. “If the quality is there, that’s nice, but it doesn’t really matter to the provider because we’re still getting paid anyway.”

If a procedure needs to be repeated, providers just get paid twice, he noted.

Davis envisions what is beginning to happen in the Lower 48 coming to Alaska, he said in an interview. That is, the “value-based” purchasing components of the Affordable Care Act, or ACA, spreading to private payers.

Under the ACA, some Medicare payments are being held back based on patient satisfaction and procedure quality scores.

This year is the first year for provider penalties under the Medicare Physician Quality Reporting System set up by the ACA.

Penalties result from performance two years prior, so physicians who did not report in 2013 or were found unsuccessful that year receive a 1.5 percent penalty on Medicare payments, according to the American Medical Association. The penalty increases to 2 percent in 2016.

Lower 48 insurance companies are beginning to follow the ACA methodology, Davis said.

Bundled payments for predictable procedures — hip and knee replacements and back surgeries among others — that include “the whole episode of care” down to physical therapy also emphasize value for payment, he said.

Payers in Alaska have begun to ask for case rates and bundled payments. While no providers have agreed to those terms yet, Davis predicted they are not far off.

The state’s small insurance market could slow the growth of bundled payments because insurers have less leverage, so it will likely start with the government structure and evolve into private plans.

“Once the practice is in place it becomes sort of a natural progression” through the types of payers, Davis said.

Davis, Taylor and Tonjes all agreed that hospitals need to take a back seat in the state’s care structure.

“We all have to take a little bit of a leap of faith,” Tonjes said.

He emphasized that patients aren’t the only ones who need to change their behavior; hospital administrators do too.

Taylor outlined the reasoning behind Alaska Regional’s decision announced in January to open a community health clinic in Anchorage’s Mountain View neighborhood, an area currently lacking in primary care. However, a bus route takes patients directly from Mountain View to the Alaska Regional emergency room, she noted.

“I’m paid very well for patients that come in with sniffles and sore throats and it’s not the right thing to do,” Taylor said. “Reimbursement does not encourage us to keep people out of the ER.”

The Mountain View clinic is an effort to put proper, economical care where it is needed most, she said.

Taylor has led Alaska Regional for nearly two years following hospital administration positions in Idaho and Denver.

She said primary care physicians led the decision-making process of appropriate care at her previous hospitals, another Lower 48 lesson Alaskans could learn from.

The idea of having one’s health care guided by a primary care doctor doesn’t always sit well in Alaska, when direct access to specialists is available, according to Taylor.

The lack of care management that exists in the state is costing everyone a lot of money, she said, because preventative care and less-expensive treatment options often aren’t explored.

Taylor used the example of a patient going under the knife for back pain who might have missed key care steps such as physical therapy because they went directly to a specialist before consulting a primary care physician.

“This is not just the hospital reducing cost or physicians aligning; this is changing behavior and an expectation (by patients) that’s been set for many years,” she said.

In small Alaska communities, hospitals will still be the umbrella organization for care, but patients will be directed to primary physicians under this coordinated care model.

Davis said he is in the early stages of shifting the mentality among providers towards a coordinated care model at Central Peninsula Hospital.

Population health management is an angle of coordinated care he feels could work well in Alaska.

In the population health management structure, large payers — state Medicaid and large defined groups — and providers agree to a lump sum payment amount to cover groups of patients numbering into the thousands each year.

“(Population health management) gives the payer a confidence that their costs aren’t going any higher and it incentivizes the system to put better coordination of care in place,” Davis said.

Because group members can now go out of network and still charge the provider group, providers are encouraged to get the patient as healthy as possible as inexpensively as possible, according to Davis.

Payment amounts are negotiated on available data and stop-loss insurance for providers is available to cover costs exceeding the payment, particularly for smaller groups where percentage cost variance risk increases.

The group management system also pushes provider networks to invest in behavioral health and primary care as ways to avoid high-cost ER use and prevent long-term conditions as often as possible, Davis said.

Alaska’s primary care and behavioral health provider shortage would not be a major issue under a coordinated care model, according to Davis.

According to the Alaska’s Health Workforce Vacancy Study, about 20 percent of primary care positions are vacant in rural areas of the state. Rural behavioral health positions are 14 percent vacant, according the report released in August 2014.

Statewide, there is a need for a 10 percent increase in behavioral health professionals, the report states.

Coordinated care has helped increase wages for primary care physicians and slowed specialist pay increases in the Lower 48 where it has been implemented, he said. Higher wages in Alaska should encourage more primary care and behavioral health providers, he said.

“The incentive is to shift the money over to those primary care providers who are going to be the captain of the ship,” Davis said.

Elwood Brehmer can be reached at elwood.brehmer@alaskajournal.com.