SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Former president Bill Clinton appeared before 100 people in New Hampshire Wednesday as his Republican rivals Donald Trump and Sarah Palin spoke to an overflow crowd of about 15,000 in Tulsa, Oklahoma.

Clinton, stumping for wife Hillary, took aim at Bernie Sanders, whose staggering 27-point lead over Hillary Clinton in the Granite State has fundamentally changed the Democratic race. CNN how scheduled a quickie town hall Sunday night in Iowa to give Clinton another opportunity to make her appeal to the white Democrats rapidly fleeing from her support base.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

“We’re fighting it out in Iowa. We’ve got a little lead that I think is solidifying and maybe growing a little bit. We’re on a home-field disadvantage here” in New Hampshire, Clinton said.

Though Sanders is from the neighboring state of Vermont, Hillary still won the New Hampshire primary in 2008.

“If you elect Hillary president, it will be a great day when you stop her from defunding Planned Parenthood,” said Bill Clinton. “Hillary Clinton does not consider Planned Parenthood a member of the establishment.”

Clinton called Bernie Sanders’ health care plan a “recipe for gridlock.”

“On health care, Hillary thinks we should remember how important the Affordable Care Act is. Her opponent says, no, we should scrap that and go into a single-payer system,” Clinton said, defending Obamacare against Sanders’ plan.

As Sanders attacks Hillary for her Wall Street donations and coziness with Goldman Sachs, the Clintons are struggling to regain control of the party they once dominated.

Tellingly, Hillary Clinton praised President Obama in the last debate numerous times, leading Donald Trump to suggest that Hillary was doing so in order to suck up to the White House to avoid being indicted for her private email use.

“She wants to stay out of the clink, that’s why,” Trump said in Tulsa to an approximately 150-times bigger crowd than the one Clinton spoke to. “Every single thing, oh she thinks the president is wonderful. She never thought the president was wonderful before. She couldn’t stand him, and frankly he couldn’t stand her…She wants to make it through this thing, and he has the power of the presidency.”