LITTLE ROCK — A month after a federal appeals court ruled that a Fort Smith orthodontist could proceed with his lawsuit challenging the Arkansas Dental Practice Act, the orthodontist said Friday he is dropping the suit — and relinquishing his orthodontic license.

Dr. Ben Burris filed the suit in May 2014, with another orthodontist who is now deceased, alleging that the law violated his rights under the U.S. Constitution.

He filed the suit after the state Board of Dental Examiners sent him a letter in June 2013 advising him that low-cost teeth-cleaning services he was providing at several locations in the state violated the Dental Practices Act, which states that a dentist with a specialty license “must limit his or her practice to the specialty in which he or she is licensed except in an emergency situation.”

Orthodontics is a specialized form of dentistry dealing mainly with the diagnosis, prevention and correction of teeth irregularities, including alignment and occlusion, often with the use of braces.

U.S. District Judge Brian Miller dismissed the suit in November 2014, but in December the 8th Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals in St. Louis reversed Miller’s decision and said the suit could proceed.

In a statement issued Friday by the Institute for Justice, which represented Burris in the suit, Burris said he was ending the lawsuit and relinquishing his orthodontic license so that he would no longer be limited to practicing orthodontics.

“I have long believed that every Arkansan should have access to quality, affordable dental care, which is why we’re offering cleanings and an exam for $99 at all of our clinics, no insurance required,” Burris said. “And we offer an initial free cleaning, exam, and X-rays to anyone who hasn’t been receiving regular dental care.”

Burris said he will continue to practice orthodontics but will no longer be bound by the law to practice only that specialty.

“In essence, nothing changes. I’m still the same guy, with the same qualifications, that I was yesterday. But Arkansas has forced me to make a ridiculous choice about what to call myself. I have chosen to put the needs of Arkansans above my own right to call myself what I am — a trained orthodontist,” he said.

Burris also said he will work to get the law changed.