Health Minister C. Vijaya Basker (second from left) addressing a review meeting at the Collectorate in the city on Saturday. Photo: S. James

“It is important to ensure source reduction,” says Health Minister C. Vijaya Basker.

With concrete preventive efforts made by the State government, the number of people suffering from dengue fever has come down in the last three years, said Health Minister C. Vijaya Basker here on Saturday.

He was addressing a review meeting of health officials from Madurai, Sivakasi, Theni, Virudhunagar, Dindigul and Palani on the dengue control measures implemented and to be brought into force to prevent communicable diseases during the monsoon period.

Mr. Vijaya Basker stated that while there had been 13,000 cases of dengue recorded in 2012, the number of cases recorded in 2013 were 6,122 and it further came down to 1,400 so far in 2014. “Officials from the city corporation as well as the district health authorities are ensuring that hotspots as well as public places where mosquitoes are breeding are identified and fogged,” he said.

Addressing officials on the preventive measures to be taken, the Minister said that it was important to ensure source reduction which would prevent the spread of communicable diseases during monsoons. “The public should be instructed to drink boiled water, cover water stored in drums and vessels as well as ensure that the surroundings around their homes are clean and hygienic,” he stated.

He also asked the officials to ascertain reports of the spread of such diseases from specific locations and conduct inspections to check for probable causes and implement preventive measures. “People can further contact the ‘104’ helpline for information on symptoms and infections,” he added.

Minister for Cooperation ‘Sellur’ K. Raju said that 10 health workers had been appointed for each block in the district who would help maintain the hygiene of the area and that officials from the District Rural Development Agency (DRDA) would also be working in the rural areas to spread awareness among the people.

“The Government Hospitals and the Primary Health Care Centres are being kept prepared in the districts with medicines and the necessary vaccines. People can go there to get the ‘ELISA’ procedure done to diagnose dengue, if necessary,” he said.

Director of Public Health K. Kulandaisamy, Corporation Commissioner C. Kathiravan, Member of Parliament R. Gopalakrishnan, Special representative to the Tamil Nadu Government at New Delhi S. T. K. Jakkaiyan were among those present.