Topics: Christianity, Conservatism, Editor's Pick, Editor's Picks, Jesus, Killing the Buddha, Tea Party, The Fellowship, Westmont College, Media News, Life News, News

This piece originally appeared on Killing The Buddha

The road to Westmont College winds up a hill and between the estates of people too wealthy to let their houses be visible to passersby. Oprah Winfrey, it is said, lives somewhere along the road, on an estate last valued at $50 million; “one of the most beautiful places on earth,” she calls it. “I have a little ritual,” she told a newspaper. “Every time I pass the front of my house I sing ‘Jesus Loves Me’.” A quietly marked turn-off leads to Westmont’s campus, 111 acres of an estate built and landscaped in a Mediterranean style, ocean below, mountains above. A streambed meandering down the hill, wooded paths crisscrossing it, stone benches squatting beneath California oaks, eucalyptus, and exotic evergreens collected by the property’s previous owner. The smell of sweet pine and flowers, rose gardens and a dozen different tropical blossoms pouring off balconies and bubbling fountains. It’s the prettiest campus in America; or, in the words of one alumnus, a Presbyterian pastor in San Jose named Ben Daniel, “a very beautiful corner of a dying world.”

Ben called after I published an essay about a short time I’d spent living with a Christian conservative movement called the Fellowship, or the Family. The Fellowship is secretive, “invisible” in its own words, and exclusive, intended not for the masses but for those whom the movement calls “key men,” particularly in business and politics. Some members speak of “biblical capitalism,” others of “biblical law,” but in essence their beliefs are simple: “Jesus plus nothing,” they like to say.

“Look at Westmont,” Ben told me. “It’s a feeder school.”

Westmont’s motto is “Christus Primatum Tenens,” or, “Holding Christ Preeminent.” Some call it the Wheaton of the West, after Wheaton College in Illinois, which likes to consider itself “the Harvard of evangelicalism.” Its liberal arts faculty is distinguished and its students generally affluent, many of them drawn from the wealthier suburbs of Southern California. Not Ben. He’d been raised, he said, “behind the redwood curtain” of rural Northern California. His parents were Jesus freaks, hippies for Christ. In 1986 he went to Westmont to become a preacher, but he understood the job as something more like that of a druid, deciphering God’s works in nature, than that of a megachurch CEO.

Ben chose Westmont because his older brother had done a year there, and his divorced father lived in Santa Barbara. But his brother dropped out, his father found the college’s mix of aggressive conservatism and Christianity unsettling, and Ben found himself adrift in a campus culture that revolved around beach parties. Not long after he got there, a group of older students “sock and dimed” him: they scooped him up, drove him to the beach, stripped him naked, and left him with a sock to cover his crotch and a dime to make a phone call. Ben had no one to call. He found a couple making out on the beach—Westmont students, it turned out, in violation of campus policies forbidding sexual activity before marriage—and they drove him back to campus.

Ben’s father called the dean of students, but as Ben recalls the conversation, the dean had no sympathy for the 18-year-old. He told Ben’s father there were no rules against hazing. (There are now.) Ben’s father was shocked. “You don’t allow dancing,” he said, “but hazing’s ok?” The dean’s answer, Ben’s father said, was a chuckle and a “Yep.”

Ben didn’t go to the beach much after that. Instead, he went hiking. He could walk off the campus and right into the Santa Ynez Mountains. When he got to Westmont, they were brown and crackling, ready to ignite, a condition Californians refer to as “golden.” As the semester progressed, green crept up the hill from the well-irrigated campus. It reminded Ben of fertile Humboldt County. He’d finish classes and set off by himself and walk for hours, thinking about the usual things, girls, and grades, and being lonely, and also Christian things, theology and God and the pressing problem of creation. He’d wanted at one point to be a physicist, but geology was more his speed. He loved the stories of mountains rising and falling and shifting and colliding, the quiet grandiosity of the earth in motion. But the stories made him uneasy, too. They nudged him toward questions he’d never had to ask and to which he had no answers. If the fossil record chronicled life emerging from a primordial soup, what did that mean for the truth of Adam and Eve?

Ben’s questions didn’t drive him away from his faith, they propelled him deeper into it. He began writing columns for the student newspaper about faith in the world. Standard social gospel fare, working with the poor, the hypocrisy of affluent Christians, American involvement in the late 1980s dirty wars of Central America. Radical by Westmont standards. And yet nobody could deny Ben’s sincerity, his intensity. He became a student-chaplain, and then, with the encouragement of the head chaplain, a man named Bart Tarman, Ben joined what Tarman called a “cell group,” a group of young men devoted to their faith through their devotion to one another.

Ben remembers Tarman telling them they should seal the deal: commit to being a cell group forever. Brothers for life. Such a brotherhood would be stronger than “Christianity,” a term, Ben recalls, that Tarman considered nothing more than a label. They could leave names like that behind. They could leave everything behind. Ben, in fact, should ease off writing for the paper. The brothers should live together. They would be special. The dean of students, Jonathan H. Hess, became one of their mentors. “Every guy confessed to one another,” Ben remembers. “Mostly, we talked about masturbation.” It was a sin, but not as great a sin as women. “It was supposed to be just men and Jesus.”

Ben didn’t last. “I was a failed recruit,” he says. “I fell in love.” Fellowship men were allowed to fall in love, of course, but their romance was to follow a certain order. When Ben tried to explain he told me about a Fellowship man he’d spoken to recently, about to marry. The groom-to-be told Ben he had his priorities straight: 1. His Fellowship mentors. 2. His Fellowship brothers. 3. The Fellowship. 4. His fiancé. He compared himself to Hosea, the prophet who married a “harlot” on God’s command: “Go, take unto thee a wife of whoredoms.” A lesson in humility for the groom, and a chance for the bride to be redeemed. “You must dwell as mine for many days,” the biblical Hosea told his wife when he bought her in a slave market for 15 pieces of silver and a bushel of barley. “You shall not play the harlot, or belong to another man.”[1]

Ben didn’t want to own his girlfriend. He didn’t want to submit to his mentors. But the Fellowship wanted Ben. The older men invited him to Washington. By now Ben knew his cell was just one of many, that the main work of the organization was not with students in need of grooming but with “followers of Christ” in politics, business, overseas. In Washington he attended the Fellowship’s only public event (the Fellowship “works best when it’s clandestine,” another member told him), the annual National Prayer Breakfast. Public and not-public; the President of the United States is the star speaker and much of Congress attends, but the Breakfast belongs to the Fellowship. They decide who’s invited and where they sit and who attends the week of hotel suite meetings, the dinners, the receptions for generals and contractors and defense ministers around the globe.

This was not the social gospel. This was not what Ben believed. There was a man there Ben had only read about: a man said to run death squads in El Salvador. That made Ben’s decision easier. He chose the girl. He left the Fellowship behind.

As the years went on, as he began to pastor his own church, he started wondering more about what he’d been a part of. That led him back to Westmont College; in particular to a man with whom he wanted me to speak to better understand his time with the Fellowship: Dr. Ronald Enroth, a sociologist who studies what he calls “spiritually abusive” religious movements.

Enroth was my first appointment at Ben’s alma mater.

* * *

Enroth was a bearish man, bearded and gruffer in voice than in fact. We met outside the school’s switchboard office, in the mansion at the heart of the campus, and he guided me to a handsome room bordered west and south with walls of windows, where we sat at one end of a long oak table. Enroth had been teaching at Westmont College for 39 years, and it was where he intended to end his working days. “Why would I leave paradise?” he said. He was fascinated by his college’s history, his evangelical Presbyterian faith, and, recently, the threats to both he perceived in the Fellowship. He’d launched his career with studies of cults, a word, he admitted, that had fallen out of fashion. “Now, we’re supposed to call them ‘new religious movements,’” he said. But “cults” are what made him. Jesus People USA and the Children of God, the Unification Church, AKA “the Moonies,” and even the Family—a hippie fundamentalist group famous for “flirty fishing,” recruitment through the implied promise of sex, and not be confused with the Family also known as the Fellowship—provided him with grist for eight books and a reputation that brought speaking fees and courtroom appearances as an expert witness, work that both thrilled and inspired him to further investigations.

Then Enroth turned his methodology inward, toward mainstream evangelicalism itself. Churches That Abuse, as he titled one book, became his obsession, and the phrase “spiritual abuse” his contribution to modern American theology not just as studied in academia but also in popular magazines and on talk shows. Like the discovery of a disease long suspected but ill-defined, the words “spiritual abuse” gave a form and a name to what had until then been just a feeling.

Spiritually abusive movements, Enroth explained, lack the most explicit warning signs by which we know fanaticism and charlatanism. They don’t usually believe in flying saucers, like the 39 suicides of Heaven’s Gate, or homegrown Christs with a taste for classic rock, like the Branch Davidians of Waco. They rarely retreat into compounds, they don’t stockpile weapons. But common to cults, “new religious movements” gone sour, and old church communities turned abusive, is an emphasis on submission and obedience, what one informant called “learned helplessness,” stumbling upon a common psychological term for a condition of perceived powerlessness that can lead to depression and mental illness.

Enroth ran down a list of characteristics of spiritual abuse: “disrupted families,” “surveillance,” “spiritual elitism,” ostracism of those who leave. I found myself nodding in recognition. It sounded like what I’d witnessed in the Fellowship. Later, I’d read in Enroth’s work about other aspects that were just as instantly recognizable:

—an emphasis on amorphous “attitudinal sins,” especially “rebelliousness”;

—suppression of dissent;

—no institutional checks and balances;

—an aversion to publicity;

—a perception of persecution, the notion that outsiders can never understand;

—a recruitment strategy that, in the beginning at least, denies that there’s anything to which to belong.

Enroth glanced toward the door frequently as he spoke. His voice rose and dipped between indignation and tact. When he settled on one tone he’d tilt his head back and close his eyes and tick off point and counterpoint like a rhythm, petting and tapping the table. His two books on spiritual abuse, Churches That Abuse (1992) and Recovering from Churches that Abuse (1994), won him more notice than the combined work of his three-decade career, and also more attacks. Fellow evangelicals who thrilled to Enroth’s anti-cult crusades grew angry when his diagnoses returned to the house of the faith they shared. Enroth, long at war with a secular academic establishment that prefers the term “new religious movement” to the pejorative “cult,” found himself embattled among other evangelicals. His tenure at Westmont spanned half the life of the college, he was unmovable; but the quick glances at the door and the resolute recitations of symptoms, signals, and warnings were the results of certain unpleasantnesses to which he had become accustomed. There were things, he said, he couldn’t talk about because his lawyer had told him not to. And there were things, he said, he couldn’t talk about because of his heart. At the height of his career, he underwent quadruple bypass surgery. Afterward, his doctor gave him a choice—his life as an investigator of hostile organizations, or his life, period. “So,” he said, “I have avoided any formal research on the Fellowship, or ‘the Family.’”

But still. Students talk. Parents, grandparents, complain. Other faculty members grumble. One man, he said, Jonathan Hess—no longer Westmont’s dean of students but still a fixture in the community—launched a prayer group for Westmont grads who’d remained in the area. During his Westmont tenure, Hess had decried the college’s conventional place in the world. In a 1987 speech to the college, he described Westmont not so much as an educational institution as a kind of training ground dedicated to producing “change agents” bound by “deep unity of mind.” The goal? Transformation of the “out there” culture to conform to the “in here” culture. That is, to make the world more like Hess’s vision of Westmont. It was a radical amplification—or perhaps a radical reduction—of Romans 12:2, which reads, “Be ye not conformed to this world: but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind.” Hess took a Bible verse that speaks to a believer’s liberty of conscience and turned it toward a hive-minded tautology: “We will transform culture to the extent that we are a transforming community,” he said. “We will be a transforming community to the extent that we are being transformed individually and corporately…. Students will become transformers to the extent that they see and feel us being transformed.”

Hess left Westmont and began working on transformation full time. The Fellowship became one of his partners. A first step, as far as Enroth could tell, was to send out a mass mailing to students and alumni asking them for funds to support his new mission. Enroth recalled Hess’s unusual travels over the years. Once he’d told Enroth that he was flying to Peru just so he could spend some time on the plane sitting next to a “South American leader”—the Fellowship way of “coming along side” the powerful people it considers “key men.” Enroth said Hess became vague when Enroth asked him who the man was, dodged when Enroth asked him who was paying, and directly refused to answer when Enroth asked him what they’d discuss. “We’re trying to make an impact on leaders,” Enroth recalled Hess telling him.

Who’s the “we,” Jon?

There is no “we”; just a group of friends.

So when the buzz about Hess’s new group started crackling with what Enroth thought might be symptoms of spiritual abuse, he asked his old acquaintance directly if he could learn more. He was evasive, Enroth recalled.

Not much to learn, Ron.

Well, Enroth asked, is it true that it’s a closed group?

Everyone who knew Hess said he had an easy manner. Some women thought he could be creepy, but men understood; Hess was a guy.

That’s what Enroth remembered Hess telling him.

No, no. We’re just a group of guys.

Would I be invited? Enroth asked.

Well, no.

One of Enroth’s neighbors, a mutual friend of both men, a wealthy contractor who told Enroth that he was a big financial contributor to the Fellowship, tried to explain. It wasn’t that Hess was excluding anyone. It was just that—well, Ron would be uncomfortable. These men had grown close together in the Lord. There were things they shared, about their lives, and Ron hadn’t shared such things, and so.

Another time, Enroth recalled, three young men from his neighborhood approached him while he was gardening. Clean cut, good Westmont grads. “Dr. Enroth. We understand you’re going to include the Fellowship in your next book. Hope you’re not going to write about us.”

Every now and then, “maybe two or three times a year,” Enroth said, a parent would call him about the Fellowship. They wanted to know if the Fellowship is a cult; Enroth would promise to investigate; and, he said, invariably reassures them that it is not. But as the questions and the complaints piled up over the years, he became less certain. One student told him that the Fellowship’s longtime leader, a man named Doug Coe, had explained to her that certain young people don’t “need” college. A couple called him in distress upon learning that their son, having spent much of the family’s savings on four years at Westmont—comparable in cost to elite secular colleges—had announced that he was called by God to be Coe’s personal driver. “Coe,” said Enroth, “appears to me to be a sort of an evangelical guru.” Another student had gone to Washington to work for the Fellowship. “ ‘These people have good connections,’ ” Enroth recalls him explaining. “ ‘They’re going to get me a job. And if I don’t play along, they might make sure I don’t get a job.’

“I’ve heard from some students that [Coe] discourages the name ‘Jesus Christ,’” Enroth continued, “that he tells students, ‘Don’t use the two terms, Jesus and Christ, together. Just refer to Jesus.’ Jesus minus the Bible, in a sense. They don’t like the word Christian. There’s a reluctance to identify with mainstream Christianity. There’s a sense of spiritual elitism. The Fellowship tells young people this is a way to be closer to God, closer than they can get within Christianity.”

Bart Tarman, Ben Daniel’s old cell group mentor and the chaplain of Westmont—a position of real influence at an evangelical college—was proud and open on campus about his Fellowship connections, many of them with rich and powerful people around the world. These relationships constituted what he considered to be true community of Jesus followers, marked not by the “natural liberty” of an individual to make his or her own choices, but rather, he explained in a recorded talk, “true freedom,” as John Winthrop put it, the “liberty to [do] only that which is good.” Tarman was invoking Winthrop’s Puritan ideal of control, applied to the modern world in all its difference.