On Wednesday, Glenn Beck interviewed Matt Bevin, one of the individuals running against Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-KY) in the 2014 elections. Beck said he looked in to Bevin before the interview, consulting with groups like FreedomWorks and the Senate Conservatives Fund, and was shocked that some of the groups’ members described him as the best constitutional candidate they have seen, period. The Madison Project has already officially endorsed him.

Bevin modestly commented: “To say I’m a constitutionalist like [Senators] Mike Lee or Ted Cruz would be an insult to them, although we’ve had interesting discussions and I think the world of them.”

When asked to describe himself and the condition of his soul (Beck’s favorite question to ask aspiring politicians), Bevin remarked: “I’m a guy who grew up, second of six children, and I grew up in the country in a three bedroom house. Ate everything we grew on our own land…It was a home grounded very much on Judeo-Christian ethics and principles. And my Christian faith is really the cornerstone of who I am as a person. So my entire life as a business person, husband, father, how I will be as a politician is grounded in my Christian faith. So that’s me from a broad stroke.”

Speaking about his professional experience, Bevin said he put himself through college and joined the military, where he was an army officer on active duty for “a number of years.”

“Left the military a little over twenty years ago. Have worked exclusively in the private sector. Small business owner, a guy who employs other people, pays taxes and pays attention,” Bevin said. “That’s why I am in this race, because I do not see the future, the American dream being offered to future generations in the way that it was to mine and those who preceded me.”

Bevin’s website has more information on his experience. One accomplishment, in particular, stands out:

In 2008, Matt began helping out at Bevin Bros. – a bell manufacturing company that had been in the Bevin family since it opened its doors in 1832. Besieged by high taxes and foreign competition, Bevin Bros. was on the verge of bankruptcy and Matt’s uncle was planning to shut it down. In 2011, Matt became the President of Bevin Bros. In only a year, he paid off all the company’s debts and back taxes, modernized the business model, and saved more than 20 jobs. After the company was struck by lightning in 2012 and burned to the ground, Matt started over yet again. Today, Bevin Bros. continues to make thousands of bells including those used by the Salvation Army and Macy’s Santas every year.

Bevin has also served on numerous non-profit boards, including as chairman of the board of the American Red Cross, Louisville Area Chapter, according to his website. He has permanently endowed a number of scholarship funds, grants and centers that offer educational opportunities for young people in the U.S. with limited financial resources. He has also done extensive work to help the underprivileged overseas, helping to construct water towers, expand electrical grids, erect security walls, develop agriculture and dairy programs, and update classroom facilities in India and Africa.

Beck said he felt the need to get one question out of the way before continuing the interview, seeing as Bevin described himself first and foremost as a Christian.

“Do you believe that rape is sometimes the way God works to create children?” Beck asked sarcastically.

“No,” Bevin remarked, adding that he has no “burning desire to to discuss the physiology of women at any point in this campaign.”

The two proceeded to discuss issues like Obamacare, the national debt, domestic surveillance, and Common Core.

Beck also asked Bevin about an MSNBC interview that, when you look him up on Google, is prominently displayed. The title is, “Matt Bevin: I’m Not ‘a Tea Party Guy.’”

Bevin explained that while he agrees with many of the values of the Tea Party, and is proud to have the support of more than 15 local Tea Party affiliates around the state, he isn’t a member of one.

“I want people to understand, I’m not pretending to be something I’m not,” Bevin said. “I don’t want to give the impression that I’ve been a Tea Party leader. I’m not. I’m the father of nine children. I own a number of businesses. And I’ve been busy paying taxes and living life.”

Bevin’s children range in age from ages 3-14. Four were adopted from Ethiopia.

Your browser does not support iframes.

The full episode of The Glenn Beck Program, along with many other live streaming shows and thousands of hours of on-demand content, is available on just about any digital device. Get it all with a FREE TRIAL.

–

Other Must-Read Stories: