U.S. Sen. Richard Blumenthal wrote the top executive of the nation's largest health insurer Tuesday, calling on UnitedHealth Group to reconsider a possible decision to stop offering plans under the Affordable Care Act as early as 2017.

The letter comes about a month after CEO Stephen Hemsley told investors that UnitedHealth Group expected to lose $650 million this year and next year from its 550,000 customers served through health care exchanges under Obamacare. According to UnitedHealth, customers who signed up on the exchanges have proved to be more costly and use insurance more frequently.

"We cannot sustain these losses," Hemsley said. He said the insurer would suspend marketing for plans offered on the exchanges next year and eliminate commissions to brokers who sell those plans.

In an interview Tuesday Blumenthal said abandoning the exchange was "shortsighted and shortchanges consumers."

"This insurer has … an ethical duty to stay with the marketplace while it stabilizes and achieves even more enrollees in the very near future," he said.

Blumenthal said some of the challenges that UnitedHealth has pointed out, such as customers signing up for a policy to cover a planned medical expense and then quitting, are short-term issues that can be overcome as more people sign up for the exchanges.

"UnitedHealthcare has a longstanding public commitment to helping Americans gain access to quality care on a sustainable basis," Maria Gordon Shydlo, a UnitedHealthcare spokeswoman, said in an email. "We will continue to offer our exchange plans in 2016 and will begin evaluating our plans for 2017 on a market-by-market basis in early 2016."

Other insurers have been more positive about the exchanges, Blumenthal said, including Anthem, which has 824,000 customers enrolled nationwide.

"The number of insurers participating in the ACA-created Marketplace has grown in 2016 and other large health insurers have voiced optimism about the prospects of the Marketplace," Blumenthal wrote.

Blumenthal also referenced a statement Anthem CEO Joseph R. Swedish made around the same time as Hemsley's remarks. Anthem had almost 44,000 customers sign up for insurance for 2015 under Access Health CT, Connecticut's health insurance exchange.

"Anthem remains committed to enhancing access to high quality, affordable health care for all of our members inside and outside of the insurance exchanges and continuing our dialogue with policymakers and regulators regarding how we can improve the stability of the individual market," Swedish said last month.

UnitedHealth didn't offer plans on the exchanges created by the Affordable Care Act in 2014, the first year the marketplace was available. About 2,300 customers signed up for UnitedHealth plans this year on Connecticut's exchange.