editorials

chieftain editorial

IMAGINE A $25 billion-a-year payroll tax to force every single person in Colorado into a government-run universal health care system.

Well, advocates for a single-payer — socialized medicine — mandate are trying to do just that. They have petitioned the so-called ColoradoCare plan onto the November 2016 ballot. So Colorado voters will have the final say on this nightmare that would make President Barack Obama’s health care law and all its problems look small by comparison.

Sen. Irene Aguilar, D-Denver, a physician at Denver Health Medical Center, is the moving force behind this campaign. After failing to get her fellow legislators to pass a universal health care law, she has rallied other advocates who agree with her that even Obamacare doesn’t go far enough to force socialized medicine on the nation.

The $25 billion tax is not a misprint. The $25 billion, the highest imaginable tax on Coloradans’ paychecks, would nearly match the state’s entire budget, which funds education, transportation, corrections, public safety, social welfare and the ever-expanding Medicaid program. In fact, it would swamp everything the state funds now.

Although the state would have to collect the tax, the massive takeover of health care wouldn’t actually be under the control of the Legislature or governor. Instead, ColoradoCare proposes creating an elected board of trustees who then would, in the words of The Associated Press, “act as an enormous insurance company and reimburse doctors.”

The AP also reported that ColoradoCare would tax us enough “to cover everyone, even people who don’t work or aren’t legally in the country. It’s not exactly a single-payer plan, because Medicare and the military health care system would remain intact.”

This harebrained scheme would do far more harm than the good these liberal ideologues dream it would do. The tax would drive businesses and taxpayers out of the state and likely spell the exodus of doctors, other medical providers and the private insurance industry.

Be forewarned: An extremely dangerous $25 billion tax socialized medicine issue looms on the 2016 ballot. We trust the voters to kill it when the time comes.