A blighted old Thriftway in Denver’s Westwood neighborhood finally will be torn down next month.

What was once the OK Thriftway (4401 Morrison Road), has been abandoned since 2008 and the owner is said to not have paid any taxes on the property for several years. Last week, the land was acquired by the Urban Land Conservancy, which is planning demolition on Sept. 3.

“It’s definitely our goal to, as soon as possible, get it abated and demolished and have it be a more productive and positive force in the neighborhood,” said Debra Bustos, vice president of real estate for the Urban Land Conservancy.

Bustos said another group had purchased a tax lien that was on the property, which Urban Land Conservancy then bought. If a property owner does not pay property taxes for a certain period of time, someone else can pay those taxes and file a treasurer’s deed. In this case no one came forward to take possession of the property and the liens are wiped out. Urban Land Conservancy paid just over $100,000 for the property.

“This is a major victory for us as a community,” said City Councilman Paul Lopez, who represents the area. “This is a major victory for me as a councilman.”

The property, which is referred to as the “Old Thriftway” in the neighborhood, once was home to a Laundromat, convenience store and dry cleaner. But since 2008, it’s been a haven for criminal activity and squatting place for the homeless.

In the past year, police have responded to a suicide, a sexual assault and recovered stolen goods in the back of the property. There was illegal dumping on site, and the building is littered with graffiti and broken windows.

More recently there was an assault at the building that resulted in a person’s death.

Bordering the site is a seniors apartment complex, a trailer park community and a preschool for the Denver Indian Center.

“It’s been vacant, an eyesore and a magnet for transients, all within a few feet of a daycare facility,” Lopez said. “That’s unacceptable.”

It’s yet to be decided what will become of the property, but Bustos said it would complement the neighborhood. Urban Land Conservancy also will have a special contractor come in to properly remove the asbestos from the property prior to demolition.

Residents and people in the community are excited that a blight in the community is being removed.

“I think that this change is going to be catalytic for the neighborhood,” said Rachel Cleaves, co-chair of Westwood Unidos, a neighborhood group. “It’s been been a very unsafe, blighted property for years.”

Felipe Perez, maintenance supervisor of the Belmont Apartments, a senior living facility bordering the property, said the residents always have expressed unease over the Old Thriftway. He thinks they will be glad when the building comes down.

“I think for the seniors who live here, they will probably feel safer,” Perez said. “I know they have concerns.”

Joe Vaccarelli: 303-954-2396, jvaccarelli@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joe_vacc