This slideshow requires JavaScript.

By Dennis Seid

Daily Journal

TUPELO – Jay Isby wanted shoes – but not just any shoes.

“I need boots for a tough little man doing big work,” the spunky 9-year-old said of himself, smiling broadly. “I’m helping fix our neighbor’s house across the street. … I really need the boots.”

And he got those boots – size 71⁄2 – along with a pair of red Nike athletic shoes, some red – his favorite color – socks, a football and a few other items.

Isby was among 30 area youth from the Boys & Girls Club of North Mississippi who were invited by Academy Sports + Outdoors to take part in a shopping spree Thursday, prior to today’s opening.

But none of the kids knew about the event until they got there.

“We just told them that they were going to the store to help the employees practice for their opening,” said Evie Storey Boyd, the club’s marketing director. “We didn’t tell them about the shopping cards.”

In fact, she was only told each child would receive a $100 card to spend.

But when the group arrived, Academy Sports’ communications specialist Eric Herrera told them they each would get $200 cards to mark the company’s 200th store – which just happens to be the Tupelo store.

The news brought screams of joy from the kids, who then walked through the store’s front doors and through a line of employees, who were giving high-fives, cheers and claps before scattering across the sales floor.

Employees helped them around the store, offering suggestions, keeping track of the purchases and having as much fun as their little shoppers.

“This is amazing,” said Zell Long, the chief professional officer for the Boys & Girls Club. “None of them have had an opportunity to do anything like this before, and it’s just heart-warming to see the smiles on their faces. It’s an unbelievable feeling.”

The kids were given a chance to buy anything in the store – except weapons and firearms. Shoes, clothing and sports equipment were popular items.

Inflatable swimming pools, back packs and even a basketball goal were just some of the other items that wound up at the registers Thursday.

For Isby, the event was the time of his life.

After battling store employees Bayle Bryant and Maddy Lukens with foam swim noodles, he declared confidently, “this is the most fun I’ve ever had!”

Meanwhile, 7-year-old Kiersten Gibbs had her shopping cart filled with a pair of shoes, a backpack, a bag, a hula hoop, a pool, a pool noodle, a Hello Kitty ball, a swimsuit, shorts, a badminton set and a toy Z-Curve Bow.

“I got everything I wanted,” she said with a smile, “and I got something for my brother and sister, too.”

Boyd said she was overwhelmed by Academy’s generosity as much as she was impressed by the 30 kids who were invited to the shopping spree.

“It was based on their behavior, attendance and participation, and not even their parents knew they were coming to this,” she said. “They have been wonderful. … there was one little girl who bought everything she needed for school – it’s all she wanted. So many of them are buying things to share . … that says a lot about them. It really makes you feel good.”

dennis.seid@journalinc.com

Twitter: @dennisseid