RENO, NV - On a warm day with parking at a premium due to a high school graduation next door at Lawlor Events Center, GOP candidate Dr. Ben Carson still drew a respectable crowd to the UNR campus Tuesday.

All in all it was a good showing for a retired neurosurgeon and first-time candidate running for the nation's highest office in a field crowded with experienced politicians.

That unusual resume may be an important part of his appeal.

In any case, he insists he doesn't worry about breaking out of the pack.

"Instead, I spend more time thinking about how to get your message across to people, how you get the solutions out and the people get to make the decision," he told us in an impromptu one-on-one interview before the rally.

He arrived on the national political scene with a series of statements many judged over the top, likening Obamacare to slavery and present-day America to Nazi Germany.

He's a more disciplined candidate today.

"You won't find me making a lot of inflammatory statements anymore because I've discovered people can't hear what you're saying."

Indeed, if the crowd was expecting more political raw meat they were disappointed.

"Just because someone does not agree with you does not make them your enemy," he told them. "It does not make them someone you're supposed to be trying to destroy. That makes no sense whatsoever."

What they heard instead was a retelling of his own up-from-his bootstraps personal story, raised in poverty, rising to become an accomplished surgeon, a story he told with occasional self-deprecating humor.

"As a youngster I wasn't the kind of person you would have thought was ever going to become a doctor. I was a terrible student and my nickname was 'dummy', that's what everyone called me."

And they heard a message of conservative, small government values. A simplified flat-tax system based on the Biblical model of tithing. Less regulation, more control returned to the states.

"It was never intended for the federal government to be in all aspects of our lives. They've got enough to do to protect us, which is one of their biggest jobs and they're not doing it the right way."

Surprisingly given his past statements and background, he only touched on Obamacare obliquely in his remarks, but during the interview defended his previous comments, saying it had changed the basic relationship between Americans and their government.

He also said he favors immigration reform, which would allow undocumented immigrants to remain in the US as "guest workers," but only after first securing the borders.

The next stop for Carson is Las Vegas, where he will speak to a convention of Latino leaders. The unedited interview with Dr. Carson is linked to this story.