Since Alachua County's CHOICES program kicked off in October 2005, it has helped about 9,500 employed-but-uninsured residents gain access to affordable health care.

But when the program ends along with the year 2013, just over half the people currently enrolled may be left without health insurance or another way to get the care they need.

CHOICES is closing down on Dec. 31, after which the 4,382 people enrolled will need to find another source of health care, Acting CHOICES Director Candie Nixon said.

"Unfortunately, as with a lot of Americans, some of them will not have access to health insurance," she said.

Some enrollees are able to get health insurance through their jobs and may do so once CHOICES ends, but others may not be able to afford health coverage even if their employers offer it.

Others will be eligible for the Affordable Care Act and can call the CHOICES office at 264-6772 to get contact information for local navigators who can help them with that process.

But because state lawmakers decided to reject $51 billion in federal money to expand Medicaid, at least 2,500 or so of the 4,382 CHOICES enrollees may be unable to get any kind of health insurance, Nixon said.

At this point, the county is referring people who won't qualify for insurance through their employer, the Affordable Care Act or any other source to safety net clinics in the area that offer free or low-cost health services, including the Westside Samaritans Clinic, Gainesville Community Ministry, and the University of Florida Mobile Outreach Clinic.

People can call the CHOICES office to get information on which clinics might be able to help them.

When CHOICES ends, it will take the county a few months to pay out all the remaining claims for enrollees, Nixon said. Once that's been done, the county will know how much is left in the program's fund and can determine how to use that money.

Approved by voters in 2004, CHOICES let uninsured workers receive primary care from physicians as well as vision, dental and pharmaceutical services, although it doesn't cover hospitalizations.

Over its lifetime, the program served about 9,500 residents directly as enrollees. But it helped more residents indirectly by giving funding to area organizations like the ACORN Clinic and the UF mobile outreach clinic to boost their operations and allow them to serve more people.

CHOICES also developed a wellness program that included Zumba and other free fitness classes as well as activities aimed at combating childhood obesity, among other health problems, for any interested county residents.

"I think for the citizens of Alachua County, especially enrollees, that CHOICES has been in some ways a lifesaver," Nixon said. "It gave them access to affordable health care that otherwise they would not be able to have."

Community Support Services Director Minnie Rolark said she's heard so many stories of how CHOICES helped its participants.

One woman had a lump in her breast that turned out to be breast cancer. Without CHOICES, she wouldn't have been able to go to a doctor to get checked out and they wouldn't have caught the cancer early, Rolark said.

A man was able to get dentures that helped him land a decent job, Rolark said. Getting jobs had been hard without teeth in the front of his mouth.

"Those are success stories, and there's hundreds and thousands of them," Rolark said.

Many CHOICES enrollees had one or more of the "Big Four" — asthma, high blood pressure, diabetes and heart disease — and were able to manage those medical issues through the program.

Florida legislators' decision not to expand Medicaid has left a big hole in coverage for residents losing the support they got from CHOICES, Rolark said.

But the CHOICES Advisory Board is looking at how best to fill that void in the future, mulling over potential successors to the soon-to-be-retired program.

Dr. Allan March, a retired physician who is chair of the advisory board, said he and his fellow board members are evaluating their options.

Although March and the rest of the board don't know what form a new health program might take, he said they do know it is important to design a successor to CHOICES that will help residents access affordable health services.

"It's not going to be CHOICES. It's going to be something different," he said. "We have a history of success here in Alachua County and we know we can do something positive, so I think we're going to try to move forward on this."

The successor to CHOICES, if the advisory board is able to drum up support for its forthcoming proposal, will likely focus once again on helping low-income workers and the people who fall into the insurance coverage gap between Medicaid and what's available through employer insurance programs.

"The health care insurance climate has been changing rapidly, and not always in the direction that is favorable to our underserved and medically needy in Alachua County," March said. "So it's been hard to predict exactly what the needs will be until we see how the Affordable Care Act is implemented or what its shortcomings in implementation might appear to be."

The dental care offered by CHOICES was well-received by the community and may be worth incorporating into a new proposal, as would CHOICES' history of supporting innovative endeavors like the FluMist program, which provides flu vaccines for local children and thus raises the community's overall immunization level, March said.

The advisory board may recommend that the county emulate some of the things CHOICES succeeded at, but March wants to draw up a plan that improves upon the program's weaknesses as well.

CHOICES was criticized for its extremely slow start in attracting enrollees. With CHOICES' potential successor, March said it would be beneficial for a smoother, faster transition to getting the program up and running.

The question of how to fund a new program is still uncertain, March said, as are the specifics of how it would operate. Voters may be willing to adopt another quarter-cent sales tax, as they did with CHOICES in 2004, but the advisory board is considering possible state funding or other alternatives as well.

"We have to do this in an organized way, and for that reason we will be drawing up a plan," March said.

Contact Morgan Watkins at 338-3104 or morgan.watkins@gainesville.com.