STAMFORD, Conn., Feb. 18, 2015 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- via PRWEB - Independence American Insurance Company (IAIC), a subsidiary of Independence Holding Company (NYSE: IHC), announces the availability of Connect Net, a new short-term medical (STM) plan, offering access to the Cigna Payer Solutions network of health care professionals and facilities. Connect Net plans are designed for consumers who want protection from the financial impact of an unexpected medical need while waiting for the effective date of a permanent medical plan. IHC has been a national leader in administering and underwriting STM for over 20 years.

"Our new STM product affords clients with cost effectiveness of the Cigna-contracted physician, transplant, prescription drug and other networks, plus disease management and complex case management services," said David Kettig, Chief Operating Officer of Independence Holding Company. "When combined with IHC's expertise in writing STM, our plan's expanded network can bring significant value to individuals and families with short-term medical insurance needs arising in between open enrollment periods or prior to the effective date of their individual plan available through the Affordable Care Act."

"Our broad network of health care professionals meets the needs of customers in a variety of ways," said Amie Benedict, President, Cigna Payer Solutions. "In this instance, it will help individuals during that period between enrollment seasons to continue receiving care and offer ready access to in-network health care professionals in the event of an unforeseen medical circumstance."

Consumers can choose a monthly pay option for their short-term medical needs, or a pre-payment option for up to 180 days. In addition to access to the broad Cigna Payer Solutions network, IHC's new Connect Net features an office visit copayment, copayments for prescription drugs and a $2,000,000 coverage limit per policy period, unlike many STM plans that do not pay out until the deductible is satisfied.

According to Dave Keller, Chief Marketing Officer of IHC Specialty Benefits, "One of the most common questions we are asked on our website, http://www.healthedeals.com is: What are the enrollment deadlines for coverage through the Affordable Care Act? Many people wait until the last moment, and are surprised to find out when they are ready to enroll for a permanent plan that the start date for their coverage can be as many as 45 days from the day they apply. Short-term medical is a great way to provide financial protection during that period in case the unexpected happens."

These STM plans are not designed to replace coverage provided by the Affordable Care Act, but to bridge the gap between open enrollment periods. Enrollment for Connect Net can be done entirely online with the help of a licensed insurance agent, or by calling 888-452-6522.

For more information on Connect Net, please visit http://www.healthedeals.com/Media/Default/brochures/Connect_Net_1214.pdf

#

About Independence Holding Company

Independence Holding Company provides life and health insurance products in the United States, the Virgin Islands, and Puerto Rico. Its products include medical stop-loss insurance that provides coverage to public and private entities, which elect to self-insure their employees' medical coverage; group major medical insurance product that is designed to work with health reimbursement accounts and health savings accounts; and dental products that include indemnity and preferred provider organization plans for employer groups of two or more lives, and for individuals within affinity groups. The company also offers short-term medical products for people with temporary needs for health coverage; and vision plans that offer a flat reimbursement amount for exams and materials; supplemental products comprising fixed indemnity limited benefit, critical illness, and hospital indemnity products; ancillary non-essential health benefit plans; pet insurance; and occupational accident insurance products. In addition, it provides final expense life policy, a whole life product for 50 to 85 years old people; group long-term and short-term disability products to employers that provide benefit to their employees; New York short-term disability plan that offers temporary cash payments to replace wages lost; group term life products, including group term life, accidental death and dismemberment (AD&D), supplemental life and supplemental AD&D, and dependent life products; and individual life, annuities, and other insurance products, as well as reinsurance. Independence Holding Company markets its products through independent and affiliated brokers, producers, and agents, as well as through company-owned Websites. The company was founded in 1980 and is headquartered in Stamford, Connecticut. Independence Holding Company is a subsidiary of Geneve Corporation.

About The IHC Group

The IHC Group is an organization of insurance carriers and marketing and administrative affiliates that has been providing life, health, disability, medical stop-loss and specialty insurance solutions to groups and individuals for over 30 years. Members of The IHC Group include Independence Holding Company (NYSE:IHC), American Independence Corp. (NASDAQ: AMIC), Standard Security Life Insurance Company of New York, Madison National Life Insurance Company, Inc. and Independence American Insurance Company. Each insurance carrier in The IHC Group has a financial strength rating of A- (Excellent) from A.M. Best Company, Inc., a widely recognized rating agency that rates insurance companies on their relative financial strength and ability to meet policyholder obligations. (An A++ rating from A.M. Best is its highest rating.) Collectively, the companies in The IHC Group provide insurance coverage to more than one million individuals and groups. For more information about The IHC Group, visit http://www.IHCGroup.com

About IHC Specialty Benefits, Inc.

IHC Specialty Benefits, doing business as Health eDeals Insurance Solutions, is a full-service marketing and distribution company that focuses on small employer, individual and consumer products. IHC Specialty Benefits markets products through general agents online, telebrokerage, advisor centers, private label and directly to consumers. For more information about IHC Specialty Benefits, visit http://www.IHCGroup.com

This article was originally distributed on PRWeb. For the original version including any supplementary images or video, visit http://www.prweb.com/releases/2015/02/prweb12517589.htm

The IHC Group Jeena Choi +1 917-882-0960