TALLAHASSEE -- It took 79 days but Florida lawmakers finished their 2015 session early Friday evening, passing a $78.7 billion state budget a scant 12 days before a new fiscal year begins on July 1.

House and Senate members, who went through a 60-day regular session followed by a 19-day special session, will be back in Tallahassee before you know it. Committee meetings begin again in September, with lawmakers set to begin their 2016 session in January.

Despite the accomplishments of the 2015 session, lawmakers face a number of unresolved challenges, some of which could draw them into another special session before January.

Here’s what looms on the legislative horizon:

HEALTH CARE

It’s the reason why the regular session melted down into a House-Senate stalemate in late April, with lawmakers unable to accomplish their constitutional duty of passing a state budget.

The two chambers were at odds over a Senate plan to expand health care coverage under the federal Affordable Care Act to make up for the eventual elimination of the $2.2 billion federal program, known as the “low-income pool (LIP),” which compensates hospitals for charity care.

The differences were temporarily resolved in the special session when the House rejected the Senate expansion plan but agreed to bolster the hospital budgets with an infusion of $400 million in state funding.

But the two chambers will face the same problem in 2016. LIP, which dropped to $1 billion in the coming year, will drop to $600 million in the following year, putting even more pressure on lawmakers to either expand health care coverage or increase state funding.

But House leaders and Gov. Rick Scott oppose Medicaid expansion and will likely resist efforts to make up for the shortfall with more state funding.

“I think it’s important for them (the hospitals) to recognize that they’re going to have to restructure their business model and know that Washington isn’t going to be there for them anymore and the taxpayers of Florida aren’t necessarily excited about being there for them,” said House Speaker Steve Crisafulli, R-Merritt Island.

Scott has created a hospital funding commission that is likely to make his case that more competition is the key to driving down health care costs rather than government funding or government programs.

Sen. Aaron Bean, R-Fernandina Beach, has suggested a joint Senate-House committee to review health care challenges, which could provide the basis for a compromise, although that doesn’t seem likely at this point.

KING VS. BURWELL

The U.S. Supreme Court will rule in the next few weeks on the validity of using federal health-care exchanges to provide insurance under the Affordable Care Act.

If the federal exchanges are rejected, it could leave 1.3 million Floridians without health insurance since Florida is using a federal exchange, rather than setting up a state exchange. One option to address that potential problem would be for Florida to create a state exchange.

Crisafulli said legislative leaders will wait to see the court opinion before developing a response.

In March, in an opinion piece for Politico, Scott made it clear that he doesn’t like state exchanges. He suggested a better approach would be for the federal government to authorize personal “health savings accounts” for low-income Floridians, allowing them to pick their health care coverage.

He also suggested Congress should move to make other changes to drive down costs and improve competition, such as selling insurance policies across state lines or providing incentives to insurance companies to offer discounted services.

GAMBLING

The state’s five-year agreement that gave the Seminole Tribe exclusive rights to banked card games such as blackjack at most of its casinos expires in July. The agreement generated some $1 billion for the state.

But with lawmakers and Gov. Scott unable to agree on an extension of the Seminole gambling pact, it enters an uncertain phase on July 1.

“If you put 10 attorneys into the room you’ll get 10 different opinions as to what happens July 1,” said Senate President Andy Gardiner, R-Orlando.

Gardiner said he was open to a special session on gambling if the Seminole situation warranted it. But he also said it would be “very difficult” to restrict the session to the Seminoles, with other gambling interests again pushing for some type of broader agreement on gambling in the state, which could include Las Vegas-style casinos in South Florida.

REDISTRICTING

Lawmakers met in a special session last August, with a court ruling forcing them to revamp seven congressional districts with the major changes aimed at districts held by U.S. Rep. Corrine Brown, D-Jacksonville, and U.S. Rep. Dan Webster, R-Orlando. The session was response to a court ruling that the original districts violated a constitutional ban against partisan redistricting.

Another court ruling could force more map changes by the Legislature in the coming months. The revised congressional districts are being challenged at the state Supreme Court, which heard oral arguments on the case in March and could rule any time on the latest challenge.

Another redistricting lawsuit, aimed at state Senate seats, is scheduled for a trial in September.

WINNER OF THE WEEK: Hometown projects. In their own version of midnight madness, House and Senate budget negotiators struck their final deal late Monday night, adding some $300 million in “supplemental funding” that spread an assortment of local projects across the state. They ranged from economic development efforts to social services to water projects. The projects still must pass review by Gov. Rick Scott, who has the ability to reject individual projects with his line-item veto.

LOSER OF THE WEEK: Environmentalists. Environmental advocates who successfully pushed Amendment 1 on the November ballot were deeply disappointed in the results in the new budget, which they say short-changed land-buying programs like Florida Forever. Lawmakers say they followed the guidelines of the amendment, which required some $742 million in real estate taxes be spent on environmental programs.

QUOTE OF THE WEEK: “It’s nobody’s turn. It’s everybody’s test, and it’s wide open, exactly as a contest for president should be,” Jeb Bush said in announcing his presidential campaign in his hometown of Miami.