AUSTIN — A state Senate panel’s plan to highlight how the federal health care overhaul may be harming Texans has nettled the law’s supporters, who furiously demanded equal time.

On Friday, Sen. Craig Estes, who heads the panel, relented. Estes, R-Wichita Falls, asked a Democratic colleague to invite a couple of the law’s backers to testify at Monday’s hearing at the Capitol.

An Estes aide downplayed the episode, but it highlights a dread that is increasingly on the minds of Democrats and liberal activists: Next year, the Senate very likely will tilt more to the right.

In January, at least six and possibly as many as eight staunchly conservative freshmen will take seats in the 31-member chamber, already controlled by Republicans.

If, as expected, Republican Sen. Dan Patrick of Houston wins the November election for lieutenant governor, the freshman firebrands at least will begin the legislative session expecting to have a sympathetic presiding officer.

Patrick’s rapid political ascent may have underlain Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst’s assignment about Obamacare to the Senate State Affairs Committee. Dewhurst issued what Democrats describe as an inflammatory “interim charge” on Feb. 6, as he and Patrick were battling for the GOP nomination for the No. 2 job.

Charges are the presiding officer’s direction for legislative committees to examine issues while lawmakers are out of session. They often form the basis of major bills considered the next time lawmakers meet.

Dewhurst asked Estes’ panel to study “emerging negative impacts” of the federal law. He mentioned possible increases in premiums, narrow provider networks, harm to the state economy and potential misbehavior by the federally paid workers who help people sign up for insurance coverage online, known as “navigators.”

Suspicious timing?

Dewhurst issued the directive because of constituent complaints about Obamacare and not to score points with staunchly conservative primary voters, said spokesman Andrew Barlow.

“He’s been engaged with those issues all along,” Barlow said.

Supporters of the federal law scoffed.

“We all know when the charge was written,” Sen. Rodney Ellis, a Houston Democrat, said Friday, referring to the tough primary fight that Dewhurst would ultimately lose.

The activist group Texas Organizing Project arranged a press call with Ellis and others Friday to highlight those who would be missing from the Senate hearing. A Houston navigator praised the law. A Richardson woman said her family finally found an affordable policy in the marketplace.

A Houston home health care aide, who’s too poor to receive federal subsidies in the marketplace, pleaded for state leaders to take advantage of federal financial incentives to expand Medicaid. As the law was designed, she would have gained coverage there.

Ellis said he wished Estes would take testimony from the public at Monday’s hearing. Rep. Garnet Coleman, another Houston Democrat on the call, questioned the GOP game plan for the hearing.

“That does nothing to bring us to a place of common ground,” Coleman said.

Estes spokesman Noe Barrios said that as soon as the senator learned of the press call, he quickly invited Ellis to choose two Obamacare supporters who would be allowed to testify.

Earlier, Estes’ committee staff members announced that the only speakers would be officials from the Texas Department of Insurance, four business and professional groups, a conservative think tank and a liberal think tank.

Researcher Phillip Martin of Progress Texas, which calls itself a “progressive nonprofit” group, said the episode underscores why many people who care a lot about expanding access to health care are anxious about the next legislative session — and especially about what the Senate will do.

“If we rely on demagoguing to the basest instincts of the Republican Party, we’re going to continue to fall behind,” Martin said. “The question for 2015 is whether health care policy experts will write health care policy or political consultants will write policy.”

‘Wishful thinking’

Analyst John Davidson of the free market-oriented Texas Public Policy Foundation, though, said the federal law’s supporters are guilty of “wishful thinking” as they gush about its benefits.

Texas’ federally run, online marketplace has underperformed, signing up only 3 percent of the state’s 6 million uninsured residents, said Davidson, one of those invited to speak at Monday’s hearing.

Premiums are too high for most people eligible to buy in the marketplace, he said, and a looming requirement that employers provide coverage is slowing economic growth.

“Employers are saying, ‘We’re not hiring as many people as we would be because of the [law]. We’re hiring more part-time workers,’” he said.

The subject of insurance navigators sparked much talk last year but probably won’t dominate the hearing.

Dewhurst has stressed that, if federal safeguards alone had been in place, the navigators could have included convicted felons and poorly trained people who might mishandle Texas consumers’ confidential information.

At the urging of state GOP leaders, Gov. Rick Perry ordered the Insurance Department to require state licensing of navigators. In late January, Insurance Commissioner Julia Rathgeber issued requirements that applicants be fingerprinted, undergo more extensive background checks and receive 20 hours of additional training.

Federal officials and supporters of the federal law said state leaders merely wanted to suppress participation in the marketplace. Experts who closely track the navigators’ activity have said that ultimately, there were no reported cases of identity theft or harm caused by navigators.

On Friday, Insurance Department spokesman John Greeley said the agency hasn’t disciplined any of the more than 200 navigators currently registered. Nor has it revoked anyone’s registration, he said.

Since Rathgeber issued her rules, the department has received no complaints about navigators, Greeley said. He noted, though, that 28 applications were withdrawn.

“One of the drivers of withdrawn applications are questions related to review of the individual’s criminal background,” Greeley said. He didn’t say how many times that happened.

Barlow, the Dewhurst spokesman, said the lack of trouble proves state leaders’ wisdom.

“There’s a deterrent effect,” he said. “By raising the alarm … it helped protect Texans.”

Follow Robert T. Garrett on Twitter at @RobertTGarrett.