Video

Image Jaymes Diaz tries to escape our questions We caught up with Jaymes Diaz – and finally got answers out of the embattled candidate about those six points.

Labor has declared victory in the ultra marginal western Sydney seat of Greenway, following the infamous gaffe of the Liberal's candidate Jaymes Diaz.

Michelle Rowland thanked a small room of enthusiastic supporters at Blacktown RSL and kissed her first baby of the campaign - her infant daughter Octavia.

Ms Rowland declared victory despite her Liberal opponent Jaymes Diaz refusing to concede defeat.

"Tonight we have proven them wrong. We have come out tonight with a swing that has defied national averages," she said.

"The people of Greenway deserve nothing but the best. This is a very humbling result and means a great deal to me personally. It's been a long three years," she said.

Defending a margin of 0.88 per cent and with all the analysts predicting Mr Diaz would shoe it in despite his inept media performances, Ms Rowland had a 53.8 per cent to 46.2 per cent lead in the two-party preferred vote, achieving a swing of three per cent, with 71 per cent of vote counted.

Mr Diaz finally appeared at his campaign party just before 10pm in a Toongabbie carpark and was adamant he could still claim the marginal seat.

"It's too close to call," he said.

"There's still a lot of votes to come in and we'll probably know more about it tomorrow."

When asked why he was such a late arrival at his own party, he said "I've been going around, talking to a lot of people."

Mr Diaz refused to speculate on why he had failed to take advantage of the swing to Liberal in the rest of western Sydney.

Toongabbie State Labor MP and former premier Nathan Rees acted as an active campaigner for Ms Rowland.

"It is a victory for grassroots campaigning and members who are engaged with their communities. More local members like

Michelle Rowland would be a real shot in the arm," she said.

He also supported calls for her to join the opposition front bench.

"I would support that 100 per cent. She is really smart, she works hard. She is the only ALP member that's retained her seat and improved her margin," he said.

"This is the second time this gentlemen (Mr Diaz) has run, he simply wasn't up to it. If he does again he is throwing good money after bad."

Mr Diaz was absent from most of the major polling booths in the Blacktown-based seat and not even his own family knew where he was.

Jayme's father, Blacktown councillor and branch powerbroker Jess Diaz told the Telegraph he had didn't know where his son was outside a Toongabbie booth, while his mother Josephina was also in the dark on her son's movements when approached at Kellyville Ridge.

Campaign volunteers at several booths could not shed any light either, with one even asking why the Telegraph wanted to talk to him for.

Mr Diaz posted one photo of himself talking to Liberal volunteers at a Pendle Hill booth, won by the ALP in 2010, on his Facebook page and wouldn't pose for the media voting.

The Liberals moved their Greenway campaign office from Seven Hills to Toongabbie following the media fall out from Mr Diaz's media gaffes.

The Labor Party has rolled out a large truck playing constant coverage of Mr Diaz's now infamous gaffes, which stopped outside key booths in the south and north of the western Sydney seat.

Jess Diaz told the Telegraph that his son's gaffes wouldn't matter.

"It's Labor propaganda that doesn't mean anything. People know. What is embarrassing about it? A person makes a mistake once, does anybody not make any mistakes? Is there anyone perfect in the world?," he said.

Jess Diaz said his 37-year-old lawyer son, who achieved a five per cent swing in 2010 but was unable to land the knock out blow, had been targeted by the media but wouldn't comment if he was because he was a Filipino-Australian

"Unfair and biased reporting definitely. I don't want to answer that," he said.

"I know Jaymes is confident and he will serve parliament in the best traditions of the Liberal Party.

"It will not come down to preferences. That is not true, the preferences will flow to us, I think we may not need them."