What can a young boy who grows up black, poor and abused in Birmingham, Ala., do but dig up worms and search for interesting-looking junk to occupy his senses?

If you go Opening reception WHAT: Opening public reception for “Something To Take My Place: The Art of Lonnie Holley.” WHEN: 6:30-8 p.m. Aug. 21 WHERE: Halsey Institute of Contemporary Art COST: Free MORE INFO: halsey.cofc.edu Art exhibit WHAT: “Something To Take My Place: The Art of Lonnie Holley.” This project is supported in part by grants from the National Endowment for the Arts and the Elizabeth Firestone Graham Foundation. The exhibition is a visual arts offering of the MOJA Arts Festival. WHEN: Aug. 22-Oct. 10 WHERE: Halsey Institute of Contemporary Art, 161 Calhoun St. COST: Free MORE INFO: halsey.cofc.edu Gallery talk WHAT: Gallery talk with Lonnie Holley and curator Mark Sloan. Halsey Institute director and chief curator Mark Sloan will walk through the exhibition with Lonnie Holley and discuss his work and life. WHEN: 1 p.m. Aug. 22 WHERE: Halsey Institute of Contemporary Art COST: Free MORE INFO: halsey.cofc.edu Holley at market WHAT: Lonnie Holley at the Charleston Farmers Market. Holley will talk with visitors and lead them in creating small assemblage works from found objects gathered from the city. Participants can bring their own materials to work with or use some provided. All ages are welcome. WHEN: 9 a.m.-noon Sept. 12 WHERE: Marion Square COST: Free MORE INFO: halsey.cofc.edu Walk-through WHAT: Gallery walk-through with scholars and catalogue essayists. Leslie Umberger, Bernard L. Herman and Theodore Rosengarten will walk through the exhibition and discuss their varied approaches and impressions of his works. WHEN: 2 p.m. Sept. 12 WHERE: Halsey Institute of Contemporary Art COST: Free MORE INFO: halsey.cofc.edu Holley concert WHAT: Lonnie Holley in concert at the Charleston Music Hall. Holley will perform with cellist Ben Sollee and multi-instrumentalist Infinitikiss. WHEN: 8 p.m. Sept. 12 (doors open 7 p.m.) WHERE: Charleston Music Hall, 37 John St. COST: $15 in advance, $17 at the door MORE INFO: halsey.cofc.edu; charlestonmusichall.com/events/; Music Hall box office, (843) 853-2252.

What happens to a boy with a forcefully curious mind and the wherewithal to forge deep pathways into his imagination to escape, and then confront on his own terms, the ugliness and violence that surrounds him?

The boy, nicknamed Tonkie, becomes the artist Lonnie Holley. And the artist now is getting his due.

The Halsey Institute of Contemporary Art has organized an exhibition of Holley’s work called “Something to Take My Place,” which opens with a free public reception at 6:30-8 p.m. Friday, and runs through Oct. 10. The solo show features 40 works on loan from the artist, collector William Arnett and the Atlanta-based Souls Grown Deep Foundation.

Holley crafts sculptures using found objects, both natural and man-made. These “assemblages” typically refer to specific experiences and rely on coded language common among self-taught African-American artists and musicians, according to William Arnett’s son, Matt Arnett, who is Holley’s chaperone, fan, business partner, advocate and music promoter.

The artist, now 65, also has become a unique presence on the stage, performing jazz-like songs the lyrics of which Holley makes up on the spot while tapping a small keyboard. His musical approach is so particular and fascinating it has inspired many fine musicians to collaborate with Holley: Bradford Cox and Josh McKay of the band Deerhunter, for example; Richard Swift of The Shins and Black Keys; Kelly Pratt of Beirut, Arcade Fire and the Antlers; Dave Hartley of War on Drugs; Bill Callahan, Jon Batiste and many others.

For those who want a taste of Holley’s idiosyncratic musical style, he will perform at 8 p.m. Sept. 12 at the Charleston Music Hall.

More is planned, including visits to K-12 schools and college classrooms by Holley, an appearance at the Charleston Farmers Market 9 a.m.-noon Sept. 12 and a gallery walk-through with scholars and catalogue essayists at 2 p.m. that day.

The broken mule

Holley’s devotion to art as a primary means of expression began when the children of his sister were burned to death in a house fire. Holley carved two tombstones, the tears dripping from his face onto the surface of the rock, sanctifying the material, transforming it from an object into a story.

This is how Holley’s art works. It tells stories of his incredible life.

He was born on Feb. 10, 1950, the seventh child of a mother who would go on to have 20 more. He was adopted (though not in the traditional sense) by a burlesque dancer who worked for a traveling fair. Holley grew from a baby to a boy, malnourished, filthy, witness to life’s depravities.

Adopted again by another woman, he ate a bit better, but endured drunken attacks, including a strike to the head with an iron poker by a man who wanted to eat the food from Holley’s plate.

At 6 years old, he got a job picking up trash at the fairgrounds, a place that “enlarged my mentality, expanded my thought capability,” Holley told Ted Rosengarten, a local historian and writer. “I was curious — I was so curious about natural things.” He preferred digging in ditches to school. He liked to contemplate the weather.

At 7, his adoptive mother died, and her husband blamed the boy, beating him, cursing him, forcing him to cut wood. A terrible car accident nearly killed him, but he recovered after three-and-a-half months, surprising the doctors. Soon, Holley could no longer endure his circumstances and he ran away. When he was caught, he was beaten, then he would run away again.

He made it to New Orleans and learned a few things, before the authorities shipped him back to Birmingham. But he ran away again, with the energy of the civil rights movement buzzing through the South, and soon landed in a juvenile residency, “a victim of surprise circumstance,” picked up for vagrancy during a curfew.

Holley was forced to pick cotton, harvest watermelon and suffer more abuse. Once, he escaped, running and running all day and into the dark, until he fell into an open grave and, exhausted, fell fast asleep.

But he was caught again, returned to the detention center, beaten mercilessly. Holley would remember these episodes all his life, transforming them into works of art. “Blood on the Rock Pile.” “Memory Paper.” “Leaving You Alone.” “I Can’t Eat Locks.” “Mule Trying to Feed Himself.”

Holley was the mule. The broken mule.

At around 14 (he can’t be sure), he was reunited with his mother, and a new phase of his life began, with new experiences, traumas and challenges. His art tells this story, and more. It tells the story of the African-American experience. It tells of hardship and endurance and the narratives spun by unsettled minds.

“Some of the greatest performers in America is us, the African American,” Holley told Rosengarten. “Because Negroes of America watched, we observed, and we became America. We are truly Americans.”

Rosengarten traveled with Holley to Alabama late last year where the artist wanted to trace his roots and the historian wanted to revisit the terrain of Ned Cobb, the tenant farmer he wrote about in his 1975 National Book Award-winning “All God’s Dangers: The Life of Nate Shaw.” The trip was sponsored by the Halsey and part of an effort to create an essay-laden catalogue to accompany the show.

“Lonnie Holley as a little boy was discarded, and he has made a life of trying to retrieve all discarded things,” Rosengarten said. “He’s, in a sense, given new life, but even more than that, new meaning, to trash.”

Holley’s modus operandi is to retrieve, reimagine and reuse. “He goes a little bit further than the rest of us, and that’s part of what makes him an artist.”

Holley never knew he was an artist until others pointed it out to him. Today, he knows enough about the art world and its marketing biases and priorities to reject such labels as “vernacular artist,” “naive artist” and “folk artist,” preferring instead, simply, “artist,” Rosengarten said.

“I’m considered an outsider artist,” Holley recently told Mark Sloan, director of the Halsey. “Outside of what?”

Patronage

Holley’s most important patron is Bill Arnett, an art scholar and promoter who has devoted himself to discovering and protecting obscure African-American artists in the South. In 2010, Arnett started the Souls Grow Deep Foundation, which is dedicated to documenting, researching, preserving and exhibiting the work of self-taught black artists.

His approach is to provide certain artists with a monthly stipend and other financial assistance in exchange for the right of first refusal for works of art for sale.

Bill Arnett has “corrected” the value of this obscure art, according to Sloan. Self-taught black artists once collected far too little money for their work, if they sold it at all, Sloan said. Arnett pays them thousands of dollars per piece, effectively resetting market values and creating demand for work that often went unnoticed, Sloan said.

“What Lonnie’s work was about just struck a chord with my dad,” Matt Arnett said. “He realized that all of these other artists were part of a bigger system.”

All were operating outside of the commercial art market. All were documenting their history and unleashing the ingrained creativity of people accustomed to poverty and hardship.

They worked on their own, never expecting recognition, not to mention fame, Arnett said. Indeed, it was as if the work was designed to evade public admiration; it was not meant to look anything like “regular” art, Arnett said. It dared to express a cultural experience and a version of history that most whites in the art world preferred not to confront, he said.

“So it had to be disguised, it had to take on forms that weren’t readily recognizable to people who would see it,” Arnett said. “This kind of work began almost certainly in the cemeteries, because the cemeteries were more or less the one place where blacks were left on their own.”

Art then migrated from the cemeteries to backyards. Only with the onset of the civil rights movement, when blacks felt empowered by the forces of change, did this art find its way to the front yards and, eventually, into the sights of outside admirers, Arnett said.

The work of self-taught black artists partly was a result of the clash between rural and urban sensibilities, he said. Many blacks moved from small country towns and farms to bigger cities where work in textile factories and other industries was available. As a result, black artists gained access to a variety of new materials they used in their creations.

“When my dad met Lonnie is when he realized that the study and documentation of all of this would become his life’s work,” Arnett said.

On the verge

For Sloan, this show is as meaningful as any he’s curated, he said. It features a relatively obscure artist of enormous talent with a hard-to-believe biography, and it gives the Halsey Institute a chance to raise his profile. The show, therefore, fits precisely the Halsey’s basic mission, he said.

A few of his pieces will be installed in the Addlestone Library rotunda during the course of the Halsey exhibit, Sloan said. A documentary film has been produced, shot by John David Reynolds.

Sloan thinks Holley is on the verge of a greater success. Several important collections already possess some of his assemblage pieces, including the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York, and the Smithsonian American Art Museum in Washington, D.C.

And he won a prestigious Robert Rauschenberg Residency in 2014.

The artist finally is enjoying the fruits of his labor.

“We have gone out of the way to give Lonnie Holley his voice,” Sloan said.

Reach Adam Parker at 937-5902. Follow him at www.facebook.com/aparkerwriter.

Correction: An earlier version of this story misnamed the maker of the video.