"With service, I want to bring attention to some of those areas of health care that are really lacking."

Sitting next to one another in the St. Paul's library on Thursday, Caroline Scott and her most-influential teacher, Julie Albrecht, were quite a contrast.

Scott, 17 and petite with straight, brunette hair and an intense gaze, talked a mile a minute about how just being named a U.S. Presidential Scholar fit right into her career plans. She'll graduate from the Spring Hill parochial school next week, with Tulane University in New Orleans scheduled as the next stepping stone on her path to becoming a doctor and, maybe, a future politician.

Albrecht was every bit the proud, professional parent; doting and appreciative, with an easy answer ready in relation to one of her star pupils. She was not only Caroline's 11th-grade instructor but has also been one of her spiritual guides since middle school.

Tall with curly-blonde locks and an all-bright smile, Albrecht's a 15-year veteran of St. Paul's Episcopal School, teaching U.S. History and advanced placement courses.

And while they seem every bit mentor and apprentice, the two are part of a highly successful and driven team with aspirations of changing lives in the decades to come.

"Teaching Caroline is a special joy and a special challenge, because Caroline is so intelligent," she said. In sixth grade "you could tell that Caroline was processing the information in a way that was different than everyone else, at a very deep level . . . that reflected critical thinking and knowledge."

Caroline is Coastal Alabama's first U.S. Presidential Scholar since 2007, and the first her school has produced since 2000, according to Albrecht. There were two other scholars honored in the state.

This year, 141 students were chosen to be a part of the program, which measures academic achievement, artistic excellence, leadership, citizenship, service and contribution to school and community. Those students were chosen by a White House committee out of more than 4,300 who qualified.

What AND who you know

Caroline said it's great to be singled out for all the hard work and dedication to being a well-rounded young woman – she is a multi-sport varsity athlete and plays piano, violin and, most recently guitar. And on May 16 she will graduate as class salutatorian.

But the cooperative rubber is already meeting the road through networking with the other scholars nationwide, she said. They'll all meet during a trip to Washington D.C. June 21-23.

"I think it's not only incredible to be recognized but also become a member of this society where you're collaborating with other people," she said.

The daughter of Dr. Paul and Shelly Scott, Caroline is the oldest of four siblings attending St. Paul's. She said she wasn't targeting urology – her father's specialty – as a future physician, and is hoping to end up in public health.

She said she's excited about moving to New Orleans, where family connections and an existing familiarity are tremendous assets just out of high school. But attending Tulane – where she said the public health course of study has grown into a nationally ranked program with a heavy community-service requirement – is an inexhaustible subject of interest for her.

"I think this is a much more global and practical than just studying chemistry and going to med school," Caroline said. "And it's also something I can serve through."

Addressing health at home and abroad

Talking about the school, Caroline is very impressed with the international outreach her soon-to-be peers are achieving, especially in the medical field.

She's heard of many going to Australia, West Africa and Amsterdam, just to name of few ports of need the programs are sending students to.

And with that in mind, when asked where in the world she would go to help the suffering masses, if cost and access were no obstacles, her answer was a surprise.

"If you handed me a plane ticket I'd probably turn it down and drive down the street," Caroline said. "I think there's so much need that's right here in our community.

"There's absolutely nothing wrong with going to Costa Rica or other places, there's obviously incredible need there. But I think one of the things that would be best for us to address is to fix our home towns where we grew up that have supported us."

It's not just confidence in her future skills as a physician that fuels Caroline's appetite for service, but also her faith, she said. Sixth-grade confirmation at Ashland Place United Methodist Church "was definitely a huge part in my faith journey," she said.

And it was Albrecht who facilitated Caroline's confirmation.

Still a teenager at heart

"I started my college essay with, 'I'm from Alabama, I'm a woman, I'm a classical musician and I hunt and I have all my teeth," Caroline said on Thursday. She likes looking down the rifle sight during deer and turkey seasons, but was a bit disappointed when her busy schedule kept her from participating in the latter.

And while she may not have many guilty pleasures, Caroline said she's been spending a lot of time playing her graduation present, which also happens to be a six-string favorite of the great Eric Clapton, her favorite guitarist and rock musician.

As for social interaction, including friends and new relationships, Caroline said it's sometimes frustrating being so driven, so gifted, and still wanting to interact with people her own age.

"Sometimes it can certainly be a barrier; with me patience can be a huge thing," she said. "Sometimes people think, 'She's so smart I can't be friends with her. She's too this or too that,' and make assumptions.

"I just try to be congenial and friendly."

And having a well-defined plan and path earned over years of sacrifice and dedication, who's allowed into personal spaces is of great concern, as well.

"That's one of my main concerns as I go to colleges: am I going to make friends, am I going to meet people?" Caroline said. "Sometimes you definitely have to make those choices and say, 'Is this person going to be a good influence for me?

Is this person going to help me grow as a person?

"'Are they going to help me in any way?'"

Senator Scott?

For now, she seems far more interested in who she can help, as opposed to the converse. And the public service aspect of that interest could likely be fanned into flame with her upcoming trip to Washington D.C. On a class trip as an eighth-grader, Caroline observed a debate in the U.S. House of Representatives over what would later become the Affordable Care Act, and it enthralled her.

"I don't if it was me being interested in the politics or the health care, maybe both," she said. She finds it particularly interesting that a neurosurgeon, Dr. Ben Carson, has announced his bid for president in 2016. And that Alabama Governor Robert Bentley is also a physician.

"With service, I want to bring attention to some of those areas of health care that are really lacking and being a politician is a huge way to do that," Caroline said.