Legally, Florida lawmakers must accomplish just one task during the annual two-month legislative session, which begins Tuesday in Tallahassee. They must pass a state budget.

But given the pent-up issues facing Florida after last year's do-little, election-year session, legislators are proposing a host of ideas to address the challenges and opportunities facing this booming state.

There's some bad stuff in the mix, too, including bills that would allow concealed weapons on college campuses, erect more barriers to government in the sunshine, and make it illegal for a woman to duck into a man's bathroom, though the bill's true target is, sadly, transgender people.

Taxes and spending

But first things first. The budget. With the economy on an uptick, Florida government has more money than ever to spend this year — a record-setting $77 billion, including a $1 billion surplus.

Gov. Scott wants to return $673 million of that surplus in tax cuts, including a cut in the "communications services tax," which would save about $3.58 on an average $100-per-month bill. Look at your phone and cable bill and you'll see a lot of add-on taxes. So the governor deserves credit for trying to deliver on a campaign promise to cut taxes, as he did last year in reducing the vehicle registration fee by $25.

But once a governor proposes a budget, he has little control over the outcome until the session's end, when he can exert a line-item veto. And though lawmakers want to remain on his good side, they have other ideas about how to spend the money, emboldened by a new veto-proof majority in the Florida House.

Plus, the surplus might be illusory.

Health care

The forecast projects more than $1 billion in federal funds for the Low Income Pool, which helps reimburse hospitals for indigent care. Absent a dramatic about-face in Washington, that money is going away because the Affordable Care Act now provides such funding through the expansion of Medicaid, which Florida lawmakers refuse to accept. It makes no sense that lawmakers would accept charity-care dollars from one federal account, while refusing $5 billion a year from another.

Florida Senate President Andy Gardiner, R-Orlando, has suggested his chamber would consider an expansion of Medicaid, something the governor tepidly supports. The House, however, remains staunchly opposed. Still, it's worth noting that on this issue, House Speaker Steve Crisafulli, R-Merritt Island, says he's a "never-say-never kind of guy."

On behalf of people at the poverty level, as well as businesses and consumers who pay higher insurance premiums to cover the costs of the uninsured, let us hope Crisafulli can find a way to say yes.

Environment

Water will be a big issue this year, with House and Senate leaders saying they want to develop a long-term policy for sustainability and funding. Along with a focus on agriculture and development, there's a big push to address Florida's unique springs, which are losing their crystal-clear sparkle because of fertilizer runoff, animal waste, septic tank leakage, sewer plant failures and air pollution.

Water is critical to Florida's future, and given the challenges we face from Pensacola to Key West, it's good to see a big-picture focus emerging. But South Florida lawmakers should keep a vigilant eye on fair-share funding for projects south of Lake Okeechobee, including the Everglades. With legislative leaders from Central Florida, a disproportionate share of the money could be flowing north.

At the same time, lawmakers should commit to spending Amendment 1 money as intended by voters in November. The new state constitutional amendment requires a third of documentary taxes on land transactions be spent on water and land conservation. It says nothing about spending the money on aging sewage and stormwater projects, as some have suggested. To prevent a needless lawsuit, lawmakers should use the money for the intended purpose of buying and managing precious public lands.

Education

On education, Gov. Scott wants to fulfill his promise to spend $50 more per pupil than his re-election opponent, former Gov. Charlie Crist did in 2007-08, the state's record-high year. The governor's $19.75 billion proposal is up from this year's $18.9 billion. However, given competing interests from lawmakers with pet projects back home, it's doubtful the governor will deliver on this one.

It's also worth noting that the governor's plan counts on people paying higher property taxes because home values are up. Sure, the millage rate hasn't increased. But there is no getting around this. On education, the governor is counting on people to pay higher taxes to fund his education goals.

Speaking of schools, there's too much time spent on testing. The Senate may cap the amount of time students spend on state and local tests at 5 percent of school hours. The House is talking about giving school districts more flexibility. But given the possible presidential aspirations of former Gov. Jeb Bush, who implemented accountability testing, there's a good chance Florida will do little to address the problems with high-stakes testing this year.

Prisons

Sadly, too few leaders are talking about spending what's needed to address the mess in Florida's prison system, where a record number of prisoners have died in the last year, where investigators have been muzzled from speaking publicly, where wardens must barter to get vehicles with 100,000 miles on them and where dilapidated and moldy buildings threaten the health and safety of underpaid employees, and those in their charge.

Florida prisons need more guards, better maintenance and equipment, more training and the oversight commission proposed by the Senate Criminal Justice Committee. But so far on this issue, the House is missing in action. It is a moral imperative that Florida stop starving the prison system and address the abuses happening behind prison doors. And it's time Gov. Rick Scott addressed this crisis.