Topics: 2014 election, 2014 elections, 2014 midterms, Democratic Party, Democrats, midterm elections, Midterms, Politics, Republican Party, Republicans, U.S. Politics, Politics News

Everyone understood that the Republicans would make substantial gains in the 2014 midterm elections. That’s business as usual in the dumbed-down Newtonian physics of American politics. Almost every midterm since the current two-party system began to take shape at the end of the 19th century has involved the president’s party losing seats in the House and Senate. But this week’s calamitous wipeout came as a surprise to everyone, Republicans included. Even GOP strategists cautioned that the struggle for control of the Senate would be close. It wasn’t. And I didn’t hear anybody predicting that Republicans would win their largest House majority since 1930, or that Republican governors would be elected in Illinois, Maryland and Massachusetts, three of the bluest states in the country.

Some liberals find themselves scrabbling for reassurance amid the dregs of history in the wake of Tuesday’s catastrophe: Hey, Warren G. Harding’s Republicans lost a total of 84 House and Senate seats in the 1922 election! (That must have been about the Teapot Dome scandal. Although, seriously, who cares?) Even the sainted FDR lost 79 seats in 1938, amid a vigorous Republican counterattack against the New Deal. First of all, any time you start comparing your political fortunes to those of Harding, quite likely the most corrupt and incompetent president of them all, you’re in big trouble. More important, the paralysis, dysfunction and widespread public apathy – or public antipathy – of our political era distinguishes it from all others. This week’s shocking result is big trouble, all right. For the Democrats, most obviously, but also for the whole system and for the Republicans too, even if they don’t know it yet. As I observed while watching Fox News the other day, some of the savvier people on the right understand this already.

This is not a “seismic shift” in favor of the Republicans or the so-called conservative agenda, no matter what John Boehner and Mitch McConnell may say this week. Reading an off-year election result as an indicator of larger societal trends is like interpreting a blizzard as evidence against global warming. The political clock is already ticking toward 2016, when the pendulum will swing in the other direction and Democrats are nearly certain to win back some or all of what they just lost in Congress. If the human conundrum known as Hillary Clinton runs for president she will be the prohibitive favorite; Democrats have won the popular vote in five of the last six presidential elections. No, what the dire 2014 midterms really tell us is that the entire electoral system is on the critical list, stuck in a “Groundhog Day” wave pattern of bitterness, stagnation and cynicism. For one thing, it’s built around two political parties who despise each other with a passion and who represent profound cultural divisions in American society, but whose vague ideologies (as I have repeatedly argued) are suspiciously similar when it comes to fundamentals.

Viewed from a traditional social-science perspective, the 2014 election results appear nonsensical. Historians of the future, if there are any, will look back on this one as a head-scratcher, or possibly a tolling bell. Opinion polling clearly tells us that the public dislikes both political parties, but in general Republicans are even less popular than Democrats, and Congress is seen as even less trustworthy than President Obama. On a whole range of issues, from marriage equality to the minimum wage to tax policy and healthcare (as long as we avoid the O-word), majority public opinion is closer to the stated Democratic positions. Let’s set aside, for the moment, the highly relevant question of what Democratic politicians really believe, how they behave when they hold power and whom they actually serve.

Yet somehow the Democrats, who are notionally the party of cosmopolitanism and diversity and tolerance, and who have asserted for the last 15 years that they represent an “emerging majority” that will be along any day now, managed to get absolutely blitzed by an opposition party that increasingly represents one race, one gender and one region of the country, and whose only agenda is obstruction and negation. I know what the Republicans are against – they’re against Obamacare and immigration and taxes and environmental regulations and gay marriage and abortion. Broadly speaking, they’re against women and gays and black people and Muslims and Mexicans, all of whom are plotting to spread Ebola, but they have learned by trial and error to speak about those things in modulated tones, and with asterisks. But can anybody, John Boehner and Mitch McConnell included, tell me what the Republicans are for? OK, they’re for war and they’re for oil. Obama is for those things too, so I guess their problem with him is that he isn’t for them enthusiastically enough. Oh, and he’s black.

So the upshot of all this is that nothing got done in the last Congress and nothing will get done in the next one, but this time the nothing will be a lot scarier to watch. Of course it was disheartening to die-hard Democrats to learn that the “Obama demographic” simply didn’t feel it was worth showing up to vote this year, even though the venom and evil of the Republicans was right there for all to see. (As I argued a couple of weeks ago, declining to participate in a broken system is an entirely reasonable response, whether or not we approve of it.) Voter turnout has been depressingly low for 40 years in the United States, but has now apparently drifted to an all-time nadir. Hatred triumphed over hope in a rout, which could be interpreted as the fulfillment of brilliant conservative strategy – block Obama’s agenda at every turn and bog the entire Beltway process down in pointless bickering – or as the result of several decades of post-Reagan Democratic spinelessness and groveling, which concluded with the party selling itself wholesale to Wall Street. Or both; the two phenomena have nurtured each other.

Is there any plausible way out of this obsessive, recursive cycle, in which we can expect to see President Clinton 2.0 take office in January of 2017 with a feeble and ineffective Democratic majority, only to be punished for her feminist acts of treason by the resurgent angry white men in 2018, and so on, ad nauseam? Yeah, there must be. We just don’t see what that might be yet, and anybody who says they do is full of it. Nothing endures forever, especially not in politics. The United States has already gone through at least five or six distinct systems of factional or partisan electoral politics. Back in February, I put forward the hypothesis that we have entered a new one: The current era of stagnation, gridlock and symbolic cultural warfare could be considered the Seventh Party System, supplanting the Sixth, which began with Pat Buchanan’s “Southern strategy” of 1968 and the ensuing conservative counterrevolution.

How we might possibly get out of this mess has been the subject of considerable magical thinking on all sides. I’ll take these propositions one at a time, but here are the four big ones I see. First, there’s the idea that we’ll elect some president so charismatic and large-spirited and post-partisan that he or she will heal our wounds, reach from one fortified bunker to another and forge a new way of consensus or compromise. Yes, it’s the “transformational figure” fantasy, and you can stop laughing now. Or is that crying? Then there’s the alluring notion, extensively indulged in online comments forums, that one party will conclusively win the ideological debate and banish the other to near-permanent secondary status. (This sounds comical now, but remember that when Republicans won the House in 1994 they ended 40 uninterrupted years of Democratic majorities.) Next comes the allied but distinct notion that demographic change will doom one party to irrelevance, or force it to change into something unrecognizably different. (You get only one guess.) Finally, if we conclude that none of those things is likely to happen any time soon, we introduce a fourth possibility, the big unforeseen event that leads to implosion, collapse, transformation or revolution. That one sounds the most far-fetched, but it’s a little like Nietzsche’s proverb about the abyss: The longer you look at it, the more irresistible it becomes.

1. The Transformational President

Ouch. And also crap. I’ve given Obama a lot of grief in this space (because he’s been a moderately terrible president) but it’s not like I don’t understand all the emotion, pride and history that went into his initial election. His 2008 campaign touched a profound nerve in American cultural and political life, which was partly about racial healing but also about what that might represent — transcending the limitations and rhetorical pitfalls of American democracy, all its small-mindedness and stupidity and greed, and answering the historical call of Abraham Lincoln and Martin Luther King Jr. I believe that Obama actually wanted to play a role in that kind of transformation, and did not realize that was no longer possible. You had to feel for the guy during his humiliating press conference the other day, the one where he promised to sip some Kentucky bourbon with McConnell. (I’d rather drink molten nails with Satan, personally.) Run for president as a post-partisan consensus builder, and this is where you end up: Spending the fourth quarter of your presidency as a lame duck, forced to play smoochy-face with an inflamed majority of flat-earthers, “climate skeptics” and country-club maroons.

From his first moments as a candidate, Obama never misled anyone about his intention to govern from the middle and seek compromises. Those on the right (and the left) who obsessed about his roots in the Saul Alinsky activist tradition had clearly never read Alinsky, who despite his Commie-sounding name was all about pragmatic coalition-building. And from the morning after Obama’s election, the Republicans made clear that they weren’t interested in any sort of compromise with a Kenyan usurper, and would devote all their energies to a salt-sowing, forest-cutting policy aimed at disempowering Obama and undermining his legitimacy. There’s a much longer postmortem to be undertaken here, of course, including the observation that if many of us were taken aback to discover that Obama’s version of centrism involved recycling the same people who wrecked the economy under Bush-Cheney and expanding the national-security state’s war powers around the globe, we probably shouldn’t have been.