It’s more than two months since the Supreme Court issued its eagerly awaited decision in the recess appointments case, National Labor Relations Board v. Noel Canning. You may recall that by a vote of 9 to 0, President Obama “lost” this case, in as much as the court held that his recess appointments of three members of the labor board were unauthorized by the Constitution’s recess appointments clause.

The president had made the appointments during a monthlong Senate recess that was punctuated by momentary twice-weekly “pro forma sessions,” intended to keep the president from using his recess appointment power to fill positions that the Republicans were determined to keep empty. The court ruled that the pro forma sessions were real, not phony, sessions, and that the “recesses” between them were thus only three days long. That was too short, the court held, to count as a recess within the meaning of the recess appointments clause.

I put “lost” in quotation marks because by any objective view, this narrowly technical decision was a major victory for the president, considering the damage to presidential authority the court might have done – and came very close to doing – had it affirmed the lower court in functionally eliminating the recess appointment power altogether. Only an inside-the-Beltway commentariat, infected by a toxic politic atmosphere that obliterates all nuance, could have construed the decision as a defeat – thus enabling the Republicans’ effort to sweep the decision up into their false “presidential power grab” narrative. The unsung architect of the president’s unsung victory was Justice Stephen G. Breyer, who engaged in a head-to-head battle with his interpretive nemesis, Antonin Scalia, and came out the winner, marking the 20th anniversary of his appointment to the Supreme Court with perhaps the most important opinion of his tenure.

I had intended to offer this contrarian take on the Noel Canning decision back in June. But then came the Hobby Lobby decision, along with new developments in the contraception and abortion wars and other summertime distractions. The moment passed. But two developments in recent days sent me back to contemplating Noel Canning, and I have come away more convinced than ever that this important Supreme Court decision has been profoundly misunderstood. Hence this column.

The first development was a fascinating interview that Marcia Coyle of the National Law Journal conducted with Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg. Ms. Coyle, a highly experienced observer of the court and the author of “The Roberts Court: The Struggle for the Constitution,” published last year, drew a number of pointed observations from an obviously energized Justice Ginsburg. For example, the justice commented that while the Supreme Court was “once a leader in the world” in combating racial discrimination, “what’s amazing is how things have changed.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

What jumped out at me in the interview was Justice Ginsburg’s comment on the recess appointment decision: “I think some of the reports about Noel Canning, some of the headlines – ‘Court rejects Obama’s nominees’ – they missed what was really important about Noel Canning. The administration prevailed on the first two questions.”

Indeed, had the administration not prevailed on those questions – by a vote of 5 to 4 – this president and future occupants of the White House would have been constitutionally disabled from making the kind of recess appointments that have been regarded as a standard executive branch prerogative for much of the past century. The first question was the definition of “recess”: was the recess appointment power temporally limited to the recess between the two annual sessions of a Congress, or was it broader – a summer or holiday recess, for example. The second question was whether the vacancy had to have arisen during a recess, a definition that would have sharply limited the vacancies eligible to be filled by recess appointments in the first place.

Over a furious objection by Justice Scalia (joined by Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr., Justice Clarence Thomas, and Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr.), Justice Breyer’s opinion rejected the analysis of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit and adopted the answer to both questions that’s least restrictive of the president. As a result, a recess appointment can (still) be made for any vacancy, pre-existing or newly occurring, during any “significant interruption of legislative business” that the Senate deems a recess. So what’s a significant interruption? “Presumptively,” Justice Breyer said, a recess had to be at least 10 days long to qualify, although he added that an exception might be made if a “national catastrophe” required filling a vacancy on a more urgent basis.

The other recent development that induced me to revisit Noel Canning was a real-world application of the decision, in a ruling last week by the United States Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit. Before reviewing a National Labor Relations Board order, issued in a dispute between the Teamsters Union and an employer over the threatened hiring of permanent replacement workers during a lockout, the Denver-based appeals court said it first had to address the question of whether the board had authority to act in the first place. The five-member labor board can act only if at least three members are present, and at the time of the disputed order, the board had only three members. One of them, Craig Becker, had been appointed by President Obama during a two-week Senate recess in the spring of 2010. Given the uncertainty surrounding the validity of that appointment, the appeals court had placed the case on hold to await the Supreme Court’s ruling in Noel Canning.

The 10th Circuit’s decision, Teamsters Local Union No. 455 v. National Labor Relations Board, was written by Judge Neil Gorsuch, a rising star among Republican-appointed judges on the federal appellate bench. He wrote last week that given the Supreme Court’s decision, “there seems little reason to doubt the validity of the appointment before us and the power of the board to issue the order under review.”

That conclusion required no heavy lifting – and that’s the point. Any judge in the country would have ruled the same way. A question that was deeply disputed just a few months ago is now settled. (The 10th Circuit went on to uphold the board’s order and rule against the union.)

To return to the Noel Canning decision itself, and to why I credit Stephen Breyer with an important victory: It’s hard to imagine a more perfectly designed contest between two justices, Breyer and Scalia, and between the contrasting approaches to constitutional interpretation that they have come to stand for.

To start with the constitutional text – and, for the Scalia camp, that’s basically where the analysis ends – the language of the recess appointments clause appears to favor a tightly constricted power. The clause gives the president authority “to fill up all vacancies that may happen during the recess of the Senate, by granting commissions which shall expire at the end of their next session.” The recess of the Senate? At the founding, and until the 1860s, the Senate knew only one kind of recess, the recess between the two annual sessions of a single Congress. May happen during the recess at least suggests that the Constitution’s framers intended the clause to apply to those vacancies that came about while senators were away on their annual recess.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“The constitutional text is thus ambiguous,” Justice Breyer wrote in an understatement. His opinion, of course, didn’t end there. Text for him is a beginning, not an end point: “The Founders knew they were writing a document designed to apply to ever-changing circumstances over centuries.” He has made clear over the years that for him, text is to be interpreted in light of a provision’s overall purpose and of the understanding that has built up over the centuries.

For the two questions – the definition of “recess” and whether a vacancy must have occurred during a recess – both purpose and historical practice support the broader reading of presidential authority, Justice Breyer concluded. The purpose of the clause, he said, was “to permit the president to obtain the assistance of subordinate officers when the Senate, due to its recess, cannot confirm them.” The narrower answer to the two questions, he said, would thus restrict the president in a way the framers couldn’t have intended, preventing recess appointments “no matter who the official, no matter how dire the need, no matter how uncontroversial the appointment, and no matter how late in the session the office fell vacant.” Historical practice, with longstanding Senate acquiescence, supported the broader readings, he concluded.

This analysis was anathema to Justice Scalia. “The majority sweeps away the key textual limitations on the recess-appointment power,” he wrote. His opinion was labeled “concurring in the judgment” because the court’s bottom-line judgment was that the three disputed appointments were invalid. But in the “concurring opinion” he delivered from the bench – surely a first for an expression of disagreement so labeled – he denounced the court’s “judicial adventurism” and made abundantly clear that this was a dissent in all but the most formal sense.

The text was “clear,” Justice Scalia wrote in his opinion, which at 49 pages was eight pages longer than Justice Breyer’s. (I’ve wondered whether Justice Scalia’s opinion started out speaking for a majority, and whether Justice Breyer picked off Justice Anthony M. Kennedy as a fifth vote. But lacking proof and sources, I’ll leave it at that.) He said there was “no ground for the majority’s deference to the unconstitutional recess-appointment practices of the Executive Branch.”

The “real tragedy of today’s opinion,” Justice Scalia wrote, was the “damage done to our separation-of-powers jurisprudence.” Maybe so. Or just maybe it was the damage done to the rigid formalism that governs his approach to constitutional interpretation, the originalism of which Justice Breyer’s functional pragmatism is the polar opposite. Not for nothing did Justice Breyer give his 2010 book its title: “Making Our Democracy Work.”

Justice Scalia’s tragedy, it’s not unfair to say, is Justice Breyer’s triumph.