FRANCISCAN ST. JAMES TO SHARE COMPREHENSIVE SOUTHLAND HEALTH CARE PLANS AT JANUARY 9th BRIEFING

Public meeting on outpatient and inpatient care investments

for Chicago Heights and Olympia Fields

Glad to report that Franciscan St. James Health's will host a public meeting to discuss its plans to better meet the Southland's future healthcare needs will include briefings from the hospital’s medical staff president, Dr. Tonja Austin, and emergency medicine director, Dr. Vernell Johnson.

The meeting will be held on Saturday, January 9, 2016, at 9:00 a.m., at Victory Apostolic Church, 20801 Matteson Avenue, Matteson. Community residents and leaders are invited to share their feedback about the plans.

Arnie Kimmel, Franciscan St. James Health CEO, will also discuss Franciscan St. James’ plans to respond to the rapid changes in health care made necessary, in large part, by the Affordable Care Act.

“These reforms have ushered in a major transformation of health care in the Southland and across the nation. We are proud of the investments Franciscan Alliance is making in our community to respond to these changes and to better serve our community for years to come,” said Dr. Johnson. “As a physician who lives and works here, I look forward to continuing to provide personalized, high-quality care in the best possible environment, both in and out of the hospital setting.”

Kimmel says the meeting will also discuss the planning process for transitioning emergency room services to the expanded Olympia Fields emergency department and plans to reinvest in the Chicago Heights campus with medical offices offering expanded primary care as well as new community services and development.

"We look forward to sharing the comprehensive plans we've developed and to correct the misinformation spread to many residents," said Kimmel. "The Sisters of St. Francis of Perpetual Adoration have served the Southland for more than 100 years. This plan will enable us maintain their commitment to health care, and to serve our patients and community for many years to come. We look forward to engaging the community in open dialogue about the proposed plans.”

Improved services in Chicago Heights will include expansion of the Urgent Care facility at 211 Dixie Highway to include 24/7 care, improved access to primary care physicians and shorter wait times for treatment. The Chicago Heights campus redevelopment will include an outpatient pharmacy, bariatric/weight loss, outpatient behavioral health and diabetes services and a modernized professional building. The expanded outpatient care in Chicago Heights will be integrated with improvements at the Olympia Fields campus. These upgrades will include expanding the Emergency Department, the development of Obstetrics and Physical Rehabilitation programs, as well as expanding the ICU and Medical/Surgical bed capacity. Upon completion of the project the Olympia Fields campus will be comprised of all private rooms.

“The future of healthcare for the Southland is of utmost importance to Franciscan St. James and we sincerely want the community to understand how this restructuring will enhance care to everyone in the area,” said Mr. Kimmel. “Franciscan St. James has been in the area for over a century and we are committed to providing quality care for another 100 years.”

Additional meetings are planned and will be announced in the coming weeks.

###

About Franciscan St. James Health

Franciscan St. James Health is a member of Mishawaka, Ind.-based Franciscan Alliance, one of the largest Catholic health care systems in the Midwest with 14 growing hospitals. Franciscan St. James Health serves Chicago’s south suburbs and includes Franciscan St. James Health – Chicago Heights and Olympia Fields, as well as Franciscan Physician Network with offices in Chicago Heights, Frankfort, Homewood, Matteson, Olympia Fields and Park Forest.