Published: Sunday, 2/15/2015 - Updated: 1 year ago



Like it or not, Affordable Care Act to show up on everyone’s tax forms Health-care overhaul to affect returns for years



THE BLADE/AMY E. VOIGT Enlarge | Buy This Image Robert Hodge of Robert G. Hodge Tax Service, says penalties relating to the Affordable Care Act will come from refunds.

Tax-filing season is upon us again, and this year brings few changes from last year.

But one of those few changes is a huge issue that will affect taxpayers for years to come.

Political rhetoric and Congressional gamesmanship aside, the Affordable Care Act — frequently called Obamacare — is a reality and the law of the land.

And this tax season it is making its first appearance on every citizen’s tax form, with implications for many.

“The biggest thing this year is the impact of the Affordable Care Act. This year we’re having to verify health insurance on all of our clients or they face the penalties,” said Jeff Ogg of Jeffrey P. Ogg CPA Ltd. tax service in Toledo.

The ACA requires all taxpayers to do one of three things:

■ Have qualifying health insurance coverage for every month of the year.

■ Have an exemption from the requirement to have health coverage; or

■ Make an individual shared responsibility payment when filing your federal tax return.

New lines to claim health-care coverage have been inserted this year on all IRS forms. On the standard 1040 form it is Line 61, on the 1040A it is Line 38, and on the 1040EZ it is Line 11.

“In most cases, it’s going to be only a matter of checking a box on the form,” said Jennifer Jenkins, a spokesman for the Internal Revenue Service. “That’s the bulk of people, those checking a box.”

But for others, the ACA may enable them to claim an exemption, or it may require a shared payment if during any month in 2014 either you, your spouse, or your claimed dependents did not have health-care coverage and don’t qualify for an exemption.

“The Un-Affordable Care Act is what I call it,” said Robert Hodge of Robert G. Hodge Tax Service of Toledo. “The thing about it is the majority of the people who don’t have health insurance probably couldn’t really afford it anyway. They’re subject to a penalty.”

The penalty for not having insurance can be taken out of your refund. It is based on how many months in 2014 you didn’t have health insurance.

For the 2014 tax year, which people must submit a return for by the April 15 tax deadline, the penalty is $95 per adult and $47.50 per child or 1 percent of the household income, whichever is higher.

The first three months of 2014 are not subject to penalty, meaning that citizens only had to have health-care insurance covering April-December. And the penalty is prorated, meaning that if an adult didn’t have insurance in April but was covered from May-December, the penalty would be about $10.50.

And the IRS computes the penalty only on income above the tax filing threshold (the limit where someone is required to file a return), which is about $10,000. So a person with an income of $30,000 would have their 1 percent based on $20,000 of income and pay a penalty of $200.



THE BLADE/AMY E. VOIGT Enlarge | Buy This Image A spokesman for the IRS says most taxpayers will simply have to check a box on their tax-return forms.

“It starts out low because they want to get people used to it. But it will increase significantly,” Mr. Hodge said.

In 2015 the penalty rises to $325 per adult (and $162.50 per child) or 2 percent of household income, whichever is higher, and in 2016 it goes up to $695 per adult (and $347.50 per child) or 2.5 percent.

“To collect the penalty the IRS won’t put a lien on your house like they would an unpaid tax bill. But if you’re getting a refund they will take it out of that,” Mr. Hodge said.

The escalating penalties, experts say, may encourage young people who prefer to forgo health insurance because they rarely get sick to just pay the $95 penalty this tax season. But by 2016 it will make financial sense for a young person to go on either their state — if the state has one — or federal Health Insurance Marketplace exchange and buy an inexpensive health policy rather than pay a large penalty and get nothing.

Tax credits

Another new item the ACA brings to the tax table is something called a Premium Tax Credit, which will be available to some eligible people who buy coverage through the marketplace.

Based on one’s 2013 income, those who bought coverage through the marketplace last year had an option to have subsidies — advance payments — from the Premium Tax Credit paid directly to the health insurer, thereby lowering their coverage premiums.

However, when those people file their taxes, the amount of subsidies they will be eligible to receive will be based on their 2014 income.

“Let’s say your premium was $800, and your subsidy [based on 2013] was $600, which goes to the insurer. If your income went up in 2014, and you were no longer eligible for that [$600] subsidy, you will have to pay it back when you file your tax return,” Mr. Hodge said.

“What I’m seeing is the majority of people were getting too much money in subsidies and now have to pay it back at the end,” he said.

“That’s why I’m advising people that for next year, if you can afford to pay the premiums, you pay them, and then see what subsidies you get at the end,” Mr. Hodge said.

Few other changes

As for other tax changes this year, there are not many of any significance.

“There are not many drastic changes because in December [Congress] just extended everything. They kicked the can down the road, so to speak,” Mr. Hodges said.

For those under 65, a big change was in what can be deducted for medical expenses. Previously, one could deduct the amount of medical and dental expenses that was more than 7.5 percent of one’s adjusted gross income. But this tax season the threshold is 10 percent.

“It wiped out a lot of people” who previously could deduct some expenses, Mr. Hodge said.

Homeowners have good news and bad news. The good news is that at the last moment in December, Congress extended a deduction for mortgage-insurance premiums, but only for 2014.

Unless it acts later this year, that deduction will disappear and the mortgage insurance homeowners pay in 2015 will no longer be deductible next tax season.

Personal exemption

The personal exemption for 2014 tax filers has increased to $3,950 from $3,900 in the 2013 tax season. Part of the exemption gets phased out, however, if the adjusted gross income exceeds a certain amount depending on filing status.

The standard deduction — for those who don’t itemize — used by most people also has risen. It is $6,200 (up from $6,100) for singles or marrieds filing separately, $12,400 (up from $12,200) for married taxpayers filing jointly, and $9,100 (up from $8,950) for the head of a household.

The standard mileage rate for 2014 business use of your car has been reduced to 56 cents a mile from 56.5 cents in the 2013 tax year.

For 2014, the Alternative Minimum Tax exemption has increased from $80,800 to $82,100 for married couples filing jointly, and from $51,900 to $52,800 for single taxpayers. The AMT exemption is reduced by 25 percent of the amount by which alternative minimum taxable income exceeds $156,500 for married couples filing jointly, or $117,300 for single taxpayers.

One new change this year that taxpayers won’t see on their 1040 forms is a heightened emphasis on fraud and identity theft.

The IRS, which has been facing severe budget cuts the last three years and faces a 3 percent cut in 2015, is short on manpower even as identity theft is on the rise.

To combat the issue, it is limiting to three per year the number of refunds that can be directly deposited to a single financial account or prepaid debit card. After the limit is exceeded, it will issue paper checks that must be cashed in person.

“Over the last year I probably had 20 to 25 returns that we had to send in by paper after the electronic returns were flagged because the tax filers had been victims of identity theft. So, yeah, it is a big thing,” Mr. Ogg said.

“With all the cutbacks at the IRS it is taking longer to process refunds. And now [preparers] have to monitor identity theft and health care,” Mr. Ogg said. “Just trying to even call [the IRS] is like pulling teeth now. They are so understaffed.”

Contact Jon Chavez at: jchavez@theblade.com or 419-724-6128.