Party honors Loveland man who will reach 100 on Wednesday

Nevin Glassgow, right, leads his father Carl Glassgow into a surprise celebration in honor of his 100th birthday on Sunday at the Pulliam Building. ( James Garcia )

Well-wishers turned out for a surprise birthday party on Sunday in the Pulliam Building for a Loveland man who will turn 100 on Wednesday.

"I didn't know nothing was going on. They told me there was a meeting," Carl Glassgow said about being surprised by around 75 friends and family members.

He was born to Grace and Walter Glassgow Dec. 11, 1913, in New Market, Iowa, and was the seventh of eight children. He is the last surviving sibling.

His secret to living a long life: "When you retire, don't go home and sit in the rocking chair."

Carl schooled at Old Memory School near New Market through the seventh grade, after which he worked various jobs to help support the family. He was nearly caught in a cave-in when working as a coal miner in the winter of 1929 at the age of 16.

In May 1934, Carl married Mildred "Mic" Cavner. The couple had one son, Nevin, who was born Nov. 15, 1941. The family ran a farm near Conway, Iowa and later Coin, Iowa.

"He keeps telling my wife how poor we were when we lived on the farm," Nevin said. "I had no idea we were poor.

"Grand life. He's a good dad."

In the fall of 1953, the couple sold their farm, leaving for Loveland early the following year. Carl worked at the Johnstown Sugar Factory, for the city of Loveland's water department and the Loveland Great Western Sugar Factory. He retired in the spring of 1976.

"I remember when I was young, the way they worked at the Great Western Sugar Factory, there was a lot of shift work, so a lot of times he'd work overnight," his oldest grandson Mark Glassgow said.

Advertisement

"He lived through the Depression, so he knows what hard times are," he said.

Carl and Mic then became snowbirds, spending winters in Arizona until 1995. Mic died in the spring of 1994, while in Yuma, Ariz.

Carl was remarried in 1996 to Orio Trout. They traveled around Texas and Yuma in a recreational vehicle until purchasing a mobile home in the Meadowlark Mobile Home Park in Loveland in 1998. After Orio died in 2006, Carl continued to live in his mobile home until this September.

His friends from the mobile home park had nothing but praises for their former neighbor, who could commonly be found climbing on top of people's homes, even at the age of 98, making repairs or clearing snow from sidewalks for people.

He now lives with Nevin and his wife, who said they have been trying to "fatten him up."

"They miss me? I was figuring they was glad I was gone," Carl said laughing.

"To be around him, you wouldn't know he was 100. He's seen a lot of things we'll probably never get to see. But I never really think of him that way -- he's just my grandpa," Mark said. "He helped shape me into who I am."

At the celebration, many family and friends came to the podium to relive anecdotes, describing Carl as a generous, kind-hearted man. His responses showed his sharp wit and humor, causing the room to erupt with laughter every time he spoke.

"There are a lot of people here I didn't expect to see in a while. I'll get around and to them if they'll talk to me," he said jokingly.

James Garcia can be reached at 970-635-3630 or garciaj@reporter-herald.com. Follow him on Twitter: @JamesGarciaRH.