TOP STORIES

Despite criticism and disapproval by some, the president gives Obamacare an 8 out of 10 rating – not giving it a ten because you can “always improve something.”

“Sixteen million people or more have health insurance that didn’t have it before,” Obama said. He added that has led to the lowest uninsured rate “since we started keeping records.”

The biggest pharma deal of the year could be underway with specialty drug manufacturer Mylan’s $29 billion bid to purchase Ireland-based Perrigo.

The deal would create a generic medicine powerhouse, giving the combined company critical mass in specialty brands, generics, and over-the-counter and nutritional products. Together, the two companies would have about $15.3 billion in 2014 sales.

LIFE SCIENCE

BSD Medical, recently rebranded as Perseon Corp, said today that it won an expanded 510K clearance from the FDA for its MicroThermX device.

Preliminary research suggests therapy with a human antibody appears to reduce levels of the HIV virus in the blood for at least a month.

Biopharmaceutical company PAREXEL is contributing to the industry workforce with the announcement of three new academic programs at the PAREXEL Academy.

PAYERS-PROVIDERS

SERMO, as the leading US social network for doctors, has announced an international expansion, starting with the UK.

An estimated 6 million people enrolled in health coverage using privately managed health insurance exchanges in 2015, according to a new report by Accenture.

Enter the new era of house calls: Dallas physician Jonathan Clarke, MD, has launched an app called “Mend,” which allows users to request his services via smartphone, similar to Uber, but for healthcare

TECH

Intel has been not so subtly trying to get into China’s hardware industry and spread use of their ARM-based chips. This includes wooing big vendors to use its technology with free chips, as well as smaller companies like CEIN Biotechnology, which develops finger vein scanners.

On Wednesday, Intel held its annual developers conference in Shenzhen, China, at a time when rival ARM-based chips from Qualcomm and MediaTek have been all the rage.

POLITICS

Questions about GMO labeling regulation guidelines and the reasoning behind what makes concerns about the process valid continue.

President Obama was briefed on the diminishing Ebola epidemic in West Africa. This is the first time the White House has publicly addressed the disease in several weeks.

A LITTLE EXTRA

Getting little ones excited about science is a fun and very worthwhile endeavor – and what better way to to do that then tell them they are allowed to get their hands dirty.

A startup that wants to encourage kids to get excited about science and engineering, MudWatt, is now selling an affordable, fun (and, yes, a bit messy), science kit by way of Kickstarter that allows children to make electricity using just mud and electrodes.

The Morning Read provides a 24-hour wrap up of everything else healthcare’s innovators need to know about the business of medicine (and beyond). The author of The Read published it but all full-time MedCity News journalists contribute to its content.