Probe prompted by internal hospital whistle-blower

Buy Photo Westchester Medical Center is shown in this file photo. (Photo: Frank Becerra Jr./The Journal News)Buy Photo

Westchester Medical Center has agreed to pay $18.8 million to settle a civil complaint accusing it of improperly charging Medicare and other misconduct.

U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara on Thursday said the Valhalla hospital allegedly submitted cost reports to Medicare seeking reimbursement for improper charges related to an agreement with a cardiology practice.

"Westchester Medical Center participated in a coordinated shakedown of Medicare and, by extension, taxpayers," FBI Assistant Director-in-Charge Diego Rodriguez said.

From 2000-07, according to the complaint filed in Manhattan federal court, Westchester Medical had a financial relationship that violated the law. That relationship was with Cardiology Consultants of Westchester, a practice formerly operating on the medical center's Valhalla campus.

The medical center said the incident preceded current management.

"Although the Medical Center believes that its financial relationships with its clinical faculty are customary for academic medical centers of its size and complexity, we acknowledge that, with respect to a very small number of legacy relationships, we could not produce documentation sufficient to meet certain technical requirements of federal law," the center stated in an email.

Here is how Bharara's office described the alleged fraud that prompted the settlement:

•Westchester Medical, through an affiliate, Matrix Resources, entered into a management agreement with Cardiology Consultants of Westchester in July 2001.

•The medical center agreed to assist the cardiology practice in opening a medical office in Kingston, N.Y., with the goal of expanding Westchester Medical's referral base and service area northward.

•Between 2001 and 2002, Westchester Medical, through the affiliate, advanced $450,000 to the cardiology practice under the agreement. The cardiology practice was to repay that money with interest by the end of the agreement's three-year term, along with other conditions.

•In July 2002, Westchester Medical and the cardiology practice started discussing termination of the agreement. At the time, the cardiology practice sent a letter asking the medical center to eliminate some interest payments and extend the repayment period. The request cited the referral of patients from the Kingston office to Westchester Medical as the reason, court documents show.

•In April 2003, the cardiology practice and Westchester Medical agreed to terminate the management agreement, with conditions that included less interest and an extended payment period.

•At the same time, they also entered into a separate two-year consulting agreement. That deal involved Westchester Medical paying the cardiology practice $50,000 annually, retroactive to July 2002, court documents show.

•The medical center paid the cardiology practice $190,000 in connection with that agreement, but couldn't provide evidence that the cardiology practice performed the contracted services, court documents show.

•During the two-year span, the cardiology practice referred patients for hundreds of medical procedures at Westchester Medical, court documents show.

Another part of the settlement involved Westchester Medical allegedly improperly filing charges related to its cardiology fellowships.

Prior to 2003, Cardiology Consultants paid hundreds of thousands of dollars to Westchester Medical for the salaries and expenses relating to cardiology fellows, court documents show.

Beginning in 2003, the cardiology practice stopped paying the fellowship charges for which it was billed by Westchester Medical, court documents show. Westchester Medical continued to bill the cardiology practice, failed to compel payment and then wrote off the amounts as uncollectible in April 2007, court documents show.

Westchester Medical, which now has 3,000 employees, agreed to the settlement after it was accused in the complaint of violating the anti-kickback law, which prohibits hospitals from paying someone to purchase, order or refer other forms of business that would be paid for by federal health-care programs, such as Medicare.

Another law that Westchester Medical allegedly violated is the Stark Law, which says the government will not pay for health care connected to improper financial relationships that can compromise physicians' professional judgment as to whether a service is medically necessary, safe, effective and of good quality.

The civil complaint stemmed from whistle-blower Dan Bisk, the medical center's former compliance officer who has since died, according to attorneys representing his estate.

According to the complaint, Bisk discovered the alleged fraud and blew the whistle internally before commencing a False Claims Act action, which he alleged led to his marginalization and firing. His estate has settled the retaliation case for an undisclosed amount, according to the attorneys at Sadowski Fischer.

Whistle-blowers also receive between 15 percent to 25 percent of settlement amounts, in this case the $18.8 million.

Federal lawmakers and prosecutors have targeted Medicare fraud in recent years amid criticism of out-of-control increases in health-care costs. The issue has drawn added scrutiny since the Affordable Care Act in 2010, which is seeking to expand access to health care while reducing spending.

Read or Share this story: http://lohud.us/1Hjvt8c