Amgen Inc. (NYSE:AMGN) is having a tough time with biosimilar versions of its own blockbuster drugs. Last month Novartis AG ADR (NYSE:NVS) launched its biosimilar for Amgen’s Neupogen in the US.

Only last week, Novartis announced the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) had accepted a regulatory submission by Sandoz, its biosimilar subsidiary. This is to produce a biosimilar version of Amgen’s best-selling drug, Enbrel.

Biosimilars – Biosimilar drugs are imitation versions of more expensive biologic drugs. The two versions differ in the living cells used in their manufacture.

These less expensive alternatives have been available in Europe since 2006. They have been delayed in the US by the lack of regulatory framework for their approval. US regulators were allowed to approve biosimilar drugs, after the passing of the Patient Protection Affordable Care Act 2010, which enforces close examination to certify the similarity. It became mandatory for manufacturers to conduct clinical studies to prove the similarity between the biosimilar and its reference biologic.

The first and the only biosimilar currently approved in the US is Zarxio, Novartis’ version of Amgen’s Neupogen. Following a series of lawsuits, the drug was approved in March and launched in September.

What Is In Biosimilars To Be Feared ?

Novartis set the price of its biosimilar 15% less than the reference biologic. Insurers expected the drug to be priced at least 40% lower.

The introduction of biosimilars is seen as a real threat to Amgen. Some of its top revenue generators, including Neupogen, Neulasta, Epogen, and Enbrel have lost their patent protection or are nearing their patent expiration. It provides biosimilar developers with an opportunity to launch their own versions to disrupt the market share of the original biologics.

Last year, the drugs generated $12.47 billion in sales. With the launch of biosimilars, Bloomberg reports, the combined sales from these four drugs will fall to $10.32 billion in 2020.

When biosimilars cannibalize the market share of these drugs, it will dent biologic drug sales. An Enbrel biosimilar could be the most threatening.

Enbrel Biosimilar

At the moment, Enbrel contributes 20% of Amgen’s revenue, with global sales of $9 billion, making it the fifth best-selling drug. The drug is marketed by Amgen in collaboration with Pfizer Inc. (NYSE:PFE). Amgen sells the drug in the US while Pfizer sells it in the rest of the world. Enbrel generated $4.70 billion in sales for Amgen, last year.

Enbrel’s patents were to expire in 2012, but a 2013 court ruling extended the patent protection by 16 years. Novartis has filed for approval of its Enbrel biosimilar. The drugmaker wants approval for each area where the original Enbrel has already been approved, such as psoriasis and rheumatoid arthritis. "Sandoz believes that the totality of evidence in its submission, including two pivotal clinical studies, will demonstrate that the proposed biosimilar is essentially the same as the reference product," Novartis said on Friday.

Merck & Co. Inc. (NYSE:MRK), Samsung Bioepis, and Biogen Inc. (NASDAQ:BIIB) are also eager to cannibalize Enbrel’s market share. Collaboration between Merck and Samsung Bioepis, to produce a biosimilar rival to Enbrel, was approved by South Korean regulators last month.

The Merck, Samsung Bioepis partnership is targeting approval by Europe’s regulators before hitting the continent’s market. Another collaboration involving Samsung, this time with Biogen, is launching its own Enbrel biosimilar into Europe.

Is Amgen Ready For Enbrel Biosimilar?

Amgen appears well-equipped to face the biosimilar wave fast approaching the enterprise. Its' new drugs and promising pipeline have the potential to contain any losses.

Newer Drugs – To counter declining sales, Amgen could focus on newer drugs, introduced in the past decade, including Prolia, Xgeva, and Vectibix.

With the launch of biosimilars, Amgen is expected to generate sales of $5.30 billion by 2020, a loss of $2.10 billion in total revenue compared to 2014. The newer drugs are expected to generate sales of $6.70 billion in the same time, an increase of $3.70 billion over 2014 revenue.

Repatha, Amgen’s latest drug, which belongs to the new PCSK-9 inhibitor class of cholesterol lowering drugs, could be a blockbuster. It received FDA approval only last month and costs $14,100 for a year-long treatment. Its annual peak sales potential has been marked in the $2 billion - $5 billion range by analysts.

Robust Pipeline

The Amgen pipeline contains 40 experimental candidates, 18 are being evaluated in initial phase trials, and 10 in mid-stage, while 12 are in late stage clinical development. Its therapeutic targets are the lucrative oncology and hematology fields. In 2014, the hematology market made sales worth $15.70 billion with oncology valued at $79 billion, reports Bloomberg. Spending on cancer hit $100 billion last year, probably climbing to $147 billion by 2018, suggests IMS healthcare.

Enbrel Sales



Enbrel’s 2015 sales are predicted to rise to $5.01 billion, when they will stagnate until approximately 2017. Sales will rise a little in 2018 before flattening again up to 2020.

How Has Amgen Stock Been Impacted So Far By Biosimilars

Despite its exposure to the threat of biosimilars, Amgen appears to be in a position to control the losses. The patent expirations and launch of biosimilars might slow down the growth rate, but not weigh down revenues. Bloomberg reports the business’ sales are expected to reach $24.30 billion by 2020.

The stock performance points to fear of the patent expiration of Amgen’s top revenue generating drugs, among investors. The corporation’s shares have underperformed biotech stocks, despite reporting exciting developments with the pipeline and Repatha.

Amgen’s shares have slid 10% in 2015, YTD, while the iShares NASDAQ Biotechnology ETF is up 4%.