Biosimilars are a major discovery of the 21st century, which produced a shockwave in the stagnant pharmaceutical industry globally. According to IMS Health, the total revenue biologic drugs generate could touch $221 billion in 2017, thereby making up 20% of total global sales.

Biologic drugs are approximately 22 times more expensive than traditional drugs, and it is expected that the biologics segment will account for 50% of total sales globally, by 2018. Due to the price hike, regulatory agencies as well as federal authorities are working on cost-cutting techniques, including launching generics and biosimilars, into different therapeutic markets.

In 2010, the healthcare system in the US adopted the Affordable Care Act, also called Obamacare, which specified timeframes for the maximum allowed delays in the research and development of the biosimilars. US presidential candidates are raising their voice against price hikes by drug companies, and proposals on how this will be tackled have grown into a major issue. They are also inclined towards heightened efforts in the biosimilar segment, to substantially cut costs.

It is expected that biosimilars will save $25 billion to $250 billion in costs in the 2014-2024 period. Due to the cost effectiveness, they are rapidly capturing different therapeutic markets globally. According to Allied Research, biosimilars are expected to capture multiple therapeutic markets worth of $26.5 billion by 2020, which reflects an annual growth rate of 48%.

The main factor that will facilitate growth is the patent expiration of multiple blockbusters in 2016 and 2017. This gap is going to have to be compensated for by biosimilars. They provide the same efficacy as well as safety profile as branded drugs, at a fraction of the cost. In Europe, biosimilars are expected to provide savings worth €10 billion from 2016 to 2020, mainly thanks to competition with branded drugs.

THE EUROPEAN EXPERIENCE

Despite strict rules and regulations in the EU, biosimilars are not eligible for interchangeability with the original molecule. Regardless, biosimilars have clinched a significant portion of multiple therapeutic markets in European countries.

The acceptance of the biosimilars in the EU is slow, but steady since generics are well established and represent 90% of the therapeutic markets. The main reason is the discount option. Biosimilars are sold at 15-25% discounts compared to biologics, and generics carry discounts up to 40%.

Remsima by Celltrion was the first biosimilar in the EU, to be approved by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. The drug was approved in 2013, and started sales in February 2015.

According to Celltrion, since the inception of Remsima, it has clinched 20% of the sales of Remicade in Europe. The sales of Remicade declined from $2.3 billion in 2014, to $1.8 billion in 2015.

BIOSIMILARS IN THE US

The impact of the launch of biosimilars in the US therapeutic market is multidimensional, since the US pharma industry allows biosimilars to be used as an interchangeable option for the original molecule.

In the next five years, the picture of the US pharma industry will change radically, due to the induction of biosimilars and generics. There are a number of biosimilars of multiple drugs currently in the drug pipeline, expected to be launched in the next five years. The latest example is the launch of Zarxio, a biosimilar of Neupogen, by Novartis (NVS: NYSE), in September 2015.

In the US market, physicians are generally very receptive to biosimilars. In a survey conducted by InCrowd, which included 150 doctors, 83% prefer biosimilars due to cost effectiveness, compared to biologics. 33% said they prefer the biosimilar if the discount was even as low as 5%, when treating chronic oncology and immuno-oncology diseases. This is likely since the cost of the branded products is very high, and even discounts as minimal as that make an impact.

The political atmosphere in the US is supporting biosimilars, and presidential candidates are increasingly critical of the pricing practices of major drug companies. Despite this, there is still ambiguity in the process in place for their approval.

BIOSIMILAR THREAT

In 2015, Remicade generated $6.5 billion, $4.5 billion of which came from the US, whereas sales in Europe were worth $1.8 billion. Inflectra, a biosimilar of Remicade, is likely to slash the market share of Remicade to half, by 2020, according to Morningstar analyst Damien Conover.

HUMIRA

The launch of Inflectra has put AbbVie’s Humira and Amgen’s Enbrel in the spotlight. Humira is one of the leading drugs indicated for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The drug contributed to approximately 60% of AbbVie's total sales and is expected to touch $18 billion in 2020.

Bloomberg Intelligence (BI) analyst Sam Fazeli said: “Humira, an antibody to TNF-alpha, has driven the class to become the biggest therapeutic class globally, with $32.4 billion of sales in 2014. The second biggest drug is Johnson & Johnson’s Remicade.”

In view of the patent expiration of Humira, expected in the US in 2017, and in the EU in 2018, AbbVie has taken the benefit of the patent protection policy. Humira is safe from the threat of biosimilars till 2022 to some extent, but its revenue is still going to be eaten away by other immuno-oncologic drugs, such as Remicade.

ENBREL

Amgen’s Enbrel is also a big contributor, making up approximately 25% of total company sales. In 2015, it clinched sales worth $5.3 billion, and by 2020, it is expected to touch the $5.6 billion mark. The launch of Inflectra is expected to decline due to its pricing criteria.

NEUPOGEN



Zarxio was the first biosimilar to be launched in the US in September 2015, opening a new window for patients to use cost-effective drugs with the same efficacy and safety profile. Due to its low cost, it is bound to jeopardize the sales of Neupogen. Except the US, the biosimilars of Neupogen have been available in 40 countries since 2009.

Since 2008, the drug has faced a decline in sales, due to biosimilars. The drug generated its peak sales of $1.34 billion in 2008. In the European market, biosimilars have taken over almost 30% of its market share.

NEULASTA

The patent for Neulasta has already expired in the US, whereas the European patent will expire in 2017. Novartis and Apotex are working on its biosimilar version.

The version developed by Novartis is in the final clinical trial, whereas Apotex is waiting for FDA approval. Estimates suggest that its sales will decline at an average of 8%, from 2016 through 2022.

BIOSIMILAR FOR INSULIN

The first biosimilar for Lantus is expected to be launched by the end of 2016, by Eli Lilly and Boehringer Ingelheim. There are many other biosimilars also in the pipeline, which will help patients save money. Merck and Sanofi are in the process of developing a biosimilar for insulin.

COST FACTOR

The launch of copycats has investors tending towards them, since they now cover most of the market. On the other hand, investors are also worried about the decline in the profit generated at the likes of Roche and AbbVie.

The role of biosimilars is established in Europe, since they were launched about a decade ago. They encountered a stumbling block initially, but are now moving country to country, to cover multiple therapeutic areas. According to the IMS Health, Germany generates the highest number of biosimilar prescriptions there.

BIOSIMILAR PIPELINE

At the end of 2015, pharmaceutical companies were working on 41 biosimilar versions of four blockbuster drugs, as their patents near expiration.

Amgen’s ABP501 filed in 2015, is a biosimilar candidate for Humira (adalimumab). Aprogen filed two drugs – G5071, the biosimilar for Remicade (infliximab) and AP052, a biosimilar for Rituxan (rituximab).

According to Eastern Research Group, the FDA spent an estimated $81.7 million on the biosimilar development program, resulting in a workload that totaled 295 full-time equivalents.