As the owners/operators of rental property in Boulder and on the Hill, we know the following to be true:

1. Creating restricted properties for seniors or providing affordable housing in the core area of the Hill would add to the number of noise complaints that the city already receives.

2. There is a very low demand for office space on the Hill. The office space vacancy rate on the Hill has averaged 45 percent over the last 10 years.

3. Over the past four years there has been significant investment in the Hill in terms of retail space and residential units. The overall appearance of the Hill has improved.

I came to Boulder in the summer of 1971 as a student at the University of Colorado. My wife came to Boulder in 1975 and also graduated from CU. When I walked on the Hill for the first time in 1971 I was shocked. I was actually afraid of the people who were walking the streets on the Hill. I had never seen such a collection of dirty, drugged-out people in my life. The scene was very similar to that of Telegraph Hill in Berkeley. A young man who walked the Hill with me that day told me I would be OK and to just be careful as I walked along. Well we both survived.

Advertisement

The core part of the Hill is now and for the 44 years that we have been here has been the home of many University of Colorado students. Help us understand why are there people who insist on trying to change the makeup of the Hill when our history has shown that this part of the Hill has been the home for CU students. Frankly, we believe trying to go against the history and evolution of the Hill makes as much sense as recommending and trying to change the make-up of those who live and work on Mapleton Hill. Yes, there are many little home businesses that are doing quite well in that hallowed part of town. Should we recommend that we create affordable housing or perhaps a small student area to improve the diversity of the Mapleton neighborhood as well as some of the other affluent neighborhoods of Boulder?

Help us understand why the Hill in general has drawn so much attention from those who do not own, operate a business, or live in the core area that is under review? Help us understand why is it wrong that the Hill is comprised mostly of students? Help us understand why this is wrong when the Hill is right across the street from campus. Most public and private universities across the country have areas across from campus that are made up of students. The Hill has always been where the students live. Help us understand why this needs to change and who is bothered by this?

The improvements that have been made on the Hill over the past four years have improved the appearance of the Hill and improved the quality of life for those who live in this area. Help us understand why there are people who insist on imposing there parochial views as to how the Hill should evolve when local citizens in collaboration with the city have made the Hill better. Please help us understand why we need to rush making long-lasting decisions that will affect the hill, its residents and their quality of life? We are respectfully begging that the City Council not make any quick decisions regarding any recommendations from anybody. Please help us understand why some would want to rush making any decisions of any kind that would minimize the wonderful opportunity that this unique part of Boulder offers. We would appreciate any face-to-face meetings with members of the City Council to discuss many other points that we would like to offer that would benefit all of us.

The commercial-residential area of the Hill has come a long way from my first walk on the Hill in 1971. Let's be wise going forward. A rush to judgment truly helps no one!

John and Nancy Pavelich live in Louisville.