The global consulting and technology services company Accenture agreed in September 2011 to pay the U.S. government $63.6 million to resolve a whistle-blower lawsuit alleging the company submitted false claims for payment under numerous contracts with federal agencies for information technology services.

“Kickbacks and bid rigging undermine the integrity of the federal procurement process,” Tony West, assistant attorney general for the Justice Department’s civil division, said at the time.

“Companies profiting off the breach of their government contracts will pay,” said Brian Miller, the General Service Administration’s inspector general.

So, how has the Obama administration made Accenture pay for its alleged kickbacks, rigged bids and fraudulently inflated prices (other than the $63.6 million slap on the wrist to which the Justice Department agreed in 2011)?

By awarding Accenture a one-year, $45 million contract to take over healthcare.gov, the Obamacare online portal that had a disastrous, glitch-ridden rollout in October and still is not operating as smoothly as the average insurance company website.

The Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services, which oversees healthcare.gov, is still developing a work plan for Accenture, which may very well increase the final value of the contract beyond $45 million.

Perhaps it will even top the $63.6 million settlement Accenture paid the government for undermining the integrity of the federal procurement process. That would be prima facie evidence that, in federal contracting, no bad deed goes unrewarded.

Speaking of which, the Obama administration cut ties Friday with CGI Federal, the original contractor for healthcare.gov. The IT firm, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Canadian company CGI, had a two-year federal contract valued at $100 million.

That was despite the fact that CGI’s performance on a medical registry for diabetes patients in the Canadian province of Ontario – a cohort of less than 1 million people – was so horrendous, including three years of missed deadlines, that the provincial government jettisoned its $46.2 million contract with the IT firm.

The question is, how companies with such problematic track records as CGI Federal and Accenture nevertheless managed to score lucrative contracts with the Obama administration.

Some suggest that the relationship between first lady Michelle Obama and her Princeton University classmate, CGI Federal senior vice president Toni Townes-Whitely, may have helped CGI win its contract.

And there’s speculation that the $286,168 President Obama has received from Accenture’s political action committee and the firm’s employees and their family members may have influenced its just-announced award.

We are not prepared to say that CGI Federal and Accenture received sweetheart contracts from the Obama administration. But we don’t think it unreasonable to say that CGI’s record of incompetence and Accenture’s record of gaming the federal procurement process should have disqualified those firms from being awarded government contracts.