Securing more organs for transplantation would save lives, but there are ethical issues to navigate when discussion turns to compensation for donor expenses. (Photo: Sean Gallup / Getty Images)

It is encouraging to note data from the United Network for Organ Sharing that show more than 30,000 organ transplants were performed in the United States last year, reaching the highest total in the country’s history. Nevertheless, the supply of organs — donated by living and deceased donors — will fall short of the number of patients added last year to the transplant waiting lists.

With the persistent shortage, there are those who would seek to increase the organs available for transplantation by providing financial incentives as a motivation for organ donation. These financial incentives would represent a monetary gain or “valuable consideration,” and are currently prohibited by the National Organ Transplant Act of 1984 (NOTA) to buy and sell organs.

The financial incentives (valuable consideration) proposed include a contribution to the donor’s retirement fund, an income tax credit or a tuition voucher or global health insurance. Even though cash would not be exchanged, these incentives have a monetary value and target individuals who otherwise would not have these resources/finances, for example, to secure their retirement or those not qualifying for health insurance through the Affordable Care Act.

For those who are enticed by such incentives, they would simply be trading the commodity they have (a kidney) for a commodity they need (a mortgage payment or health insurance). One in 7 people in the U.S. live below the poverty line. The target group of donors/vendors becomes inescapable, it becomes the economically distressed to supply organs for transplantation.

Every other country in the world has wrestled with the dilemma of targeting the poor as the source of organs by such incentives, and only Iran permits such financial incentives.

The World Health Organization rejects a system that would foster a social stratification in obtaining transplant organs. WHO’s transplantation guideline state clearly that “cells, tissues and organs should only be donated freely, without any monetary payment or other reward of monetary value. Purchasing, or offering to purchase, cells, tissues or organs for transplantation, or their sale by living persons or by the next of kin for deceased persons, should be banned.”

However this WHO Principle emphasizes “the prohibition on sale or purchase of cells, tissues and organs does not preclude reimbursing reasonable and verifiable expenses incurred by the donor, including loss of income, or paying the costs of recovering, processing, preserving and supplying human cells, tissues or organs for transplantation.”

Making reimbursement available for the actual costs or losses incurred, regardless of donors’ financial resources, would not enrich donors but make donating a kidney a financially neutral act. Covering expenses results in neither a better — nor worse — financial situation for the donor.

Thus far, the government has not supported the provision of financial incentives as a motivation for organ donation — presumably because it does not want to be responsible for placing anyone at risk of kidney failure in their life time — as a result of being a donor.

But we can all agree that a program of financial neutrality is an ethically proper approach for those who wish to be a donor. Otherwise the stale arguments in the debate of financial incentives are going nowhere for the help of donors and the needs of the patients that would benefit from organ transplants.

Read or Share this story: http://detne.ws/1T9Mo29