In Tuesday’s special elections to fill four vacated seats in the state House, Kentucky Democrats not only preserved their control of the chamber, but defied expectations by expanding their majority with three victories.

Republicans had held out hope that they could sweep all four races and give their party control of the House for the first time in nearly 100 years — as well as solidify their complete control over Frankfort with a Republican Senate and governor. Instead, Democrats expanded their House majority from 50-46 to 53-47 and are expected to hold onto the chamber for at least the rest of the year until the fall elections.

Two of the vacancies were created when Gov. Bevin appointed Democratic House members John Tilley to run his Justice Cabinet and Tanya Pullin to a judge position. Despite Democrat Jack Conway losing handily in those districts to Republican Matt Bevin in last November’s gubernatorial race, Democrats Jeffery Taylor and Lew Nicholls won blowout victories in Districts 8 and 98.

In the District 62 race to replace Republican Ryan Quarles — who vacated his position when he won his race to become Commissioner of Agriculture last year — Democrat Chuck Tackett won a closely contested upset victory over Republican Phillip Pratt. Republicans avoided a sweep by holding onto District 54 — vacated by current state Auditor Mike Harmon — with Daniel Elliott handily defeating Democrat Bill Noelker in the solidly conservative district.

Sannie Overly, new chair of the Kentucky Democratic Party, said her party’s victories served as a rejection of Gov. Bevin’s new administration and budget proposal, as Bevin made an effort to campaign for Republican candidates in each race.

“Kentuckians have spoken, and this is a repudiation of Gov. Bevin’s efforts to dismantle public education and healthcare,” said Overly. “Trying to dismantle Kynect, which has helped more than half a million Kentuckians obtain health insurance, is a perfect example of the bad decisions Bevin is making that will hurt the people of the Commonwealth. These Democrats won because they are all good leaders – and they will serve Kentucky well. Tonight is not just a victory for them, but it is a victory for every Kentuckian.”

Democratic candidates hammered Bevin’s current budget proposal that includes steep cuts to higher education, as well as his intention to end Kynect and roll back the Medicaid expansion reforms of former Gov. Beshear. Labor unions also spent significant effort warning about the potential of Republicans passing “right to work” legislation that would hurt their membership.

The Mitch McConnell-affiliated Kentucky Opportunity Coalition spent significant money airing TV ads that hit Kentucky Democrats for supporting “Obamacare” and praising Republican leaders for wanting to end it — but unlike last year, Democrats took that issue head-on in the District 8 race. Instead of running from the president and his signature legislation, Taylor — an African-American — had robocalls from President Barack Obama to voters in his district in which he praised the expansion of health insurance in Kentucky due to the Affordable Care Act, and said that Taylor would help protect it from Gov. Bevin and Republicans.

District 8 is mostly made up of Christian County, which Bevin won by 16 percent last year over Conway. The Democrat Taylor won his race by nearly 19 percent on Tuesday.

Republican Party of Kentucky Chairman Mac Brown cast the elections as a win for the party, claiming that Republicans are now “one seat closer to taking the majority” in the House.

“With Republican candidates running in 91 House districts and the Democrats tied to the Obama-Clinton agenda, I am confident we will take the majority and turn Kentucky in a new direction in November,” said Brown.

With three more weeks until the veto session of the General Assembly begins, Bevin’s budget will now take center stage the rest of the way. Democratic House leaders say they will present their budget next week, which is expected to differ dramatically from Bevin’s — despite the governor warning that he would veto any budget that was significantly different from the one he proposed in January.