The sun finally broke through at Coors Field on Sunday afternoon, and it shined directly on Chad Bettis.

When the right-hander walked to the dugout in the ninth inning, he received a standing ovation from Rockies fans, who watched him pitch eight of the best innings in franchise history. At one point, it even looked like Bettis might pitch the Rockies’ first-ever solo one-hitter.

But Bettis faltered in the ninth, giving up two runs on four hits. Still, there was no wiping the smile off his face after he led the Rockies to an 11-2 victory over San Francisco, giving them a split in the four-game series.

“I felt great and I had everything working,” Bettis said. “I was able to throw my curve for strikes and throw my fastball down and away. I was in a really good place today.”

The Rockies and Giants endured 7 hours, 7 minutes of rain delays during the series, including a delay of 2 hours, 10 minutes before Sunday’s game. But once the sun peeked through, the Rockies came out swinging. Their 11 runs were a season high and came on 11 hits, including four from Nolan Arenado, who was a double short of hitting for the cycle.

“It would have been cool, but the most important thing is that we broke out and got back on track,” said Arenado, who tied a career high with four RBIs. “Chad was amazing. He was throwing strike after strike, and his curveball was great.”

Bettis’ first pitch of the game was a 91 mph fastball to Nori Aoki, who drove it up the middle for a single. After that, the Giants couldn’t touch Bettis, at least not until Matt Duffy scooted a single to right to lead off the eighth. Duffy was quickly erased when Bettis coaxed a double-play grounder out of Joaquin Arias.

“That was about as good as it gets today with Chad. That was a big-time performance against a very good club,” manager Walt Weiss said. “I was hoping to get him through that ninth (inning) there, but he came up just a little bit short.”

Bettis was bidding to become the first Rockies pitcher to throw a shutout since Tyler Matzek did it against San Diego last season on Sept. 14. The Giants ended Bettis’ quest when Aoki led off the ninth with a double and subsequently scored on Joe Panik’s single.

Bettis pitched 8 innings, and ultimately surrendered six hits as he notched his second career victory, his first as a starter.

“Yeah, I got a little tired there in the eighth and ninth,” he said. “I didn’t quite have my legs under me.”

Arenado’s big game began in the second inning with a leadoff triple off Giants right-hander Tim Hudson. He scored on Ben Paulsen’s groundout.

Then the Rockies exploded for eight runs in the fourth, highlighted by Arenado’s three-run shot off Hudson, Arenado’s team-leading eighth homer of the season. Arenado also singled in the fourth as the Rockies sent 10 men to the plate. The eight runs were the most in an inning for the Rockies this season, and their most since scoring eight against the Dodgers at Coors Field last Sept. 17.

Arenado stalked a double in the sixth, trying to become the eighth Rockie to hit for the cycle, but had to settle for a single up the middle. He popped out to center on his final at-bat in the eighth but received a nice ovation from the baseball-savvy fans behind the Rockies’ dugout.

Hudson, 39, remained winless in Denver after 10 starts. After giving up eight runs on six hits in 3 innings, his LoDo record fell to 0-3 while his ERA rose to 7.69. He is 5-1 with 2.15 ERA in eight starts against the Rockies away from Coors Field.

The Rockies finished their homestand 4-4, and their offense is finally getting cranked up. They begin a three-game series at Cincinnati on Monday.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp

Hitting their stride

The Rockies finally cranked up their offense over the weekend during a four-game series against the Giants at Coors Field:

• Scored a season-high 11 runs Sunday

• Averaged eight runs per game

• Averaged 11.5 hits per game

• Batted .364