New York City has some ideas about your birth control situation.

In a new ad campaign featured on subways and buses, the NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene suggests women consider the IUD (intrauterine device), a highly effective, reversible form of birth control that is inserted in the uterus.

See also: Congress proves it's now impossible to talk sanely about abortion

That convenience — it's "literally always with you" — happens to be compatible with the unpredictable nature of living in the big city.

"You spent the night in Brooklyn," reads one ad. "But you left your birth control in Staten Island. Maybe the IUD is right for you."

The "Maybe the IUD" campaign is meant to reach women 18 to 30 years old. They may have spent the night at a date's place or had a fun night out with friends and missed taking a birth control pill. Oral contraceptives, which have a failure rate of 9%, are most effective when taken every day at the same time.

Less than 1% of women using a hormonal or copper version of the IUD, however, get pregnant.

"The best method is the one a woman chooses and is best for her," says Dr. Deborah L. Kaplan, assistant commissioner of the health department's Bureau of Maternal, Infant and Reproductive Health. "But she needs accurate information."

Image: NYC Dept. of Health

When left in place, the IUD can prevent pregnancy for as long as 10 years. It can easily be removed by a doctor and requires little maintenance. Side effects include cramping and irregular periods or spotting. The IUD does not prevent sexually transmitted infections.

For years, women and their physicians were skeptical of the IUD, following the introduction and recall of a poorly designed IUD called the Dalkon Shield in the 1970s; thousands of women who used the device complained of infections and miscarriages. The IUD was also linked to more than a dozen deaths.

The kind of IUDs used now are widely considered safe, but at several hundred dollars, they are expensive. The Affordable Care Act, however, requires insurance companies to cover the cost of at least one form of the 18 FDA-approved birth control methods, including the IUD.

Every person is different. #MaybeTheIUD is right for you. Maybe not. But maybe you should ask a doctor! #MaybetheIUDchat — mary alice carter (@MACarter73) October 6, 2015

Kaplan says it's essential for all New Yorkers to get access to every birth control option available.

In 2013, according to the city's data, almost 40% of women between the ages of 18 and 45 who had vaginal sex in the previous year did not use birth control, despite the fact that they didn't plan on becoming pregnant. Reaching low-income women is particularly important as they far more likely to report unintended pregnancies.

The city's IUD campaign is part of a five-year public awareness initiative to increase access to and use of contraceptives in addition to a range of sexual and reproductive health services. Its honest approach about sex is a radical departure from controversial debates about birth control, including lawsuits over the Obamacare contraception mandate and Congressional hearings to defund Planned Parenthood.

Kaplan says the city wants to lead on this issue: "We strongly support a woman’s right to comprehensive reproductive and sex health services."

#MaybetheIUD is the right choice for you! via @nycHealthy #LoveMyLARC #kycsf pic.twitter.com/FyDalMYCAs — Know Your Choices SF (@kycsf) October 5, 2015

"Normalizing" the conversation, Kaplan adds, means involving both women and men, making it playful, and also acknowledging that some women of color and low-income women may be wary of certain types of birth control given a history of forced sterilization in the U.S.

That's why the health department partnered with reproductive justice advocates to ensure its outreach is sensitive to those experiences and reflects the needs of a diverse city that includes not only communities of color, but also people with different sexualities and gender identities.

"Our overall goal," says Kaplan, "is to ensure all New Yorkers have the information and services they need to take control of their sexual and reproductive health."

Have something to add to this story? Share it in the comments.