Please enable Javascript to watch this video

AKRON--Debate over the 'Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act' may have shut down the government on Tuesday, but the 'Health Insurance Marketplace' it created was up and running for the first time.

"Today is the day that Americans who previously could not have access to health insurance today have access," said Donna Skoda, Deputy Director of the Summit County Department of Public Health.

The Summit County agency has a designated site to help people navigate the Health Insurance Marketplace and complete the process of applying for benefits.

"I think for a lot of individuals health insurance was never an option so they kind of got used to living without it, but this is an opportunity to actually go see what you can get and you don't have to make a decision today. There's six months of open enrollment," said Skoda.

Ohioans who investigate their insurance options are expected to find 46 different plans from which they can choose.

Applicants will have to answer questions that include information about their income and employment.

Skoda says it is very important to be honest because it will impact the price of the plan and what tax credits might be available.

"There will be subsidies based on income, and number of family members. There's also the tax credit, you can apply that subsidy, tax credit during the process online," said Skoda.

Often referred to as Obamacare, the act has generated divisiveness in Washington and within communities.

"I believe in it. I think it's a good thing," said Doris Ross of Akron.

"I certainly can't say too much because it's certainly benefited me a lot. Since I'm so young, I've been able to stay on my parents' insurance, " said University of Akron Law Student Travis Watson.

"It's basically socialism. I mean everybody having to pay into, you know, healthcare," said Josh DelMedico of Tallmadge.

"Despite what you have heard, Obamacare is not a socialized one size fits all approach. There are different levels of coverage from bronze through platinum. There are plans from students to younger adults. These plans are all provided by private insurers," said Summit County Council Member Tamela Lee.

At Tuesday's kickoff of the Health Insurance Marketplace, Lee called shutting down the government over trying to defund the program "reckless and irresponsible."

"The Supreme Court has ruled. The public has voted. It's a done deal, so to shut down our country over an end game is just irresponsible. Affordable care is in place and we are rolling it out today," said Lee.

*CLICK for more.