More Video...

Plane Crash Tower Radio Transmission

Your browser does not support the audio element.

Plane Crash 911 Radio Traffic

Your browser does not support the audio element.

One person has died after a small plane crashed near a west Wichita neighborhood.

The crash happened around 4 p.m. Friday near Cowskin Creek in the area of Maple and Maize Road. Wichita Fire Chief Ron Blackwell said the twin-engine Cessna 310 took off from Eisenhower National Airport, and the pilot reported trouble.

While in the process of turning around to head back to the airport, the plane crashed behind a home in a heavily wooded area near Cowskin Creek. The pilot, identified as Aaron Waters, 47, of Parker, Colorado, was pronounced dead at the scene.

"The aircraft is significantly damaged," Chief Blackwell said. "The scene does include a significant odor of aviation fuel. We've had contact with state environmental officials about that. We feel, at this point, that there is no threat from the fuel."

Donna Stegman is a 737 pilot who witnessed the crash. She was driving in the area when she saw the plane in the air directly in front of her. She said she knew it was going to crash.

"The upper wing was straight up in the air," she said. "It was coming down. He hadn't went completely vertical at that time, but I knew just shortly he would be going down."

Pat Knutson tells KAKE News as soon as the explosion happened, he ran to the crash site.

"I knew it was too late," he said. "It was totally, totally demolished. We looked around and we could see some things, and we knew that there were no survivors."

Knutson said the pilot saved many lives.

"The guy knew what he was doing," he said. "He directed the airplane so that it wouldn't cause casualties to others."

The plane was en route to Colorado. It was built in 1972 and was registered to Celestial Knights, LLC, out of Parker, Colorado, according to the plane's FAA registry .

The 310 was the first twin engine design from Cessna after World War II, and it made its first flight in January of 1953.

Chief Blackwell said the fire department has completed its investigation, and federal authorities will be taking over.