NEOSA is making big changes. So big that it needed a new name.







The Northeast Ohio Software Association is now OHTech.







First, notice that “Northeast Ohio” is gone.







The organization — which spent much of the past year revamping its lineup of services — is becoming more of a statewide group.







It's forming partnerships with tech associations in Cincinnati and Dayton, and it's evaluating whether it could expand into other “underserved” regions, according to chairman Gabriel Torok, who also is CEO of PreEmptive Solutions, a software company in Mayfield Village. Torok cited Columbus as a place where the group could expand.







Becoming a statewide group would allow OHTech to serve as a voice for information technology companies across the state. Ohio doesn't have such an organization, but lots of other states do, which makes it easier for them to advocate for issues that matter to tech companies, according to Brad Nellis, president of OHTech.







What issues is OHTech interested in? Workforce development is the big one, given that tech companies are constantly talking about how they can't find enough good employees — especially software developers. And who knows what other issues will come up at the state or federal level.







Nellis gave a hypothetical example: “If suddenly they decided web design projects have to be taxed at 50%, we want to be able to respond to that.”









Related Links

The word “Software” is gone from the name, too. That's because about 40% of the group's members are IT services companies — not software companies.Plus, Torok said OHTech is looking at how it could provide more services to companies that use software "as a secret sauce” — even if they aren't usually classified as IT companies. He described how software is a key ingredient in medical devices, cars and even soap dispensers.The new name is just “the next step” in a series of changes that have been going on at the organization since it began a strategic planning process in 2013, Nellis said.Consider the tech talent problem. The organization — which is part of the Council of Smaller Enterprises in Cleveland — recently hired Patrick Antos as manager of talent services.Now OHTech has two full-time employees, though it also gets support from COSE and dozens of volunteers.Antos is working as a talent coach for local tech companies, and he's tasked with creating events, blog posts and other content designed to help them figure out how to find and keep good employees.Antos also is building partnerships: He's talking to local colleges to figure out how they could offer continuing education programs for people in the tech community. And a few OHTech members are now able to post open positions on a national job board called TechFetch, through a pilot project OHTech is doing with help from the Technology Councils of North America.“It's such a huge need,” Nellis said. “Everybody's hiring.”OHTech wants to expand in other ways, too. The group plans to start holding regular networking events in Akron in conjunction with networking events going on at the same time in Cleveland. If there's a speaker or a panel discussion at one event, it will be broadcast live at the other event.Will people show up for a networking event where they watch speakers on a screen? Nellis isn't sure, but he thinks there's potential.“It's going to take a while to get it off the ground, because it's something new,” he said.The group also will work with other tech associations — such as The Circuit in Cincinnati and Technology First in Dayton — to run joint events. Plus, they'll share content such as blogs and podcasts on topics that tech companies care about.If OHTech's expansion plans work, they could help the group reverse an ongoing decline in its membership. Roughly 700 tech companies belong to the organization today. Two years ago, the group had roughly 800 members — and it had about 930 five years ago.The recession drove away some members and put others out of business, Nellis said. But he noted that membership started going down after the federal government passed the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.Why does that matter to OHTech?Businesses that join can buy health insurance through COSE. That insurance had been the organization's most popular benefit for years, because it allowed small businesses to buy insurance through a larger group.But the health reform law gave individuals and small businesses more ways to buy health insurance, which reduced demand for COSE's insurance program.