The gloomy weather matches my postelection mood, and I imagine the same could be said for progressive people all across Wisconsin. While the national media was talking up the big (and potentially convention disrupting) wins for Sens. Bernie Sanders and Ted Cruz, back here the bigger news items were the results of local elections.

JoAnne Kloppenburg's loss to Rebecca Bradley was especially heartbreaking. Much hay has and will be made of where to place the blame for Kloppenburg's loss. Some already have tried to point fingers at Sanders supporters who, according to exit polling by Benchmark Politics, either failed to cast down ballot votes entirely or didn't remember who they voted for at a significantly higher rate than Clinton supporters (15% to 4%).

But the simple fact of the matter is that even if every person who voted for Hillary or Bernie also had cast a vote for Kloppenburg, she still wouldn't have won. Republicans turned out in greater numbers overall, full stop: just over 1 million for Democrats and almost 1.1 million for Republicans.

Traditional wisdom seems to hold that higher turnout generally favors more liberal candidates, but in a primary that saw historic numbers of people participating this go-round, it actually favored conservatives. What happened?

It's complicated.

The complexities lie in a decades-long strategy by conservatives to create a perfect storm of conditions to both naturally and artificially support their candidates and causes at the polls. It includes everything from gerrymandering voter districts (Wisconsin enjoys some of the worst in the nation, as a matter of fact) to absolutely dismantling any semblance of transparency or fairness in campaign finance.

Political parties aren't legally allowed to directly support candidates for nonpartisan offices such as state Supreme Court. But whereas the Democratic Party of Wisconsin followed the letter and the spirit of the law, the Republican Party and several "independent" conservative groups took advantage of the currently murky rules and saturated the airwaves with anti-Kloppenburg propaganda. Conservative talk radio, essentially a free in-kind donation to Republican-backed candidates, pitched in with the effort as well. Often, it's all that's available in many media markets statewide, so theirs is the only message getting out to the vast majority of voters.

The cherry on top was the implementation of the utterly unnecessary voter ID law that got its first major run on Tuesday. Despite a complete lack of evidence of voter fraud, Republicans saw fit to ram through rules that could disenfranchise upward of 300,000 people. Of course, they didn't pass those rules to combat nonexistent voter fraud. They did it to hinder participation by those demographics that don't traditionally support them. Even Glenn Grothman, in his characteristically tactless way, admitted as much when he told a reporter that requiring certain kinds of photo ID at the polls was "gonna make a little bit of a difference" for Republicans.

When it comes down to it, too, conservatives are better at turning out to vote in allelections, especially ones with local significance. There are existing networks and social groups, communities, that revolve around that year-round participation. There's a real sense of the stakes involved and a feeling of urgency to be involved in the local process.

It seems as if progressives have to reinvent the wheel every time there's a major election. The issues are all the more life-or-death, but we struggle with consistent willingness to get out from behind our computers to engage with real-life community on a regular basis (and too often tear down the people who actually do for somehow not solving all our problems).

We have to do more to support new, innovative leaders willing to buck the status quo. We have to put our money where our mouths are and fund short- and long-term efforts to fix campaign finance and voting laws. We have to get out into our communities and form real bonds with a wide array of people, cultivate a real sense of urgency — because the issues at play have real-life consequences. Ignoring politics or treating them as a fun game are privileges that the folks most impacted by its consequences simply don't have.

It's a daunting, uphill battle to be sure. Working toward the greater good will light the way, but we need fuel for the fire to get us there.

Emily Mills is a freelance writer who lives in Madison. Twitter: @millbot; Email: emily.mills@outlook.com