The White House says “there is no evidence” that defining full-time employment at 30 hours a week under the ACA “has caused a broad shift to part-time work to date.”

Republicans and lobbyists for companies employing swaths of part-time laborers are pushing to redefine full-time employment under the ACA to 40 hours a week. Obama has vowed to veto it, saying it would “significantly increase the deficit, reduce the number of Americans with employer-based health insurance coverage, and create incentives for employers to shift their employees to part-time work.”

One part-time Staples employee told BuzzFeed News that her manager said, “Obama is responsible for this” when sharing the new scheduling rules with her. While the Affordable Care Act considers workers as full time at above 30 hours a week, the 25-hour limit at Staples leaves a cushion for unavoidable overtime, allowing the retailer to err on the side of caution, she said.

“I’ve already been working a second job, so I just increased my availability there,” she said, pointing out she’s in a much better position than some of her colleagues, who don’t have that option. Her other job is at another large retail chain, which provided its part-time associates with healthcare benefits prior to the passage of ACA. Business has been unaffected at that chain, she said.

“Honestly, I think the Affordable Care Act is a good thing, and I think everyone should have healthcare,” she said. “I think companies that are deciding they don’t want to pay out benefits, it shows how much they really don’t care about their employees.”

Another part-time employee who shared her story said she’s a single mother earning just under $10 an hour. She commutes an hour and a half to Staples, and used to finagle more than 35 hours a week, despite being scheduled for 28, with a combination of overtime and skipping meals and breaks. Now, she can’t get more than 20, and says the scheduling is so “haywire,” she has to find another job.

One part-time employee, a student, said he lost his job at the end of last month as part of broader cutbacks at Staples. Stores have been relegated to four different tiers, as illustrated through a leaked organizational chart posted to Imgur. This employee said his store was a Tier 4, the lowest, which resulted in a number of positions being eliminated. Starting last month, if anyone worked over 25 hours at his store, the associate, general manager, and district manager would all get written up, he said.

Christine Komola, Staples’ chief financial officer, noted in August that the company sought to cut $250 million in costs last year and “at least” $500 million during the next two years.

“Salesforce productivity — we’ve basically done significant reinvestment in our sales specialists, but that’s been done through challenging our office supply model and kind of redeploying and eliminating where appropriate,” she said at the time. “Our retail store labor has changed pretty dramatically in how we’ve set up those kind of labor pools and tiering of the stores.”

Staples employed 46,361 full-time and 36,647 part-time associates as of Feb. 1, 2014. In 2009, the company said it had 57,291 full-time and 33,834 part-time associates.

The fifth employee, who has had his hours cut from up to 35 a week last year to 25 this year, emphasized that general managers at stores are being held responsible for associates staying below the threshold, emailing schedules to district managers on a weekly basis, if not more frequently. This employee views Staples’ actions as management “making its employees suffer to prove that Obamacare has failed.”

While architects of the ACA hoped companies wouldn’t manage their labor forces this way in response to the law, they’re unable to do much about those who do. And in the absence of any recourse, it’s the part-time workers who are suffering.

FiveThirtyEight reported last month that while data illustrating this issue is extremely limited, it appears as if a few hundred thousand workers are seeing fewer hours because of Obamacare. “That’s small in the context of an economy with 150 million workers,” Ben Casselman wrote. “But it isn’t a minor issue for those workers. Most of them are among the economy’s most vulnerable: low-wage, part-time workers who likely have few other options.”

It’s uncomfortable for companies to discuss these matters publicly, given the backlash that tends to accompany such behavior. Last year, Staples was highlighted as a high-profile employer cutting hours, after a Change.org petition tied to its new limited-scheduling policies went viral. A spokesman for Staples initially defended the 25-hour a week limit as having been in effect for more than a decade. Once BuzzFeed News showed him December 2013 internal memos on “talking points” for “implementing” the policy, which was described as “new,” he ceased responding.

Alice, the 19-year-old employee, said she’s actually on her father’s insurance plan and wishes she could convince Staples to let her work more hours with the guarantee that she won’t ask them for benefits. With the way things stand now, she wants the full-time worker definition changed to 40 hours a week.

“I would really love it if that bill got passed,” she said, after thinking about it for a moment.

“I don’t think a lot of people understand it really affects those of us who are stuck in these retail jobs or whatever,” she said. “I know a lot of people who I work with have families and have been in retail for a long time, and I myself am trying to help my family out financially, and we can’t get the hours. Obamacare in theory is a great idea but corporations are so selfish, they’re going to find a loophole and in the process, they’ll hurt us, the little people, before they’ll take a hit themselves. So it’s us that gets stuck with the short end of the stick.”

*Name changed at the request of the source.