Pity the poor Republican governor.

Take John Kasich of Ohio. He's caught between a state budget that has to be balanced every year, one of the least healthy state populations in the country, a deep purple electorate, a Republican legislature, and his own presumed presidential aspirations in 2016. For a time, it looked like he might also face a stiff challenge to keep his office this year, though an improving economy and a catastrophically gaffe-prone Democratic nominee leave him in the catbird seat.

Kasich is no one's idea of a liberal, and under his leadership the Buckeye State rejected a state-level health-insurance exchange under Obamacare, meaning Ohioans buy insurance on the federally run HealthCare.gov. But he fought hard to accept the expansion of Medicaid for citizens making as much as 138 percent of poverty level—those making too little for subsidies, but too much for traditional Medicaid. He did that even after a Supreme Court ruling made it optional, and he did it over the fierce objections of the Republican-controlled legislature, circumventing it with clever executive maneuvering. As Molly Ball has noted, Kasich was one of several GOP governors, especially in purple or blue states, to embrace the Medicaid expansion.

There's a straightforward appeal here, even for a dedicated small-government conservative like Kasich. It's free federal money for three years (with 90 percent federal funding after that) to get insurance for more than 285,000 lower-income Ohioans. That's especially relevant because Ohio lags the nation in key health indicators. Kasich also couched the move in religious terms: "Now, when you die and get to the meeting with St. Peter, he’s probably not going to ask you much about what you did about keeping government small. But he is going to ask you what you did for the poor. You better have a good answer."

That's essential background for what Kasich told the Associated Press Monday when asked about repealing the Affordable Care Act. "That's not gonna happen," he said. "The opposition to it was really either political or ideological. I don't think that holds water against real flesh and blood, and real improvements in people's lives."