Instead, Guevara—a name that recalls the Argentinian Marxist icon Che—along with fellow social insurance start-ups like Friendsurance in Germany or France's Inspeer, are proposing a different model that puts a new spin on modern insurance. It allows friends to group policies together, rather than with strangers, in order to introduce a sense of control, trust, and transparency.

Filing a claim comes out of the common pool of money you share with your friends, and the less claims you have, the less all of you pay. Any savings left over are either returned in cash payments or rolled over to continued coverage. (Tweet This)



Guevara CEO Kim Miller believes the model offers something very different from what big insurance companies sell today.

"Betting on an actuarial table isn't insurance, it's gambling," he told CNBC in an interview.

For Inspeer co-founder Louis de Broglie, who first thought of the idea when his friends opted to split rental car insurance on a road trip, the model is the latest example of the "sharing economy" revolutionizing a forgotten industry.

"The sharing economy has impacted a lot of sectors already, from peer-to-peer lending, to hotels and Airbnb, to transportation and Uber," he said, referring to the lodging and transportation apps respectively. "But sharing hasn't moved through the insurance sector until now, which is strange since from the beginning insurance was all about sharing risk."

Read More'Surprise'—Obamacare insurers desire double-digit hikes

By leveraging the power of social pressure from friends, Harvard professor and behavioral economist Brigitte Madrian believes the idea carries huge potential to reduce costs and discourage risky behavior.

"If the costs for everyone else in the group depend in part on my behavior, the group has an incentive to encourage me to act in a way that reduces the likelihood that any of us have a claim," she said.

When a lot of groups aren't filing claims, that "lowers the cost to all of us purchasing insurance," she added.