Topics: Editor's Picks, HBO, Love and Sex, porn, Pornography, Sex, Life News

The last time I watched HBO’s “Real Sex,” it was the ’90s and I was covertly masturbating late at night in my parents’ living room. That documentary series was my pubescent sex education — at least until I discovered Internet porn a short while later. It was everything they weren’t telling me in those impotent middle-school health classes. As a result, my erotic catalog is disproportionately made up of images from that show — a stripper shaking her breasts in a man’s face, a couple having sex at a swinging convention, a woman writhing behind glass.

When I saw the premiere this week of HBO’s “Sex//Now,” a new show being billed as the next “Real Sex,” I had to rewatch those old episodes. I was like a grown man revisiting his first issue of Playboy — so much of the titillation and mystery was gone. What I was surprised to find was that in hindsight, despite the fact that I sometimes joke about perilously imprinting on “Real Sex” like a horny baby duck, the show wasn’t the worst education. It showed that, despite my health teacher’s insistence to the contrary, sex could be a great many things.

I decided to speak with Chris Moukarbel, the director of the “Sex//Now” pilot, which aired Thursday, about his own pubescent relationship with “Real Sex” and how the carnal act has changed since that legendary series.

As a pre-pubescent, “Real Sex” was my sex education — and I know I’m not alone in that. I’ve read that you had a similar experience.

I think a lot of people from my generation who didn’t necessarily have access to a lot of the stories and images that are available online now, we looked to television and specifically “Real Sex” for a lot of those stories. HBO’s “Real Sex” was in a lot of ways proto-reality TV. It was radical, not just because of the subject matter but because it was one of the first times people in America were seeing real people and their real stories. So it was seminal in many ways.

[Laughs]

Sorry. I didn’t even mean that pun.

So, what do you remember from watching “Real Sex” as a kid?

Obviously the on-the-street interviews made a real impression. The segments were racy or sexy — or a lot of times they were really not sexy and just plain funny — but the on-the-street interviews gave people at home insight into what other people’s sex lives could be like. I read this oral history of “Real Sex” that Vulture did and [the show’s producer] Patti Kaplan was talking about her experience — she really got a sense of how the show was changing popular culture and ideas around sex. When she first started doing her on-the-street interviews, people would be super-shy, super-careful with what they said. After a while, after the show had been on the air for a while, there was a precedent for that kind of confessional experience, so the floodgates opened. Eventually she had to be like, “OK, enough,” and pull the microphone away from people because they had so much to say.

What about today’s pubescents? Are they going to watch “Sex//Now” to learn about the birds and the bees or are they too immersed in Internet porn to care about the relatively tame titillation found on HBO?

I think a show like this has relevance now almost more than ever. It’s not so much about exposing young people to ideas around sex that they couldn’t access otherwise. Everybody knows it’s all available online and young people have come of age in that culture. What our show sets out to do is essentially curate the Internet. There are so many people out there who want to tell their stories, who want to share what they think about sex culture now. We’re bringing an audience to those subjects and individuals. You can watch in 30 minutes some really fascinating stories and meet individuals you might not be able to immediately find online.

One of the early episodes of “Real Sex” features a segment on a live call-in “tele-fantasy” show. The technological difference between that and the first episode of “Sex//Now” is stunning. But how fundamentally different are these interactions — the tele-fantasy of the ’90s and the webcamming of now?

In a lot of ways that’s why we thought the show should happen now, because so much has changed since they stopped producing “Real Sex.” You take a service like phone sex or even peep shows, there was a really incredible episode about peep shows that I remember coming across and when I saw it I realized there are probably not many peep shows anymore. They used to exist all around Times Square. It was the form of sex entertainment that was least likely to survive the rise of the Internet, because there’s no purpose for it. Why we ended up focusing on camming is that it was the most one-to-one example of how something like that would dematerialize and reform online as this other form of sex entertainment. Camming is essentially a virtual peep show, but instead of the glass wall and the curtain that comes up and down, it’s the glass wall. So it became this interesting metaphor for how different our relationships are and how they’re mediated by technology.