Nothing changes. The fools in charge remain in charge. The few get caught playing fast and loose with the law are indicted, occasionally tried and convicted and then slapped on the back of the hand for their evil deeds. And the worst malefactor’s feel themselves “too big to fail.”

Meanwhile; the Liar and Thief commands the abrogation and dissolution of the Constitution and Bill of Rights from his throne on-high. This is so he may get things his way and because the damned document refuses to recognize his claims he knows best what’s good for America. The guy needs to be treated to the Bastille Day ceremonies and celebrations held originally in 1789. As there’s little to indicate he has a functional brain it would be a hollow victory at best.

As this all started as an exercise in “stream of thought” writing I must mention former Vice-President Dick Cheney has called Obama “the worst president in my lifetime”. Because Cheney is “way older” than I that must mean he’s got the chops to back up the statement. I figure he must know because he attended William Henry Harrison’s inauguration and was the first guy in the audience to recognize the then new “prez” was too stupid and self-absorbed to understand he should come from out in the rain.

There seems to be so many comparisons between the present occupant of the White House (who has tried in vain to have that name changed to the “Iranian Rainbow Coalition (Gender Challenged Division) Venue”) and “Old Billy Hank” as to seem legion. Obama has a few sterling behaviors to place him on a par with the man didn’t understand he was all wet. Obama has ObamaCare, the bloated misanthropic and sardonic effort to give away trillions of dollars in the name of defective medical insurances to those statistically not in need of it. It’s referred as “sardonic” in this instance because it was passed in a mocking and cutting fashion requiring it be passed first and then understood later. (Don’t you just love that witch (sic)?”). It went forth without the inspection and assent of the people.

Then there’s the absolutely stellar performance of his malfeasant function in refusing to allow Congress to offer and pass legislation because he simply doesn’t want it to happen. Obama only listens to what he wants to hear and accepts Josef Goebbels’ observation: “If you tell a lie big enough and keep repeating it, people will eventually come to believe it. The lie can be maintained only for such time as the state can shield the people from the political, economic and/or military consequences of the lie. It thus becomes vitally important for the state to use all of its power to repress dissent, for the truth is the mortal enemy of the lie, and thus by extension, the truth is the greatest enemy of the state.”

Now, in the depth of our despair we find there are no sides to the triangular, tripartite structure of our government. We’re stuck with leaders like Mitch McConnell and John Boehner who both suck equally in their understanding of what it means to be Conservative. Evidently their definition of being Conservative means you don’t wear pastel colored suits and Blue pin-stripes and muted neckties show the strength and concentration of their values when representing the people.

Oh, wait! The Democrats wear the same colors and behave the same way because Pelosi has bigger cojones than Boehner and Harry Reid keeps beating-up McConnell and stealing his lunch.

This garbage has been slithering across the marbled halls of Congress and the Senate for too long. It’s composed of trash, moral filth and undiscoverable ethics blighted by the viral disdain for the constituents of this great nation. These frauds need prosecution for malfeasance and imprisonment upon conviction.

I’d say we should follow the old (paraphrased) adage of: “we do not hang horse thieves in vengeance for their acts but more as a warning for him who thinks he may get away with it next.”

Is anybody ready for the next Bastille Day celebration? I know a razor grinder.

Thanks for listening.