TobyMac will play the Wicomico Youth & Civic Center on Nov. 15. (Photo: Submitted image)

Throughout the ages, humans have pondered the essence of life: the deep statements that define humanity and what it’s like to truly be alive.

Residents of the Delmarva region will have an opportunity to do just that on Nov. 15, when six-time Grammy winner TobyMac is scheduled to make a stop in Salisbury on his “This is Not a Test” tour.

“There are no practice runs in life; this is the real thing,” TobyMac said. “Take every day and every moment and use it as best as you can.”

TobyMac is a renowned Christian-contemporary artist that has been in the industry for nearly two decades. His success has taken him to places all around the world, but he says he loves playing in smaller towns and cities like Salisbury.

“In the big city you get lost in the shuffle, but sometimes a smaller city gets people that might not normally come out to a show just because something is going on,” he said. “I love that and I think there’s a lot of appreciation toward you and you feel welcomed.”

His recent album also titled “This is Not a Test” features singles “Beyond Me” and “Feel It.” The majority of his performance in Salisbury will feature songs from the new album, but he will also play songs from his previous albums.

Six-time Grammy winner TobyMac is scheduled to make a stop in Salisbury on his “This is Not a Test” tour. (Photo: Getty File Image)

In 2012 he released “Eye On It,” an album that contains songs like “Me Without You,” “Steal My Show” and “Speak Life.”

TobyMac says his favorite song to play right now is “Feel It” because it takes on the likeness of a funk jam and it turns the whole place into a big party.

“I want people to come and be entertained, I want them to laugh and to see a spectacle that gives them spiritual food for thought,” he said.

TobyMac won’t be alone in his performance. Christian artists Britt Nicole, Colton Dixon and Hollyn will also take the stage at the Wicomico Youth & Civic Center.

While he hopes to entertain the audiences that come to his show, he said nothing makes him more happy than walking out onto the stage and performing live.

“When you walk onto the stage, it’s the moment that everything comes together,” TobyMac said. “It’s not like my music is some self-indulgent thing, it’s to serve. I hope my music is art that serves human kind; when I get to perform live, I see the people I hope my music is serving.”

If You Go

What: TobyMac's “This is Not a Test” Tour

When: 7 p.m. Nov. 15

Where: Wicomico Youth & Civic Center, Salisbury

Cost: $75 Artist Circle; $36 Level 1; $28 Level 2; $27 Group Level 2; 10+, $18 Level 2

Online: http://www.wicomicociviccenter.org/events-listings/tobymac-this-is-not-a-test-tour

Read or Share this story: http://www.delmarvanow.com/story/news/local/maryland/2015/11/08/tobymac-performs-salisbury/75413188/