George Pataki was originally expected to appear on campaign stops in New Hampshire, but he has canceled events after Pataki’s son-in-law suffered a stroke earlier this week.

Pataki’s son-in-law, David Levy, is only 30-years-old. Pataki’s campaign has called the stroke “life-threatening.”

A representative from Pataki’s campaign said in a statement, “This episode is a shock to us all, as David, only 30 years of age, is a strong young man who enjoyed excellent health. We are praying for his recovery and welcome everyone’s prayers and good wishes.”

According to Capital New York, Pataki will not be officially suspending his campaign and still plans to pursue the Republican nomination for the 2016 presidential race.

In a statement, @GovernorPataki explains he suspended campaign because his son-in-law had a stroke. He’s at ICU in Chicago hospital. — Jimmy Vielkind (@JimmyVielkind) June 11, 2015

Repeat: @GovernorPataki has not formally suspended his campaign. He’s just canceled events in New Hampshire bc his son-in-law had a stroke. — Jimmy Vielkind (@JimmyVielkind) June 11, 2015

Pataki’s son-in-law apparently suffered the stroke while traveling on an airplane on Tuesday, aides for Pataki’s campaign told Capital New York. Levy and George Pataki’s daughter, Allison, live in Chicago and had been away on vacation. Allison Pataki is pregnant with her first child and is expected to give birth later this year.

As a result of Levy’s stroke, the flight he was on made an emergency landing in Fargo, North Dakota, where he was treated at Sanford Medical Center, Capital New York reports. George Pataki’s son-in-law was supposed to be moved to Rush University Medical Center in Chicago today. He’s expected to stay in the intensive care unit in Chicago.

Sending good thoughts to family of @governorpataki who announced his 30 year old son-in-law suffered serious stroke. — Kelly O’Donnell (@KellyO) June 11, 2015

In a statement, George Pataki’s campaign made special mention of the medical personnel who assisted Levy.

“The Patakis and the Levys want to thank the doctors, nurses and all the staff at the Sanford Medical Center which has been world class and the people of Fargo who have opened their hearts during this difficult time.”

Pataki jumped into the crowded race for the GOP bid on May 28 and has since repeatedly been called a long shot for the candidacy. George Pataki is the former three-time Republican governor of New York, which has traditionally been a Democratic state. In fact, the 69-year-old Pataki was only the third Republican politician to be elected to three gubernatorial terms since 1943.

If elected, George Pataki has said he would repeal the Affordable Care Act and abolish Common Core standards in the educational system.

[Photo by Scott Olson/Getty Images]