In Utah, health insurers will raise policy rates by anywhere from 10 to 60 percent in 2016. This increased cost has Utah families and individuals reevaluating their health plans to make sure they still have the most affordable and quality health care coverage available. Enrollment USA, launched in September, is a new exchange that allows Utah individuals and families to compare health care plans to find the option that best fits their needs.

“Our service offers a great benefit to the small business owner or self-employed individual looking for health coverage,” said John Carroll, principal and founder of Enrollment USA. “We are here to help them validate that they have the best health insurance, and if they don’t, we’ll find them the best option at the cheapest price.”

Enrollment USA allows users to verify that their health plan is the most affordable, based on specific factors like prescription drugs, how much they are willing to pay out of pocket and how they prefer to pay for insurance. After these factors are considered, Enrollment USA provides users with the plan that most closely matches their preferences. Enrollment USA also offers free health insurance advice from 75 licensed agents who are certified in Arches Health Plan, Humana, Regence Blue Cross Blue Shield, SelectHealth and United Healthcare policies.

Sean Dehghani, owner of Mykonos at City Creek Mall said, “I started looking for health insurance online, but I gave up after a while because it was so confusing and complicated. But Enrollment USA is easy to use and it helped me find a plan that perfectly fits my family.”

Every year starting around Oct. 15, health insurance companies send out new premium rates to customers that reflect changes for the upcoming year.

“These rates almost always increase, rarely stay the same and never decrease,” said Carroll. “Every individual insured today, covered under an individual policy will be getting one of these letters.”

The regulations in the Affordable Care Act allow individuals and families to change their health care plans once a year during a three month span called Open Enrollment Period. This year, that period runs from Nov. 1 to Jan. 31, 2016. With the exception of those who qualify for a Special Enrollment Period, buyers can only enroll in or change health care plans within this window of time. Those who fail to do so during the Open Enrollment Period will face a tax penalty.

Individuals who use Enrollment USA’s free service can do so through the online comparison feature or by speaking with a live agent over the phone. All of Enrollment USA’s services are also available through the Spanish language arm of the company, Família USA.

About Enrollment USA:

Enrollment USA is the only health insurance exchange built exclusively to help Utahns buy insurance for themselves and their families. With over 55 years of insurance expertise, our licensed and certified agents help individuals and families make the right health insurance decision. We use the latest online service technology in addition to a traditional call center, with the single goal of helping Utahns feel confident that they found the best health plan possible. Visit us at http://www.enrollmentusa.com/ or call 888-861-0186 to speak with one of our agents. Para español, llama a 888-861-0186 o vista http://www.familiausa.com/.