ST. LOUIS — South Dakota State University wide receiver Jake Wieneke was named Missouri Valley Football Conference Freshman of the Year on Wednesday, following a vote of the league's coaches, sports information directors and media.

A native of Maple Grove, Minnesota, Wieneke became the first freshman in league history to top 1,000 receiving yards in a season, finishing the regular season with 1,318 yards on 66 receptions. His 15 touchdown receptions are a school record and one shy of the MVFC record of 16 set by Eddie Berlin of Northern Iowa in 2000.

Heading into postseason play, Wieneke has recorded seven 100-yard games and caught a touchdown pass in all eight league games. He holds three of the top-12 single-game receiving yard marks in program history, including an eight-reception, 183-yard, three-touchdown performance Oct. 11 at Missouri State that ranks sixth in the SDSU annals.

Wieneke is the second Jackrabbit player to be named MVFC Freshman of the Year, joining quarterback Austin Sumner in 2011. He also is a finalist for the Jerry Rice Award as the top freshman player in the Football Championship Subdivision.

Wieneke also placed second in the balloting for the league's Newcomer of the Year, finishing behind Illinois State quarterback Tre Roberson. Jackrabbit running back Zach Zenner finished third in the balloting for the MVFC Offensive Player of the Year award, finishing behind Illinois State running back Marshaun Coprich and Northern Iowa back David Johnson.

The MVFC Defensive Player of the Year Award went to North Dakota State defensive end Kyle Emanuel, while Illinois State's Brock Spack was named MVFC Coach of the Year.

The full all-conference team will be announced Dec. 1.

South Dakota State, 8-4 overall, will make its third consecutive appearance in the FCS playoffs with a matchup Saturday at Montana State. Kickoff is slated for 2 p.m. Mountain Time (3 p.m. Central) at Bobcat Stadium in Bozeman, Montana.

Courtesy: SDSU Jason Hove

Sports

College {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

DISCLAIMER: The views of the author are not necessarily those of this station, its owners, officers, agents or employees.