The latest figures on the uninsured population were cause for celebration at the White House. The Centers for Disease Control said that only 9.1% of Americans were uninsured last year, which is the lowest figure since the CDC started tracking it in 1957.

Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell called it “further proof that our country has made undeniable and historic strides thanks to the Affordable Care Act.”

There’s no doubt that the uninsured rate dropped after 2013, which is when ObamaCare went into full effect.

But a closer look at the data show that the drop in the ranks of the uninsured had little to do with ObamaCare’s subsidies for private insurance, and almost everything to do with skyrocketing enrollment in Medicaid, the government program for the poor.

First, keep in mind that the 9.1% figure includes seniors on Medicare. Given the aging of the population, increased enrollment in Medicare would have pushed the uninsured rate down somewhat, even without ObamaCare. For those under age 65, the uninsured rate was 10.5% last year, and for those 18-64, the rate is 12.8%, the CDC data show.

The CDC data also show that the uninsured rate dropped in the past three years in part due to gains in private insurance coverage. But at least some of those gains are due to the fact that the economy was recovering from a deep recession over those years. More than 14 million more people have gained jobs since 2010, and many of them got insurance coverage as well.

A better measure is how private coverage compares to before the recession. And here the data show that the share of people covered by private plans is still below where it was in 2007.

CDC data show that 65.6% of those under age 65 had private coverage in 2015; in 2007, that share was 66.8%.

In contrast, the share of the population that gets insurance coverage directly from the government — through Medicaid, the VA, etc. — jumped from 18.1% in 2007 to 25.3% in 2015.

So, as the accompanying chart makes clear, the entire decline in the uninsured rate for non-retirees since 2007 is due to the expansion of government health programs — mostly Medicaid.

A separate survey by the Census Bureau shows the same phenomenon, with the share of the population covered by private insurance lower in 2014 (the last year they have data) than it was in 2007. During those same years, Medicaid enrollment shot up from 13% of the population to 19.5%.

Whether the fantastic growth rates for Medicaid is a good thing or a bad thing isn’t entirely clear, since Medicaid is a notoriously troubled program that provides lousy care for those stuck in it, and since its ballooning costs are overwhelming state budgets.

Also, while ObamaCare expanded Medicaid eligibility, which swelled its rolls in the past two years, the rest of the enrollment gains in Medicaid could indicate that more people are living below the poverty level, and so are eligible for the program under the old rules.

The question then becomes: Is it better to have more people living in poverty with insurance (even if it is crappy Medicaid), rather than have more people moving out of poverty and being temporarily uninsured?