Top row: Ryan Chase, Mario Wilson and Mike Segal. Bottom row: Ben Firestone, Chris Hyldahl and Jacob Gehl. This 'Silver Tsunami' environment will create new opportunities for healthcare operators, investors and service providers. By partnering with Blueprint Healthcare Real Estate Advisors, clients will receive an innovative holistic approach to real estate…

Blueprint Healthcare Real Estate Advisors announces the launch of its national advisory firm, which provides a multitude of real estate services for investors and operators of seniors housing and healthcare real estate. Headquartered in Chicago, Blueprint also has offices in Los Angeles, New York City, and Washington, D.C.

“The healthcare real estate market is experiencing unprecedented growth, with 80 million Americans becoming senior citizens within the next 15 years, and, as a result, they will be utilizing more healthcare-related services,” said Jacob Gehl, managing director and founding partner of Blueprint. “This ‘Silver Tsunami’ environment will create new opportunities for healthcare operators, investors and service providers. By partnering with Blueprint Healthcare Real Estate Advisors, clients will receive an innovative holistic approach to real estate solutions and be poised for growth wherever healthcare and real estate intersect.”

According to Gehl, real estate firms traditionally have distinguished seniors housing and medical office facilities as separate product types. But as population demographics become clearer and societal changes such as the Affordable Care Act are incorporated into the healthcare system, forward-thinking firms such as Blueprint have identified correlations between the sectors of the market that will benefit healthcare real estate investors and operators alike.

“As the baby boomers age and more segments of the population enter into the healthcare system through the Affordable Care Act, healthcare-related properties are likely to see a major boost,” said Gehl. “Whereas seniors housing and medical office used to be considered cousins, they are more like siblings now. Instead of viewing the seniors housing as a subsector of multifamily housing and medical office as subsector of office, the two should be viewed as healthcare real estate. Savvy investors know this and they want real estate service providers who can consult on all facets of the industry to enhance their portfolios.”

The Blueprint team brings an unmatched wealth of healthcare real estate knowledge and expertise to the industry, having completed more than $1.5 billion in transactions during their careers at national real estate investment firms and healthcare-focused real estate investment trusts and lending institutions. And with offices across the country, the firm can provide solutions coast-to-coast for its clients.

“We want to position Blueprint as the preeminent provider of healthcare real estate strategy and solutions,” said Ben Firestone, managing director and founding partner of Blueprint. “By providing a cadre of services, Blueprint can offer its clients optionality.”

Blueprint’s core service lines include exit strategy, capital solutions, partnership placement and consulting. Each service line brings its own unique set of solutions and network partners.

For its capital solutions service, Blueprint has partnered with Housing Healthcare & Finance LLC, a leading FHA-insured mortgage lender for seniors housing and skilled nursing properties.

“By partnering with one of the nation’s leading healthcare real estate lenders, we can offer clients direct access to capital for refinancing or acquisition purposes,” said Firestone. “Housing Healthcare & Finance brings a breadth of knowledge in the healthcare lending market and can help Blueprint’s clients navigate highly complex and specific financing programs.”

Consulting services provided by Blueprint will include: due diligence management; market intelligence; feasibility studies and growth strategy.

“This wealth of services allows us to take a solutions-agnostic approach with every client at Blueprint,” said Firestone. “Each case brings a unique scenario and we are dedicated to delivering a unique solution.”

Joining Gehl and Firestone on the Blueprint team is Christopher Hyldahl, managing director and founding partner who leads Blueprint’s West Coast operations, as well as industry veterans Michael Segal, senior associate; Ryan Chase, senior analyst; and Mario Wilson, associate.

# # #

About Blueprint Healthcare Real Estate Advisors

Blueprint Healthcare Real Estate Advisors is a national advisory firm exclusively focused on seniors housing and healthcare real estate. With offices in Chicago, Los Angeles, New York City and Washington D.C., clients benefit from both the dedication delivered by boutique advisory groups and the power and presence of a national platform. The Blueprint team of professionals possesses unmatched healthcare real estate knowledge and expertise, profound and longstanding industry relationships, and an extensive track record having completed more than $1.5 billion in transaction volume. To Learn more, visit http://www.blueprinthcre.com.

Editors:

For more information or to schedule an interview, contact Mark Thomton at Taylor Johnson at (312) 267-4528 or mthomton(at)taylorjohnson(dot)com.

Photo Caption:

Top row: Ryan Chase, Mario Wilson and Mike Segal.

Bottom row: Ben Firestone, Chris Hyldahl and Jacob Gehl.