Charity tennis event raises more than $16,000 for Pathways Hospice and McKee Cancer Center

Windsor's Kelley Hoime (left) returns a serve against Amy Black (middle) and John Boose during the 15th annual Debbie Boose Memorial Tennis Tournament at North Lake Park in Loveland on Sunday. Boose and Black are the husband and daughter of the tournament's namesake, which raised more than $16,000 for the McKee Cancer Center and Pathways Hospice floor at the McKee Medical Center. ( Cris Tiller/ Loveland Reporter-Herald )

You won't find two people who care more about the Debbie Boose Memorial Tennis Tournament than John and Amy.

The annual charity event has come to mean much to many over the course of the past 15 years in Loveland and beyond, but it will always carry extra significance to John Boose and Amy Black because of the memories it holds of a wife and mother they lost.

"It's just fun to see everybody out here and to have people still remember my mom; it's special," Black said. "It's great and it's fun to be able to play with my dad, and I've played with my sister in the past and my husband, so it's a great family event. I know my mom would happy to see it going on like this."

It's been years since Boose has played together with Black, yet the duo handled their opponents and navigated the field at the 15th annual Debbie Boose Memorial Tennis Tournament to reach the mixed 3.5 doubles final Sunday against a very strong pairing of Kelley and Stu Hoime of Windsor.

The Hoimes took the title with a 6-4, 6-1 victory, but Boose and Black had little to complain about on a perfect summer day at North Lake Park.

"We made it to the finals, so that's not bad, right?" Boose joked. "She carries an old guy, and I can still play a little bit, so it was kind of fun. It's been a great tournament. I think the beauty of this, frankly, is that it just keeps going and it has a bit of a life of its own now.

"Most tournaments don't last this long and this one keeps going strong. It's important for Loveland because it's really a family event and that's what it's all about. It's about competition, but also getting families together."

Mission accomplished. Just one court over there was plenty of both to be found in the men's 3.5 doubles finals as two father-son pairings battled one another over three sets.

Toughing through the heat and plenty of equally hot volleys, eventually Daniel and Wade Sunada persevered, 4-6, 6-3, 1-0 (8), although former Thompson Valley tennis coach Jay and his son, Anthony Klagge, could easily have ended up the victors.

It was a battle of opposites as Anthony, a sophomore-to-be at TVHS, stood across the net from Daniel, who at 79 never looked close to his age on the court.

Daniel won the respect of Jay and Anthony, who found that happening frequently over the week as the two competed in the Debbie Boose tournament for the first time.

Anthony Klagge (right) plays an overhand shot during the men's 3.5 doubles final as his dad, Jay Klagge, watches Sunday at the Debbie Boose tennis tournament at North Lake Park. Anthony and Jay lost a competitive final in their first time playing doubles together. (Cris Tiller/ Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"It was a lot of fun and this was a great match of back and forth and big points. They just hit shots down the stretch. It was really fun for our first time," Jay said. "We got to play a lot of tennis and my purple toes can attest to that. We've always heard it's going on, and we've often been gone during the tournament, so it was fun."

Other winners during the finals Sunday were Jessica Barr and Shelli Friesen of Fort Collins at women's 4.0 doubles, Fort Collins' Carol Hiller and Susan Ross in the women's 3.5 doubles, Bonita Hanner and Kent Mueller won at mixed 4.0 doubles and Patrick Dolan and Samantha Penhale were winners in mixed 4.5 doubles.

Loveland's Adam Less took the men's 3.5 singles crown, Brian Smith of Windsor won at men's 4.0 singles, Joseph Bieker and Kent Mueller won men's 4.0 doubles and Jonathan and Jameson Lumpkin of Loveland were champions at men's 4.5 doubles.

Numbers were up for this year's event, which was a welcome sight to tournament director Jon Messick and the McKee Medical Center's Fund Development Coordinator Ashley Kasprzak.

Kasprzak said the tournament rose just over $16,000 for the Pathways Hospice floor as well as the McKee Cancer Center. The money will be used to improve the hospice rooms.

"We were thrilled with the attendance and it's such an incredible event for Loveland because people have come for every year, or the first time and people come from Fort Collins or Boulder and it builds community," she said. "Not just the tennis community, but all of Loveland.

"I think the community sees how it benefits local residents in the end. It's interesting how playing tennis, and doing something you love, can actually benefit more and more people in their greatest times of need, so we're very excited about that."

Cris Tiller: 970-669-5050 ext. 511, tillerc@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/cristiller