The weather in Denver for the next week could look a lot like Saturday: high temperatures in the 60s with sporadic afternoon storms, according to the National Weather Service.

Showers and thunderstorm cropped up across the Front Range Saturday, raising flood concerns in Douglas and Jefferson counties, while western Colorado weathered snow and ice.

Five to 10 inches of snow was possible in elevations above 10,000 feet, and 2 to 4 inches possible between 9,000 feet and 10,000 feet in western Colorado, forecasters said.

Though there were no immediate reports of significant flood as of Saturday afternoon, several rivers were running at a high velocity, according to the U.S. Geological Survey’s streamflow gages.

Nearly every monitored stream or river from Pueblo to Fort Collins was running higher than normal Saturday, the agency said.

The South Platte River at Cheesman Canyon was flowing at more than twice its normal median cubic feet per second. The South Platte River in Commerce City was flowing at 566 percent of its median cfs. Monument Creek in El Paso County was at 566 percent, and the Big Thompson River in Loveland was at 988 percent, according to the USGS.

Before Saturday, Denver has recorded more than twice its normal rainfall so far this month, with 2.63 inches of precipitation, when 0.99 is normal. The city’s weather station at Denver International Airport recorded rain on 12 of the first 15 days of the month.

In April, the city received 2.65 inches of precipitation, which was nearly an inch above average for the month.

Saturday afternoon, the NCAA lacrosse semifinals at Sports Authority Field had a 30-minute lightning delay.

Sunday, a ridge of high pressure is expected to move over Colorado, with enough moisture and atmospheric instability in the afternoon to lead to more showers and a few thunderstorms.

Weather in the backcountry prompted increased avalanche dangers.

“Backcountry travelers can expect increasing and rapidly changing avalanche danger through the weekend,” the Colorado Avalanche Information Center forecast Friday. “The avalanches will be mostly confined to the new snow.”

Backcountry travelers were urged to be cautions wherever 8 inches or more of new snow has fallen.

The first storms of Saturday afternoon were moving northeast through Highlands Ranch at about 1:20 p.m. and an urban/ small stream flood advisory was issued for parts of Douglas and Jefferson counties until 4 p.m. By 2:45 p.m., the National Weather Service reported dime-sized hail in parts of Aurora.