Business interests split on energy efficiency mandate

Savings stats Highlights of the Public Act 295 energy optimization program for 2013:



Michigan's energy optimization standard was created under Public Act 295 of 2008. It requires all 65 natural gas and electric utility providers in the state to offer programs to reduce overall energy use and help customers cut monthly bills.



For 2013, utilities hit a combined average of 132 percent of their electricity savings targets and 121 percent of their natural gas savings targets. The 2013 targets were to reduce energy use by 1 percent of retail sales for electricity providers and 0.75 percent for gas providers.



Customers spent $253 million and saved $948 million on reduced energy use. For every dollar spent, customers enjoyed a return on investment of $3.75.



Overall, energy efficiency programs saved 1.3 megawatt-hours of electricity and 4.41 million thousand cubic feet of natural gas. This savings amounted to the annual electricity use of 121,000 households and the annual natural gas use of 58,000 households.



Residential programs included lighting; heating, ventilation and air conditioning; weatherization; and energy education.



Commercial and business programs included rebates for specific equipment replacement, such as lighting, boilers, pumps and compressors.



Tons of reduced environmental pollutants included lower amounts of sulfur dioxide, nitrous oxides, mercury and other air toxins and particulate matter.



Source: Michigan Public Service Commission, 2014 report

Over the past five years, Michigan utility customers have saved more than $3 billion through state-mandated energy efficiency programs.



But the 2008 law that created them expires later this year, and some Republican legislators and Michigan's two major utility companies, DTE Energy Co. and Consumers Energy Co., want to drop the mandate in favor of voluntary programs and integrated resource planning, commonly known as IRP.



Such a law — which aims to predict future supply and demand of natural gas and electricity usage — would require the utilities to offer service to customers at the lowest system cost that would provide adequate and reliable service.



The issue has split business interests. For example, the Association of Business Advocating Tariff Equity, which advocates for large industrial companies on energy issues, is lobbying differently than Ford Motor Co., an ABATE member until about four months ago.



The Michigan Manufacturers Association, Michigan Chamber of Commerce, ABATE, the utilities and Republican legislators want to replace the energy efficiency mandates with IRP. The utilities say they'll voluntarily continue offering energy efficiency programs.



Ford, Whirlpool Corp., environmental groups and key Democratic legislators are skeptical of that promise because utility profits and shareholder returns are contingent on energy sales.



Still, there is a general consensus that the energy optimization standard featured in Public Act 295 of 2008 has been a success. But over the past several months — in hearings and discussions over how to proceed when the current energy law expires in December — there has been strong disagreement among key stakeholders over one word: mandate.



The law requires the state's 65 utilities to offer energy efficiency programs to lower monthly bills for customers. The utilities are expected to create savings that amount to 1 percent of retail sales for electricity and 0.75 percent for gas.



Customers pay a surcharge to fund the programs. Large users can exempt themselves from most surcharges by creating their own energy optimization plan, but continue to pay a surcharge that subsidizes low-income residential customers.



The Republican- and utility-led mandate opponents want the next energy law to be tied to an IRP, a process that evaluates energy alternatives, including new generation plants, power purchases and efficiency programs. They say this will give Michigan a flexible approach, especially when facing new federal carbon emission reduction rules.



On the other side, leading Democrats, environmental groups, energy efficiency advocates and some large corporations, including Ford and Whirlpool, want to extend the mandate.



They point to 1995, when the Michigan Public Service Commission eliminated man-dated programs and utilities mostly abandoned efficiency efforts until the 2008 law brought them back. They also don't have confidence in integrated resource planning as a method to encourage energy efficiency because states that use it generate lower savings than the mandate states, according to a new report from the American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy.

Bill vs. bill

The two camps are represented by dueling bills.



Earlier this year, Rep. Aric Nesbitt, R-Lawton, chairman of the House Energy Committee, introduced House Bill 4297, which does away with the energy optimization standards.



Sen. Mike Nofs, R-Battle Creek, has introduced a counterpart bill, Senate Bill 437, that repeals energy efficiency and renewable energy standards and replaces them with the IRP process.



Rep. Sam Singh, D-East Lansing, has introduced H.B. 4055 to slowly increase the current energy optimization mandate to 2 percent of annual retail sales for electric utilities over four years from the current 1 percent.



In April, Valerie Brader, Snyder's senior policy adviser and now executive director of the Michigan Agency for Energy, presented the governor's proposed IRP process, which is supported by the utilities, among others.



Michigan's IRP proposal would include the consideration of renewable energy generation and energy efficiency savings as part of energy supply and demand planning, said Mike Byrne, the PSC's legislative liaison. Not all IRPs include those elements.





New climate

Where Snyder stands on maintaining a mandatory standard is unclear.



Last year, he expressed support for continuing state-led energy optimization programs. But sources tell Crain's that Snyder is privately telling legislators he would not object to doing away with energy efficiency mandates.



Irene Dimitry, DTE's vice president of business planning and development, said the regulatory and economic climate is vastly different today than in the 1990s.



"We have looming carbon reduction requirements, and as a company we support that and the IRP process," Dimitry said.



"We will not start and stop because it wouldn't make sense," she said. "We think energy efficiency has value and has been a good thing for our customers because in general they use less energy."



In June 2013, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency proposed the Clean Power Plan, which asks states, including Michigan, to develop compliance plans by August 2015 to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from fossil fuel-fired electric generating units by 2030. Interim emission targets are expected by 2020.



In August 2015, the EPA will issue final regulations for power plants to reduce excess carbon dioxide — gases that trap heat in the atmosphere and are blamed for global climate change — by at least 17 percent.



DTE and Consumers officials say continuing energy efficiency programs are an effective way to help them meet the EPA carbon emission regulations.





'What is the harm?'

But James Clift, policy director with the Michigan Environmental Council, said he is somewhat skeptical DTE is committed to energy optimization.



"What is the harm in continuing the standards?" Clift said. "If you are fully committed, then fine, give us the comfort level that it won't change."



Clift said he's not sold on the idea that carbon reduction rules will be an incentive for utilities because legal challenges could delay implementation of interim rules past 2020, especially if the issue goes to the U.S. Supreme Court.



"We also worry the national perception of Michigan will change if we take the standards out of the law," said Clift. "Companies thinking about locating here might change their mind, and we could potentially lose economic development potential."



Dimitry said DTE has filed an energy optimization plan with the Public Service Commission for 2016 and 2017 that keeps in place its current program. She believes Michigan's proposed IRP process will continue energy efficiency programs past that period because they will be made part of rate cases.



A 2014 survey by the Michigan Conservative Energy Forum showed that 84 percent of Michiganians support mandated energy efficiency programs offered by utilities. Some 75 percent support expanding renewable energy like wind and solar.



"Energy efficiency has been a home run for Michigan, saving money, reducing pollution, creating jobs," said Becky Stanfield, deputy director for policy for the Midwest region for the Natural Resources Defense Council. "Both major utilities have consistently exceeded the goals under budget and the results have been thoroughly evaluated and celebrated."



Robert Strong, ABATE's legal counsel, said the provision for large companies to create their own energy optimization programs isn't practical because of the amount of documentation required.



He said there's not a reason to include large industrial companies in the mandates because they have financial incentives for efficiency improvements. However, he said residential and smaller commercial customers could benefit from the mandated programs.



Dave Mengebier, Consumers Energy's senior vice president of governmental and public affairs, said the energy optimization mandate has saved its customers $855 million with lifetime savings of about $2 billion.



"It is not just reducing use, it is the avoided generation costs," Mengebier said. "We don't have to purchase as much electricity (on the regional market), and over time we avoid building power plants."



But Mengebier said Consumers also supports the voluntary approach with a strong IRP process tied to rate regulation. The Jackson-based energy provider also plans to file an energy optimization plan for 2016 and 2017 that extends its current programs.



"The IRP will have two major requirements: one, energy providers must demonstrate they are meeting customer energy needs (and offering) affordability and reliability. Two, (utilities) must meet all federal and state (environmental) rules. We need to reduce carbon emissions."



Rep. Bill LaVoy, D-Monroe, said Democrats are pushing Republicans and Snyder to have a mandate kick in if efficiency targets are not reached using the IRP process.



"I don't know how you get to goals without the mandate," said LaVoy, who is minority vice chair of the House Energy Committee. "The current rules have been a positive, both from the environmental and cost-savings standpoint. It doesn't make sense to change."



Jay Greene: (313) 446-0325. Twitter: @jaybgreene

Related Links