<p>STAR FILE PHOTO</p><p>Estella Park in Thousand Oaks</p>

By Wendy Leung

Five parks in Ventura County will receive a total of $1.2 million for renovation projects from the California Department of Housing and Community Development.

Westpark Park, in Ventura; Estella Park, in Thousand Oaks; and Ebell, Teague and Mill parks, in Santa Paula, were selected for a housing-related parks program that provides grants to communities with recent affordable housing projects.

The program, a result of a 2006 voter-approved initiative on low-income housing funding, awarded $34 million to communities across the state.

In Ventura, $421,000 will go toward Westpark Park, one of three skate parks in the city. The plan, which has not been finalized, could bring a larger skate bowl and artificial turf to a 2-acre area.

“It’s been a long time coming, and we feel very lucky,” Director of Ventura Parks, Recreation and Community Partnerships Elena Brokaw said.

As the only Ventura park with a community center, Westpark is a heavily used facility in a neighborhood that Brokaw called “park-deficient.”

Last year, the city received funding from the same program for the construction of Kellogg Park, which is expected to open in 2017.

Estella Park, the oldest park in Thousand Oaks, will receive $280,000 to renovate the playground and tennis court. The grant will also fund fencing and gate modifications, sign improvements and other fixes.

The 2-acre park dates to the mid-1960s and is heavily used.

Tom Hare, administrator for the Conejo Recreation and Park District, said Estella Park is in a high-density area of the city and needs upgrades.

“It’s the perfect spot to invest money,” Hare said.

The grant was rewarded following the completion of the Garden View Apartments, an Area Housing Authority of Ventura County project on Los Feliz Drive. The apartments have 54 affordable units, with some reserved for residents earning as little as 30 percent of the region’s median income.

In Santa Paula, Teague Park and Mill Park restrooms will be renovated, thanks to a $516,000 grant. Both parks were built in the mid-1970s and haven’t been upgraded since.

At Ebell Park in downtown Santa Paula, the original irrigation system from 1964 will receive a complete upgrade.

A number of affordable housing projects put the city in a position to receive the funding and include Rodney Fernandez Gardens, Orchard Place and two Trinity Lane units built by Habitat for Humanity.