New York City doctors earned $37.2 million from pharmaceutical companies and medical manufacturers in the last five months of 2013, according to federal data released in September.

The data shows that the five highest paid doctors received the majority of their money from royalties on medical devices and drugs they helped develop. Many others on the list of 17,252 New York City doctors earned smaller amounts for consulting and speaking engagements at conferences in places such as China, Colombia and Argentina. For example, some earned up to $15,000 per trip or more than $70,000 in consulting fees.

While there's been widespread criticism of the relationship between doctors and drug companies, medical ethicists say there is a distinction between the fees doctors earn for drugs and devices they create, and what they are paid for travel, consulting and speaking fees.

Art Caplan, director of medical ethics at N.Y.U. Langone Medical Center, said that while royalties do not pose an ethical problem, doctors taking trips sponsored by companies need extra scrutiny.

“The relationships skew [doctors] to prescribe devices or drugs,” said Caplan. “When companies hire experts [doctors] to present their drug as useful, it influences other doctors and the marketing undoubtedly is effective. ... There’s data that show it. I see it in my own experience.”

The payments were made public as part of the Physician Payments Sunshine Act, passed in 2011 under the Affordable Care Act as a move toward transparency in the relationship between physicians and the industry. For the first time, doctors and pharmaceutical companies are legally required to log these payments on the CMS Open Payments Database, released in September.

The database allows the public to look up their doctor to see how much money they took in from companies.

Capital’s analysis identified the top five doctors in each borough who received the highest payments according to the database, which has been criticized for being difficult to navigate while containing limited data. So far, only data for August through December 2013 has been posted.

Capital contacted 54 doctors listed on the database. Eleven responded, all staunchly defending receiving money from pharmaceutical companies. Some doctors resent the scrutiny that results from their relationships with pharmaceutical companies which they say provides education and networking opportunities.

The group of 25 doctors made up of the top five in each borough made a total of $9.8 million, about a quarter of the amount earned by the 17,252 city doctors in the database.

Of the 25, five were orthopedic surgeons; four were ophthalmologists; three were cardiovascular specialists; three were endocrinologists, and two were gastroenterologists. The five highest paid were in Manhattan.