If the state of Oklahoma had a sufficient tax base, a newly proposed revenue stabilization fund would be prudent.

As it is, it’s robbing Peter to bail out Paul.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

House Bill 2763 creates a new revenue stabilization fund that would take “excess” future tax revenue and save it for times when it is more desperately needed.

Specifically, the bill would designate that 75 percent of oil field tax collections and corporate income taxes above the five-year average to the newly created stabilization fund for use in the case of future revenue failures or declines in year-to-year tax collections. The other 25 percent of above average corporate income tax would go to the state’s existing constitutional Rainy Day Fund, which can be spent by the Legislature during certain specified financial emergencies.

In some ways, the idea mimics a good strategy used by North Dakota, which saved 30 percent of its severance tax receipts during the now-gone oil boom, which left it with a $3 billion cushion to fall back on.

The problem is, North Dakota’s severance tax was 11.5 percent. Oklahoma’s is 2 percent on newly drilled wells. The Oklahoma severance tax is part of an inadequate state revenue plan that perpetuates underfunding of state government, especially public schools, higher education, health and mental health.

If the tax base were sufficient to adequately fund those essential elements of state government, it would only make sense to save extra money. But there is no extra money. Taking away future tax growth and saving it only assures that we perpetuate even worse state government funding at an inadequate level.