CVS will share electronic patient data from its in-store health clinics with University of Chicago Medicine, under a deal announced Thursday.

The deal is the latest attempt to ease concerns that patients will get lower-quality care when they substitute walk-in retail care like that practiced at CVS's 44 Chicago-area MinuteClinics for traditional primary medical care from a family doctor.

It comes just four days after CVS rival Walgreens sold its 56 Chicago-area clinics to Downers Grove-based Advocate Health Care, which previously had a tie-in deal with CVS.

Sharing electronic health records with the University of Chicago will help "health care decision-making and help ensure patients adhere to important medications for chronic diseases," CVS chief medical officer Dr. Troyen Brennan said in a news release.

Doctors have in the past complained that patients don't always let them know when they get medication from the nurse practitioners who typically staff in-store clinics. And patients who don't have their doctor's address or fax number with them when they visit walk-in clinics can't tell the clinics where to send the records.

But a push to lower health care costs and keep patients away from expensive and unnecessary emergency room visits has encouraged hospitals to get on board with clinics like CVS's as they compete for patients newly insured under the Affordable Care Act.

A CVS spokeswoman did not immediately respond to questions about whether the University of Chicago could expect more patient referrals as a result of the deal. In a news release, the company said it would "encourage collaboration" between MinuteClinic, the university and three other health care providers in other parts of the country with which it announced similar deals.

University of Chicago patients who get their prescriptions filled at CVS can also opt to have their medical records electronically shared with the university, so that their doctor can see if they're picking up their prescriptions.

CVS will only share a patient's medical records with the patient's consent, and it will continue to share patient information with doctors who are not affiliated with the University of Chicago, it said.

kjanssen@tribpub.com

Twitter @kimjnews