Truth rating: 10

By Shari Weiss

VIDEO

Donald Trump participated in his first Republican presidential debate on Thursday, and his appearance made for plenty of soundbites. Check out the video below!

As Gossip Cop has reported, Trump announced he was running for president in June. He’s since become one of the most outspoken and controversial candidates on both sides of the political aisle. While seven “bottom-tier” candidates had their own debate on Thursday afternoon, in which many ripped Trump, he had to share the spotlight with nine others for the primetime debate at Cleveland’s Quicken Loan Arena.

Donald Trump got booed right off the bat when he was the only candidate to say he’d couldn’t guarantee he would support another nominee and not run independently should he not get the nomination. The first question just to Trump was about his history of degrading comments about women, and he shot back, “Only Rosie O’Donnell.” Asked about being part of the “war on women,” Trump said, “Part of the big problem this country has is being politically correct.” He went on to insult moderator Megyn Kelly, and said he would not apologize for not being more careful with his words.

The next question to Trump was about his infamous comments about Mexican immigrants, and he responded, “If it wasn’t for me, you wouldn’t even be talking about illegal immigration.” Put on the spot to share “specific evident” that the Mexican government is sending criminals across the border, Trump cited his own conversations with border patrol, and blamed the “stupid leaders” of the United States for allowing it to happen.

Trump was the first to be asked about Obamacare, and he reiterated his stance that it’s a “complete disaster.” He was next confronted about previously supporting liberal policies and candidates, which he used to as an opportunity to slam Hillary Clinton. And that was all in the first half of the two-hour debate.

In regards to the economy, Trump was asked why he should be trusted given the bankruptcies he’s had with his businesses, which he tried to spin as wisely using America’s laws. He went on to point out that he personally hasn’t been bankrupt, and once again touted how he’s supposedly worth more than $9 billion. Later, Kelly asked Trump point-blank when he actually became a Republican.

The mogul responded by saying he’s “evolved” on issues over the years, just like Ronald Reagan. When Jeb Bush denied calling Trump a “buffoon” and “asshole,” based on a report released earlier Thursday, Trump actually thanked him. Interestingly, Trump later said he doesn’t want to call President Obama “incompetent” because that’s “not nice.”

In his closing statement, which he was the last to give, Trump said, “Our country is in serious trouble. We don’t win anymore. We don’t beat China in trade. We don’t beat Japan with their millions and millions of cars coming into the country in trade. We can’t beat Mexico at the border. We can’t do anything right. Our military has to be strengthened. Our vets have to be taken care of. We have to end Obamacare, and we have to make our country great again, and I will do that.”

Check out video of Trump highlights, including the O’Donnell jab, below. TELL US: How do you think Trump did in the debate?