This year’s presidential primary elections have taken the public on a roller coaster ride. The 2016 primaries began with 17 Republican candidates and only one remains. The Democratic Party began with six candidates and only two are still in the race.

Republican candidate Donald Trump

According to his website https://www.donaldjtrump.com/, his main issues are: Immigration, healthcare, veterans, tax reform, U.S.-China trade and Second Amendment rights.

He proposes to build a wall between the U.S. and Mexico to keep undocumented immigrants out. He says, “We don’t have a country if we don’t have borders.”

He would get rid of the national “Common Core” standards, which are national college-and-career ready standards for K-12 grade in English language arts/literacy and mathematics.

As far as healthcare, Trump said he would repeal Obamacare, including the individual mandate to have health insurance. Trump plans to use the free-market concept to broaden health-care access and create more competition in the business.

He’s spoken briefly about his plans to increase jobs, but has not given any details. However, he says, “I will be the greatest job-producing president that God ever created.”

Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton

Clinton has an extensive list of main issues on her website https://www.hillaryclinton.com/

“Students should never have to borrow to pay for tuition, books, and fees to attend a four-year public college in their state under the New College Compact,” Clinton says about her plan to make college more affordable to ordinary students.

She supports Obamacare, and plans to build on the current program. She plans to make premium plans more affordable and lessen out-of-pocket expenses for consumers.

She plans to provide accessible training programs and resources that lead to jobs and lifelong skills.

She is a supporter of LGBT rights, and plans to ensure full federal equality for all LGBT citizens. She is a leading advocate for women’s rights, gun violence prevention, disability rights, national security, among other issues.

Democratic candidate Bernie Sanders

Sanders has a robust list of main issues. Some issues he addressed in his website, https://berniesanders.com/, are to make college tuition free, reduce debt for students, create well-paying jobs, provide a living wage, adopt fair and humane immigration policy, achieve racial justice, provide Medicare for all and ensure for LGBT equality.

Sanders plans to implement programs similar to those in Germany, Finland, Norway, among others, that make public college and universities tuition-free, paid by imposing a tax on Wall Street.

Sanders is a supporter of the $15 per hour minimum wage.

He plans to provide health care to every American regardless of income. Sanders believes, “Health care must be recognized as a right, not a privilege.”

Sanders proposes the Rebuild America Act, which he said would create 3 million jobs. Sanders’ other issues include getting big money out politics, fighting for women’s rights, and caring for veterans.