In Maine, where I grew up, our number-one pastime is complaining about the weather. Yet we hate umbrellas and stubbornly never carry them. The rain inevitably comes, so many of us get wet.

As I travel the country attending health care conferences, the mere mention of high-deductible health plans (HDHPs) raises hackles. People instantly start opining that HDHPs are a terrible idea, or a great idea, or both. These debates, while interesting, divert attention from an unalterable fact: HDHPs are rapidly becoming the plans of choice — for employers, for other purchasers of health benefits, and for public sector plans offered through state exchanges under the Affordable Care Act (ACA). In short, HDHPs have unleashed forces that will compel stakeholders to adjust to new realities — and everyone will get wet.

A Primer on High-Deductible Plans

HDHPs are typically defined as plans with deductibles that exceed $1,200 for individuals or $2,400 for families. Employers often pair HDHPs with a tax-protected health savings account (HSA) that helps employees meet the deductible or, if they remain healthy, pocket the money as savings. According to the 2014 Employer Benefits Survey from the Kaiser Family Foundation/Health Research & Educational Trust (HRET), the average deductible for individual coverage paired with an HSA is $2,098 — but 18% of workers have a deductible of $3,000 or more. For family coverage, deductibles average $4,059, and almost a third of covered workers have an aggregate deductible of at least $5,000. People enrolled in HDHPs pay for every dime of their care until they reach the deductible (with the exception of certain preventive services that plans are required to cover). That means the whole price for the MRI, the entire emergency room visit, and so on.

This makes for a potentially dramatic shift in patient behavior and thinking. In traditional plans, even if you have a deductible, you skim to the section of the bill that says “patient responsibility.” It’s usually a nice, round copay like $25 or $50 — the same predictable amount regardless of which services you received. In contrast, with an HDHP, the whole bill is yours to pay.

HDHPs are not a new idea. Research by Harvard Business School’s Regina Herzlinger and others began decades ago, and the George W. Bush administration fought successfully for employers to offer this option. Although the Bush policy was decidedly GOP-led, the Democrat-inspired ACA greatly accelerated the adoption of HDHPs, as new state exchanges usually feature high-deductible options.

Even more influential is the so-called “Cadillac tax,” set to take effect in 2018, which imposes a 40% excise tax on the value of health insurance benefits that exceed a certain threshold, starting with $10,200 for individuals and $27,500 for families. Employers are determined to avoid that tax, but that means slowing growth now, or risk blowing the cap by 2018. Employers used to hesitate to launch unpopular cost-cutting strategies like HDHPs so that they would remain competitive with plans offered by other employers. But pressure from the looming Cadillac tax is felt by all employers equally, so taking a risk on cost-cutting strategies now has less of a competitive disadvantage.

According to the Kaiser HRET survey— the definitive source on plans and options offered by purchasers — one in five workers had an HDHP in 2013, up from nearly zero in 2006. Half of all firms with more than 5,000 workers now offer HDHPs.

The Economic Impact of HDHPs

In January 2014, federal actuaries released their annual report on U.S. health spending; it documented relatively slow, stable increases in 2012. This may sound boring, but it should be shocking, in light of our nation’s history of “crisis level” cost escalations. The actuaries state that the ACA had nothing to do with this slowdown in cost growth — they specifically credit the influence of HDHPs. And hospitals are feeling the pinch. An August report from Moody’s shows a slowdown in hospital revenue, which it attributes to the popularity of HDHPs.

Despite this finger-pointing at high-deductible health plans, it’s generally rare for analysts to cite them as culprits in emerging health trends. But hospital leaders have told me that the well-documented growth of hospital debt is, in part, explained by the phenomenon of patients exhausting their unaffordable deductibles soon after being admitted for care. In many cases, the patient is still responsible for a portion of the remaining bill and cannot afford the out-of-pocket maximums, so the hospital doesn’t get fully paid.

This bleeding from the hospitals’ bottom lines will prompt uncomfortable changes in the way they do business, far beyond beefing up collections processes. Hospitals will need to incorporate pricing into conversations with patients about treatment options. And price-conscious patients, questioning the expensive inefficiencies that are rampant in health care, will not tolerate absurdly opaque and confusing hospitals bills for much longer. In effect, hospital CFOs will increasingly find themselves involved in clinical operations.

There’s also an unprecedented national movement afoot for price transparency. The state of Massachusetts has passed legislation requiring providers to disclose prices to patients in advance of delivering services. So, as patients pay more of their bills themselves, ensuring their satisfaction is no longer a soft PR strategy, but a hardcore financial growth industry for providers. Accordingly, health systems are increasing their focus on patient- and family-centered care, creating new positions like “chief experience officer.”

How to Weather the Storms of Change

High-deductible health plans are clearly setting big changes in motion. Here’s how various stakeholders can cope with new realities instead of turning a blind eye:

Providers need to prioritize transparency by giving newly activated consumers the information on price and quality that they demand. They also need to keep up the good work on shifting to patient-centered care models. Once and for all, fix those confusing hospital bills!

need to prioritize transparency by giving newly activated consumers the information on price and quality that they demand. They also need to keep up the good work on shifting to patient-centered care models. Once and for all, fix those confusing hospital bills! Policymakers must move beyond old partisan truisms and take a cold, hard look at the emerging evidence. For instance, policymakers must remove laws that impose rigid barriers to transparency, such as those that protect Joint Commission and other accreditation reports from public scrutiny. Contrary to conventional wisdom, these laws were never handed down from Mt. Sinai and have little justification.

must move beyond old partisan truisms and take a cold, hard look at the emerging evidence. For instance, policymakers must remove laws that impose rigid barriers to transparency, such as those that protect Joint Commission and other accreditation reports from public scrutiny. Contrary to conventional wisdom, these laws were never handed down from Mt. Sinai and have little justification. Employers need to adopt innovative strategies that empower workers to use information about price and quality to safely navigate the health system. Many health plans and companies, such as Castlight, have used online tools to enable consumers to easily find out what a particular service costs at a variety of providers. Still, these tools are not nearly as sophisticated as search engines that consumers use for other goods and services, in part because significant chunks of information on cost remain unavailable.

Fortunately, some leaders are already taking action. An executive at a successful, large company recently told me how her firm adapted its HDHP to fully cover pharmaceuticals and certain kinds of ongoing care, such as diabetes support. And they are seeing good results even at this early stage, including better use of primary care instead of emergency rooms by people with diabetes.

The Business Roundtable, representing Fortune 1000 CEOs, has issued a much-discussed report on corporations’ innovations to improve transparency about provider quality and pricing. In addition to offering toolkits, videos, and personalized support for employees, some go farther. For instance, Honeywell’s second-opinion service, called Surgery Decision Support, gives employees access to information and expertise to help them weigh their options related to possible surgical treatment. Honeywell finds that one in five participants in the service opt not to undergo surgery, and 98% of employees are satisfied with the program.

HDHPs represent one of the most significant changes in our health care system since Medicare. They may not be perfect, but complaining about them won’t change the realities we’re already facing and those that are coming soon. It’s time that leaders embraced the facts, the opportunities, and the hazards of high-deductible health plans.