Chris Kelly, left, Brady Sturgeon, middle, and Brian White are among the leaders of Emergency Physician Partners. (Photo: Submitted)

For independent emergency room physicians who want help in navigating technology and regulatory challenges, but don't want to give up autonomy to a staffing company, there's a new option: Emergency Physician Partners.

The daily workload of ER doctors is changing because of a variety of factors, including the Affordable Care Act, the transition to a new set of diagnostic codes called ICD-10 and the increasing use of electronic health records.

"That's just the tip of the iceberg," said Chris Kelly, founder, president and CEO of Emergency Physician Partners. "We want to help."

Emergency room staffing is coming into focus for staffing companies, in part because it's the "front door" to the hospital. Kelly said ER doctors perhaps see independence as the "holy grail" — and that Emergency Physician Partners would compliment the work they do, rather than force it into a template.

Doctors or independent practices that join Emergency Physician Partners will be partners in the firm and be able to make decisions about their practice.

"Our company is not going to tell hem how, where and with whom to work or how to take care of their patients," Kelly said. “I think the reputation, rightly or wrongly, is some of that clinical autonomy is given up if you sell that practice.”

The sector is not as consolidated as anesthesia or radiology.

Kelly, who most recently worked as executive vice president and general counsel of U.S. Anesthesia Partners, chose emergency medicine for his next venture because the sector is "ripe for a consolidation partner model." Kelly estimates that about 40 percent of ER doctors are still in independent practices.

"My hope is we’re going to find strong, reputable groups that have great relationships with the hospitals they serve and an entrepreneurial spirit,” he said.

Chris Kelly (Photo: Submitted)

—

In May a new company, American Physician Partners, bought two ER staffing companies — Align MD and Elite Management Services — in a $24 million deal.

In October AmSurg made public its target of acquiring TeamHealth, a Knoxville-based hospital staffing firm, which rebuffed the offer. In the interim, AmSurg bought Premier Emergency Medical Specialists, an emergency medicine practice in Phoenix.

Emergency Physician Partners is working out of a building in Green Hills but will move to a permanent home in Cool Springs. Kelly estimates the corporate office will have 10 to 15 people. Brady Sturgeon and Brian White are chief financial offficer and chief operating officer, respectively.

The staff is approaching physicians across the country and expects to bring on some as partners in the near term.

It's got $25 million in equity from Claritas Capital and will finance transactions with debt financing.

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 or on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1YAZXWI