MANCHESTER, N.H. – Sen. Ted Cruz returns to New Hampshire this afternoon for a two-day swing, his first stop in a presidential battleground since he declared his candidacy on Monday.

He might be a bit groggy.

The Senate pulled a near all-nighter, finalizing a $3.7 trillion budget plan at 3:29 ET this morning.

Cruz was one of just two Republicans siding with Democrats against the plan, which passed 52-46. The other was Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky, who plans to announce his own White House bid a week from Monday.

Having missed 16 votes in the three days after he announced for president at Liberty University, Cruz returned to the Senate for a “vote-a-rama,” a 16-hour marathon that included votes on 44 budget amendments starting at noon Thursday.

“I congratulate the Senate on its passage of a budget for the first time in years, and I commend my colleagues for their efforts to try to mitigate the unrealistic spending increases and continually expanding deficits proposed by the President,” Cruz said in a statement issued Friday morning. “However, given the gravity of the debt facing our children and grandchildren, I believe that Americans expect us to do more. We need meaningful entitlement reforms, without budget gimmicks, and I cannot support a budget that claims to balance in the year 2025 by utilizing revenue increases generated by Obamacare taxes.”

During the vote-a-rama, Paul pushed to boost defense spending beyond levels sought by GOP leaders, and to offset the spending with deep cuts in education, climate change research and other areas. His amendment failed.

“It is irresponsible and dangerous to continue to put America further into debt,” Paul said. “We need national defense, but we should pay for it.”

The GOP-led House approved a $3.8 trillion budget blueprint earlier this week. Both versions rely for eventual balance on revenues projected from the Affordable Care Act – the law that Republicans, Cruz more adamantly than most, want to repeal.

Cruz speaks to a conservative group at a VFW post in Merrimack this afternoon, to a conference of young conservatives tonight in Nashua, and to a county GOP group at the Portsmouth Country Club at a brunch Saturday. He returns to Iowa on Wednesday for a two-day visit.

The Senate is on recess until April 13, freeing Cruz, Paul and others with White House ambitions to tend to fund-raising and campaign appearances.