By Josh Sweigart

Staff Writer

The number of local government employees last year who earned more than $100,000 swelled across some area governments, with police officers and firefighters awash in overtime pay competing with chiefs and administrators for the biggest paycheck.

The city of Kettering leads the pack, with 105 employees bringing in six figures in gross pay last year. This is compared to 68 in the much larger city of Dayton, and 69 in Kettering the previous year.

Go here for a searchable database of 2014 payroll for local governments, now updated with 2015 payroll with Kettering and many other local governments.

One driver of payroll spikes for Dayton, Kettering and some other local governments was a calendar quirk that happens once every 11 years: their pay schedule had 27 paychecks last year, compared to 26 in 2014 and this year.

But Kettering’s growth in the number of employees making six figures – outpacing all other local governments surveyed – was also fueled largely by exploding growth in firefighter overtime.

“We did have an increase for firefighters in overtime last year,” said city manager Mark Schwieterman, still the highest paid in the city, and among the highest overall, grossing $190,236 last year.

He said the main factor fueling exploding growth in overtime pay for firefighters last year was staffing changes made to cope with the Affordable Care Act.

Schwieterman said the city got rid of volunteer firefighters in 2015 and had to cut hours to part time firefighters to comply with federal healthcare mandates that employees on the clock more than 28 hours a week – even if they’re on standby pay – be provided health insurance.

This means the full time firefighters had to work more overtime to maintain fire protection.

Of the 105 city employees who made more than $100,000 last year, 34 were in the fire department. Of the 20 highest overtime earners, 14 were in the fire department.

“Unlike a position in an administrative office where you cover with other staff with no overtime, in fire if we have to fill a position, then we have to fill a position and have three people on the truck to meet those minimum standards,” he said.

For complete coverage on this story, visit MyDaytonDailyNews.com.