Kenneth Faried’s recent rising-star status is proof that a world stage can be a powerful thing. Average 18 points and 10 rebounds after the all-star break last season for the Nuggets, against the best players in the world? The skeptics’ voices rang loudest.

Do the same thing against overmatched competition in group play of the FIBA World Cup? Now he’s a keeper. Strange thinking, and backward thinking, but true.

It can be argued Faried has done more to open up the eyes of his own fan base and NBA fans nationwide in one week in Spain than he had in the final two months of the NBA season. That’s been the real value of the tournament for him. He’s playing as he always has, but his name and his nickname, the “Manimal,” are becoming more recognizable. For a player looking to earn his first all-star berth this upcoming season, this is big-time stuff.

Former Nuggets coach George Karl used to say players looking for their first all-star nod often don’t get it until the year after they’ve played well enough to deserve it. Have a great season and then you’re on the map for the following season. Stephen Curry made everyone sit up and take notice with a spectacular playoffs in 2013 in the Golden State Warriors’ upset win over the Nuggets in the first round.

Last season Curry not only made the All-Star Game, he was voted in as a starter.

The more ESPN broadcasters gush over Faried, the better for him. He’s held up his end of the bargain by being the most consistently effective player on Team USA, but all of this exposure is fast-tracking Faried onto the radar screens of fans beyond the Rocky Mountains.

The truth of the matter, though, is that he is the same player no matter where he plays — with the Nuggets, in summer-league play, with the star-studded USA Basketball team. Faried is a testament to what simply playing hard can do.

But now there’s more to that with Faried. Much more.

His burgeoning offensive game has garnered praise, and rightfully so.

In an 86-63 demolition of Mexico on Saturday, Faried had eight points and eight rebounds. The biggest tests in this tournament are yet to come, because group-stage play is a glorified extension of the exhibition games. But no matter, Faried has already left an indelible footprint that, as long as he makes it stand up during the NBA season, will pay dividends for him well after the tournament ends.

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@ denverpost.com or twitter.com/ dempseypost