Buy Photo Lynn Hicks (Photo: Rodney White/The Register )Buy Photo

At the Register, we're proud of our strong editorial voice.

Our talented group of folks spend time analyzing the issues, investigating potential wrongdoing and interviewing public figures and political candidates to form opinions and keep readers informed. Soon, that team will focus more on engaging with our readers and amplifying our editorial voice in new ways.

At the helm of that team will be Lynn Hicks, 46, who on Thursday was named to the position of lead engagement editor. Lynn is a familiar face to many in the community as the Register's executive business editor and author of the weekly Biz Buzz column and video.

Lynn will take over the opinion section in December when editorial page editor Randy Evans retires. Randy, who has spent a 40-year career at the Register, is instrumental in the success of our editorial efforts and has been a mentor to many in the newsroom, including Lynn.

In his new role, Lynn will oversee the Register's editorial board and A Better Iowa, a site designed to capture your ideas, opinions and solutions. He also will do some writing and outreach, including events designed to bring people together to discuss important issues we're facing in the community.

Lynn started at the Register in 1991 as a copy editor while studying at Drake University. His career has included stints as a business and metro reporter, covering crime, courts, agriculture, technology and economics, among other topics. He also was the editor and general manager of the Stevens Point Journal in Wisconsin from 2001-2004.

"I consider this position a special responsibility to readers," Lynn said. "I've read the Register's opinion pages longer than I can remember. I understand the importance and influence these pages have had on the great debates and daily life of Iowa. I've always been impressed with the conversation we convene every day through letters to the editor, guest columns, social media and online discussion."

Randy came to the Register in September 1974, after spending two years as editor of two weekly newspapers in Albia. He's been an editor here since the mid-'80s, including state editor, metro/Iowa editor, assistant managing editor, news editor, and for the past three years and a half years, opinion editor.

Through the years, Randy guided the Register's coverage of political campaigns and elections, state government, education, crime and the courts, the nation's wars, investigative reporters, and all manner of disasters and tragedies, including the devastating floods of 1993 and the miraculous crash-landing of the United Airlines DC-10 jetliner in Sioux City.

"Through the years, I have been blessed to guide some of the legends of the Register's history," he said. "And not all of those legends are in the past. How could I be so fortunate?"

Our opinion-engagement team also includes:

• Rox Laird, Andie Dominick and Clark Kauffman, who all will focus on editorial writing and investigations. Rox, who started at the Register in 1972, has been an editorial writer here for three decades. Andie, a Pulitzer Prize finalist this year for editorial writing, has been in her position since 2001. Clark is the newest editorial writer on the team, joining in September after serving for more than a decade as an investigative reporter here (he also is a Pulitzer finalist, earning that honor in 2005 for investigative reporting).

• Brian Smith, who is taking on a new engagement editor role that emphasizes reaching new audiences and connecting with the community. Brian is moving into the role after serving since May 2012 as an associate digital editor at the Register, where he also oversees social media efforts.

• Kim Isburg, who will be a community engagement specialist on the team. She'll work closely with guest opinion writers, letters to the editor and contributors to A Better Iowa. Kim has been with the Register for seven years, serving as a copy editor for a variety of sections and publications.

With these moves, our editorial board now consists of Register President and Publisher Rick Green, me, Lynn, Rox, Andie, Clark and Brian.

We promise to keep bringing you great opinion content that provides leadership, challenges and celebrates the community. And we'll look for new ways to bring you that content and new ways to engage with you.

As always, thanks for reading the Register.

AMALIE NASH is the executive editor and vice president for news and engagement at The Des Moines Register. Reach her at anash@registermedia.com or 515-284-8551. Follow her on Twitter @AmalieNash.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1u4YLiX