Sioux Falls, SD

After surviving the deadly Sioux Steel Shooting in Lennox Last month, Kathy Steever continues the long road to recovery. It's a difficult time, and the community steps up to help.

March is one of the busiest months at the Benson Flea Market, as up to $4,000 people step inside the Expo building. With that heavy foot traffic, Kari Black knew it was the perfect opportunity to help out her friend, shooting victim Kathy Steever.

"I was literally sitting at the end of the driveway on Monday morning waiting for the bus. My youngest started talking about Cassidy who's their youngest and just popped into my had the flea market come up this weekend," Black said.

Black quickly started a bake sale fundraiser. She called the principal at the Lennox School, who sent a note home with parents telling them about the event. The bake goods on sale this weekend were donated from people across the community.

"When the stuff started coming in yesterday morning it was awesome. Boxes and boxes came from different groups of people that we don't even know, which was amazing," Black said.

Despite the quick turnaround, the event has been a success. The first day of the event, $4,700 was raised for the Steever family. Today, there's not as many cookies and brownies, but people are still buying.

"I think it's great because I live out by Lennox. Kind of a bad deal that went down, and I like that they're raising money to help her out," Daniel Ridgeway said.

This isn't the first event to help raise money for Steever and her family. Otis' Bar and Grill in Worthing held a benefit in February.

Black, who also created a gofundme page for people that couldn't make it to the flea market this weekend, isn't surprised to see the community rally around this tragic event.

"I think a lot of people try to put themselves into those shoes and it's impossible to imagine that. So being able to do that something just heart-warming and inspirational I think for me to be able to do that. It makes me feel like I can help," Black said.

There's also a benefit set up for Sunday, March 15th at the Lennox High school for all Sioux Steel victims. Doors open at 2 p.m.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.