SHARE "The Sleeve Waves" by Angela Sorby.

By of the

Opening an unfamiliar poet's new book can seem as daunting as beginning the climb up a strange mountain.

Fortunately, Angela Sorby offers plenty of pitons in her new collection, "The Sleeve Waves" (University of Wisconsin Press), this year's winner of the Felix Pollak Prize in Poetry. Wisconsin locales and musical references are among the handholds she's carved for a reader prepared to travel with her: How could I turn down a poem ("Golden Spike") that opens with an epigraph from Johnny Thunders?

In "The Knit," watching the nonagenarian bluesman Honeyboy Edwards, she imagines he "could be my Grandpa Harold's twin brother," despite their racial difference. "Can loud plaids cross the color line? / Can certain polyesters travel / beyond our peculiar national evil?"

Sorby, an associate professor of English at Marquette University, lives in Bay View; Wisconsin joints and place names dot these poems. "Kochanski's, Saturday Night" finds her contemplative at the going-away party for a friend headed to Afghanistan: "Oh, Lord. / To say the whole army / is stupid and wrong / is stupid and wrong, surely."

"Paradise, Wisconsin" takes us to Mary Nohl's house in Fox Point: "For years she practiced / the art of continuous error, / wrong turns taken / so meticulously." (I wonder what out-of-towners who've never seen Nohl's environment take away from this poem.)

Sorby's poems also travel back to her hometown, Seattle. "End of the Century" laments the death of Seattle musician and scenemaker Chris (Slats) Harvey: "We thought we could make ourselves real / by knowing the words to songs."

She swings across the country for "Stopping at the Joyce Kilmer Rest Area on a Snowy Evening," which packs three poets in its modest length: Kilmer, the "poem lovely as a tree" guy, who died in World War I; Robert Frost, hiding in the second half of her title; and Ezra Pound, lurking in parentheses. She ends with a stanza that's truly lovely, dark and deep: "Soldier, soldier: / can you tell us where to go / now that we've shaken up the glass / globe and brought down the snow?"

"Duck/Rabbit" masterfully links the ordeal of matching socks with the powerful thought of a philosopher: "I cover the bed with singles, / ...and of course whites,/ that are, like white people,/ not really white,/ which was Wittgenstein's point:/ nothing matches."

No poetry collection today seems complete without its act of ekphrasis. Sorby give us "The Second Daguerreotype," believed to be only the second extant photographic portrait of Emily Dickinson. She likens Dickinson, in a string of words too long and complex for me to easily excerpt here, to the dinosaurs who made tracks found by Dickinson's teacher in the Amherst area. "How strange, how alien / to be both an energy source / and a burner."

Most artists understand they're the current wave of a historical continuum that began long ago, but I think poets in particular engage with their forebears by name and through allusion. In "Epistle," Sorby playfully apostrophizes "Sylvia Plath, Bad Mom," and imagines her response: "How you hated that! / How unsexy / to be Mom to so many / perfectly sane young / tattooed women wondering / Am I crazy?"

Sorby will appear at Boswell Book Company, 2559 N. Downer Ave., on March 26 to talk about her other new book. She's co-editor of "Over the River and Through the Wood: An Anthology of Nineteenth-Century American Children's Poetry" (Johns Hopkins University Press), a wide-ranging collection of the poems American children used to read, memorize and recite more than a century ago.

Sorby and co-editor Karen L. Kilcup pored through periodicals and obscure books to assemble a big book of poems for children written by the famous, including Dickinson, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Paul Laurence Dunbar and Louisa May Alcott, to children themselves, and in some cases by children who would become famous poets, such as the teenage Edna St. Vincent Millay.

IF YOU GO

Who: Angela Sorby

When: 7 p.m. March 26

Where: Boswell Book Company, 2559 N. Downer Ave.