A recent ruling by the Colorado Court of Appeals that ski resorts don’t have to warn skiers or close runs when avalanche risk is high is troubling — and demands a change to the Colorado Ski Safety Act.

The appellate court in a 2-1 decision ruled avalanches within ski resort boundaries are an inherent danger, affirming a lower court’s decision to dismiss a lawsuit by the widow of 28-year-old skier Christopher Norris. He died in a Winter Park avalanche in 2012.

Norris, a father of two, was skiing inbounds on Winter Park’s Trestle Trees run on Jan. 22, 2012, when he triggered a slide that was 40 feet wide and ran 30 vertical feet and was enough to bury him.

His widow, Salyndra Fleury, filed a lawsuit, saying the ski operators knew about the avalanche danger that day and should have roped off the area.

The appellate court’s ruling says the risk of avalanche is implied in the Colorado Ski Safety Act — the law that spells out the sport’s “inherent dangers” and the liability of ski operators.

The law says skiers and snowboarders should know they may encounter changing weather and snow conditions and steep terrain.

Despite the law saying nothing about avalanches, the appellate court said “an avalanche falls neatly into the examples of dangers in the Act.” They are a product of changing snow and weather conditions and occur on steep terrain, the ruling states.

In dissent, Judge Jerry Jones said avalanches shouldn’t be “intrinsic to the sport of skiing on open, designated ski trails within ski areas.”

We agree. By all means, skiers should understand that hurtling downhill on waxed boards through icy, forested land will never be safe.

But at least they ought to know when an area is prone to an avalanche.

Colorado averages 5.5 avalanche deaths every year. Already this year, there have been six avalanche-related deaths in the state, and it’s only February.

On the day that Norris died, the Colorado Avalanche Information Center sent out a warning about the conditions, advising people to ski in the safety of a ski resort.

The appellate court’s ruling acknowledged that the General Assembly over the years has continually broadened ski area operators’ immunity for skier injuries. We think in the cases of avalanches, it should be reined in a bit.

The law should be changed to compel ski resorts to inform skiers when avalanche risk is high and signs should be posted on problematic runs.