Topics: aol_on, Books, City Carshare, Innovation News, Business News

In 1997, my friends and I began to organize a carsharing cooperative in San Francisco as a way to test our theories about alternative institutions. We first learned about carsharing from an article published in 1994 in RAIN Magazine. Two brothers in Berlin had started an organization called Stattauto Berlin, which literally translates to “instead of cars.” The general idea is this: A co-op owns a fleet of cars and keeps them all over the city. Members of the co-op can use a car when they want. They pay based on how much they drive. It’s that simple.

In the case of Stattauto, which started in 1988, members made reservations by phone; an employee of the organization took calls and kept track of reservations. Keys were kept in a lockbox at each parking location, and members had the combination. People wrote down in log books how far they drove. There was an hourly fee and a mileage fee—the idea being that the hourly rate roughly covered the capital cost of the car and the mileage rate roughly covered the gas and the wear and tear. Membership in the organization included insurance.

City CarShare operated largely the same way, except that we automated the process of reserving a car, both because we came along a decade later and got to take advantage of new technology and because we thought the high-tech approach would be more appealing to our San Francisco audience.

One way of thinking about the economics of carsharing is that it converts most of the fixed costs of car ownership into variable costs. Under private ownership, the insurance, the purchase price of the car, and, depending on where you live, the parking are all fixed costs, regardless of how much you drive. In a sense, having already committed to those costs, most car owners think the only “real” cost of driving is the gas, so there is no economic incentive to minimize car use. In contrast, when you pay each time you use a car based on how long you use it and how far you go, there is a pricing incentive to be mindful of how much you drive.

The core work of organizing an alternative institution, just like other kinds of political organizing, is talking to a lot of people to find supporters who will help make it happen. We talked to hundreds and hundreds of people, from neighborhood leaders to bicycle groups, from developers to technology firms, from elected officials to more experienced activists. And from these conversations we found supporters, members, funders, volunteers, and— the core of the organization—board members.

We had a wonderful board. It organized itself into committees to deal with operations and technology, fund-raising, marketing, and—once we had staff and money—human resources and finance. Later, we organized committees for each sub-area of the region where we wanted to operate. This leadership model allowed us to distribute the workload and involve large numbers of people while still preserving the overall direction of the project.

People got involved for a wide variety of reasons. Some were committed environmental activists. Some cared about local economic development. Some were motivated by the negative impact of cars on cities. There was little ideological or political unity among us. In fact, we made sure to recruit board members who were connected to both the right and the left of the political establishment. We were confident that our institution would do its job if it succeeded in getting large numbers of people to abandon private car ownership (or at least to reduce the number of cars they owned) and switch to carsharing.

Ultimately we organized City CarShare as a traditional nonprofit, rather than a co-op. This allowed us to go after some important funding sources. And more important, we believed that the nonprofit form provided the greatest likelihood for the organization to stay true to its mission over time.

We had some unexpected early success with fund-raising, and one of us (not me) quit her job to be the full-time director. We leased one car to try out the technology in it. We first signed up five friends, and then fifty, to test the system. We leased five cars, then another five. Once we were up above a hundred “testers,” we launched. The story hit the newspapers, and members poured in faster than we could sign them up. The amount of time from our first efforts at serious organizing to our launch was about three years.

Each location where we kept cars was called a “pod.” We lined up mostly free parking, relying on support from the city government, transit agencies, and businesses. Over time, as the project got bigger, we reached the limits of the free-parking strategy and had to rent spaces, but the contributed space from supporters was crucial to getting started.

Our outreach strategy at first was simply to contact the people we had been signing up for the previous three years and tell them they finally had their chance to join. Only gradually did we start to do “real marketing.”

We immediately felt the stress of rapid expansion, especially never having enough money. We needed more staff to do the work than we could afford to pay, and we needed to put more cars into service than we could afford to lease. Demand was not a problem. The ability to service the demand was the problem.