Registered nurse Debby Smith-Wint demonstrates how to use hand sanitizer before entering a patient room Friday at Columbia St. Mary’s Hospital Milwaukee, 2301 N. Lake Drive. Washing hands and using sanitizer play a key role in preventing infections. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

On average, almost three people die each day in Wisconsin from sepsis, a complication from infections. The infections often occur in hospitals and other health care settings. And new strains of bacteria are increasingly resistant to antibiotics.

The potential risks were shown last week when the state Department of Health Services announced that bacteria causing sepsis had been linked to 18 deaths and 44 cases of infection in southern Wisconsin since late December.

Reducing so-called health care-associated infections has become a priority in recent years for hospitals throughout Wisconsin and the country.

Hospitals have made impressive gains in preventing infections from central lines, catheters and surgery by putting in place strict guidelines and redesigning how they care for patients.

Hospitals are quick to acknowledge that much work remains. However, an annual report by the Wisconsin Hospital Association released Thursday documents the gains so far:

■Infections from central lines used to deliver fluids, medications and blood fell 42% from 2008 to 2014. For 2015, an additional type of infection was added to the measure, resulting in an increase in the rate.

■Infections associated with urinary catheters fell 66% since 2008.

■Deaths from sepsis fell 16% since 2011.

The measures — for about 100 hospitals in Wisconsin, including 65 that have 25 or more beds — are all better than the national benchmarks.

Nationally, an estimated 722,000 health care-associated infections occurred in U.S. acute care hospitals in 2011, and approximately 75,000 of those patients died, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Infections are the most common and most deadly of so-called hospital-acquired conditions. Others include falls and pressure ulcers, or bed sores. Hospitals also have worked to reduce those.

"All of our hospitals are trying to drive these rates as low as they can," said Kelly Court, chief quality officer for the Wisconsin Hospital Association.

The association launched a series of initiatives in 2009 to prevent infections and other health care-acquired conditions.

The steps taken by hospitals have entailed hundreds of changes in the way they care for patients. Clinical guidelines and checklists are now common. Prompts and alerts are built into systems for electronic health records. And doctors increasingly are asking whether a patient needs a central line or urinary catheter.

"First and foremost, if you don't need it, don't use it," said Richard Shimp, chief medical officer of Columbia St. Mary's Health System in Milwaukee.

When a patient in the health system needs a central line, a standard kit is used. And the electronic health record will remind the nurse each day to check whether the line can be removed.

He or she also will get similar alerts for a urinary catheter.

The guidelines and best practices for reducing infections and other risks to patients being put in place by Columbia St. Mary's were developed by Ascension Health, its parent organization and the largest Catholic health system in the country.

"We have to start thinking differently in health care around what we do," Shimp said.

The result has been fewer infections, falls, and other health care-acquired conditions.

"Our trend lines are all down," Shimp said.

Hospitals have had additional incentives to focus on improving the quality of care.

Medicare now requires them to disclose infection rates and other quality measures or pay a penalty. Until 2011, Wisconsin was among the 23 states that did not disclose hospital infection rates.

That information and other quality measures are available on Medicare's website at medicare.gov/hospitalcompare.

Medicare also stopped paying hospitals for 10 health care-acquired conditions in 2008. Before that, hospitals could bill the federal government for the additional care required when a patient was harmed while being treated.

The Affordable Care Act added other incentives and penalties.

■Medicare payments to hospitals that perform the worst in preventing infections and other health care-acquired conditions – those in the bottom fifth — are reduced by 1%. Fifteen hospitals — out of the 65 hospitals in Wisconsin subject to the penalty — are receiving the lower payments this year.

■Medicare payments to hospitals that perform poorly on an array of quality measures compared with other hospitals can be reduced by a maximum of 1.75%. Hospitals that do well receive bonuses. This year, 52 of the 65 eligible hospitals in Wisconsin are receiving bonuses.

Continuing to make progress in lowering the rate of infections and other health care-acquired conditions will get more difficult each year, said Court of the Wisconsin Hospital Association.

She nonetheless expects future gains.

"We are going to keep after this," she said.

so what's your risk?

The risk of getting an infection while hospitalized is small for any one person.

For each day that a hospital patient in Wisconsin had a central line or urinary catheter, for example, he or she had a less than one-in-1,000 chance on average of getting an infection in 2014.

But the overall numbers add up, and the infections can be deadly.