Transcript for Mom Bathes Baby Once a Week, Unleashing Online Firestorm

story that's topping our "gma heat index." Very groovy music. One mom has a confession that she only bathes her infant once every week or two. Paula faris has the story. Reporter: Ah. The nightly bath for your baby. It's a time many parents look But 32-year-old mom, claire goff, is coming clean. Sort of. Confessing her 3-month-old, charlie, rarely sees his tub. I will confess I've bonn longer than a week. Reporter: I met little charlie. And give him the sniff-a-radio. Smell like a baby. The mother of three said the nightly baths were a nightly ru teen. Five years and three kids later, she simply doesn't have the time. The daily bath. Sometimes two baths a day. What I've realized after five years of parenting children is, he's not a dirty kid. He's a baby. Reporter: And now, her blog post, do you need to bathe baby? Has started a splish splash backlash. Lazy people, says one reader. And eww, that's so gross. Others agree. Their skin would be dust if we did soap and water every day. How would you feel if you didn't shower for a week? I would feel gross because I'm an adult. I have hormones. But mothers know their babies. They have gut feelings about their babies. I would never presume to tell you how often to bathe your baby. Reporter: She said it's not only a matter of convenience. It's a matter of health. My pediatrician told me that I was bathing my second one too frequently. Reporter: Too many trips to the tub can decrease your baby's natural bacteria count. And subsequently make your baby more susceptible to infections and rash. However, they do still advise that it's best to wash your baby at least three times a week. Really, you want to wash your baby more than watching the lander when deciding to give a bath. Reporter: For now, goss says she's okay with her nightly routine. In case she changed her mind, i had a little gift. I'll put it to good use. Reporter: Promise? In her blog, she cites the mayo clinic. They're suggesting you don't need to bathe the baby every day. Just wipe down the important parts. Her pediatrician is onboard. That's important. And I think every mom knows what's best for their child. Use your best judgment. And wipe down his feet. Thanks for reaching in. That would be a bad scene. You guys came so close. I know. Had to go there. Our favorite physicians and surgeons from seattle have been

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.