Obamacare: Roberts’ Supreme Court Overstepped It’s Bounds, Again by Gary D. Halbert

FORECASTS & TRENDS E-LETTER

by Gary D. Halbert

June 30, 2015

IN THIS ISSUE:

1Q GDP Revised From Negative 0.7% to Negative 0.2% Current Recovery is Worst Since 1960, So Get Rid of GDP May Consumer Spending Rose the Most in Almost Six Years The Roberts’ Supreme Court Overstepped Its Bounds, Again Justice Antonin Scalia Blasts Court’s “SCOTUScare” Ruling Justice Antonin Scalia: America’s ‘Ruler’ is Supreme Court

Overview

Last week the Supreme Court rendered two controversial landmark decisions, one on Obamacare subsidies and another on same-sex marriage. Both went in favor of the liberals on the Court, and many conservatives cried foul.

While neither decision came as a surprise to me, Supreme Court observers on both the right and the left were surprised by the way the court went about making them. In both cases, there was a great deal of liberal “interpretation” of the law, and in the same-sex marriage case, states’ rights were trampled.

Today, I will share a few of my thoughts on the landmark decisions last week. More importantly, I will share with you summaries of the “dissents” written by conservative Justice Antonin Scalia, one of my long-time favorites on the Court. He had some powerful thoughts on last week’s decisions that I think you will appreciate.

There was one other troubling Supreme Court decision last week that you probably didn’t hear about, but you should have. The ruling cracks down on housing discrimination, which sounds like a good thing. Yet this decision could lead to a new housing bubble and the next financial crisis, so you need to know about it. This story appears as the first link in SPECIAL ARTICLES.

Before we jump into the Supreme Court discussion, let’s take a look at a couple of important economic reports released over the last week.

1Q GDP Revised From to Negative 0.7% to Negative 0.2%

Last Wednesday, the Commerce Department released its third estimate of 1Q GDP. The latest estimate for the January-March quarter was -0.2% (annual rate), slightly better than its second estimate of -0.7% last month.

With more complete data this month, the government said that exports decreased less than previously estimated, and consumer spending increased more than reported last month. There were also positive contributions from inventory investment and housing.

While -0.2% represents an improvement over the previous estimate, a familiar pattern continues in the current expansion, in which several quarters of impressive growth are upended by a significant slowdown. The latest reading marks the fifth time in the six-year old recovery when the economy failed to achieve at least a 1% growth rate for a quarter.

Most forecasters still expect a significant improvement in the economy in the 2Q; however anecdotal evidence in recent weeks suggests that the rebound may not be as strong as many have been suggesting. We don’t get our first estimate of 2Q GDP until the end of July.

Current Recovery is Worst Since 1960: Push to Scrap GDP

Next, you should know that there is growing evidence of a strong push by the Obama administration, and its willful accomplices in the media, to get rid of GDP as the bellwether indicator of the economy. It is true that GDP, as currently measured, is lacking in a number of areas and fails to capture everything that is produced in our economy. Yet Gross Domestic Product is still the best indicator we have of the strength or weakness in the economy.

The weakness in GDP so far in 2015 merely extends the dismal track record of the 23-quarter post-Great Recession recovery. The annualized growth rate from 2008 to 2014 of just 1.13% is dead last compared to the six other post-recession recoveries since 1960, which averaged 3.97% after 23 quarters.

This is making President Obama and his policies look very bad, and he doesn’t want that fact to be his legacy. No wonder they want to get rid of GDP and replace it with some other measurement that looks better. You’ll be hearing more about this in the weeks and months just ahead.

Consumer Spending Rose the Most in Almost Six Years

On a brighter note, household spending climbed in May by the most in almost six years, buoyed by gains in incomes as the US job market strengthened. Consumer spending increased 0.9% (annual rate) last month, the biggest gain since August 2009, after rising by only 0.1% in April, Commerce Department figures showed last Thursday.

The median forecast of 75 economists in a Bloomberg pre-report survey called for a 0.7% increase, so the report was better than expected. Incomes rose 0.5% for a second month. The better than expected boost in spending and income in May gave forecasters some renewed optimism that the economy may rebound in the 2Q.

Spending on durable goods, including automobiles, increased 2.3% in May, following a 0.1% drop in April, Thursday’s data showed. Purchases of non-durable goods, which include gasoline, rose 0.9%, while outlays on services climbed 0.2%.

Auto sales have been boosting the spending figures, with cheap financing helping to spur Americans’ appetites for vehicles. Industry data from Ward’s Automotive Group issued earlier this month showed cars and light trucks sold at a 17.7 million annualized rate in May, the strongest pace since July 2005.

Let’s hope this good news continues. Now let’s move on to our main topic today, the latest Supreme Court decisions.

The Roberts’ Supreme Court Overstepped Its Bounds, Again

Like many conservatives, I disagreed with last week’s two landmark decisions by the Supreme Court. But more irritating than the decisions themselves was the way the High Court went about making them. In the Obamacare case, King v. Burwell, the challengers argued that it is unconstitutional for the federal government to provide health insurance subsidies to people who live in states that did not set up their own insurance exchanges.

The language in the Affordable Care Act specifically states that such subsidies are allowed only in exchanges “established by the State.” The defense argued that the phrase included the federal government and not just the individual states. Without these federal subsidies in states that do not have exchanges, Obamacare would not be able to survive.

For the second time in three years, Chief Justice John Roberts (a George W. Bush appointee) sided with the court’s liberals to uphold that key interpretation of Obamacare and saved it once again. Adding insult to injury for the right: Roberts again wrote the opinion for the majority, stressing that the intent – not the wording – of the law was more important. In other words, that was what the lawmakers in Congress meant to say, in his opinion.

But how does Chief Justice Roberts, or any of the other justices really know what Congress meant to say? They don’t but they ruled as they did anyway. How is this justice? It’s not.

Next, in the gay marriage decision, I was not totally surprised that the High Court ruled in favor of same-sex marriages. What bothered many conservatives most was the fact that, before this ruling, 37 states already had some kind of law making gay marriage legal. This had always been an issue for the states to decide,

Sign up for our free newsletter