Increase would bring project budget to $160 million, up from initial $143 million

The $156 million price tag on the University of Colorado's stadium expansion and remodeling project could be getting bigger.

University and construction officials are still crunching the numbers but so far have tallied roughly $4 million in new cost overruns for the project, which includes an expansion of the Dal Ward Athletic Center, construction of an indoor practice facility and an addition to the stadium's northeast corner.

"In general, this has been one of those very complex and very fast projects," said campus spokesman Bronson Hilliard. "It's both a complex project in terms of scope and then the speed of delivery has been really quick. On top of that, we've had the rapid change in the construction market, materials market, the labor market. We have seen some expansion of costs."

Hilliard said campus officials could be going before the Board of Regents again this fall to ask for additional spending authority.

The campus already added $13 million to the cost of the project a year ago because of poor soil conditions and high labor costs. That brought the project's initial $143 million budget up to $156 million.

If approved by the board, the newest budget could be $160 million, a 12 percent cost increase since the project was first approved by the board in December 2013.

Advertisement

Though the campus is financing the expansion with about $150 million in bond revenues, the athletic department is responsible for the full cost and plans to pay for the upgrades with fundraising, business contracts and community partnerships.

So far, the athletic department says it has raised nearly $77 million — $18 million in endowment funding and $58 million for construction.

Athletic department officials launched the "Drive for $105M" campaign in January and want to raise $85 million in capital funding and $20 million in endowment funding.

Officials with Mortenson Construction, which is leading the expansion and remodel, declined to answer questions and instead sent an emailed statement.

"Mortenson is currently working with CU to finalize our final contract value and schedule," wrote Nancy Kristof, a spokeswoman for the company.

Work began in the spring of 2014 and is expected to be completely finished by the spring or summer of 2016, Hilliard said. The stadium upgrades are set for completion Sept. 12, he said.

Hilliard said other campus construction projects may also require more spending authority, some of which could be presented to the regents' capital construction committee Aug. 19 in Denver.

Hilliard declined to specify which other projects may need budget increases, but he said the $25 million 580-space parking garage to be built under the indoor practice facility should finish on budget.

"It's safe to say right now with all of our major projects that we are evaluating the numbers and looking at that exact thing," Hilliard said.

Already this year, rising costs delayed the start of a project to construct a building atop the Euclid Autopark garage. Planners are reworking the design of the $43 million Center for Academic Success and Excellence to stay within the budget, officials said.

Hilliard said the campus plans to reflect on these construction challenges to develop a system that allows CU to "adjust more quickly to market conditions."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta