Good day Austin:

Wendy Davis will announce "what's next" for her on October 3. And, unless she has a very peculiar sense of humor, what's next will be a run for governor that, at the very least, promises to be the most exciting for Texas Democrats in a generation.

Otherwise, there is no explaining the tone of theemail that went out to supporters this morning.



Dear Friend,



There’s one question I’ve gotten quite often in the past few months. I’ve heard it online, while I’m traveling around the state, from the media, and in my Fort Worth neighborhood: What’s next?



On October 3rd, I’ll be answering that question. And as part of my dedicated network of grassroots supporters, you will be among the very first to find out.



But today, I have a question for you -- do you have any friends or family who would like to be among the first to know?



Share this on Facebook and tweet it to your followers to let your friends know how they can sign up to receive the news early.



I truly appreciate all the work that you -- my grassroots team -- have done for me thus far. And I’m excited about what we can do together in the future.



Thank you for all of your support -- and thanks for spreading the word!



Your friend, and proudly your state Senator,



Wendy

Of course, back in July, Gov. Rick Perry promised to reveal his "exciting future plans," which turned out to be nothing more than not seeking re-election.

But, having so raised her party's expectations, Mark Jones, the Rice University political scientist, said for Davis, there's really no turning back now.

"She’s painted herself in a corner," he said.

Davis has said she wouldn't make the race unless she thought she could win, but Jones thinks that the circle of advisers pressing her to go for it have perusaded her that she and the party can emerge stronger from the campaign even without winning.

"No one's foolish enough to think that there’s a chance she could win – well there’s always a chance, but it's 1 in 100 - but that she can do really well and by doing really well, both revive the Democratic Party, and pretty much write her own ticket in 2018, running for governor or (U.S.) senator," said Jones.

To actually win, Jones said, "It would take Abbott rolling Steve King and Todd Akin into one package, and even then he could probably still skate by. And Abbott isn’t going to do that. He’s not that type of outrageous person, though he needs to get a little better message discipline and maybe stop using Twitter.

To wit, Texas Democrats last night released a web video, Greg Abbott has a women problem, featuring news reports on Abbott's tweeting his thanks to a supporter who had tweeted that Abbott was goig to teach "retard Barbie" a "life lesson," and campaign adviser Dave Carney's retweeting a blogger's tweet suggesting that Davis was "too stupid to be governor."

The kicker on the video comes courtesy an on-air appearance by Christy Hoppe, Austin bureau chief for the Dallas Morning News: "If he continues to dismisss Wendy Davis as a stupid woman because she disagrees with you, that is not helpful to any campaign."

If some of Carney's recent tweets felt like brushback pitches intended to try to intimidate Davis out of making the race, they do not seem to have had their desired effect. But then again, maybe Carney had a different agenda.

Just two followers more and I hit 3000. Thanks to all new new followers. — Dave Carney (@granitewinger) September 18, 2013

You'd be too stupid not to follow this guy :) RT @granitewinger: Just two followers more and I hit 3000. Thanks to all new new followers. — Jay Root (@byjayroot) September 18, 2013

My work here is done for the night. — Dave Carney (@granitewinger) September 18, 2013

NEXT UP - VAN DE PUTTE

Meanwhile, yesterday Matt Angle's Lone Star Project, which has played a central role in promoting a Davis candidacy, was extolling the virtues of Sen. Leticia Van de Putte, D-San Antonio, who is contemplating joining Davis as a candidate for lieutenant governor.

Get to know Senator Leticia Van de Putte: We bet you don’t know all of these things about the Senator from San Antonio



Senator Van de Putte has been blessed with six children and six grandchildren and has been married to Pete Van de Putte for 36 years.



She is a registered and practicing pharmacist. When she’s not serving as a legislator, she is in a white coat working as a neighborhood pharmacist at Davila Pharmacy, in the West San Antonio neighborhood where she grew up.



Her work on House Bill 5, the landmark education curriculum and testing reform bill in 2013 was instrumental in its development and passage — work that earned her a spot on Texas Monthly's 10 Best Legislators of 2013 list.



She is chair of the Veteran Affairs and Military Installations Committee. In honor of her father, a veteran of the Korean war era, she has devoted her legislative career to honoring service members and veterans, most recently with legislation providing property tax exemptions for wounded warriors and surviving spouses.



She served as Senate Democratic Caucus Chair from 2003 to 2011, and led the historic 2003 Senate quorum break to block Tom DeLay’s mid-decade redistricting scheme that trampled on the rights of minority voters. Her heroism stands in stark contrast to Tom DeLay’s felony conviction.



Along with Rep. Senfronia Thompson, she has been the leading voice at the Capitol in anti-human trafficking legislation and in advocating for the victims of this heinous crime.



Senator Van de Putte served as Co-Chair of the 2008 Democratic National Convention where President Barack Obama was formally nominated. In the same year, Senator Van de Putte was the subject of a book published by Texas A&M University Press titled Latina Legislator: Leticia Van de Putte and the Road to Leadership, by Dr. Sharon A. Navarro, a professor of political science at the University of Texas at San Antonio.



She bravely challenged the Senate GOP leadership asking, "At what point must a female senator raise her hand or her voice to be recognized over her male colleagues?" and inspiring citizens in the gallery to speak up and speak out to continue Senator Wendy Davis's filibuster to block GOP efforts to deny Texas women healthcare.



She is a former member of the Thomas Jefferson High School Lassos, and is happy to show her rope skills when asked.



She is an avid sports fan and cheers for the Spurs, the Longhorns and the Aggies. She also gets MLB alerts on her phone several times a day.

Indeed, by late morning yesterday it seemd like Van de Putte's campaign for lieutenant governor was already underway, as, in a tweet, a blog post and a letter to Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst, she pounced on his comments during a debate Monday in Houston with this three Republican rivals,.

With all due respect,Mr Dewhurst,if you don't think our work on behalf of TX vets is important,please step aside so we can continue it. — Leticia Van de Putte (@leticiavdp) September 17, 2013

Here, from Van de Putte's blog:

As you may know by now, Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst boasted to a gathering of Republican partisans yesterday that he has “been reducing the number of Democratic [Senate committee] chairs since I came in [to office].” That kind of talk is to be expected at such a meeting. But then he crossed a line by saying that of the few committees that are chaired by a Democrat, “not one of them is one of the critical committees.” I find this infuriating, not least because I chair a committee that works to help our nation’s heroes: veterans, active military, and their families. And frankly, all our committees in the Texas Senate are “critical” to Texans’ lives."

Dewhurst spokesman Travis Considine replied with a statement:

Lt. Governor Dewhurst believes every committee in the Texas Senate addresses issues important to Texans. As a veteran of the United States Air Force and foreign officer in the C.I.A., David Dewhurst has always supported veterans and was proud to preside over the passage of legislation such as SB163, which awards a 100% property tax exemption to spouses of active duty service members who were killed in action, and SB 162, which helps ease the transition of service members and their families to civilian life.

The debate was interesting. You can listen to it here (thanks to Scott Braddock for posting the link in his story at the Quorum Report)

Essentially, Dewhurst is defending himself from the charge by Sen. Dan Patrick, R-Houston, that he has ceded too much power to Democrats.

"We work too hard as Republicans to have half the Democrats be chairman of comittees - bottom line,"' said Patrick, who said Democrats "used that power to thwart what we want to get done - border security, sancutary cities, property tax reduction, school choice. I can down the list of things that they stopped as chairman."

He said that he has long supported reducing the Senate's two thirds rule to a 60 percent rule, meaning that it would take 19 instead of 21 votes to prevail, and "we will have 20 Republicans becasue we will beat Wendy Davis whatever she runs for."

And, he continued, "Wendy Davis is one of the reasons I am running for this office because she should never have had the floor that day (of the filibuster), never have had the floor."

"That's a lack of planning, that's a lack of leaderhsip, that's a lack of vision," said Patrick.

Dewhurst followed by saying, "now let me tell you what really happened."

"If I've said it once, I've said it probably 50 times. I can play it round and I can play it square. The two thirds rule is a senators' rule and the senators have wanted a two-thirds vote."

He said he the two-thirds rule did not apply in the special session during which Davis filibustered the abortion legislation, and he had told Speaker Straus to get the abortion legislation to him before it was in "filbuster range."

That didn't happen, and Dewhurst said, the day of the filibuster, "and Dan you konw perfectly well, you were sitting there, I asked the senators that morning, `do you want to break the filibuster precedent forever, or do you want me to recognize Wendy Davis, and everyone said, "don't break it," not a word was said."

On the commitee chairman, he said "I've been reducing the number of Democrat chairs since I came in. You know how many committees we have? 17. You know how many Democrat chairs we have? 5. OK? So, I've been reducing them and not one of them is one of the critical committees. At the end of the day on bills, who do they turn to to go get the votes? Me. OK? So, we've been reducing that number."

And, he defeneded his credentials as a battle-tested fighter for conservative causes.

"In passing photo voter ID, you think that was easy? That was a bloodbath and we had to fight Senate Democrats."

In his comments, Land Commissioner Jerry Patterson - who like Patrick supports a revision of the two-thirds rule - nonetheless offered a less defensive argument than Dewhurst for maintaining the bipartisan traditions of the Texas Legislature that everyone from Gov. Perry on down like to brag make Texas different than Washingon.

"You need to lead and when you start out by saying I’m going to lead by saying we will not have Democratic committee chairs or I’m going to have fewer, you have in effect said, `I’m not strong enough to make things happen that need to happen.' I served in the Senate under a crusty old and at that time very conservative Democrat named Bob Bullock and I can guarantee you, if there was a bill in a committee and Bob Bullcok wanted it to come out, it was going to come out. That’s what we need. We don’t need an arbitrary distinction on Day One that says we're not going to have any Democratic committee chairs. That just says I’m too weak to get things done."

I came across an interesting hisotrical perspectivve on all this yesterday.

Last week, James Leonard of Lakeway died at the age of 82. An oil and gas man, Leonard was also one of the founding fathers of the modern Texas Republican Party. In the early 1960s he was the state party's first executive director, and later served as a founding member and chairman of Associated Republicans of Texas.

It was, while holding that position, that he wrote a 1993 viewpoint piece for the Dallas Morning News, that seems particularly timely.

Here is an excerpt:

The 1992 general election provided three momentous and surprising results. Three Democratic senators, "insiders' who crafted Senate Bill 1, were soundly defeated by Republicans -- Senate dean Chet Brooks by Jerry Patterson of Pasadena, Bob Glasgow by Jane Nelson of Lewisville and Ted Lyon by Florence Shapiro of Plano. Having 13 Republican has created a positive effect on the Senate. Under Senate rules, a two-thirds vote is required to conduct most business in the Senate, including bringing up bills for debate and confirmation of gubernatorial nominees. The Democrats, though a majority, must take a more careful look at what they're doing, knowing any log-rolling, pork-barreling or other back-room tactics face a potentially successful Republican challenge. Lt. Gov. Bob Bullock has felt these winds of change and in his usually astute manner has allowed a more bipartisan state Senate to evolve. The historic number of Republican state senators has created a more open and honest legislative process, provided an equitable forum for debate and thereby the inclusion of many of the electorate who had been shut out.

A funeral Mass for Leonard will be held at 11 a.m. this Friday at Emmaus Catholic Church, 1718 Lohman's Crossing, Lakeway.

CRUZ'S TAKEOVER OF AMERICA CONTINUES UNABATED

Well, not quite. But almost.

The popular liberal politcal site, TPM, was reporting late yesterday that House Speaker John Boehner was bowing to the Cruz strategy on defunding Obamacare.

And here's the reporting at the National Review by Robert Costa that was based on.

Leadership sources tell me the House will soon vote on a continuing resolution that simultaneously funds the federal government and defunds Obamacare. Speaker John Boehner and Majority Leader Eric Cantor are expected to announce the decision at Wednesday’s Republican conference meeting. This means the conservatives who have been urging Boehner to back a defunding effort as part of the CR have won a victory, at least in terms of getting the leadership to go along with their strategy. But getting such a CR through the Democratic Senate and signed into law will be very difficult — and many House Republican insiders say a “Plan B” may be needed. Here’s how my sources expect the gambit to unfold: The House passes a “defund CR,” throws it to the Senate, and waits to see what Senator Ted Cruz and his allies can do. Maybe they can get it through, maybe they can’t. Boehner and Cantor will be supportive, and conservative activists will rally. But if Cruz and company can’t round up the votes, the House leadership will likely ask Republicans to turn their focus to the debt limit, avoid a shutdown, and pass a revised CR — one that doesn’t defund Obamacare.

PERRY IN MARYLAND

Gov. Perry is in Maryland on one of his trips promoting Texas as a destination for those those seeking a better, freer place to live and do business. His itinerary inclues a tour of the Beretta USA facility in Accokeek, Maryland.

Perry was greeted by an opinion piece in the Washington Post by Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley, aruging that Maryland stacks up very well against Texas on a variety of economic measures.

Here's the guts of his argument:

O'Malley's critique is echoed in an ad that Texans for America's Future - a super PAC founded by Texans who opposed Perry'srun for the 2012 Republican nomination for president - is running on Maryland talk radio stations WNAV and WCBM. The script:

When last you saw Rick Perry, he was on national TV, forgetting which three federal agencies he would eliminate if he were president.Fortunately, voters eliminated him. But now he's back! Rick's running ads saying, 'Maryland folks, come to Texas----It's Disney World for corporate CEOs!' But Rick's a little forgetful. And here's what he forgot this time. In Rick Perry's Texas: One child in four lives in poverty. And thanks to Perry's bad budgeting, the highway department has to convert some modern paved state roads back to gravel.

Texas ranks dead last in the percent of population that graduates from high school. But we're Number One in the production of hazardous wastes, and a strong fourth in cancer causing chemicals released into the air. If that makes you sick, too bad. 28% of Texans have no health insurance at all---nada, zilch, none--- …and we're rated the worst in the nation in health care services. The trouble is, Rick's failed leadership is making these problems worse. The state of Perry will be great for business, all right, unless you like paved roads, an educated work force and air you want to breathe.





In other news:

- In the Statesman, Tim Eaton reports:

Two civil rights organizations filed a lawsuit Tuesday to try to block Texas’ controversial voter identification law. The NAACP of Texas and the Mexican American Legislative Caucus alleged that the state’s voter ID law, which requires one of a few forms of ID to cast ballots, is unconstitutional and was enacted with a racially discriminatory purpose.

- Also in the Statesman, Kate Alexander on the evolving evolution debate before the State Board of Education:

Scientific theory competed with biblical teachings at the State Board of Education on Tuesday as the members grappled with how evolution should be covered in Texas science textbooks. About 60 people spoke at the first of two public hearings before the board adopts new textbooks and other instructional materials, both print and digital, in November.

- The UT Democrats are hosting a debate tonight between three Democratic candidates seeking to succeed Mark Strama in the Texas House. It's at 8 p.m. in the Jester building auditorium (JES A121A). The debate between Celia Israel, Rico Reyes, and Jade Chang Shephard will be moderated by Scott Braddock.