CHICAGO--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Maestro Health, a leading all-in employee health and benefits company, marked 2015 with record momentum by adding 158 new logos—a 45 percent increase in revenue over the prior year—and expanding deployments for existing customers on the maestroEDGE platform. There are several notable household names included in this growth, including: Blue Cross Blue Shield of Arizona, DISH Network, and Mazda via broker partners.

“Working with Maestro Health allows BCBS Arizona to offer its employer groups a modern, simplified platform for presenting benefit options to their employees,” said Mike Tilton, Vice President of Sales for BCBS Arizona.

2015 witnessed a greater demand for an all-in health and benefits platform that could eliminate vendor juggling, reduce administrative burden, and manage enrollment more intuitively. Employers also faced a daunting task of complying with new regulations, penalties and deadlines related to the Affordable Care Act.

In response to these market realities, Maestro Health made the following strategic investments in 2015:

Benefits Administration: Acquired Group Associates, Inc., a leading benefits administrator, to create an all-in benefits administration and private exchange solution. As the line between benefit administration and private exchange has become increasingly blurred, the expertise and experience of the specialized benefits consultant/administrator have rounded out the Maestro Health solution. With added capabilities to solve the complicated coding necessary to be compliant with the ACA, Maestro Health is now able to offer a standalone ACA compliance and reporting tool.

Acquired Group Associates, Inc., a leading benefits administrator, to create an all-in benefits administration and private exchange solution. As the line between benefit administration and private exchange has become increasingly blurred, the expertise and experience of the specialized benefits consultant/administrator have rounded out the Maestro Health solution. With added capabilities to solve the complicated coding necessary to be compliant with the ACA, Maestro Health is now able to offer a standalone ACA compliance and reporting tool. Consumer Experience : Updated platform features allow users of maestroEDGE to enable a unified benefits experience across all solutions, whether utilizing a pre-built configuration, creating their own, or implementing singular products a la carte to fit their unique needs.

: Updated platform features allow users of maestroEDGE to enable a unified benefits experience across all solutions, whether utilizing a pre-built configuration, creating their own, or implementing singular products a la carte to fit their unique needs. Technology : Improved and refined back-end technology of maestroEDGE to enable customers to shop, enroll, and live in confidence with their benefits while alleviating the administrative burden for brokers and employers.

“Our tremendous customer growth is fueled largely by companies seeing the value of a technology-meets-service model set against an all-in approach to benefits management – one partner, one experienced service team, one solution,” said Rob Butler, Maestro Health Founder and CEO. “Carriers, brokers, and employers are demanding relief from the administrative burden of benefits management. Employees are seeking a greater choice and flexibility for maintaining their health and wellness. All are looking for expert support to make informed decisions along the way. We are answering the call for greater trust and transparency, choice and personalization in this important process.”

In today’s complex healthcare environment, Maestro Health sets the standard for modernizing benefits in ways that put employers in control through a single comprehensive platform to optimize the consumer experience. As the needs of employers and HR professionals shift and as plan designs for employees become more diverse, a simple and intuitive solution is needed by all. Maestro Health equips both employers and employees with benefit engagement and management resources to actively take control of their health and financial wellbeing beyond open enrollment, encompassing the other 364 days of the year.

Maestro Health also grew its physical presence, with new office locations in Detroit, MI and Phoenix, AZ, and a facility expansion in Charlotte, NC and approximately 81 new hires joining between January and December.

“2015 was an exciting year for both Maestro Health and all of our customers. We feel very fortunate and are quite pleased to be leading the industry with innovative and comprehensive offerings focused squarely on technology and service,” continued Butler. “Our escalating growth is testament to how customers are increasingly recognizing the need to optimize benefits enrollment and engagement, both for their peace of mind and as a valuable recruitment and retention tool. We are excited to continue this momentum into 2016 as we look to further serve our customers in reimagining the benefits landscape.”

Click here to learn more about how Maestro Health’s “all-in” health and benefits platform can optimize your benefits experience.

About Maestro Health™

Headquartered in Chicago, IL, the Maestro Health (www.maestrohealth.com) vision is a modern benefits administration and private exchange ecosystem that puts employers in control of all aspects of today’s complex healthcare system by unifying them on a single, comprehensive platform. Our partner base ranges from small employers to Fortune 1,000 organizations to which we offer integrated “one-stop shopping,” along with private-labeled exchange solutions—enabling them to brand our offerings as their own. Maestro Health combines private exchange, benefits administration, self-funded solutions, healthcare savings account administration and all other essential components on our integrated mobile and web platform—maestroEDGE. Simply put; “We believe benefits work better when they work together.”