WEST CHESTER, Pa.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Businesses required to deliver the new Affordable Care Act (ACA) 1094 and 1095 forms may be worried if they don’t have a plan for filing. Fortunately, PrimePay’s new ACA Compliance Navigator is open for enrollment until Dec. 31, and as the only currently available platform, gives businesses time to meet the 2016 deadlines for the 2015 calendar year returns.

This is the first year the IRS will track adherence to the employer coverage mandate enacted in 2014. PrimePay developed the ACA Compliance Navigator to address the depth and breadth of information required for documentation. The online portal simplifies the data collection, record-keeping, and filing processes, significantly shrinking the time and cost typically required for IRS reporting. Complementing that functionality is its embedded “Compliance Checklist” portal, which minimizes the risk of missed deadlines or failed disclosures.

“The complexity of the ACA demands a comprehensive tool that enables business owners to maintain compliance without memorizing regulatory intricacies,” said Steve Jackson, SVP Strategic Development and Channel Sales at PrimePay. “Our software tracks coverage eligibility, performs FTE calculations, and completes affordability analysis—all done behind the scenes to keep employers out of the weeds and focused on the big picture. That’s key, because while this first year filing may have businesses playing catch-up, implementing a process that encourages them to manage compliance year-round will be the best way to avoid IRS penalties.”

By the end of this year, more than 1,000 employers will have signed up for the ACA Compliance Navigator. PrimePay is unique in that it offers both a payroll-integrated solution as well as a comprehensive standalone solution.

“Product enrollment will stay open until Dec. 31, though most alternative services have stopped accepting clients,” continued Jackson. “Our mission is to ensure employers are fulfilling their obligations to the ACA. They have enough deadlines to worry about. Finding a resource to help with reporting shouldn’t be one of them.”

Recruiting a resource like the ACA Compliance Navigator is necessary for timely filing. The new provisions require that Applicable Large Employers, with 50 or more full-time and/or full-time equivalent (FTE) employees, must report an offer of affordable coverage. Small employers that provide self-funded insurance coverage must do the same.

The 1095 form is like the health insurance equivalent of a W-2. It’s to be filled out for each employee and distributed by the end of January for filing with individual tax returns. The 1094 document serves as a cover sheet – a roll-up of the 1095 information. PrimePay will prepare, distribute, and file the forms on an employer’s behalf.

That translates to significant cost and time savings. To manually complete the reports, an employer would have to:

know all of its insurance-eligible employees

base employee insurance contribution on what ACA considers affordable (no more than 9.5 percent of W-2 income)

monitor all full-time employee contributions, and monitor variable hour employees whose eligibility may waver based on their changing work schedules

know applicable safe harbor and transition rules, and enter that information in a separate code on the form

include spousal and dependent information on forms, if coverage is extended to family members

Congress estimates this process requires a minimum four hours for the employer to complete Form 1094, plus at least 15 minutes per 1095 form, per employee. For a group of 100 employees, that’s 29 hours of work to be completed by accounting and/or HR professionals. The PrimePay solution could be supported in a fraction of the time.

In addition to the main solution, the ACA Compliance Navigator gives employers on-demand access to more than 25 ACA notices and disclosures, along with links to templates, how-to guides, and resources for further reading.

Because Jan. 31 is a Sunday, Feb. 1 actually marks the first ACA compliance reporting deadline. That’s the date employers are required to distribute 1095 forms to employees. PrimePay will submit all documentation to the IRS by the electronic filing deadline of March 31.

To learn more about ACA Compliance Navigator, review the recap of the product webinar on the PrimePay blog. To sign up, visit http://primepay.com/aca-compliance-reporting.

About PrimePay

PrimePay is an employee management solutions provider offering a full range of integrated payroll and HR support services. As the nation’s largest privately owned Payroll Company, PrimePay serves all 50 states from more than 30 office locations. Delivering highly personalized and comprehensive payroll processing services, workers’ compensation insurance, benefits administration, compliance solutions and HR support, PrimePay’s national footprint is set to grow. With more than 500 employees, PrimePay, headquartered in West Chester, PA, holds the principle of serving its clients and franchises to the highest of standards. For more on PrimePay, please visit: www.PrimePay.com.