Buy Photo La Grange Police Chief Kevin Collett said he is looking forward to the department’s new headquarters — “something we can be proud of and can be proud to have the public in.” (Photo: Aaron Borton/Special to the Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

The La Grange Police Department has occupied its West Jefferson Street headquarters since Chief Kevin Collett was a kid in the 1980s.

Back then and into the 1990s, the building housed three different organizations — the water company, City Hall and the police department, which occupied four rooms on the far side of the building, Collett said.

The water company and City Hall have since moved out, but the police department is still “busting at the seams,” he said.

Soon, the department’s 16 employees — including its code enforcement officer, who has to work out of La Grange City Hall down the street because there’s no room at the station — will move into a facility with plenty of room to grow.

Construction on a $300,000 project to transform the former La Grange firehouse at Main Street and Second Avenue into the police department’s new home began at the end of March.

Things are moving slower than La Grange Mayor Bill Lammlein anticipated — last spring, he hoped the building would be complete by the end of last year — but he expects the police department to move into the new facility in July.

“I think the guys are anxious to get in their new space,” Lammlein said. “It’s going to be so much nicer than what they’ve got.”

Collett said the current building has “lived a hard life.” Unlike most businesses, a police department operates 24 hours a day, seven days a week, 365 days of the year, he said.

“This building’s basically a living, breathing machine,” he said. “It doesn’t get a rest like most office complexes.”

A secure foyer separating the administrative area from the rest of the police station is in the plans for the new 10,000-square-foot facility, as well as a roughly 100-person conference room, in which City Council meetings and other functions can be held.

The new building will also have a larger evidence room — the current one is stacked to the ceiling, Collett said — as well as more storage and additional offices to accommodate future growth.

La Grange Fire and Rescue moved out of the 24-year-old building and into its new $4 million facility on Ky. 53 two years ago.

Although the old firehouse had been mostly vacant those two years, Oldham County Emergency Medical Services had been using two old bays for ambulance storage and crew space. The space, leased from the city of La Grange, was a “substation” for Oldham County EMS, which is headquartered on Ky. 146 in La Grange, EMS Director Todd Early said.

Oldham County EMS opted not to renew its lease when it expired earlier this year, and the initial plans approved last year by La Grange City Council — which included bays for Oldham County EMS to store two ambulances — changed.

Instead of building the ambulance bays, the space will remain vacant, and the city will try to rent it out to someone else.

Early said the ambulances formerly stored at the old fire station have moved to a temporary spot at Baptist Health La Grange, where Oldham County EMS hopes to build an additional station in the near future. Planning is in its earliest stages, Early said, but he would like to see it up and running by the end of the year.

The conversion of the firehouse into a new police station will be paid for with the rent money EMS has already paid the city for the space it occupied, as well as fees from alcohol sales and the sale of the current police building.

Lammlein said the city will auction off the current police station after the department moves. The current facility has been appraised, Lammlein said, although he declined to disclose its value.

Collett said he is looking forward to having a more up-to-date building, “something we can be proud of and can be proud to have the public in.”

He also thinks the new location will benefit the community.

“Having the police department on Main Street, we’re going to be much more visible, much more open to the public,” he said. “It’s going to be nice for the community to see the police station, stop by the police station, see our officers out and about more often around the Main Street area.”

Reporter Kirsten Clark can be reached at (502) 582-4144 or on Twitter by following @kirstenlmclark.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1hwgiN5