Patrizia Cazzaniga suffered stomachaches, tiredness and nausea for months before going to her doctor. The 57-year-old East Dallas resident was shocked to find out that she had hepatitis C, a virus she had probably been infected with 30 years earlier through a blood transfusion she received during childbirth.

She’s one of about 400,000 Texans infected with hepatitis C. The virus can lie dormant for years before causing symptoms and is the leading cause of liver cancer and liver transplants in the U.S. Treatment typically includes 48 weeks of injections and twice-daily pills that can cause serious side effects and don’t always work.

But a new pill, approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration this month, actually cures hepatitis C. Sofosbuvir cured 89 percent of hepatitis C patients in only 12 weeks in clinical trials. Patients suffered fewer side effects than with older treatments and didn’t have to endure weekly injections. But at $84,000 for a 12-week course, or $1,000 a pill, the cure doesn’t come cheap.

“It’s a game changer,” said Dr. William L. Lee, a liver disease specialist at UT Southwestern Medical Center. Lee has treated hundreds of patients using the older medications, interferon and ribavirin, and has had varied success.

“For the past decade, we’ve had patients on treatments that caused side effects like anemia and a low white cell count,” he said. “We got some patients through it, but not many. Sofosbuvir has very few side effects. It’s very exciting.”

More than 3 million Americans are infected with hepatitis C. The virus is known as the silent killer because three quarters of those infected don’t suffer symptoms for many years. More than 15,000 Americans die from the disease every year, surpassing the number that die from AIDS.

Cities like Dallas are home to higher concentrations of people living with hepatitis C.

“We see more patients in metropolitan areas,” said Dr. Parvez Mantry, a liver specialist at Methodist Dallas Medical Center. “Most of them are baby boomers, born between 1945 and 1965.”

Hepatitis C is spread through infected blood. Sharing needles and tattooing are common risk factors for transmission. But like Cazzaniga, many baby boomers may have become infected through blood transfusions and organ donations, which were not routinely part of hepatitis C screening before 1992.

Cazzaniga enrolled in a hepatitis C trial at Lee’s clinic in May. She received one of two new drugs approved to treat the disease but won’t find out which one until early next year. It’s been two months since she finished taking the treatment, and there are no traces of the virus in her bloodstream. If the blood test is negative for hepatitis C next month, she’ll be considered cured.

“I feel so much better,” she said. “Everybody says I look much better than I did. I feel free and very happy.”

Margaret Dudley was cured last month. The 62-year-old San Antonio native was infected with hepatitis C after getting permanent cosmetic tattooing at a spa in 2000. She tested positive in 2011 after feeling tired and depressed for months.

“It’s almost like having a cheesecloth over your brain,” she said.

Dudley enrolled in a clinical trial and was treated with sofosbuvir and another drug, ledipasvir, which hasn’t been approved yet.

“My viral load went down the first week,” she said. “I could really feel the difference once I was on the medication.”

About 20 new medications are in various stages of development. But the cost of the new pills clouds the good news of a long-awaited hepatitis C cure. Olysio, made by Janssen Therapeutics, was approved in November and costs $60,000 per patient.

“Cost is a big barrier,” Lee said. The new treatments cost about four times more than the current drugs. Patient assistance programs offered by the pharmaceutical companies provide help to some who need assistance with the cost of medications.

But Lee worries that many patients will rely on Medicaid and that the state’s Medicaid program won’t fund the treatment.

“We have plenty of patients in Texas with hepatitis C,” he said. “But the fact that [Gov.] Rick Perry has turned down Affordable Care Act funding raises red flags about access to these treatments.”

Cazzaniga is one of the lucky ones. She doesn’t have health insurance and wouldn’t have had access to this breakthrough if she hadn’t been enrolled in a clinical trial.

The cost of the drugs may drop as newer hepatitis C medications reach the marketplace, but that will take time, said Dr. Raymond Schinazi, professor of pediatrics at Emory University, who oversaw the development of sofosbuvir. (The drug, whose trade name is Sovaldi, will be manufactured by Gilead Sciences.)

Until that happens, insurance companies may have to prioritize patients and offer the new treatments to those who have already progressed to severe liver damage.

Approximately 30 percent of people infected with hepatitis C will not suffer serious liver damage. They may not have entertained the idea of weeks of injections, but they might be tempted by the convenience of the new pills — and the promise of an easier cure. Whether insurance companies will cover the cost of treating this group remains to be seen.

“There’s an ethical and moral obligation to treat and cure patients,” Schinazi said.

He argues that treating everyone with hepatitis C lowers the risk of transmitting the virus and takes us one step closer to eradicating it for good.

“But until the price comes down, insurance companies may have to treat the people with severe liver damage first,” he said.

Dudley believes that no one should have to wait to be cured.

“The drugs are out there, and I’m proof that they work,” she said. “The price of the pills shouldn’t stand in the way of anyone’s health.”

Dr. Seema Yasmin, who served as a disease detective at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, is a fellow in global journalism at the University of Toronto’s Munk School of Global Affairs. Her email address is drseemayasmin@gmail.com. Follow her on Twitter at @DoctorYasmin.