MADISON (WKOW) -- Wisconsin Attorney General Brad Schimel filed a lawsuit against the federal government seeking to clarify that the State can require certain welfare recipients to undergo drug testing to satisfy the work requirement for FoodShare benefits.

“This lawsuit seeks to provide clarity that the State of Wisconsin has the authority to require drug testing for FoodShare recipients,” said Schimel in a news release. “In previous communications with the State of Wisconsin, the federal government has taken the opposite position despite the clear statutory language in federal law.”

The drug testing requirement was part of the new state budget signed by Gov. Scott Walker on Sunday. The governor made some changes to the program before signing the spending plan. One of those changes eliminates the screening questionnaire, instead making the testing random.

The federal government funds food stamp benefits, so the state needs a waiver to impose limitations.

Following the filing of the lawsuit, Gov. Scott Walker released the following statement:

"Our most recent budget builds on our record of enacting big, bold entitlement reforms to restore programs to their original purpose—a safety net, not a hammock. We are focused on helping people move from government dependence to independence because we want people to know the dignity that comes from work.

In Wisconsin, we are taking a compassionate approach to ensuring individuals on certain public assistance programs are workforce ready. By requiring able-bodied adults to be drug free, we aren’t making it harder to get government assistance; we are making it easier to get a job. Our reforms offer a hand up to those who need it, so they can get back on their feet through drug treatment and access to employment training.

As we work to implement our bold reforms, it has become apparent that the federal government is not accurately applying the law. As it relates to Wisconsin’s FoodShare program, we are seeking a declaratory judgment from the court to ensure we can move our reforms forward and maintain federal funding for this program."