WASHINGTON – Heading back to his cheap seat on the third deck of Nationals Park on the day that Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. announced his resignation, Labor Secretary Thomas E. Perez randomly encountered three reporters sharing the cheap seats one section to the left.

They asked the obvious question: Could Perez – a Snyder native and former assistant attorney general for civil rights – be nominated to be the next attorney general?

Perez held his lips tight and shook his head from left to right, as if to say no.

But a week later, more and more people in the nation’s capital are pondering the same question and answering it: Maybe.

Sources in the Obama administration and Congress identify Perez, along with Solicitor General Donald B. Verilli Jr. and former White House counsel Kathryn Ruemmler, as the leading candidates to succeed Holder, who plans to end a stormy six-year tenure as soon as the Senate confirms his successor.

Washington sources said Perez has great strengths – most notably a close relationship with President Obama and a depth of experience – along with some weaknesses largely tied to the highly partisan nature of modern Washington.

Republicans privately say the nomination of Perez, a progressive hero, would likely prompt a confirmation battle in the Senate.

Perez, a graduate of Canisius High School, Brown University and Harvard Law School, isn’t saying very much about the possibility that he soon might be named the nation’s chief law enforcement officer.

“I don’t follow the word on the street,” Perez said last week in an interview with the Huffington Post. “I don’t think about hypotheticals … I love my job and I love the work I’m doing.”

One of Perez’s brothers, Dr. Jose G. Perez-Brache, took the matter one step further, though.

“He likes his position as secretary of labor,” said Perez-Brache, an internist at Kenmore Mercy Hospital. “But if the president asked him to be attorney general, he probably would not be able to say no.”

That fact stems, in part, from the strong relationship Perez has built with the president in his 14 months as labor secretary.

POLITICO, a Washington website that tracks such things, noted late last month that Perez has `traveled more with the president in the past year than any other Cabinet secretary.

In part, that’s because the president’s domestic agenda includes a heavy focus on raising the minimum wage and improving job training, which are, of course, Department of Labor issues.

But the closeness that has developed as of late between the president and Perez goes far beyond their joint appearances.

“A couple of times when we were out in San Francisco visiting our other brother, all of a sudden Tom’s phone rang,” Perez-Brache said. “And it’s the president calling to say: ‘Tom, what’s going on?’ The president’s always calling him.”

What’s more, Perez’s admirers argue that he possesses a great résumé for an attorney general. He served as a federal prosecutor early in his career during the Reagan administration, and prosecuted domestic terrorism cases. And he later developed dual focuses on economic justice and civil rights, serving as Maryland’s secretary of labor and then assistant attorney general for civil rights in the first Obama administration.

“He has law enforcement, national security and management experience plus vision, which is more than anyone can ask for in a leader,” said Robert Raben, a longtime friend of Perez’s who managed the Senate confirmation process after he was chosen to be labor secretary.

Perez’s aggressive record in pursuing civil rights cases made that confirmation process an arduous one. The Senate approved his nomination in a 54-46 party-line vote, but not before Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., said: “Based on the evidence, Tom Perez is more than just some left-wing ideologue. He’s a left-wing ideologue who appears perfectly willing to bend the rules to achieve his ends.”

McConnell has not commented on the possibility of Perez being nominated for attorney general, but the top GOP senator seems primed to fight any nominee who is closely identified with Obama’s agenda.

“I will be scrutinizing the president’s replacement nominee to ensure the Justice Department finally returns to prioritizing law enforcement over partisan concerns,” McConnell said after Holder announced his resignation.

There are signs, though, that Perez isn’t quite the liberal absolutist that McConnell and other Republicans portrayed him to be a year ago. He has worked with Sen. Dean A. Heller, R-Nev., on extending long-term unemployment benefits, and won public praise from none other than Michael S. Steele, a former chairman of the Republican National Committee.

“Tom is a guy who gets stuff done,” said Steele, a former Maryland lieutenant governor who’s known Perez for years through his political work in the state.

Steele said that while he disagreed with Perez on policy issues, Perez was always able to work with Republicans in Maryland. That’s one reason why Steele supported Perez’s nomination for labor secretary and would also back his nomination for attorney general.

While Capitol Hill Republicans may be girding for a fight, Steele said Perez’s confirmation might not be as difficult as it may at first seem.

“He’s already been confirmed by the Senate twice,” Steele said. “A lot of that drama has already played itself out.”

There’s also the possibility that Republicans would respond just as negatively to the nomination of either of the others on the shortlist for attorney general.

Verilli, after all, defended the Affordable Care Act – which Republicans generally detest – before the Supreme Court as solicitor general. And Ruemmler, having served as Obama’s White House counsel, might be seen as too close to the president.

It is also unclear exactly when Obama will nominate someone to succeed Holder, but the conventional wisdom in Washington is that he will do so shortly after the November elections so that the Senate with a Democratic majority can confirm his choice during the lame-duck session. He may well want to do that because most close observers think Republicans will take control of the Senate in the November elections, making the confirmation of any Obama appointee next year much more difficult.

The calendar could also weigh in against Perez, Senate sources said. After all, if Obama were to try to nominate Perez, the president could find himself facing two confirmation battles – one for attorney general, one for a new labor secretary – at a time when the lame-duck Congress will have only a few weeks to finish its work.

Regardless of whether he is nominated for attorney general, Perez, who will turn 53 on Tuesday, has no shortage of political options. A dynamic public speaker who frequently cites his family’s Dominican background and his Buffalo roots, he could, for instance, someday make a good candidate for a U.S. Senate seat from Maryland, his brother said.

“He hasn’t given me any leads,” Perez-Brache said, “but this is not the end of Tom Perez.”

email: jzremski@buffnews.com