April 24 -- 70 calls for service

A car struck a deer in the area of Central and North 19th Street. Information was taken for a traffic accident report.

A male party reported theft of projector from the 1300 block of College. Information was taken for a report.

A citizen turned in a wallet that they found in the 100 block of Justice Center Road.

A resident in the 1500 block of Phelps reported that the back window of their vehicle had been broken out. Information was taken for a report.

A juvenile male ran away from the 700 block of Four Mile Parkway. Officers located the juvenile and returned him to the facility.

Officers took a report of an assault in the 700 block of Four Mile Parkway.

A female party in the 3300 block of North 15th reported that no one has heard or seen from her mother in two days. Officers gathered information for a report and sent out an attempt to locate BOLO to surrounding agencies.

April 25 -- 46 calls for service

Officers responded to the area of Field and Central on a report of a disorderly party.

An officer responded to the 100 block of Justice Center Road on a report of a disorderly party.

An officer responded to the 3000 block of East Main on a report of a traffic accident on private property. No injuries were reported.

An officer responded to Walmart on a report of a shoplifter.

Advertisement

Officers responded to the 1000 block of Park on a report of a disorderly party. Upon officer arrival, it was discovered to be a juvenile problem.

Officers responded to the area of U.S. 50 and South Fifth on a report of a two- car accident. No injuries were reported and information was gathered for a report.

An officer responded to the 700 block of Rudd on a report of a theft of a license plate. Information was gathered for a report.

Officers responded to the 900 block of North Orchard on a report of a disorderly party. The party settled down.

A business in the 300 block of North 16th reported a theft. An officer responded and gathered information for a report.

An officer responded to the 400 block of North Cottonwood on a report of criminal mischief. Information was gathered for a report.

Officers responded to the 100 block of Mackenzie on a report of a one-car accident. Kayleen Marshall, 21, of Cañon City was taken into custody on charges of DUI. Marshall was transported to the Fremont County Detention Center. She is being held on a $1,000 bond.

An officer responded to the 300 block of Main Street on a report of a theft. Information was gathered for a report.

Cody Lewis, 25, of Denver was taken into custody in the 1500 block of Main Street on charges of domestic violence. Lewis was transported to the Fremont County Detention Center. He is being held on no bond.

April 26 -- 44 calls for service

Officers responded to the 600 block of Barrett on a report of a runaway. Information was gathered for a report after officers checked the area.

An officer responded to Walmart on a report of theft. Information was gathered for a report.

An officer responded to the 400 block of North Seventh on a report of a theft. Information was gathered for a report.

An officer responded to the 300 block of West Circle on a report of a burglary. Information was gathered for a report.

An officer responded to the 1800 block of Franklin on a report of a burglary that occurred sometime during the night. Information was gathered for a report.

April 27 -- 65 calls for service

A male party in the 1100 block of U.S. 50 reported unauthorized charges had been made to a bank account. Information was taken for a fraud report.

Kim Rasmussen, 27, was arrested on two outstanding warrants. She was transported to the Fremont County Detention Center. She is being held on a $10,000 bond.

A female party in the 600 block of Forest reported that her computer had been broken by a male party.

An employee in the 3100 block of U.S. 50 reported theft of several items from the store, as well as damage to a fence on the property. Information was taken for a report.

A two-vehicle traffic accident occurred in the area of Third Street and Macon. Information was taken for a report.

A female party reported that her purse had been stolen from the 600 block of Rain Tree. Information was taken for a report.

Officers took a report of theft in the 3100 block of U.S. 50.

A female party in the 600 block of Forest reported criminal mischief. Information was taken for a report.

Officers took a report of a hit-and-run accident that occurred in the 3000 block of East Main.

Richard Warren, 30, was arrested on an outstanding warrant. He was transported to the Fremont County Detention Center.

A resident reported a bicycle had been stolen in the 2100 block of North Seventh Street. Officers gathered information for a report.

A resident in the 800 block of Macon reported that a vehicle struck his parked vehicle and then struck his house. The driver of the vehicle fled the scene on foot prior to officer arrival. It did not take officers long to locate the suspect. James Vig, 27, was arrested for careless driving, reckless driving, hit and run, DUI, DUI per se, and no proof of insurance. He was transported to the Fremont County Detention Center.