'Assume every microphone is on': Gaffe-prone Biden recalls 'big f***ing deal' moment after Obamacare signing

Biden told Memorial Day charity bike riders that they he learned his lesson from the F-bomb he uttered on live television in 2010

'Assume every microphone is on,' he said, recalling his 'This is a big f***ing deal' gaffe after the Obamacare bill signing

'Thank God my mother was gone or I'd have been one dead vice president' he said

When he was introduced by a man who noted that he planned to run for president, Biden made the sign of the cross



Gaffe-prone Vice President Joe Biden has learned a thing or two during his 64 months in the Obama administration, including the need to avoid broadcasting F-bombs like the one he let loose on Mar 23, 2010.

That was the day the president triumphantly announced the signing of the Affordable Care Act. But Biden unwittingly stole the spotlight by introducing Obama, embracing him and saying – loudly enough for the podium microphone to capture it – 'This is a big f***ing deal.'

'[A] piece of advice about that "BFD" stuff: Assume every microphone is on,' Biden told a crowd gathered on Monday at the starting line of the annual Ride 2 Recovery Memorial Challenge, a cycling event that raises money for wounded-veterans charities.

Scroll down for video of the infamous moment

I didn't mean it: Biden insisted he never intentionally called the Obamacare signing 'a big f***ing deal,' but his words looking intentional on network video feeds

Gaffer-in-chief: Biden's famous moments have included asking a wheelchair-bound local politician to stand up and acknowledge applause,and saying of the 2009 federal stimulus that there was 'a 30% chance we're going to get it wrong'

Riders travel 325 miles from Washington, D.C. to Virginia Beach every year on Memorial Day for the event.

'I just want you to know, I didn't intentionally say that,' he added, according to CNN.



'I actually turned and I said, "Mr. President," and I whispered in his ear. Unfortunately, I was looking in the direction of one guy who could actually read lips — not a joke. Because no one picked it up at the time and one of the reporters read lips.'



'Thank God my mother was gone or I'd have been one dead vice president.'

His words, however, were clearly audible and went out on every broadcast network covering the event.

The Associated Press reported at the time that 'Biden appeared to be offering that perspective to Obama privately.'

Moments later, then-White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs tweeted, 'And yes, Mr. Vice President, you're right.'



A Ride 2 Recovery coordinator who introduced Biden playfully warned the crowd that 'for those of you who don't know, Joe is famous for some of his one liners.'

'There was a bill signing at the White House ... and he said it was a "big f-ing deal." And that was a quote ... If I may say, sir, Ride to Recovery is a big f-ing deal.'

The introduction also included the prediction that 'at some point in the future Joe is going to run for president again.'

In response, Biden was seen making a dramatic sign of the cross on his body.

Biden's mouth often out-runs his brain, as he proved in 2010 with an open microphone and an F-bomb

Goofball: Biden mugged for a camera with Obama to launch his Instagram account, but was better-known for saying that in his home state of Delaware, 'you cannot go to a 7-11 or a Dunkin' Donuts unless you have a slight Indian accent. I'm not joking.'

The vice president, who is mulling a White House run in 2016, also mentioned the controversy swirling around the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, which is accused of using phony off-the-books waiting lists to mask its failure to provide timely health care to battle-tested servicemen and women.

'That is a sacred obligation, and we’re behind right now,' the he conceded. 'The VA is having problems, and we’ve got to get to the bottom of it.'