Buy Photo Holly Manuel, a tax preparer with the Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) program, works on Elizabeth Anderson's taxes on Friday, January 30, 2015. (Photo: HEIDI HEILBRUNN/Staff)Buy Photo

Housekeeper Debra Massey couldn't afford a $300 monthly tab for health insurance, so she went without for years, racking up big medical bills that she paid off over time while eschewing mammograms and other important screening tests.

When coverage became available under the Affordable Care Act last year, the Greenville woman signed up for a plan.

But since she was a little late to the party, not enrolling until March, she worried that she'd wind up having to pay a penalty when she filed her income tax return.

Massey got lucky. Obamacare assesses no penalties unless a taxpayer went without coverage for more than three consecutive months of the year.

But she's like a lot of other taxpayers who have questions about a complex new law that comes with new tax regulations.

There's been a lot of interest from consumers about how the ACA will affect their taxes this year -- and a lot of confusion, said George Brock of Brock & Co. CPAs in Greenville.

Also known as Obamacare, the law requires most Americans to have health insurance, often with a subsidy to help pay for it, or pay a penalty.

Among the changes is a provision that this year, for the first time, requires taxpayers to certify that they had insurance during 2014, said Mary Matthews, a CPA and vice president for health care services at Johnson Price Sprinkle in Asheville.

For most taxpayers, that just entails checking a box on their income tax return.

But there are a number of considerations for people who have coverage through the health care marketplace, she said.

Tax credits

Chief among them is how to file if you got a tax credit, or subsidy, to help pay for your insurance premium.

Under the law, people can purchase health insurance through the marketplace if their household income is between 100 percent and 400 percent of the federal poverty level. And most of those who do are eligible for a subsidy to help pay for that coverage, often reducing premiums to less than $100 a month.

More than 300,000 North Carolinians got a subsidy to help pay for their insurance through the marketplace last year, according to the nonprofit NC Get Covered.

About 100,000 people in South Carolina got a subsidy last year, according to the state Department of Insurance.

Nearly half the estimated 30 million adults who were uninsured last year were eligible for assistance under the law, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation. But many didn't get coverage, thinking it was too costly or they were ineligible.

The subsidy is based on estimated income, Matthews said. So at the end of the year, taxpayers may wind up having to repay some of it if their income was higher than estimated, or they may be due payment if their income was lower than estimated, she said.

"You'll need to calculate what you're entitled to based on income ... and reconcile that on your return on form 8962," she said.

"You're going to true that up and tell the government you either made more or less. And as a result, the government either owes me money or I owe you money back because I got too much."

Stephania Priester, public affairs director for New Horizon Family Health Services in Greenville, said taxpayers should be reporting any changes to the health care marketplace (healthcare.gov or 1-800-318-2596) as they occur so the premiums and subsidies can be adjusted in real time.

"We encourage people to tell them any time there's a life change - if you get a new job or get a job and your income goes up, if you get a 5-cent raise, if you move, get married," she said. "Then the premium would be adjusted making it easier to reconcile the amount at the end of the year."

Some people are exempt from the individual mandate to have coverage - those making less than 100 percent of the federal poverty level, for example. They will need to file form 8965 for health coverage exemptions, Matthews said.

Paying penalties

But those who are required to have coverage and don't get it will be assessed a penalty of $95 for every adult and half that for every child in the home or 1 percent of household income, subject to some caps, whichever is greatest.

"If you think about it, $95 at 1 percent is only $9,500, which is below the filing threshold," Matthews said.

For an individual, 100 percent of the poverty level is $11,670 a year. So most people will be in the 1 percent category, Priester said, and could end up owing a few hundred dollars.

"It will be a rude awakening for some folks," she said. "They will end up having to pay the penalty fee and they probably could have gotten affordable coverage with the tax credit for that."

And next year, she said, the penalty for not having insurance increases to $325 or 2 percent of income.

The penalty is based on the number of months you went without coverage and must be reported on your income tax return, she said. And you either have to write a check to the IRS for the amount you owe or have it deducted from your return.

However, Matthews said that Congress didn't enact any enforcement provisions for those who fail to pay the penalty.

"The IRS cannot come after you for the individual mandate penalty the way they can for other taxes you might owe, including for any excess (subsidy) you received," she said. "With the penalty, they can't file a lien against you or seize money from your bank account."

Nonetheless, she said, taxpayers who don't pay the penalty should expect correspondence from the IRS.

Matthews said the newness of the law will likely drive a lot of people to professional tax preparers for fear of non-compliance.

'A complex law'

"It's a complex law and it's impacting so many individuals who've never had to deal with this level of complexity before," she said.

"And for people with gaps in coverage, who have changed jobs or lost a job, and added or deleted dependents, it's a much more complicated calculation for them."

But there is help, which could be vital for people who may never have had health insurance before.

Residents making less than $53,000 a year can get their taxes prepared free through VITA, the Volunteer Income Tax Assistance program.

VITA volunteers are trained and certified by the IRS, said Craig Shoemaker, program coordinator for Greenville County.

There's a lot to preparing taxes in the first place, he said. Throw in a new tax law and it can be daunting to some people.

"There is a lot that goes into the ACA," he said about the Affordable Care Act, "such as who qualifies for an exemption."

And many people don't have access to affordable tax preparation services, he said.

The VITA service is offered at more than 30 locations in the Upstate through the United Ways of Greenville County, Pickens County, Anderson County, Laurens County and the United Way of the Piedmont.

Taxpayers can make appointments, which run through April 15, by calling the United Way's 2-1-1 resource line.

More than 8,700 Upstate residents used the service last year.

Free help

VITA also operates in North Carolina, along with The Benefit Bank, which provides free assistance to eligible residents.

"More consumers than ever will need free file-tax assistance because of the new ACA tax requirements," said Ralph Gildehaus, senior program director at MDC, a Durham-based nonprofit and sponsor of The Benefit Bank of North Carolina.

To make tax preparation as easy as possible, Greenville CPA Brock advises taking advantage of free tax consultations when possible.

He also said taxpayers should be sure to check the box indicating they have coverage and that they include every form that's been sent to the IRS as well. The IRS also prefers that returns be filed electronically, he said.

For those filing paper returns, it's also important not to forget to sign the return, which he said is the most common error people make.

And those who didn't get coverage in 2014 might want to think about getting it this year because of the increasing penalty, he said.

While enrollment in the marketplace is open through Feb. 15 to get coverage this year, Priester said residents who are exempt can enroll later if they get a job that puts them in the eligible income levels.

Meanwhile, Massey, 50, calls the coverage a "Godsend."

"I'm in that area where I'm poor and I couldn't afford insurance before," she said. "It just really is phenomenal."

WANT TO KNOW MORE?

http://www.irs.gov/Affordable-Care-Act

www.healthcare.gov/taxes

www.hhs.gov/healthcare/facts/factsheets/2015/01/health-coverage-federal-income-taxes.html.

http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p5093.pdf

To learn more about free tax assistance, go to w.IRS.gov/freefile or www.IRS.gov/VITA or http://www.ncgetcovered.org/free-tax-filing.

Contact New Horizon at www.newhorizonfhs.org or 864-233-1534 ext. 2219

Read or Share this story: http://grnol.co/1BI0sTc