"I have a zero percent chance of losing," said Chris Moth as we sat awash in the bustle of Noshville Green Hills earlier this week.

Smiling, Moth added that he could not quantify his chance of winning.

It is slim. His opponent, Speaker of the House Beth Harwell, is seeking her 14th term representing District 56, and has been unopposed in three of the last four general elections. Moth says voters should not blithely send her back.

Why is this rangy software engineer, who projects a calm, analytical and rational approach, taking up the lance and tilting against one of Tennessee's political windmills?

"Well, it was either run, and try to accomplish something I believe is important, or buy a new car," he said. His wry words belied the passion in his eyes and posture.

Moth clearly thinks our legislature needs to think differently, and more rationally, about the challenges we face.

Medicaid expansion

In a Tennessee Voices piece, Moth wrote, "States that have expanded Medicaid reap increased profits and financial stability at their hospitals, their health care employees are more secure, and their working citizens are healthier and more productive at their jobs."

The legislature sent a clear message to Gov. Bill Haslam to reject the Affordable Care Act's provision to expand TennCare to cover an additional 200,000 low-income Tennesseans with Medicaid insurance.

"It is a complex issue," said Harwell, whose district encompasses several hospital companies and who counts many health care executives among her constituents. She defends the legislature's decision as fiscally responsible and is counting on the governor to push through a "Tennessee Plan" that addresses covering the insurance gap and emphasizes lowering the cost of medical care.

Amendment 1

Moth also sees the constitutional amendments on the November ballot as a defining difference, saying that he thinks each is likely to pass, which makes the folks who sit in the legislature even more important.

"We should carefully consider any bills crafted to protect the health of women, but, if elected, I will strongly resist any extreme initiatives to fundamentally block access to abortion."

Focus

Harwell is an accomplished politician with 26 years of experience in the General Assembly, and she has benefited from the Republican Party's ascendance. She is the first woman to serve as speaker, and though she won't say it, her supporters are not shy to say that she will be the state's first woman governor.

Moth would like to see Harwell pay more attention to the constituents in District 56 and less attention to her political ambition, which, he thinks, compromises her service to Nashville.

Harwell refutes that position by citing her annual open "town hall" meeting with constituents at the Green Hills Public Library, and her standing policy that all constituent calls be returned within 24 hours.

She did, however, use the demands of her responsibilities as speaker and commitments to work on fellow legislators' campaigns to make scheduling a debate with Moth difficult to arrange.

An intriguing challenger

While I am skeptical of Moth's chances in the race, I can imagine few more interesting challengers to a popular and entrenched legislator.

Moth was born in London, England, where his mother, a Tennessee native, had met his father while working there. The family moved to Memphis when he was a few years old.

He studied music at the University of Rochester, and played principal horn for Orchestra Kentucky for nine years.

While in college, his father, who had a floral shop, asked Moth to write a computer program to help manage his shop. They founded Daisy Systems together and marketed it to other florists. Teleflora bought the company in 1988, and Moth continues to supervise system development. He received a master's in computer science from Vanderbilt University in 1995.

Moth returned to Vanderbilt for a master's in mathematics in 2002, and a doctorate in chemistry in 2008.

We like to make jokes about our politicians and deride their motives, but we should appreciate the passionate engagement that Moth represents. District 56 voters can't lose when they have these kinds of candidates.

Reach Frank Daniels III at 615-881-7039 and on Twitter @fdanielsiii.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1xvUBA7