Topics: alison brie, bojack horseman, Editor's Picks, Netflix, TV, Will arnett, Entertainment News

Animation is so often the province of children because it’s a medium so well-suited to the fantastical, horrible and surreal. Princes can transform into beasts and princesses into mermaids with just a few strokes of a pen; the violence of blows can be illustrated with radiating bolts of jagged light, punctuated by stars or little birds flying in circles around a character’s head. Computer-generated imagery attempts to make the fantastical real—to bring to life the wonder or horror of Ant-Man becoming subatomic, or a raptor taking a bite out of an unsuspecting side character. Animation has no such designs on the audience’s willing suspension of disbelief. If you’re watching, you must buy in to the unreal: Talking fish, magical gems, dogs that can change their size and shape effortlessly. It’s a medium of pure play; the point is primarily to be awesome.

Animation for adults, then, has always been a little bit of a twist on the form. Shows like “The Simpsons” and “Family Guy” are essentially sitcoms with very different production values. A show like “Archer” might take advantage of animation by placing its characters in a new foreign locale every few episodes, or drawing humor out of Sterling Archer’s apparent ability to get shot 15 times and still crack jokes. But it’s a subtler kind of fantasy. “The Simpsons” and perhaps even “Bob’s Burgers” offer an animated family as a universal family, eschewing the inevitable politics of casting on-screen actors. All of these shows have their merits—well, maybe not “Family Guy”—but their relative normalcy might be why “Adventure Time,” on Cartoon Network, has captured the hearts and minds of adults and kids alike. It definitively “arrived,” five seasons in, when Emily Nussbaum covered it in the New Yorker—writing that because the show is “childlike, nonlinear, poetic and just outside all the categories that the world considers serious, it’s television that you can respond to fully, without needing to make a case for why.” I’m less onboard with her description of “Adventure Time” as “druglike”—though I get it, stoned animation is its own multilayered world, crowned by “Aqua Teen Hunger Force.” But as she describes, animation that combines naiveté with fantasy is its own kind of transporting wonder; maybe this is why decades later, we still can’t let go of Disney films.

Right now there are a lot of worthy animated shows, ostensibly for children, that enter that space of genius-level creative immersion—I have been remiss on writing about “Steven Universe,” but, you guys, “Steven Universe”!—but what’s fascinating about Netflix’s “BoJack Horseman” is that the show is entering that space of surreality in a thoroughly and decidedly adult way. Where other shows play with magic weaponry and middle-school crushes, “BoJack Horseman” uses alcohol, casual sex and drug addiction to build its landscape. But the result is still comparably wondrous. Netflix released the second season of the show Friday morning, and from the first several episodes released to critics, the second season is so far even better than the first.

Partly, the second season feels stronger because “BoJack Horseman” is very much an acquired taste. It took me a solid six episodes to fall under the show’s spell, largely because I was continually navigating the show’s split personality—it’s not entirely full of awe, like the children’s cartoons I’ve mentioned, or entirely without magic, like the adult cartoons I’ve grown used to. “BoJack Horseman” is a show about an actor named BoJack Horseman, who is a man with a horse-head, voiced by Will Arnett. He is a washed-up sitcom star from decades ago who now is a barely functional alcoholic. Throughout the first season, he formed a friendship with writer Diane Nguyen (Alison Brie), a writer whose tell-all book about him ends up becoming a bestseller. Naturally, he also develops feelings for her, but she rebuffs them, to instead date and then marry the annoyingly upbeat Mr. Peanutbutter (Paul F. Tompkins), a dog-person. BoJack’s agent is a large pink humanoid cat, named Princess Carolyn (Amy Sedaris). She is dating a man who is actually three children standing on top of each other in a trench coat, who goes by Vincent Adultman (also Brie). She has not yet caught on.