Republicans believe they’ve found one way to begin to blunt incessant attacks that they’re anti-women: increase access to over-the-counter birth control.

Democrats call the proposal by several GOP senators a political ploy by a party that’s more interested in fighting reproductive rights and Obamacare.

Story Continued Below

But the effort, led by by Sens. Cory Gardner of Colorado and Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire, could reverberate in the 2016 elections. Republicans are looking to mitigate the hefty advantage in polls that Democrats have had, particularly among young, unmarried women, an important voting bloc in the presidential contest and battleground Senate races.

Gardner made the birth control proposal a centerpiece of his pitch to female voters during his campaign for Senate last year.

“I think Republicans can be on defense, particularly when it comes to the attacks that Democrats throw through the ‘war on women,’” the first-term senator said in an interview, adding that his bill offers Republicans a way to show “how we can actually move forward.”

The GOP bill would provide drugmakers with financial incentives, as well as speedier regulatory approval, to pursue the Food and Drug Administration’s blessing to sell their contraceptive pills over the counter. It would also repeal Obamacare’s ban on using health savings accounts to purchase over-the-counter drugs. Women would then be able to purchase birth control pills without a prescription with money from those accounts.

Ayotte will likely have a competitive reelection battle in New Hampshire, and among the co-sponsors are two other Democratic targets in 2016 — GOP Sens. Ron Johnson of Wisconsin and Richard Burr of North Carolina. Other senators backing the bill hail from other traditional swing states: Joni Ernst of Iowa, Thom Tillis of North Carolina and Dean Heller of Nevada.

“What has happened over time is the left [and] Democrats have been pretty effective at getting young women, particularly, to think Republicans are actually opposed to contraceptives,” said Johnson, who’s considered among the most vulnerable Senate Republicans next fall. “Nothing could be further from the truth.”

Long-shot Republican presidential hopeful Carly Fiorina, the sole woman in the GOP field, endorsed the concept of over-the-counter birth control in a speech at the Competitive Enterprise Institute last week, saying it would “drive down prices and increase availability.”

Democrats agree birth control pills should be more readily available over the counter. But they argue that the GOP plan would actually decrease birth control access for women by allowing insurers to get out of covering contraceptives — which could cost hundreds of dollars per year — sold over the counter. Under the GOP plan, they say, insurers wouldn’t be required to pay for over-the-counter drugs. And that, in turn, could leave many women struggling to pay for birth control.

A group of Democratic senators led by Patty Murray of Washington recently unveiled a bill in response to the GOP legislation that they say would ensure contraceptives purchased without a prescription would still be covered by insurance. But unlike the Republican plan, it would not attempt to encourage drugmakers to get approval to sell over the counter.

Murray rolled out her bill last week with 30 Democratic backers.

“The point of my legislation is very clear: that you can say it’s accessible but if you take away the ability for women to have it covered under insurance, it means nothing,” Murray said. “So access and affordability is the name for a reason. We want to make sure that women have access, that it’s affordable and it’s covered by their insurance. That’s a huge difference.”

Murray’s bill is backed by the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, NARAL Pro-Choice America and the Planned Parenthood Action Fund. ACOG came out against the GOP bill, saying it would take a “giant step in the wrong direction” because it doesn’t ensure insurance coverage.

Republicans say the Democrats’ complaints about their bill are meaningless.

“That’s probably the first time I’ve heard that providing a pharmaceutical product over the counter — which was always the cheaper, more accessible way to do it — is limiting,” Burr said, when asked about the Democrats’ criticism of the bill. “I find that ludicrous.”

The Murray bill, according to Republicans, doesn’t have the financial or fast-track incentives that would encourage drugmakers to go through the complex over-the-counter approval process.

“I’m not sure what they’re trying to accomplish in [their] bill because our bill really does generate more potential for access for women for over the counter,” Ayotte added. “They don’t have that piece in their bill, so I don’t know what they’re trying to accomplish.”

Sens. Cory Gardner and Maria Cantwell | Getty

One poll earlier this year suggests voters are split on which party would better handle the issue. The Pew Research Center found in February that 43 percent of Americans say Democrats would do a better job dealing with abortion and contraception, compared with 40 percent who preferred Republicans.

The Senate last took up the contraceptive fight last summer. At the time, the Democratic-controlled chamber tried to advance a bill to reverse last June’s Supreme Court ruling that said certain for-profit companies could opt out of Obamacare’s mandate that insurers cover contraceptives without a co-pay on religious grounds.

The fight over birth control also flared in 2012, when the Senate narrowly defeated a measure backed by Sen. Roy Blunt (R-Mo.) that would allow employers with moral objections to refuse coverage of a range of health care services, including contraceptives.

For Republicans in tough reelection races in moderate swing states next year, Gardner could be a model on how to battle charges of being anti-woman.

The Colorado Senate contest, one of the most high-profile races last year, was characterized largely by near-obsessive focus on women’s issues.

Gardner opposes abortion but stressed during his campaign that he supports the women’s ability to purchase contraception coverage without a prescription. Democrats highlighted Gardner’s previous support of so-called personhood, which would confer legal rights to fetuses, but Gardner reversed his stance and said his original position was a “mistake.”

“Democrats’ obnoxious strategy to use women as political pawns was rejected in 2014 and will be again in 2016,” said Andrea Bozek, a spokeswoman for the National Republican Senatorial Committee.

Sadie Weiner, a spokeswoman for the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, said of the GOP bill: “It’s just pretty obvious that this is their attempt to distract from their record.”

The focus for Democrats, Weiner said, will be “making sure voters understand what it is that these senators have done to women’s health care and how that’s contrasted with Democratic candidates.”

It’s unclear whether the GOP birth control bill will make it to the Senate floor this session. Gardner and Ayotte said they’ll push to get a floor vote on it as an amendment to a related measure.

“I think this makes tremendous sense,” Burr said. Any reluctance to vote on it, he said, “is to try to keep this in the realm of a political issue, which it’s not. I mean, this is a purely policy issue when you look at the [FDA’s] threshold that has always been there to determine the difference between prescription and over the counter.”