Ben Paulsen believes what he heard during spring training in 2012 put him in position to be enjoying his best year in six seasons in the Rockies’ farm system.

The 26-year-old first baseman has been a bright spot all season for the Colorado Springs Sky Sox in a year that has produced a lot of player traffic between Triple-A and the major-league team playing at Coors Field. But Paulsen, the Rockies’ farm system leader in home runs with 15 and in runs scored with 62, has yet to get his shot with the Rockies.

Next week, he will be the only player from the Sky Sox represented on the Pacific Coast League roster for the Triple-A All-Star Game. He will be in Durham, N.C., a little closer to his home in Florida. And he will have the opportunity to see family members for the first time this season.

Paulsen has strived to show consistency in his performance and for the most part has done just that. His batting average has stayed at about .300 or better. He’s also near the top of the Rockies’ farm system in hits and RBIs. He mentioned spring training from two years ago as he talked Friday about his upcoming trip to the Triple-A All-Star Game.

Two years ago his mentor in Arizona was Jason Giambi, who was gearing up for what would be his last season with the Rockies.

“He told me that I would be my best hitting coach,” Paulsen said. “He said I had to learn that because your coaches always aren’t going to be there. That stuck with me. He was one of the best players in the game, and I was around him a lot because we played the same position.”

Paulsen doesn’t want to take all of the credit for his success this year, noting that Sky Sox manager Glenallen Hill and hitting coach Dave Hajek have been invaluable in helping him with the mental part of baseball and understanding his swing at the plate.

After the Rockies made him a third-round pick in the 2009 draft out of Clemson, Paulsen started his journey up the franchise’s player development ladder. Batting averages of .241 and .255 with Double-A Tulsa in 2011 and 2012 didn’t help, but he still managed to hit 29 and 18 home runs.

And even with his success in Triple-A, his major-league service line still says zero.

There’s no question that former American League MVP Justin Morneau has nailed down first base for now in the Rockies’ post-Todd Helton era, and the Sky Sox’s Kyle Parker got the call to back up Morneau when Michael Cuddyer went on the disabled list.

“With Justin Morneau at first base, it creates a bigger challenge for Ben,” said Zach Wilson of the Rockies’ player development department. “But that doesn’t mean we don’t see him as a major-leaguer.”

“I can’t get too frustrated,” said Paulsen, a left-handed hitter, as is Morneau. “Kyle’s a right-handed hitter and he hits lefties. That’s going to be his calling. He’s versatile and plays the outfield as well.”

Paulsen has his future mapped out.

“If I keep doing the good things, something good will happen,” Paulsen said. “If I keep playing hard and getting results, someone will notice.”

Out of loyalty, he would like it to be the Rockies, the team that drafted him. But there are 29 other teams looking for players too.

Footnote. Christian Friedrich, who was rushed into service as an emergency starter for the Rockies, is moving to the bullpen after returning to the Sky Sox. In his first relief appearance for them, Friedrich, a first-round pick in the 2008 draft, pitched 3 ⅓ innings against Round Rock (Texas) and allowed two home runs.

Irv Moss: 303-954-1296, imoss@denverpost.com or twitter.com/irvmoss

Organization leaders

(Statistics through Thursday)

HITTING: (64 games) Raimel Tapia, Ashe- ville, .324; Michael Benjamin, Asheville, .316.

RUNS: Ben Paulsen, Colorado Springs, 62; Ryan McMahon, Asheville, 60.

HITS: David Dahl, Asheville, 102; Tapia, Asheville, 101.

DOUBLES: McMahon, Asheville, 30; Correlle Prime, Asheville, 28.

TRIPLES: Trevor Story, Modesto-Tulsa, 8; David Kandilas, Modesto-Tulsa, 7.

HOME RUNS: Paulsen, Colorado Springs, 15; Prime, Asheville, 14.

RBIs: McMahon, Asheville, 70; Paulsen, Colorado Springs, 57.

STOLEN BASES: Jason Pridie, Colorado Springs, 20; Story, Modesto-Tulsa, 20.

PITCHING VICTORIES: Johendi Jiminian, Asheville, 10; Antonio Senzatela, Ashe- ville, 10.

LOSSES: Yohan Flande, Colorado Springs, 9; Christian Friedrich, Colorado Springs, 8; Richard Castillo, Tulsa, 8; Zach Jemicia, Asheville, 8.

SAVES: Scott Oberg, Tulsa, 15; Dylan Sta- mey, Asheville, 10.

INNINGS: Alex Balog, Asheville, 102; Konner Wade, Asheville, 98 ⅔ .

WALKS: Castillo, Tulsa, 30; Jiminian, Asheville, 29.

STRIKEOUTS: Jon Gray, Tulsa, 81; Balog, Asheville, 69.

ERA: (starters) Tyler Anderson, Tulsa, 2.78; Carlos Hernandez, Tulsa, 2.84; (relievers) Troy Neiman, Asheville, 1.72; Cole White, Tulsa-Colorado Springs, 2.27.