Tucker Brockett's goal, on the heels of a Dartmouth equalizer with less than a minute remaining in regulation, lifted Princeton to a 3-2 victory in sudden death overtime at The Prudential Center Friday night in Newark.

Brockett's goal, the first of his NCAA career, highlighted an outstanding four-game set that included defending National Champion Yale as well as Brown in an all-Ivy League weekend of hockey.





Yale, in a game featuring six Delbarton alum , held off a furious comeback late in the third period to skate to a 3-2 triumph over Princeton in the Saturday nightcap of the two-day event.

Matt Beattie, an All-Prep standout at Pingry, opened the scoring for Yale three minutes into the action while Kenny Agostino put on a dazzling display which made the two-time Star-Ledger Player of the Year and former Delbarton standout one of the most coveted players in NCAA hockey.



Team Rosters: Brown // Dartmouth // Princeton // Yale

"We won a lot of races, a lot of puck battles but there in the end it's still a one-goal game," Yale coach Keith Allain said. "Matt scored his first goal for Yale, Kenny Agostino was a threat and Matt Killian (Delbarton) did his job for us. I think our New Jersey guys certainly held their own tonight."





Brown stole the show going undefeated at 2-0 with a 5-3 victory over Dartmouth and a 4-1 triumph over Yale but Princeton coachwas pleased with what the inaugural Liberty Invitational brought to local hockey.

"I thought all four games were hard-fought battles," Prier said. "For young kids to come here and see these guys, this caliber of hockey, hopefully it's exciting. You've got some of the best hockey programs in the world right here."

Down 3-1 to Yale late in the third period, Princeton cut the deficit in half when Andrew Ammon scored with eight seconds remaining in regulation. It would be as close as Princeton would get, however.





"We showed pretty good resilience in the win Friday night. It was a gutsy win and a great start to the year," Prier said.

Michael Ambrosia, an All-State forward at Delbarton, did not skate for Princeton due to a lower body injury but was thrilled to make it back to "The Rock."

"In terms of this venue, it's an awesome facility," Ambrosia, who won three NJSIAA Non-Public titles at Delbarton, said. "We continue to be thankful to the New Jersey Devils and what they do for local hockey. We really enjoyed this and look forward to coming back the next couple of years.

"There are so many paths you can take in the game but high school hockey in New Jersey is one right here you can take to get to the next level," Ambrosia added.

Kenny Agostino echoed his former teammate's sentiments.

"I saw a lot of great hockey out there. It was a fun weekend," Agostino said. "Pulling up to the arena you can't help but not think about the high school days, winning three state championships on this ice. It was real cool to see."

Agostino and his Yale teammates will return to New Haven next weekend and lift a banner commemorating its first-ever NCAA Frozen Four championship.





"Coming back after a rough loss last night this was a great testament to this team's character," Agostino said. "We have to build off this. We're heading back home next weekend to raise our banner."

"We've got a lot of young guys. We need to grow as a hockey team," Allain said. "I think we took a step forward from last night but we are still a long way from where we need to be."











High School Stars to Shine at inaugural Liberty Invitational



Local Hockey Represents at 2013 NHL Draft



Spotlight on New Jersey: 2013 NHL Draft



Agostino, Killian Orzetti help Yale capture NCAA Frozen Four National Title

Email JC Hageny

Follow JC Hageny on Twitter