TORONTO — The psychiatric assessment gave a sordid glimpse into the murderous teen sisters' minds: the girls had been thrilled by their plot to kill mom, revelled in "the excitement, the collaboration," noted forensic psychiatrist Dr. Phil Klassen — "the drama."

A decade after they fed their mother a disorienting cocktail of vodka and codeine, helped her into the bathtub inside their Mississauga townhouse, then held her head under the water until she stopped moving, the made-for-Hollywood murder scene will, as if destined, play out in theatres across the country this weekend.

And the so-called "Bathtub Girls" may well be sitting in the theatre.

The tale of matricide will now reach North American audiences with the release of Perfect Sisters, a film starring Mira Sorvino as the depressed, alcoholic mother and Abigail Breslin as the eldest sister.

The story is already well-known across the GTA, where the sisters' shocking trial played out for weeks inside a Brampton courtroom, revealing a calculated murder plan hatched by girls barely old enough to drive, complete with alibis and a 911 call dubbed by media as 'Oscar-worthy.'

Their plan was so seamlessly executed it wasn't until 2004, a year after the death was declared accidental, that word began to spread and one of the girls' friends went to police.

What may not be as widely known, however, is that the sisters today lead lives not unlike those of average 20-somethings.

Though they remain under the watch of the justice system — both have had court-ordered restrictions on their activities, including banning the use of alcohol and drugs as well as dating — the women, now in their mid-20s, are shackle-free.

The eldest, released to a halfway house in 2009 after just three years in jail, has been studying engineering at the University of Waterloo. Her younger sister, released in 2010 under federal parole, is a married mother who starts law school this fall.

Their relative freedom, just over 10 years since killing their mother, stands either as a rehabilitation victory or a sign the justice system laid down a sentence too merciful.

"It's really interesting. Canadians certainly do say (young offender sentences) are too lenient," said Anthony Doob, a professor at the University of Toronto's Centre of Criminology who researches the youth criminal justice system.

"And then if you ask them if kids should be treated the same as adults, they don't want that," he said.

The girls — whose identities are forever protected by a court order — were 15 and 16 when they committed the murder. But their age did not automatically mean they would be sentenced as youth under Canada's Youth Criminal Justice Act, which emphasizes rehabilitation and lighter sentences. If the crime merits a harsher punishment, young offenders can be sentenced as adults.

The Crown attempted to have the sisters, by then 19 and 20, given life sentences with no chance of parole for at least 10 years for the older girl, and five to seven years for the younger.

But after a lengthy sentencing phase, Justice Bruce Duncan wasn't convinced. Though he agreed the sisters had "carried out the plan with chilling detachment," he felt a youth sentence of 10 years, with a six-year incarceration maximum, was sufficient to hold them accountable for murder.

That decision should give the public confidence there was little evidence the women would reoffend, said Kim Pate, executive director of the Canadian Association of Elizabeth Fry Societies.

For more than a century, Canadians have — at least in law — supported the idea that young people deserve special treatment, she said, in recognition that they have only partially developed moral compasses and decision-making abilities.

Part and parcel with that, Pate said, is the goal of encouraging young offenders to rejoin society.

"The whole purpose is to ensure that young people have the opportunity to both be held accountable but also be reintegrated," Pate said.

Ryerson University criminology professor Jane Sprott said Canadians should be in favour of young offenders spending time in the liminal space between incarceration and freedom.

"The idea is that at some point, you're going to lose correctional control of these people, so you don't just want to have them in prison and then suddenly dump them out into the community without anything," she said.

The release of criminals into society typically gets attention in rare circumstances where little time has been spent in jail for a violent crime, such as murder. But in reality, a fair number of convicted killers are now living in Canadian communities.

As of December 2013, there were just under 1,500 convicted killers — 166 first degree, 1,332 second degree — out on full parole in Canadian communities, according to Public Safety Canada data.

Pate and others say it should be celebrated when criminals attempt to reintegrate, rather than taxing society through incarceration.

"I think one of the tragedies is that when we see individuals actually trying to move ahead with their lives, there is still a negative connotation put on it," she said.

Robert Jagielski, one of the sisters' defence lawyers, describes both women as incredibly intelligent and capable.

"I hope this younger sister does become a lawyer because I think, what she went through, I think she has a lot to offer," he said.

Her 10-year sentence ends in 2016, but she could nonetheless encounter problems practising law. One of the requirements to pass the bar in Ontario is to "be of good character."

Roy Thomas, spokesperson for the Law Society of Upper Canada, the body that regulates lawyers in the province, said all applicants to the bar must report prior criminal proceedings. If the law society finds the matter serious, a hearing will be held where the applicant must show they can meet ethical and professional standards.

The hearing is typically public, but the society does allow for private hearings, which would likely be the case for the bathtub-girl-turned-lawyer, whose identity can never be public.