SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Democratic presidential front-runner Hillary Clinton announced her plan Friday to fight “the rising costs of health care,” even though she previously assured Americans that Obamacare would “control costs.”

Clinton, an Obamacare supporter, wants to give out billions of dollars in tax credits to deal with rising health care costs. But her proposed handout – $2,500 to people spending more than five percent of their income on health care and $5,000 to families paying the same – wouldn’t be needed if Obamacare had actually brought down health care costs in the first place.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Clinton told then-ABC News correspondent Jake Tapper in 2010 that Obamacare would control costs, which would be an historic achievement for the United States and for the Democratic Party.

“Finally the United States is going to have a system that will begin to meet the needs of all of our people, reform our insurance industry, which is long overdue, begin to control costs, which is absolutely critical,” Clinton said. “And, you know, it’s been a long time coming. It goes back many decades. And I think it’s an extraordinary historical achievement. And I’m delighted to, you know, have – have seen it come to pass.”

As this reporter revealed, Obamacare architect Jonathan Gruber admitted that the Obamacare bill never had any cost controls in it.

“The problem is it starts to go hand in hand with the mandate; you can’t mandate insurance that’s not affordable. This is going to be a major issue,” Gruber, a White House adviser, said in a 2009 lecture.

“So what’s different this time? Why are we closer than we’ve ever been before? Because there are no cost controls in these proposals. Because this bill’s about coverage. Which is good! Why should we hold 48 million uninsured people hostage to the fact that we don’t yet know how to control costs in a politically acceptable way? Let’s get the people covered and then let’s do cost control,” Gruber said.

Thus, Hillary Clinton’s perceived handout is actually a fix to a problem that she promised would never be a problem in the first place. But all along, Democrats secretly knew the problem was coming.