Luke Nethercot (-)

Last summer, Tigers' junior quarterback Luke Nethercot attended the Manning Passing Academy in Thibodaux, La.

And while it was cool to have worked on a drill with the New York Giants two-time Super Bowl champion quarterback Eli Manning, Nethercot said his biggest takeaway from the camp had nothing to do with the Xs and Os.

"It was about being a good leader," he said. "As the quarterback, making sure that the offense is running, giving credit to all those around you, pushing through adversity and making sure your teammates know it's always about the team."

That lesson has served Nethercot well this season, as the Tigers have struggled to an 0-4 start, having lost Friday night, 52-35, on the road to Pueblo Central.

Through four weeks, the Tigers defense continues to try and find itself, while the offense has improved during the first two weeks of the season. Inexperience and injuries along the offensive line and in the backfield stagnated the offense in the first two games as it generated just seven points.

In the last two games, the Tigers have posted 24 points and 35 points with Nethercot finding his rhythm in the passing game.

Against Central, he completed 23 of 24 passes for 311 yards and five touchdowns.

"I'm just sticking to my guns, reading the defense, trusting my coaches," Nethercot said. "Our offensive line is always working their butts off."

Advertisement

Against the Wildcats, Nethercot hooked up with senior receiver Zach Manchester 10 times for 140 yards and three touchdowns. Manchester was being defended all night in press coverage by Central's standout Michael Ranson.

"It was nice to see them pressing," Nethercot said. "Zach gets off the line so quick; he's got a great release."

Junior Brandon Farnsworth hauled in five passes for 65 yards and two touchdowns. Junior Dacian Sullivan caught five passes for 73 yards, while senior Lucas Bufmack snagged two passes for 24 yards.

In the running department, Kadin Porter returned from an injury and gained 49 yards on nine carries.

In addition to his teammates, Nethercot credits his offensive coordinator Chris Coppa and his older brother, Logan, for helping his cause.

"Coach Coppa is always giving me opportunities to be successful," Nethercot said. "He's a great offensive coordinator. Logan always tells me I'm a great quarterback and just to do what I know how to do."

Logan played quarterback for the Tigers and wore the No. 16 jersey, the same one as Luke.

Despite having an 0-4 record, Nethercot is confident is team can turn things around and make a run at the playoffs.

"Everyone will continue to work hard, and if we win out, we should make the playoffs," he said.

The Tigers wrap up nonleague play Friday with a game at Air Academy.