Damaging a good name

Monday, 16 February 2015, at 4:58 p.m., I learned of a Resolution of Censure of me to be made at the Brush RE-2J School Board meeting the following evening. I called President Warren Walker wanting to know why he did not give me a head's up. His comment was that the information was in our board packets that were emailed Friday. I denied any breach of confidentiality relating to personnel. Mr. Walker apparently has a problem with time lines. Mr. Walker contacted me concerning one personnel issue months ago before there would have been any concerns with HEPA violations. This conversation is now being used as a "violation of confidentiality".

The second accusation of "failure to maintain confidentiality expectations and instructions to avoid contact with facts concerning a current teacher dismissal case" came from an email that Superintendent Johnstone sent all board members on 18 January 2015 at 4:47 p.m.. In my opinion, her actions are being directed at me. When talking with Mr. Walker, I reminded him of her email. Mr. Walker said he did not remember receiving Johnstone's email. Johnstone apparently does not see her actions as a violation of confidentiality; and, she appears to have forgotten her actions. At the board meeting 17 February 2015, both Johnstone and Walker denied the existence of Superintendent Johnstone's email.

Advertisement

The Resolution of Censure notes that I have "disrupted and delayed proceedings of the Board of Education..." On 2 February 2015, I spoke with Mr. Dixon about concerns of an employee's salary, job descriptions and other information that were sent to fulfill an Open Records (CORA) request from an outside entity. I shared with Dixon that I was tired of being told "now is not the time". I was going to ask questions at the board meeting. Dixon requested I try to do it quietly. A sealed envelope was given to each board member, Johnstone and Amen at the end of the meeting. The envelope contained my CORA request for a select group of employees. So much for discretion.

The administration contacted attorney Ortiz. The communication with Ortiz has come with a cost to the district. I did not, and still do not, agree with Ortiz's interpretation. Anyone should be able to question an attorney's advice, without having to hire their own attorney, when there is disagreement and when the attorney is engaged by another.

My actions have been noted as "having damaged the good name of the Board and obstructed the proper conduct of the affairs of the School District..." My response to these allegations—I was not informed of the Resolution and the allegations. I was not given an opportunity to address the allegations prior to allegations being made at a public meeting, no board member filed any written concerns, and board members were NOT notified if they wanted or agreed to the Resolution of Censure.

If anyone's "good name" has been damaged, it is mine.

Margo Mesch