Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker talks to a protester as a supporter grabs his sign during a visit to the Iowa State Fair on Monday. Credit: Associated Press

By

Des Moines — Shouting above protesters at the Iowa State Fair, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker criticized the Republican Congress and edged closer on immigration to surging billionaire Donald Trump, all in an effort to regain his standing in this key state in the race for president.

Capitalizing on the demonstrators as he has the past four years, Walker stood on a haybale-ringed stage known as the "soap box" and used the raucous exchanges to tout his mettle to conservatives. The GOP governor promised to start repeal work on President Barack Obama's health care law on his first day in the White House, contrasting that pledge with Republican leaders of Congress who campaigned on a repeal only to delay doing so this year.

"Again, unintimidated," Walker said, invoking the title of his 2013 book in response to a protester. "I am not intimidated by you, sir, or anyone else out there. I will fight for the American people."

"Go get 'em, Scott!" a supporter screamed in response.

But with his poll numbers slumping here, the governor acknowledged he was paying attention to another challenge — Trump's insurgent campaign. The polling for the businessman and reality TV star is rising along with his anti-immigration rhetoric and his latest call for deporting all immigrants who entered the United States illegally.

The governor's criticism of his fellow Republicans marks a subtle shift in his stance in the campaign, in which he has tried to avoid attacking Republicans and instead concentrated his fire on Democrats such as front-runner Hillary Rodham Clinton.

In interviews after his speech, Walker didn't make clear whether he would back Trump in seeking the deportation of all these immigrants and ending the granting of citizenship to the children born in this nation to illegal immigrants, a policy in the U.S. since the adoption of the 14th Amendment to the Constitution in 1868. While avoiding details, Walker said his policies of opposing amnesty for those immigrants and strengthening enforcement of the laws were similar to Trump's own proposals.

"Obviously, those are the same principles," Walker said.

In remarks to a reporter from MSNBC later Monday, the governor seemed to open the door to ending birthright citizenship.

"Do you think that birthright citizenship should be ended?" the reporter asked.

"Well, like I said, Harry Reid said it's not right for this country. I think that's something we should, yeah — absolutely going forward," Walker said, referring to a previous policy of the Senate Minority leader and Democratic senator from Nevada.

"We should end birthright citizenship?" the reporter asked.

"Yeah," Walker said, nodding. "To me, it's about enforcing the law...."

"We should deport children of immigrants who are not citizens," the reporter responded.

"I didn't say that. I said you need to enforce the law, which to me is focusing on E-Verify," Walker said, referring to the Internet-based federal system that employers use to check whether their employees are authorized to work in this country.

Ramon Argondona, a Peruvian immigrant who lives in Madison, traveled to Iowa to voice his disagreement with Walker, saying the governor had shifted his position on immigration to placate conservatives.

"We disagree because he changes all the time," he said after Walker's speech. "As immigrants, we work very hard."

But Jenny Turner of Burlington, Iowa, liked most of what she heard. Turner, 35, asked Walker a question about immigration after his speech, and in an interview later said she felt that Walker hadn't answered it in the same appealingly blunt way that Trump does.

Turner, a driver's education instructor, said Trump was resonating with Republicans who want politicians to act on issues like immigration. But she also was worried that Trump had never held public office or balanced a budget the way Walker had as governor.

Talking to reporters, Walker made clear that he saw something significant in the rise of candidates like Trump, businesswoman Carly Fiorina and surgeon Ben Carson.

"It's really a matter of protest," Walker said, adding that some voters were backing these candidates for now to send the message that they are "tired of politicians in Washington not listening to me. I want to make it clear, 'I hear you.'"

Walker slips in polls

After a low-profile performance in the first GOP presidential debate Aug. 6, Walker has slipped not only in the Iowa polls but also in national surveys. In a new nationwide poll by Fox News, the Wisconsin governor was tied for fifth at 6%, behind Donald Trump (25%), Ben Carson (12%), Ted Cruz (10%) and Jeb Bush (9%).

Before the debate, Walker was third in the Fox News poll at 9% behind Trump and Bush. And back in mid-July, Walker was second in the Fox News poll at 15% behind Trump.

Asked in the new Fox News poll which GOP candidate did the best in the debate, only 1% said Walker, who took a cautious approach in the debate in which he made no mistakes but drew little attention. Asked which GOP candidate did the worst, only 1% said Walker, providing more evidence the governor's performance just didn't register with Republican viewers.

Walker's appearance suggested he was seeking to avoid that outcome going forward by better tapping into the anti-Washington sentiment within his party.

Walker spent hours at the fair, downing two thick pork chops and a Leinenkugel's Summer Shandy beer while shaking the hands of supporters with his free hand. Not everyone embraced his message though.

A woman who described herself as a Red Cross volunteer from Milwaukee pressed Walker on how his policies affect working-class families.

"We appreciate nothing that has happened in Wisconsin," she said before asking him what would he tell a family struggling to make ends meet.

"I'd tell them that's the failure of the Obama economy," Walker said, arguing that he would work to grow jobs and improve worker training.

Not all the interactions were that polite. At various points, demonstrators tried to shout over Walker, and the govenor's supporters tried to take signs from the demonstrators.

In an interview afterward, Walker acknowledged that the protesters were helping him spread his message in the Republican primary and giving him credibility in the eyes of conservatives. At the moment, Walker can use all the help he can get.

For months, Walker had led his Republican rivals in the polling in this state neighboring Wisconsin. But after the GOP debate, Walker fell from that perch in the latest polling, averaging third in the past three polls in Iowa.

With Iowa's caucuses still 51/2 months away, this slippage may turn out to be of little consequence for Walker, who has plenty of time to recover. But it's an unmistakable threat for a governor who comes from just across the Mississippi River and who has a Christian background that plays well in this socially conservative state.

Craig Gilbert of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.