Spotlight on… Johnny Manziel, quarterback, Cleveland Browns.

When: 11 a.m. Sunday, when the 7-6 Browns host the 8-4-1 Bengals in a pivotal AFC North game. The Browns probably have to win their final three games to get a playoff berth.

What’s up: Johnny Manziel, a.k.a. Johnny Football, will make his first NFL start after spending the first 13 games of his rookie season on the bench watching veteran Brian Hoyer play. Bengals coach Marvin Lewis downplayed the move, referring to Manziel as “a midget.” The term understandably created an uproar, leading Lewis to apologize.

Background: Born in Tyler, Texas, which Earl Campbell put on the map, Jonathan Paul Manziel grew up in Kerrville, Texas. His family struck it rich in petroleum. Colorado State was among the schools that recruited him out high school, but his favorite team, the Texas Longhorns, did not. As a redshirt freshman at Texas A&M in 2012, he single-handedly beat Alabama on the road. That season, he had 3,706 yards and 26 touchdowns passing and 1,410 yards and 21 touchdowns rushing. He became the first freshman to win the Heisman Trophy. He was given the nickname “Johnny Football” while in college and has since trademarked the moniker. He had a better year passing as a sophomore, throwing for 4,114 yards and 37 touchdowns, then declared himself eligible for the 2014 NFL draft. Although there was speculation he would be a top-five pick, he slid down to the No. 22 slot.

Klis’ take: This was a no-brainer move, not because of any public or ownership pressure to play Manziel, but because Hoyer had played his way out of the starting job. The Browns were 6-2 at the halfway point, but Hoyer has since gone 1-3 with one touchdown pass against eight interceptions. I would be surprised if Manziel doesn’t lead the Browns to victory. He will bring energy not only to his offense, but to his defense. He will bring a dual threat that will cause headaches for Lewis’ defense. Should Manziel make a special play, no one would be surprised if he then draws a 15-yard penalty for taunting Lewis.