Some taxpayers who have to pay the Obamacare penalty say their tax refunds are taking longer than normal, but the IRS says there are no such delays.

Obamacare and Taxes: Is the No-Insurance Penalty Tied to Slower Refunds?

Some taxpayers who have to pay the Obamacare penalty say their tax refunds are taking longer than normal. They are mostly blaming the Affordable Care Act’s requirement to pay a penalty if you don’t have health insurance or if you don’t qualify for an exemption, which makes up the controversial law’s so-called “individual mandate.”

Even though the tax filing season is only a few days old, some early filers are worried because they normally receive their refunds more promptly.

CNNMoney reports that these early filers are getting their transcripts through IRS.gov, and they are seeing an assigned code, TC 570, which indicates the refund is frozen while the return is being examined.

As many as 6 million Americans could be subject to the Obamacare penalty, according to Treasury Department estimates. However, not every filer who has already paid the penalty is seeing their refund delayed.

Scores of readers, CNNMoney reports, say that they were subject to the Obamacare penalty and that their refunds are taking longer than normal. One of these filers, Deana Ard, had rallied more than 1,000 people to a Facebook page devoted to taxpayers in the same situation, CNNMoney said.

The IRS says refunds are not being delayed because of the Obamacare penalty.

“More than 9 of 10 refunds are issued in less than 21 days,” the agency told CNNMoney in a statement. “Refunds are going out under our normal processes, and there are no systemic delays specifically related to [Affordable Care Act] issues.”

Depending primarily on income and family size, those who have not obtained health insurance and do not qualify for specific exemptions will either pay a flat dollar amount, or a percentage of income above the tax return filing threshold for their filing status. The penalty for not having coverage will be paid on your federal income tax returns, based on your “Modified Adjusted Gross Income (MAGI)”, for each full month an individual or a family member doesn’t have health insurance or an exemption.

Non-exempt Americans not covered by an insurance plan face a penalty that ranges from $95 per person to 1 percent of household income, whichever is greater.

Filers can check the status of their tax refund check on the IRS webpage: Where’s My Refund? Representatives can only do further research if it’s been more than 21 days.