Blair Miller, KOB.com and Kasia Gregorczyk, KOB Eyewitness News 4

Updated: 08/27/2015 10:22 PM

Created: 08/26/2015 6:11 PM

The president of Blue Cross Blue Shield New Mexico announced Wednesday that BCBSNM is pulling out of the New Mexico Health Insurance Exchange, potentially leaving all New Mexicans who signed up for health care insurance with the company through the state exchange without insurance as of Jan. 1 of next year.

President Kurt Shipley wrote in a news release Thursday that all existing individual customer policies "will remain in effect through the end of the year," and said small group, large group, commercial, Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug, Medicaid and individual dental product lines will not be impacted.

Shipley said the company would "continue to offer an HMO product off exchange in 2016," which he said would be available "to all customers."

He cited the prices the company charged for health insurance in 2014 and 2015 did not cover their costs, resulting in $19.2 million in losses last year.

The release says it covered 35,000 people in our state last year. That number amounted to just below one-third of people in New Mexico on individual plans.

Shipley pointed to the company's inability to reach an agreement with the Office of Superintendent of Insurance. BCBSNM had asked the OSI for a 51.6 percent rate increase in May, which was denied earlier this month.

Other health care insurance providers were only seeking increases of about 5 percent.

The company said it would work with the OSI, health care providers and stakeholders to make the transition to a new provider.

"To the 35,000 customers who selected Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New Mexico individual products, we thank you and look forward to continuing to compete for your business now and in the future," Shipley wrote.

The company said it would communicate with customers via mail and online son.

BCBSNM said approximately 11,600 members were impacted by a Feb. 4 data breach from its affiliated company, Anthem Inc., and that a small percentage of those people's Social Security numbers were exposed.

The CEO of the Health Insurance Exchange responded Thursday:

“Following the recent announcement by Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New Mexico, we want all New Mexicans to know that there will still be plenty of choices for consumers looking for individual health insurance coverage during Open Enrollment this fall,” said Amy Dowd, CEO of the New Mexico Health Insurance Exchange (NMHIX).

She said BCBS enrollment accounted for about 50 percent of coverage plans through the exchange.

Open enrollment for the exchange will begin Nov. 1 and run through the end of Jan. 2016. If you enroll prior to Jan. 1, you should be able to qualify for a new plan.