Monday's controversial Supreme Court ruling in the Hobby Lobby case - which said closely-held companies aren't required to provide contraceptive coverage for their employees under the Affordable Care Act if their owners cite religious objections - has thrust contraception into the spotlight once again.

A lot has been written about the Hobby Lobby case, but less about the birth control at the center of the discussion. Here are some facts about contraceptives:

Q: What types of contraceptives are available?

A: The Food and Drug Administration has approved several types of contraception. Those that require a prescription are oral contraception (more commonly referred to as "the pill"), an intrauterine device, or IUD, the shot (depot-medroxyprogesterone acetate, or Depo-Provera), the patch, vaginal contraceptive ring, diaphragm, the cervical cap, and two types of emergency contraception: Plan B and Ella. Surgical and nonsurgical sterilization are also available.

Q: What is the most popular type of birth control?

A: Oral contraceptives - more than 70 kinds are available with a prescription. The FDA approved the first one in June 1960. Sponges, condoms – male and female versions - and spermicides are available over the counter.

Q: What do I need to know about the pill?

A: The most commonly prescribed ones are those that contain synthetic (man-made) versions of the female hormones estrogen and progesterone. Another type of pill, the mini-pill, only contains progestin, which is the man-made version of progesterone that is used in oral contraceptives.

Q: Is birth control used just to help prevent pregnancy?

A: No. Physicians also prescribe it to help treat endometriosis and to regulate menstrual cycles, and to ease premenopausal symptoms such as hot flashes.

Q: If I use the pill, will my chances of getting cancer increase?

A: It depends on the types of hormones in the pill and how long a woman uses them. Studies have shown that using the pill or Depo-Provera puts women at slightly greater risk of breast cancer than women who have never used them. But the risk seems to go back to normal over time once the contraceptive is discontinued. The same goes for cervical cancer. In contrast, studies have shown a reduced risk of ovarian and endometrial cancers in women who have taken the pill.

Q: What other risks are associated with birth control?

A: Among the more serious risks include bone loss in women who get the Depo-Provera shot; unwanted pregnancy in women who choose nonsurgical sterilization; and infertility when IUD is improperly implanted.

A: More than 99 percent of women aged 15–44 who have ever had sex have used at least one type of contraceptive method in their lifetime, according to a February 2013 report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

The results of a survey conducted from 2006 to 2010, whose findings were included in another CDC report released October 2012, stated that 62 percent of women aged 15-44 were using some type of contraception at any given time.

Q: Do all insurance companies cover birth control like any other prescription medication?

A: No. Certain religious employers, such as churches and other houses of worship, are exempt. Medicaid programs don't have to cover it, either, but most state programs do cover ones that require a prescription – even if a doctor writes a prescription for over-the-counter birth control like sponges.

Q: Where can I find out more about contraception?

A: If it's a history lesson that you're looking for, check out the contraception exhibition at the Dittrick Medical History Center on the third floor of the Allen Memorial Medical Library at Case Western Reserve University. It's free and open from 9 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. weekdays, except holidays. Call 216-368-3648 for information. If you can't make it in person, check out the online exhibit, History of Birth Control