People Moves of the Week: Goldman Sachs, Simpson Thacher, Norton Rose

Goldman names two independent directors; Simpson Thacher elects six attorneys as members; Norton Rose brings aboard partner Stephanie Hildebrandt

Goldman Sachs Group Inc. — Mark Flaherty and Mark Winkelman were named independent directors of the New York investment bank and financial adviser, expanding the board to 14 directors, 11 of whom are independent. Flaherty and Winkelman will serve as members of the audit, risk and corporate governance, nominating and public responsibilities committees. Flaherty is retired from Wellington Management Co., an investment management company where he served as an executive from 2001 until 2012. Winkelman serves on the board of Anheuser-Busch InBev SA/NV and was an operating partner of J.C. Flowers & Co. from 2006 to 2008. Winkelman also previously worked at Goldman, including as a member of the management committee, co-head of the fixed income division and head of the J. Aron Division, having joined the firm in 1978 and retired in 1994.

Norton Rose Fulbright LLP — Stephanie Hildebrandt will join as a partner in the law firm’s Houston headquarters. She is set to begin in February. Hildebrandt was most recently senior vice president, general counsel and secretary at Enterprise Products Partners LP. She joined that company in 2004 when Enterprise acquired El Paso Corp.’s master limited partnership (GulfTerra Energy Partners). Before joining El Paso in 2001, Hildebrandt worked in Texaco’s legal department for 12 years.

Orrick Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP — The San Francisco law firm has added private equity fund lawyer Yong-Nam Jun to its midsize real estate fund formation practice. Jun will serve as of counsel in the firm’s Los Angeles office. He was formerly counsel with DLA Piper and a partner with Kirkland & Ellis LLP.

Simpson Thacher & Bartlett LLP – The New York law firm promoted six attorneys to partner. In New York, Peter Gilman focuses on the sponsoring and operation of private investment funds, investment management M&A and other aspects of private investing in alternative asset classes. In Washington, D.C., Sara Razi focuses on antitrust matters and was formerly Deputy Assistant Director of the Bureau of Competition at the Federal Trade Commission. In Houston, Matthew Einbinder Matt represents borrowers and lenders in banking and credit transactions. In London, Clare Gaskell advises private equity firms and corporate clients on private M&A and public takeovers. In Hong Kong, Christopher Bell focuses on banking, credit and acquisition finance; and Adam Furber represents alternative asset managers in the formation and ongoing operation of private investment funds.

Weil Gotshal & Manges LLP — The New York law firm promoted a dozen attorneys to partner. They include restructuring specialist Fabienne Beuzit; Patrick Bright and Tom Richards, within the banking and finance group; Andrew Chizzik and Stephen Fox, in private funds; tax adviser Edouard de Lamy; patent litigation attorney Anish Desai; Lyuba Goltser, who works with publicly listed companies; Ariel Kronman and Brian Maher, structured finance and derivatives; Gavin Westerman, mergers and acquisitions; and Caroline Zalka, securities litigation.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: