SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Lawyer, author, and columnist Ann Coulter spoke with Breitbart News Sunday on Sirius XM about the passing of Justice Antonin Scalia, pointing out that Republicans are in the hot seat when it comes to allowing Barack Obama to appoint a liberal replacement that could skew the Court Left for generations.

Speaking to host and Breitbart News Executive Chairman Stephen K. Bannon, Coulter said, “If this had happened a year ago … we’ve seen how Republicans have behaved. They’re utterly craven.They would probably pass, or Senate Republicans would confirm whomever Obama sends up. They’d ring their hands. Lindsey Graham would be leading the charge, talking about how it’s the President’s right to decide. Now that Donald Trump has come on the scene, I think Washington Republicans may be starting to get the message. We’re really ticked off at them.”

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Coulter added, “Look, if they let somebody go through, I mean, I think Trump is going to win anyway but it’s just going to get him another ten million votes.”

Coulter also recently discussed Scalia’s passing and legacy with host Stephen K. Bannon on Saturday, as well.

Coulter praised Scalia for going beyond pointing out the absurdity of left-wing activist Court decisions, explaining why they were wrong in a clear and witty manner. She stressed the importance of Scalia’s humor to keep readers engaged, comparing it to presidential candidate Donald Trump’s use of humor to hold an audience. “We used to wait for his opinions to come out, particularly the dissents, and read them over dinner… and quote from them for months on end, his particularly hilarious lines” Coulter said of Scalia’s jurisprudence. She cited Scalia’s dissent in Planned Parenthood v. Casey as a particular favorite, mourning the way other Republican-nominated judges such as David Souter, Sandra Day O’Connor, and Anthony Kennedy would so often betray the conservative base. While Coulter said all of Scalia’s writing was “very clear and very strong,” his dissents were especially energetic. “Usually when he was writing a dissent, he’d gotten kinda fed up with the other Justices, and he would just let loose,” she chuckled.

The full Breitbart News Sunday interview with Ann Coulter can be heard below.