ST. LOUIS — A grand statue outside Busch Stadium honors Stan “The Man” Musial, one of the greatest and most consistent players in baseball history.

Consider this statistic: Musial finished his career with 1,815 hits at home and 1,815 on the road.

No one, of course, is going to confuse Rockies first baseman Justin Morneau with the iconic Cardinals Hall of Famer, but consistency is a trait Morneau does share with Musial.

Morneau entered Friday leading the National League in hitting with a .317 average, just ahead of Pittsburgh’s Josh Harrison (.314).

Unfortunately, Morneau left the game in the sixth inning with what the Rockies are calling “left-side intercostal soreness.” Morneau is listed as day to day. He went 0-for-3, dropping his average to .315

While Rockies hitters are often discounted because of their wide home-and-away batting splits, Morneau has been Musial-esque.

Morneau is batting .321 at Coors Field vs. .312 on the road. For his career, Morneau is batting .279 at home and .282 on the road.

“Justin never gives away at-bats, and he has great preparation,” said Michael Cuddyer, who won the 2013 National League batting title with the Rockies last season and played alongside Morneau with Minnesota for nine seasons. “He studies pitchers’ tendencies, and that doesn’t change at home or on the road. He doesn’t get out of his game plan very often. He stays with his approach and with his plan.”

Morneau said he wasn’t quite sure what to expect at the hitter’s paradise known as Coors Field. As it turns out, the ballpark has renewed him as a hitter.

“Coors got me back to where I wanted to be,” Morneau said. “I got away from my strengths over the last few years. Getting back into a hitter’s park (as opposed to the Twins’ Target Field), has me using the whole field again.”

Morneau remembers an April series against the White Sox at Coors Field as the starting point.

“I hit a couple of balls the opposite way, to left field, that carried over the left fielder’s head,” he said. “I realized I could use the big ballpark to my advantage.

“That’s carried over the whole season, home or away. … It’s nice to feel comfortable using the whole field again.”

Footnotes. Lefty reliever Boone Logan, out for the season because of a strained left elbow, had arthroscopic surgery Thursday to remove a small bone spur in the elbow. … The Single-A Modesto (Calif.) Nuts and the Rockies extended their player development contract through the 2016 season, the Rockies announced Friday. … Rocky Mountain High School graduate Marco Gonzales will be St. Louis’ starting pitcher Sunday against the Rockies. Patrick Saunders, The Denver Post