**Want FOX News First in your inbox every day? Sign up here.**

Buzz Cut:

• Saying goodbye…

• Finally! Obamacare numbers to be revealed

• Kerry tries to turn ‘Non’ into ‘Oui’

• They’re just not that into you, Hillary

• If cats can’t use Kickstarter, these guys are in trouble

DATA STREAM…America is home to 21.2 million veterans. As of 2012, more than 1.5 million living veterans served in more than one war, according to the Census Bureau. While a plurality of veterans, 9.6 million, are age 65 or older, nearly 1.8 million veterans are under the age of 35. Alaska is the state with the highest percentage of veterans, with 13.6 percent of its adult population having served in the military.

SAYING GOODBYE TO THE GREATEST GENERATION - Memories of service to the country remain still strong even as reunions for World War II veterans become sparsely attended. Sixty-eight years after the end of the world’s most destructive conflict, the AP has moving details as Americans consider what the nation is losing as the number of veterans of the greatest generation dwindle.

“Dad, you can't remember what you ate yesterday, but you remember everything about World War II.” – Susan Frymier, daughter of 92 year-old veteran B-25 bomber pilot Paul Young.

Because no one has ever said it better - Watch the video of President Ronald Reagan’s speech commemorating the Allied invasion of Normandy, via RCP. “Here, in this place where the West held together, let us make a vow to our dead. Let us show them by our actions that we understand what they died for. Let our actions say to them the words for which Matthew Ridgway listened: "I will not fail thee nor forsake thee."

[Hope in Healing - Sgt. Michael Schlitz lost both his hands and suffered burns over 85 percent of his body after a 2007 improvised explosive device attack in Iraq. National Security Correspondent Jennifer Griffin shares his story.]

Renewing our commitment to vets - Army veteran Jim Wolf has battled homelessness, poverty, and alcoholism for over two decades. Two months ago, Wolf accepted when a veterans’ charity offered to help him undergo a physical renewal. The amazing time-lapse video shows him receiving a makeover and ultimately, a new lease on life.

[Operation Shoebox ships care items and thank-you notes, many to servicemen and women around the globe. Today they will ship their one-millionth package. Fox News Senior Meteorologist Janice Dean has the honor of being the organization’s “millionth” packer.]

NO DAY OFF FOR THESE FUTURE VETS - The U.S. military is on the ground in typhoon-ravaged Philippines. Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel directed Pacific Command to support American humanitarian relief efforts in the wake of Typhoon Haiyan. The death toll has reached 1,000 but the number is projected to climb to 10,000. The U.S. effort is expected to include at least 90 Marines and sailors as well as a cargo planes and helicopters. Fox News has more. Correspondent Claudia Cowan has the latest developments.

[Restaurant News shares the list of eateries that are saluting our nation’s veterans with free meals and other expressions of gratitude.]

FINALLY! OBAMACARE NUMBERS TO BE REVEALED - The Obama administration has promised to release figures on how many paying customers ObamaCare attracted in October, the first month of the new entitlement program. Officials aggressively downplayed once rosy expectations for the numbers citing the technical problems with the Web site. Even with millions desperate to find coverage after losing their existing policies under the law, enrollment is expected to be direly low. Other factors: sticker shock and public confusion over the requirements and penalties under the law. If the numbers are very low, it will be difficult for the administration to refuse calls from Democrats and Republicans to delay the fines for those who do not enroll.

Downtime and delays for Healthcare.gov - In addition to its daily scheduled 1 a.m. to 5 a.m. daily maintenance, customers on ObamaCare’s Web site may find delays in the application process through Tuesday as technicians prepare for the end-of-month re-launch, officials have warned.

[Watch Fox: Rep. Trey Gowdy, R-S.C., appears in the 9 a.m. ET hour]

Organizing for distraction - “[President Obama] wants to enlist the public as allies in the push to pass an immigration overhaul, expand access to early-childhood education and raise the minimum wage. All these goals already are drawing resistance from congressional Republicans, and if the public sours on him, the job is that much more difficult.” More from WSJ.

Talk about pricey coverage - Only five individuals have enrolled in D.C.’s health exchange, costing taxpayers $26.7 million per enrollee so far, data from Sens. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, and Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, reveals. Breitbart has the story.

[WSJ: “…[S]cam-artist pages that are now pretending to be Healthcare.gov and are tricking people into divulging sensitive information or buying fake products. Important consumer warning: If an insurance shopping website is usable, it’s not the federal government’s.”]

KERRY TRIES TO TURN ‘NON’ INTO ‘OUI’ - French foreign minister Laurent Fabius told France-Inter Radio that his country did not want to be part of a “con game” on a deal to allow Iran to enrich uranium. Secretary of State John Kerry, who is leading the charge to broker a deal with Iran, responded to French skepticism, saying he wants to keep the pressure on. Iran President Hassan Rouhani said his country would not be pushed to stop enriching uranium, Fox News has more.

Bibi says Arabs, Israelis agree: Iran deal is bad news - Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu continues to try to stave off the U.S.-led effort to strike a deal to allow Iran to enrich uranium. Netanyahu told CBS’ “Face the Nation” that it’s an opinion held by many of America’s allies in the region: “There are many Arab leaders in the region who are saying this is a very bad deal… And you know when you have the Arabs and the Israelis speaking in one voice, it doesn't happen very often, I think it's worth paying attention to it.”

SYRIA REBELS CONCEDE ON TALKS - The leaders of some of Syria’s rebel forces have agreed after weeks of battlefield reversals and a worsening outlook for victory to join talks with the Syrian government if it allows humanitarian aid to begin to flow to rebel-held communities. AP has more.

WITH YOUR SECOND CUP OF COFFEE...Amity Shlaes, one of the nation’s leading economic historians, looks at the legacy of Woodrow Wilson, up to and including the presidency of Barack Obama in her review of A. Scott Berg’s new doorstop-sized biography of Wilson, the father of modern Democratic liberalism. Shlaes being the author of the definitive biography of the anti-Wilson, President Calvin Coolidge, may have something to do with the unsparing nature of her review for The National Interest: “That Wilson could not recognize the damage he perpetrated hardly constitutes an excuse for historians to downplay it. The discussion over what variety of Protestant or narcissist Wilson was has been long, interesting and stimulating, but the next biographer would do well to focus on his policies in a more thorough and sustained fashion. America’s early progressives, presidents and others, require at this moment not canonization but invigilation.”

Got a TIP from the RIGHT or LEFT? Email FoxNewsFirst@FOXNEWS.COM

POLL CHECK - Real Clear Politics Averages

Obama Job Approval: Approve – 42.0 percent//Disapprove – 52.9 percent

Direction of Country: Right Direction – 21.8 percent//Wrong Track – 70.9 percent

BAIER TRACKS: SWIFT START…“First, thanks to all of the nation’s veterans and their families for their service to the country. You are the ones who make our work possible.

Next, the GOP is wasting no time in getting on to the 2016 cycle. It's starting early. Really early. Gov. Chris Christie, R-N.J., is quickly becoming the establishment favorite for the presidential sweepstakes of 2016. But not without significant pushback from a large portion of the party. See the NYT write up.

The battle for the heart of the GOP will be ever-present ahead of the first caucus in Iowa 2016. Expect the pushback to Christie's full-court Sunday show appearances to materialize very soon.” – Bret Baier.

CHRISTIE IN A MELLOW(ER) MOOD - Gov. Chris Christie, R-N.J., came storming out of his Tuesday re-election with an unprecedented media blitz, even hitting Michael J. Fox’s sitcom and scheduling a quadruple blast of Sunday shows. Perhaps sensitive to accusations of being overweening, Christie struck a somewhat milder tone than what Americans have become accustomed to from him. Christie did not respond to criticism from fellow potential 2016 presidential candidates, including Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., telling “Fox News Sunday” host Chris Wallace, “I’m not getting into that Washington game. That’s why people hate Washington, D.C.; that kind of garbage.”Christie took a neutral tone on a potential presidential bid but told those in the GOP considering a run to “get the job done.” Watch the interview here.

THEY’RE JUST NOT THAT INTO YOU, HILLARY - New Republic Editor Noam Scheiber considers the influence Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass., is having on the Democratic Party and how it could spell trouble for a 2016 Hillary Clinton candidacy in the magazine’s cover story, Hillary’s Nightmare: “It’s hard to look at the Democratic Party these days and not feel as if all the energy is behind Warren…Increasingly, Democratic donors are looking for more than just a person to support; they’re looking for a candidate who represents something larger than their own ambition…An opponent who doesn’t heed political incentives is like a militant who doesn’t fear death.”

BEVIN WANTS TO CLUB MCCONNELL - Kentucky Senate challenger Matt Bevin is eyeing a crucial endorsement from the conservative Club for Growth. Supporters of Bevin tell The Hill there is a “50-50 chance” the group could wade into the race, potentially delivering millions of dollars to bombard Minority Leader Mitch McConnell. While McConnell has the support of former Club for Growth President Sen. Pat Toomey, R-Pa., Bevin has received the backing of the Senate Conservative Fund, founded by former Sen. Jim DeMint. The survivor of the costly Republican contest will likely go on to face Allison Lundergan Grimes, who faces no serious primary opposition and for whom national Democrats are amassing a giant war chest.

TEA PARTY EXPRESS: LAW DIDN’T LET US TO HELP CUCCINELLI - “A comment last week misstated Tea Party Express’ support for Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli. Tea Party Express is a federal PAC and only engages on federal races, which prevented the organization from financially supporting Cuccinelli's campaign for Governor.” – Taylor Budowich, spokesman for Tea Party Express.

[Ed. Note: Think we’re off the beam? Want to set the record straight? Send us your responses at FOXNEWSFIRST@FOXNEWS.COM]

TOPTWEETS - @laurenashburn’s top tweet pick for this morning: USA Today Washington Bureau Chief @SusanPage: “Sarah Palin's vision of Christmas Future: Romney finally moves into the White House--in 2028: : usat.ly/1cdfZyX via @USATODAY”

[Lauren Ashburn of “#MEDIABUZZ” tracks the Twitterverse every day in Top Twitter Talk.]

YOU HAVE A SEAT ON THE PANEL - President Obama is ignorant of what is actually in ObamaCare: Charles Krauthammer found widespread viewer consensus with that sentiment according to Bing Pulse, tracking your response to Friday’s “Special Report with Bret Baier” All-Star Panel. Krauthammer also drew widespread agreement across the spectrum when he charged that the health law was written “so that a lot of people would be kicked off” their current insurance.

Men, women, Republicans, independents and Democrats showed support for Obama’s openness to fixes for his beleaguered health law. Voter intensity surged to 31,000 per minute when Krauthammer expressed his disbelief for the president’s apology saying, “I can't believe he's adding on to the untruths.” See the full results here. There were nearly 220,000 viewer votes on Friday. Don’t miss your chance to take a seat on tonight’s panel.

AH, SWEDEN…A 14-year-old Swedish girl identified in court filings only as “Thyra” has filed a complaint with the nation’s Equality Ombudsman against paint maker Universal Colors and Chemicals for its name for a shade of beige: “skin color.” The complaint charges the company with racism UPI reports.

IF CATS CAN’T USE KICKSTARTER, THESE GUYS ARE IN TROUBLE - There’s niche, and then there’s niche. A new German magazine startup is aimed at people who hate dogs. “Poop and Pooches,” is seeking 5,000 subscribers so it can launch Nov. 25. Der Spiegel has more.

Chris Stirewalt is digital politics editor for Fox News. Want FOX News First in your inbox every day? Sign up here. To catch Chris live online daily at 11:30 a.m. ET, click here.

Chris Stirewalt joined Fox News Channel (FNC) in July of 2010 and serves as digital politics editor based in Washington, D.C. Additionally, he authors the daily "Fox News First" political news note and hosts "Power Play," a feature video series, on FoxNews.com. Stirewalt makes frequent appearances on the network, including "The Kelly File," "Special Report with Bret Baier," and "Fox News Sunday with Chris Wallace." He also provides expert political analysis for Fox News coverage of state, congressional and presidential elections.