Among the moving parts in talks over the government shutdown is a 2.3% excise tax on medical devices sold in the U.S. that are approved by the Food and Drug Administration.

The tax, long opposed by the medical-device industry, was intended to raise money to help pay for new insurance coverage for millions of people under President Obama’s Affordable Care Act. Estimated to garner about $30 billion dollars over the next ten years, the medical-device law went into effect this past January.

Republicans in the House have long fought the tax, as have members of both parties from states like Massachusetts and Minnesota where many makers of medical devices are headquartered.

Under the law, “devices” mean everything from MRI machines and cardiac defibrillators to tongue depressors and bandages – as long as they are being sold to medical “providers” like hospitals and doctors. If bandages or medical gloves are sold at a drugstore, that sale isn’t subject to the tax. But if they’re sold in bulk to a hospital chain, that transaction does fall under the law. Also, certain items are always exempt, such as eyeglasses and contact lenses.

Here’s a rundown of devices and products that typically are and aren’t subject to the excise tax.

Band-Aids EXEMPT

Associated Press

Band-Aids and other consumer products get a pass under the retail exception. In this 2009 file photo, a customer removes a box of Band-Aids from a display at a pharmacy in Tallahassee, Fla.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging machines TAXED

Associated Press

From left, MRI technician Laura Woods, Jacksonville Zoo veterinarian Adrian Atkins, and MRI Technician Sharon Vizcaino, position Torra the cheetah on the table in the MRI room at the Baptist Medical Center Nassau in Fernandina Beach, Fla., last year. Torra was having trouble with vision and stability.

Wheelchairs EXEMPT

Associated Press

Mechanical and powered wheelchairs fall under the retail exemption. Above, Korean War veteran Robert Olson, from Iowa, is pushed in his wheelchair by Zach Twedt, also from Iowa, around the National World War II Memorial in Washington, Tuesday, Oct. 1, 2013.

LASIK machines TAXED

Associated Press

A television monitor shows the image from the operating microscope during Lasik eye surgery in this 2005 file photo.

Heart valves TAXED

Bloomberg News

An Edwards Lifesciences Corp. SAPIEN transcatheter heart valve is assembled in a training room at company headquarters in Irvine, Calif., in 2011.

Pacifiers EXEMPT

Associated Press

In this 2012 image released by Jessa Decker-Smith, her 7-month-old daughter wears a pacifier with a felt mustache attached to it.

Pacemakers TAXED

Associated Press

An x-ray from the North Carolina State’s College of Veterinary Medicine in Raleigh, N.C., seen here on Wednesday Jan. 29, 2003, shows a dog with a pacemaker in place.

Dentures TAXED

Associated Press

While the final product isn’t taxed, the components that go into a set were taxed during the production process. In this March 30, 2012, photo, Kelley Gannon smiles as she first sees her new full set of dentures installed by Stephen Alouf, rear, a dentist in Roanoke, Va.

Eyeglasses EXEMPT

Associated Press

Eyeglasses and contact lenses are specifically exempted under the law. Above, then-presidential candidate Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton shops for eyeglasses during a campaign stop in Louisville, Ky., in May 2008.

Sources: IRS, American Dental Association

More

Shutdown Jargon: ‘Fairness Under Obamacare,’ More

Crisis Meter Update: Stuck on DEBTCON 3