Buy Photo Mercy Medical Center-Des Moines (Photo: Tony Leys/Register file photo)Buy Photo

Two Iowa hospitals have started seeing federal rewards for their efforts to keep patients healthy instead of just treating them when they're sick.

Medicare has agreed to pay Mercy $4.4 million for the performance of its Accountable Care Organization, the hospital announced this week.

Medicare also awarded $1.2 million to Trinity Regional Medical Center in Fort Dodge for its ACO, which was the first of its kind in Iowa, a spokeswoman said.

Accountable Care Organizations involve extensive efforts to track how patients fare and to head off health problems before they become severe and expensive. For example, ACO's carefully monitor patients with chronic conditions, such as diabetes or congestive heart failure, and encourage them to come in for regular checkups and maintenance treatment. The organizations also employ "health coaches" to help patients stay on track.

Hospital-and-clinic systems receive financial awards if they meet ACO benchmarks for quality, patient-satisfaction and cost savings.

Proponents say the idea should save billions of dollars in medical costs while helping Americans stay healthier. The government is encouraging such organizations under the Affordable Care Act.

Private insurers also have been encouraging the idea. Wellmark Blue Cross & Blue Shield announced in August that it was rewarding five health care systems for saving $12 million through their ACO's. Mercy gained $3.7 million for its 2013 care of about 25,000 Wellmark patients.

Health-care companies are spending millions of dollars to set up and run such organizations. The companies also face the risk that they'll lose revenue because fewer patients need hospitalization.

The effort hasn't always paid off as quickly as hospital companies hoped. Trinity, which is part of the UnityPoint system, was one of the first in the nation when it launched its ACO in January 2012. However, it didn't receive any financial rewards from Medicare for its first year. The $1.2 million being paid now is for its second year, which was 2013, a UnityPoint spokeswoman said.

In May, Mercy leaders cited a lack of ACO rewards from Medicare as a major reason the hospital had to cut $15 million in payroll costs.

The $4.4 million reward announced this week includes six more months of results from Mercy's ACO, said Dr. David Swieskowski, who oversees the effort.

Swieskowski said the new $4.4 million reward represented almost half what the organization had saved Medicare. He expressed confidence in the effort's future.

"These results – which were made possible by the dedicated efforts of participating physicians and staff – confirm our belief that getting patients healthy and keeping them healthy does have a direct impact on the cost of health care in our community," he wrote in a prepared statement.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1sbgZjE