GREENBELT, Md.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--ASHLIN Management Group announces open enrollment for the CDC Work@HealthTM program, a national employer-based worksite wellness training program. The initiative, funded by the Affordable Care Act, aims to improve the organizational health of participating employers and certified trainers, with an emphasis on strategies to reduce chronic disease and injury risk to employees and an eye to improving overall worker productivity.

Evidence shows that workplace health programs can be highly effective in promoting healthy behaviors and ensuring employers offer Americans a healthy and safe environment to work. Comprehensive evidence–based worksite health programs can generate significant cost savings, yielding on average a $3 return on every $1 spent over a two– to five–year period.

ASHLIN Management Group, based in Greenbelt, Maryland, was selected by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), to develop and implement the training program with more than 600 employers and other organizations across the country. In addition to formal training by experienced instructors and wellness experts, the Work@Health ProgramTM includes ongoing technical support and seed funding provided over the course of 12 months to support employer’s implementation of science-based prevention and wellness strategies. ASHLIN Management Group will be supported by Accenture and Total Solutions Inc., BETAH and Associates, the Health Promotion Council, the Public Health Management Corp., and the National Wellness Institute, under the direction of the CDC.

During the last several weeks, the training was pilot tested with online participants as well as through face-to-face training at the University of Maryland in College Park. The Universal Companies, a Philadelphia-based community development organization, participated in the Work@HealthTM pilot training and plans to introduce a health and wellness program using Work@HealthTM throughout their organization. Among other things, Universal is committed to improving K-12 education at their 10 charter schools. Since 1996, the company has also produced programs and workshops around health and wellness at the schools. Universal's Director, Dr. Patricia Bradley said, “We want our employees and our students to know that wellness is 365 days a year.” Universal hopes to boost their wellness programs via the Work@HealthTM experts who can help Universal Companies tailor a program that meets its specific needs. “We want to take what we’re doing into the 21st Century,” Bradley said. “This program is a big step toward helping us get there.”

The full-scale Work@HealthTM training program will enroll 540 employers to participate in training through 1 of 3 training models (online, hands-on, and a blend of online and hands-on activities), and 60 participants (employers and other organizations) that will participate in a more advanced train-the-trainer model. Participants selected for the hands-on or blended models will have in person training in one of four regional locations: Baltimore, Md., Atlanta, Ga., Chicago, Ill. and Oakland, Calif. in early 2014.

In addition to providing a learning environment where employers can develop a skill set and capacity to build or enhance a science-based workplace health program, prospective employers will receive:

Free Professional training

An Organizational Health Assessment to define existing needs

Technical Assistance and consultation with experts

Seed funding up to $5,000

An opportunity to network with peers

Participation recognition

Employers interested in becoming participants in the Work@HealthTM program should complete a brief online application through the program’s website (www.cdc.gov/workathealth). Applications will be reviewed based on the eligibility requirements, responses to application questions and a need of the Work@HealthTM program to enroll a diverse group of employers. The goal is to ensure roughly equal numbers of participants in each of the training models. Employer preference for one or more of the training models will be considered.

At the end of this project in 2015, CDC will disseminate the findings and provide recommendations for the most effective training methods for employers on workplace health programs.

For additional information, please email Robert Pierre at rpierre@ashlininc.com.