One of the goals of Obamacare has been the reduction of emergency room visits – the costliest kind of care that often serves as the doctor of last resort for the uninsured.

The hope was that once people had insurance, they would be under the regular care of a doctor and thus avoid the health crises that prompt ER visits.

But a study released today out of Massachusetts shows ER visits there actually rose slightly when that state passed its first-in-the-nation mandatory health insurance law.

In New Jersey, where hospitals provided $1 billion in charity care to the uninsured, hospital officials are hoping that if they see a similar jump, it will be temporary.

“It’s almost counter to what we hope to see under health care reform,” said Kerry McKean, spokeswoman for the New Jersey Hospital Association. “If we do have what we hope will be a temporary surge in visits from the newly insured, hospitals will be ready.”

Once patients become accustomed to having insurance, she said, the goal will be to have them seek treatment for health conditions earlier, instead of putting off a doctor’s visit until a crisis forces an ER visit.

“That would be the hope,” she said. "So far it's too soon to tell."

The study, published in the Annals of Emergency Medicine, showed a 1.2 percent rise in visits right after Massachusetts expanded access to health insurance. Over the following two years, visits showed a 2.2 percent increase.

Much of that was due to pent-up demand, and a perception that ER visits were efficient and available round-the-clock. But one of the biggest drivers of increased ER visits was the simple lack of other options – beginning with the availability of doctors.

The study authors noted that other states should expect to see a similar experience, especially those, like New Jersey, that have expanded their Medicaid programs.

“Providers of emergency care should anticipate increased demand for patients and plan accordingly,” said Bruce Landon, of the Department of Health Care Policy of Harvard Medical School.