Colorado Corn names cell phone/Internet service provider Company of the Year

Paul Sherman (right) accepts the Colorado Corn Business of the Year award on behalf of Viaero Wireless. (Courtesy photo)

At their annual awards luncheon in Loveland this month, Colorado Corn Growers Association named the Fort Morgan-based Viaero Wireless its Company of the Year.

Viaero "has been a great partner to the state's corn producers, and the same really could be said about all of rural Colorado," stated Eric Brown, communications director for Colorado Corn, in a Dec. 14 press release.

Viaero provides 4G cell phone coverage and Internet service to southern and eastern Colorado, Nebraska, northwest Kansas and southwest Wyoming. Paul Sherman is the divisional president of sales and marketing for the company.

Q: What is this award, and why was Viaero chosen for it?

A: Every year, the Corn Growers Association nominates a business of the year. These are businesses that have been impactful to the industry and have supported CGA. They select a winner based on a couple categories. One is the investment we have made and continue to make in the community around us. Obviously we provide their cell phone coverage, but we also organize community events, we sponsor scholarships, we work with schools and so forth.

Q:What are some specific examples of ways you support the community in eastern Colorado?

Advertisement

A:Well, BobStock is the free concert we put on every year in Fort Morgan. Last year, we had Lou Grant and Warrant there. It attracts hundreds of people from all over the state. Then there's Pedal the Plains, which we co-sponsor with the Denver Post. It's the largest race in Colorado for bikes. It's a good way of connecting people from urban areas with the places that supply their food. (The location) changes every year, but it's always in eastern Colorado.

Q:What new projects will Viaero be working on this year?

A:We'll continue with the same large events we do every year. We're also devoting quite a few resources to expanding our coverage area. The big plan is to continue network expansion and the growth of towers in Nebraska and southeastern Colorado. But we have no plans to go to central areas. We're a rural company. That's the good thing about being owned by one family. If we were owned by a major public company, we probably wouldn't be able to do this. You get fired for putting towers where we do, because we put towers in places where there are more cows than people. There's one more project we're working on: we've partnered with local news stations to put high definition cameras on our towers, which will allow meteorologists to look for tornadoes that are developing. It will also help people better monitor traffic conditions, because CDOT cameras aren't high definition like these cameras. So we'll be continuing that in 2016.

Stephanie Alderton: 970-867-5651 ext 227, salderton@fmtimes.com or twitter.com/slalderton