A new sampling of 2016 health insurance premiums in Nebraska for two leading companies shows increases between 12 percent and 31 percent for individual policies, a signal that health insurance costs more broadly are headed up again next year.

The causes include the rising cost of care and medications, increased use of health care services by people with the individual policies and changes in parts of the federal Affordable Care Act, the insurance companies said.

The 2016 rates in the report, from the Nebraska Department of Insurance, do not apply to people with group policies, Medicare Supplement plans or individual policies that they have been keeping since before the federal law took effect.

Nebraska insurance director Bruce Ramge, whose office approved the rates, said Monday that insurance companies are learning what they need to charge to cover health claims and maintain a profit for policies sold to individuals under the federal law since 2013.

The Nebraska increases seem to be in line with national trends for similar policies, he said, many of them covering people who had no insurance or had policies with fewer benefits. “They may have had some pent-up medical needs,” he said.

The department compares a sampling of premiums that will be charged by companies for individual coverage through the federally assisted marketplace by four companies in 2016. Those four — Blue Cross Blue Shield of Nebraska, Coventry Health, UnitedHealthCare of the Midlands and

Medica IC — also will sell policies outside the marketplace, as will about a half-dozen other insurers.

Compared with 2015, the Blue Cross sample averaged an increase of 14.8 percent and the Coventry sample averaged an increase of 21.89 percent.

The sampling included monthly premiums for UnitedHealthCare and Medica IC, but did not show percentage changes for those companies because they did not participate in the marketplace last year.

The largest percentage increase in the sampling was Coventry’s high-coverage policy for a 45-year-old couple in Lincoln with two children, an increase of 31.68 percent to $1,514.28 a month. But the same plan from Blue Cross would cost $1,782.10 per month.

The smallest percentage increase on the list, 12.01 percent, applied to Blue Cross’ plans for a young family of four and for a 30-year-old single female in Omaha.

The most expensive policy on the list was for a 60-year-old couple in Omaha, with high-level Blue Cross coverage, for $2,094.72 a month. The cheapest was a Blue Cross policy costing $166.79 for a 22-year-old tobacco user from Scottsbluff, covering only catastrophic expenses.

Individual plans under the Affordable Care Act have benefits at different levels designated by different metals — bronze for the least benefits, with silver, gold and platinum adding more benefits.

Tom Gilsdorf, Blue Cross’ marketing director, noted that the report’s 2016 increase for Blue Cross is less than the 19.55 percent increase listed in the state’s sampling for 2015. About two-thirds of Nebraskans with individual coverage are Blue Cross clients.

“While any rate increase is difficult to absorb in a family’s budget, the majority of our (marketplace) customers ... receive financial assistance from the government to help pay for their plans,” Gilsdorf said. He said Blue Cross’ “significant market share” for 2014 and 2015 served as a baseline for its 2016 rates.

“While we continue to see a lot of changes, with new carriers entering the market and at least one leaving, stabilization is starting to occur in the Nebraska market, which we view as a positive for consumers,” Gilsdorf said.

Coventry spokesman Rohan Hutchings said Coventry believes its products are “among the most competitive in the marketplace. At the end of the day, what we believe consumers should be aware of is the final price,” rather than the percentage change from one year to the next.

Hutchings said Conventry expects medical costs will grow between 8 percent and 10 percent for individual policy holders, and the phase-out of a government cost-sharing plan will add another 5 to 6 percent.

Greg Bury, a spokesman for Medica in Minnetonka, Minnesota, said that because the company is new to Nebraska, it had to make assumptions about health care costs when it proposed its premiums for 2016. “We don’t have a history of claims” in Nebraska, he said, although general medical cost trends are a factor.

“Our approach to pricing is long-term, so that when we enter a market, we’re there for a long haul and the price reflects that,” Bury said. “We try to avoid huge price increases from one year to the next.”

The company’s premiums in Minnesota for 2016 will increase, on average, less than 10 percent, he said. The company will have better cost information for Nebraska when it proposes 2017 premiums.

The Kaiser Family Foundation, which researches health care costs, said increases in spending on health care have slowed in recent years to 3.6 percent in 2013, the latest year figures are available and the lowest rate since 1961.

But projected increases are due to be higher, the foundation said, estimating 4.7 percent for 2014, 4.4 percent for 2015 and predicting more than 5 percent annually from 2019 to 2014.

The federal government’s latest count showed 63,380 people signed up for individual coverage through the federal marketplace in Nebraska this year, with 89 percent of them receiving tax credits to offset part of their monthly premiums. Others signed up for the same policies but not through the marketplace.

Open enrollment for the individual plans is from Nov. 1 to Jan. 31.