Topics: From the Wires, News

SAN ANTONIO DE JUPROG, Peru (AP) — The Marzano-Velasquez clan lived a simple, pastoral life on a mountain that turned out to hold the world’s largest known copper-and-zinc deposit.

They didn’t expect riches when they and dozens of other Quechua-speaking families sold out to an international mining consortium. But they did believe the open-pit Antamina mine would lift their long-neglected highlands district from poverty, provide steady jobs, decent health care and schools.

Maria Magdalena Velasquez, who could not read or write, signed away her family’s land with a thumbprint in 1999. She and her kin looked on as hired hands dismantled their homes on windswept moorlands before trucking the families down to the adjacent valley — their sheep herds, fields of potatoes, oats and alfalfa abandoned.

“It was a disaster to see,” said Luis Marzano, her eldest son, who was 27 years old at the time. “They burned the roofs and knocked down the walls.”

Twenty years ago, this rugged, mineral-rich Andean nation bent over backward to attract multinational mining companies, and became Latin America’s undisputed economic growth leader.

But the boom has been more of a curse for thousands of peasant families like the Marzanos, who saw the $49,000 they got for their land evaporate as they struggled to adjust to an uprooted life

While colossal copper, gold, lead, tin and silver pits helped Peru’s economy more than double in size, the people in the rural highlands that they dominate have been largely left behind, battling one environmental disaster after another as expanding mines contaminated their water, air and livestock. Promises of steady work and modern benefits remain mostly unfulfilled.

Instead, across Peru’s mine-pocked highlands, lax government regulation and frustration has led to a growing fury of protests. In 2012, security forces shot and killed eight people protesting against two of the country’s biggest mining projects. In April, Peru counted 81 active environmental disputes between mines and neighboring communities, according to the national ombudsman’s office.

Seven involve Antamina, including a tense standoff with villagers led by the Marzanos over what they consider the mine’s continuing encroachment in a major expansion.

Antamina CEO Abraham Chahuan declined repeated requests for an interview. But at his industry’s annual conference in September, he said, “Mining has brought back development, infrastructure, education and dignified work.”

His employer, a consortium made up of Anglo-Australian BHP Billiton, Swiss-owned Glencore/Xstrata, Japan’s Mitsubishi and Canada’s Teck Resources Ltd., earned $1.4 billion in profits from Antamina in the year ending in June 2013.

Half the 30 percent tax on its profits is distributed in its host state. The district of San Marcos, where the mine is located, is the country’s richest — receiving about $50 million a year in royalties. Yet it has no paved highways, no hospital, and no water treatment plant. Nearly one third of toddlers suffer from chronic malnutrition — double the national average.

Beset by graft, San Marcos has cycled through four mayors in four years. The three ex-mayors were charged with inflating public works contracts and giving jobs and kickbacks to relatives. The current mayor is under investigation for the same.

After his ouster for nepotism, one ex-mayor was arrested for allegedly trying to abscond with more than $100,000 in cash.

Two weeks ago, the current mayor was arrested in an SUV with $16,000 in cash whose origin he couldn’t explain. He was freed almost immediately and, four days later, $1.4 million was reported stolen from city hall.

Antamina says it spent $314 million from 2007 to 2013 on infrastructure and “social inclusion” projects in the region — including in pre-natal and dental care, child nutrition and animal husbandry.

Asked why San Marcos residents nevertheless live so poorly, company spokesman Martin Calderon suggested such questions be “directed at the authorities, be they national or regional.”

___

World Bank guidelines established in the 1990s stipulate that in big mining projects such as Antamina, whose initial owners had loans guaranteed by the bank, the people relocated should end up with equal or better living standards.

But that didn’t happen to the Marzanos or their neighbors. The poverty rate in Peru’s mining-scarred highlands remains above 50 percent, double the national average.

Of the Marzano’s nine children, only Luis works at the mine. All are fighting Antamina’s expansion.

On the edge of Antamina’s nearly half mile-deep pit, blasts hurl skyward a blood-orange dust that laces the village of Juprog’s fields with heavy metals, contaminating people, crops and livestock.

“It penetrates your skin, like ashes from a wood fire,” says Lidia Zorilla, a 34-year-old farmer. She sorted potatoes as a dust cloud wafted toward her over a ridge separating the mine from a cluster of red-tiled homes and unfinished latrines.

The cloud paints the sky ochre and mingles with billows of cumulous that drift toward the glacier-strewn Cordillera Blanca range, a favorite of mountaineers.

Antamina’s land and resettlement director, Mirko Chang, said the dust cloud is not toxic.

“It’s earth, just the same as anywhere else,” he said. He said Antamina carefully monitors the air quality — but declined to release those test results. A 2007 environmental impact statement for Antamina’s mine expansion said an anticipated purchase of three square miles of Juprog village would necessitate resettling some families due to the “impact on air quality.”

Villagers say the dust makes them sick.

“We always wake up with coughs, with headaches, chest pains,” says Pedro Cotrina, a 51-year-old potato farmer. His wife and son were among villagers with unacceptably high levels of lead in their blood, documented in tests taken from 2006 to 2009.

Requested by villagers, the tests by government health agencies found elevated levels of lead and cadmium in people’s blood and urine and heavy metals exceeding international standards on their kitchen floors and shelves, and in the livers of their sheep. Cadmium is a known human carcinogen while lead is toxic to almost every organ in the human body, according to the U.S. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry.

Lead levels measured in 2006 exceeded concentrations deemed acceptable by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control in 20 of 74 villagers, including nine children. More than half of the 82 adults and children tested had cadmium levels exceeding acceptable CDC limits.

The polymetal mine — Antamina also produces silver, molybdenum, lead and bismuth — completed a $1.5 billion upgrade in milling capacity two years ago that its CEO says has boosted production by 38 percent and will keep it open until 2029.