Predicting the future is a risky business. Just ask any horse player.

LIBN is blessed with a treasure trove of knowledgeable readers and community leaders who we can call upon for their insights. The response this year was remarkable and came from a wide range of forward-thinking professionals.

In this edition local futurists expressed a primary theme, one of cautious optimism, a feeling that the economy and Long Island have emerged from the Great Recession and are moving in the right direction.

This horse player had his best year in 37 years, eye-witnessing American Pharoah capture the Triple Crown at Belmont Park in June. At odds of 3-5, I didn’t make much money that day. Money isn’t everything; I have a memory of a lifetime.

The last time racing had a Triple Crown champ was 1978, a colt named Affirmed. At the time, the United States had endured the Nixon Watergate scandal and our failure in Vietnam. It was an era that included runaway inflation, a recession and unemployment. There was chaos in the Middle East. Americans would be taken hostage by Islamic extremists.

Sound familiar? At least we’ve moved past disco and leisure suits. It would take until the mid-’80s for boom times to return.

While I’m optimistic about the future, I’m not betting on a rosy outcome just yet. The nation, and by extension, Long Island, needs to make drastic changes.

For example, our experts implied that healthcare is a mess. The Affordable Care Act has increased premiums and put unacceptable limitations on the quality of care.

And I’m all for the ACA, but it has to actually work. It’s not working.

We’ve heard all year how our students are stressed out over standardized testing, promoted by an agenda designed to make millions and not educate anyone. That needs fixing.

It’s also time to address the statewide curriculum. The skills needed by the American workforce are changing. An overhaul of the way we teach is long overdue.

Our experts see continued growth, so long as local governments and others don’t get in the way. We should go full steam ahead into downtown revitalization, especially around the transit hubs. The NIMBYs need to stand down. Progress is needed now; affordable housing needs to be a priority.

And we need jobs, better paying, high-tech jobs that will drive the economic engine forward.

The finish line is in sight. Now is the time to pull together and win.