WASHINGTON, D.C. -- State Assemblywoman Claudia Tenney says House Majority Leader Eric Cantor's upset loss Tuesday to a Tea Party-backed candidate in Virginia's Republican primary is a positive sign for her own campaign.

Tenney, R-New Hartford, has the backing of Tea Party and conservative leaders in her own GOP primary campaign against U.S. Rep. Richard Hanna for the 22nd Congressional District seat.

In a live online Q&A on Syracuse.com today, Tenney said Cantor and Republicans like Hanna have abandoned their conservative principles.

"I think the Cantor upset is critically important as it shows that the Republican Party establishment has to stand up for its core principles -- less government and lower taxes," Tenney said. "The establishment has abandoned those principles and I am living proof that the people are not happy with them. I have run against the establishment in both of my races for Assembly."

Tenney says she is challenging Hanna, R-Barneveld, in the June 24 Republican primary because he strayed from those principles during two terms in Congress. Hanna has agreed to participate in a live online Q&A in the same format on Syracuse.com from 12:30 to 1:30 p.m. Monday.

Asked about her strategy to pull off an upset similar to Dave Brat's in Virginia, Tenney said she plans to appear "in front of as many voters as possible so the voters know that there is a true constitutional conservative running and they have a choice against the third-most liberal member of Congress who described conservatives as angry extremists -- channeling Cuomo's words -- about conservatives having no place in New York."

In a wide-ranging online discussion, Tenney took on Republicans and Democrats, repeating some of her strong conservative views.

See full transcript of online Q&A discussion with Claudia Tenney

When asked if she would support impeaching President Barack Obama over the Benghazi embassy attack and other issues, Tenney said she would not rule out the possibility.

"I do not think it is inappropriate to consider impeachment if it is relevant when it comes to Obama's lawless presidency," Tenney said. " At the very least, the House should use its powers to limit any funding to programs that further the unconstitutional actions of the executive."

Here's a recap of what Tenney had to say:



On the federal debt and deficit



Tenney lashed out at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, which has backed Hanna, and traditionally backs Republican candidates for Congress. Hanna and the Chamber opposed efforts to tie an increase in the federal debt limit to other issues, such as the repeal of the Affordable Care Act.

"Hanna is supported by the U.S. Chamber, which sounds like a business organization, but in fact supports huge 'crony' capitalist measures," Tenney said. "Nearly 90 percent of the jobs created in this country are from small businesses and we need to stop spending billions in taxpayer money to help mega corporations over the small businesses struggling against the weight of excessive taxation, regulation and a non-free market economy."

Why the Oneida Indian Nation opposes her candidacy

Tenney said the Oneida Indian Nation decided to donate money to a Super PAC opposed to her campaign because of her opposition to a gaming deal with the state and her criticism of Oneida Representative Ray Halbritter, CEO of Turning Stone Resort Casino.

"Halbritter is attacking me because I have publicly exposed that he is a fraudulent dictator and has used Washington lobbyists, corrupt casino interests and weak politicians to prop up an illegal empire at the expense of the local taxpayers and the genuine Oneida Indians," Tenney said.

Asked if she would support an effort to shut down the Turning Stone casino, Tenney said that's not her goal. She wants the Oneidas to pay taxes.

Responding to TV ads that claim she voted to raise taxes

"The attack ads are completely untrue," Tenney said. " I have never voted to increase taxes. I voted against the liberal budget proposed by (Gov.) Cuomo and approved by Speaker Silver."

She called legislation for a property tax exemption "nothing more than a campaign gimmick by Cuomo, which was panned by all credible commentators."

On gun control

Asked by a mother about the need for more gun control, rather than less, Tenney said she sees no need for more laws.

"More gun control only helps the illegal gun owners and will result in more shootings," Tenney said. "The states with the toughest gun control laws have the worst illegal gun crimes."

The 22nd Congressional District covers all of Chenango, Cortland, Madison and Oneida counties and part of Broome, Herkimer, Oswego and Tioga counties.

Contact Washington Correspondent Mark Weiner at mweiner@syracuse.com or 571-970-3751. Follow him on Twitter @MarkWeinerDC