The CWA argues in a new video that Gov. Chris Christie is shirking his responsibilities and the law by shorting payments to the public workers pension systems. (Photo: Screen grab from CWA video)

The Discovery Channel has made big waves with its promotion of "Shark Week" over the past few years, and we've all glommed onto it in one way or another.

Shark photo galleries and "Sharknado" movies have all captured our attention.

But will "Shirk Week" have the same affect?

The New Jersey chapter of the Communications Workers of America has put out a video, timed to Shark Week this week, ripping Gov. Chris Christie and what they say is his "breaking his word" and "breaking the law in the process."

Filled with ominous, "Jaws"-like music and captions with shark bites out of them, the video seeks to fillet the governor for shorting payments into the state's public workers pension systems and creating a commission to study the state's pension shortfall. That shirking of the payments, the CWA argues, breaks the pension reform law Christie signed.

""New Jersey's pension doesn't need a commission or study stocked with a handful of super-wealthy people unlikely to have any clue as to what it means to live on a fixed-income at retirement," Hetty Rosenstein, CWA area director, said in a statement. "The answer is simple: New Jersey's pension needs to be fully funded, as promised and required by law."

The administration fired back.

"What nonsense. They're just deluding themselves about the problem," Christie spokesman Michael Drewniak said in an email. "The selfishness and tone-deaf attitude is stunning when you consider the consequences of inaction."

Drewniak also pointed out that the commission included a two-time state Democratic Party chairman, Tom Byrne, and some renowned "in the fields of actuarial sciences."

Christie announced earlier this year that a significant shortfall in tax revenue was forcing him to cut the pension payments for the 2014 fiscal year, which ended June 30, and the 2015 fiscal year, which began July 1.

Public workers unions sued, but a Superior Court judge ruled Christie had the ability to cut the pension in the 2014 fiscal year. She said the issue of the 2015 pension payment could be revisited.

Drewniak also pointed out that Christie has contributed more than his predecessors to the public pension systems. Previous governors had ignored payments to the system over the past two decades.

Here's the video:

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/VfIsBc