Cigna Announces Private Exchanges, Latest In Growing Trend

The programs are offered for the first time this year in Atlanta, Dallas, Washington D.C. and San Francisco. It started with small employers in those regions, but Cigna plans to expand this year to larger employers and to other markets.

Cigna Corp. said Tuesday it has launched its first proprietary private health insurance exchanges, setting up employer-based marketplaces to sell coverage to workers in four major metropolitan regions.

Some private exchanges are operated by brokers or consultants, such as Aon Hewitt, which offer health plans from a variety of insurers. The Cigna announcement Tuesday is different.

The Bloomfield health insurer has a proprietary relationship with each of the employers to be the only insurer offering health plans to workers at those companies. The workers typically have more choices of medical coverage than they would in an ordinary employer-insurer arrangement — such as four options instead of one or two, said Cigna spokesman Joe Mondy.

Employers have different options for how they choose to fund medical coverage for workers — and what share of the costs the employer will pay compared with the worker, Mondy said.

"Cigna's goal is to offer a full range of plan choices to employers, and employees and their families as they become more actively involved in their health and benefit choices," Dave Guilmette, president of Cigna's global employer segment, said in a prepared statement.

A private health insurance exchange is different from the public exchanges that got a lot of attention leading up to the start of the year. Public health exchanges were created by the Affordable Care Act and allow people earning up to 400 percent of the federal poverty level to get a tax credit or subsidy.

Private exchanges are increasingly common as employers look to control health care costs for workers. The health-care consulting firm Accenture released research last year that said "private health insurance exchanges will rapidly upend insurance purchasing for many of the 170 million people who receive benefits through their employer." Accenture estimated that the number of people who buy coverage on private exchanges will increase from about 1 million this year to about 30 million by 2017.

In September 2013, the global benefits business Aon Hewitt announced that 18 large employers — including Walgreens, Sears Holdings and Darden Restaurants, which owns Olive Garden and Red Lobster — offered health benefits last fall through the Aon Hewitt Corporate Health Exchange, the nation's largest multi-insurer private health care exchange.

Aon Hewitt estimated more than 600,000 U.S. employees and their family members would be covered through plans offered by the company's exchange. Worker enrollment tripled this year over 2013, according to Aon Hewitt.

In Cigna's proprietary private exchanges, workers also can buy other types of insurance, such as dental, pharmacy, vision, life/accident and disability coverage.

In addition to proprietary private exchanges, Cigna has participated in other private exchanges run by brokers or benefit consultants since 2012. Cigna participates in a number of private exchanges.