Healio.com/Family Medicine presents the latest news in practice management, including ACA changes, OxyContin approvals and genome sequencing.

NIH grants millions to research incorporation of DNA sequencing into EHR

The National Human Genome Research Institute of the NIH has granted 12 awards to support research that focuses on combining genomic information and electronic health records. The grants, which are representing the third phase of the eMERGE program, will focus on the medical effects caused by rare genomic variants in approximately 100 clinically relevant genes, according to the release. Read more.

New ACA rule aims to protect patients from sex, disability discrimination

The HHS has announced a proposed rule to modify discrimination provisions of the Affordable Care Act, which would help provide equal access to health care and coverage to some of the nation’s most vulnerable populations. The rule would extend to ban all bases of discrimination. Discrimination based on gender identity would be specifically mentioned, requiring providers to treat patients consistently with their gender identity. Read more.

FDA approves OxyContin for use in adolescents

The FDA has approved the use of OxyContin (oxycodone, Purdue Pharma) for pain management in adolescents aged 11 to 16 years. The new approval is intended for children needing long-term pain management, such as cancer and extensive trauma or surgeries that require round-the-clock care. Read more.

NIH launches study to evaluate RSV in healthy adults

The NIH has announced plans for its National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases to conduct a pilot study to evaluate how respiratory syncytial virus infection develops in adults, and how it affects immune system responses. The study aims to provide insight on how to best develop and test antivirals and vaccines that will help to combat the disease. Read more.

HHS to award $169 million to fund primary health care service centers

The HHS has announced that an additional $169 million in Affordable Care Act funding will be distributed to 266 new community health care centers across the nation. The HHS estimates that more than 1.2 million added patients will receive health care services from these new centers. Read more.