Can the 1% really pay for “free stuff” for everybody else?

For years, the idea that higher taxes on the rich could pay for renewed social spending was a punchline. Republicans have thought it lunacy to ask “job creators” to pay more; until Obamacare, Democrats gave up on new programs after the 1960s. The common assumption was that soaking the rich was a feel-good move that wouldn’t raise any real dough.

But it’s different now.

WSJ Opinion: The Supply-Side Solution (3:20) Manhattan Institute Senior Fellow Jason Riley explains why increasing taxes doesn't help the economy. Photo credit: Getty Images.

Maybe the first serious shot at a political economics of redistribution came in a provocative New York Times piece last week, arguing that relatively modest tax increases on the top 0.1% to 10% of all earners actually can pay for spending promises made, mostly, by Democratic candidates for president.

You may not be talking about this piece — yet. But you’ll talk about what’s in it for the next year.

Want every student to have free access to state universities? It would cost $47 billion, covered by the $55 billion the Times says boosting taxes on the 115,000 highest-income households to 40% of their income would raise in its first year. Raise taxes on the top 1% of earners from about 33% to 40%, and you’d collect $157 billion the first year, the Times calculates.

Boost taxes by about 5 percentage points on 95th to 99th percentile households, bringing their federal tax bill to 30% of income from 25%, and you’d raise the $86 billion needed to repeal the Cadillac tax on the most-expensive employee health plans, set to take effect in 2018.

The Times piece is certainly incomplete. The experts it quotes run the ideological gamut from Joseph Stiglitz, the Nobel-winning Columbia economist, to Thomas Piketty, the French economist who shares Stiglitz’s focus on income inequality. In other words, it spans no real spectrum of thought at all. While its form was studiously objective, the narrowness of the sourcing made it read like an op-ed.

Yet reporter Patricia Cohen asks exactly the right question — and gives a preliminary look at an argument for a society pursuing a different, more bottom-up path to building economic value. It’s a discussion Occupy Wall Street started, but it has lacked analytical meat on its ideological bones.

Debate causation if you like, but we know what 28 years of emphasizing cuts in top-bracket tax rates and minimal taxes on capital has coincided with: More of the middle-income stagnation that began in the 1970s, and massive inflation in luxury assets like art and Columbia University educations. (Et tu, Dr. Stiglitz?). Plus the odd financial crisis caused by asset inflation in housing or commercial real estate, and bad decisions by income-strapped consumers who borrowed too heavily to keep up.

Running the question past business economists produced a few different answers — and some pointed critiques.

The big problem is that the Times’s sunny picture assumes higher taxes have no effect on economic activity, said Richard Moody, chief economist at Birmingham, Ala.-based Regions Financial. Those big first-year returns on tax hikes would tail off later as consumers and entrepreneurs adjust their plans, he said.

“Would it sink the ship? No. Would it make the ship go slower? Probably,” says Moody, who’s not cultivated an image as a partisan economist. “They should reform the tax code. Simply raising rates on the highest earners [under] the current tax code will get you at best a short-term increase in revenue.”

Ask conservative Mike Englund of Action Economics and you’ll get a stronger answer. Higher taxes would bring price hikes at Taco Bells owned by the working affluent, who build taxes into the cost of chalupas, and higher rates for services like medical care provided by the doctors that Cohen treats as rich, he says. And over time, markets will get distorted as capital seeks tax shelters.

“High-income people who pay the tax on ‘the rich’ don’t think they are rich,” Englund says. “They see themselves as upper-middle class, and spend nearly all of their time working.”

But this back-and-forth cries out for tougher, less-offhand analysis by non-economists, work the Times piece begins.

If Republicans, for example, think raising taxes always cramps activity, how do they explain the acceleration of consumer spending growth after the Republican Congress let President Barack Obama’s payroll-tax holiday expire in 2013? And if Democrats insist that every expansion of social spending will pay for itself — see Hillary Clinton’s argument that universal pre-K is not subsidized day care but very, very early investment in future workers — how do they seriously propose to measure that? Or prove it?

Do some of that, and we can have a presidential campaign worth listening to, after we stop laughing at Donald Trump’s latest idiocy or the can-you-top-this silliness of Republican tax-cut plans that would cost anywhere from $1 trillion to $12 trillion over 10 years but “forget” to cut spending.

Would changing policy to prioritize middle-income workers over “job creators” (as the Federal Reserve is doing) produce better results? More than anything else, that’s what 2016’s election’s about.

More from MarketWatch