Buy Photo Dawn Ryan, who with her husband Joe, had twins Emma and Abby in December 2013 at Jersey Shore University Medical Center in Neptune, visits the new neonatal intensive care unit with Dr. Kenneth Sable, left, the hospital's president. (Photo: FILE PHOTO)Buy Photo

Aetna will sell a new insurance plan to employers beginning July 1 that will offer lower prices to Monmouth and Ocean County consumers who use Meridian Health's hospitals and doctors, the two companies said Wednesday.

Company executives said the partnership will allow them to provide patient care more efficiently.

"It’s really about how health care is changing, and we want to hopefully be a part of that change," said Patrick Young, executive vice president of Meridian.

Wall-based Meridian is the Shore's biggest employer. It owns Jersey Shore University Medical Center in Neptune, Bayshore Community Hospital in Holmdel, Riverview Medical Center in Red Bank, Ocean Medical Center in Brick and Southern Ocean Medical Center in Stafford. It also has 1,300 doctors who are admitted to practice at some of its hospitals.

YOUR TURN: Would you be willing to give up your doctor if you could save money? Comment on this story and like us on Facebook to join the conversation.

The agreement is part of a health care landscape that is changing fast. New Jersey insurers are partnering with hospitals and doctors, creating so-called tiered networks. Their customers who use Tier 1 health care providers have lower out-of-pocket costs. Consumers can visit Tier 2 providers, but they would pay more.

They have touted it as a way to stem the tide of rising health care costs and improve the health of their customers. But it hasn't been universally embraced, particularly among Tier 2 hospitals that fear customers will gravitate to the lowest prices.

Most notably: Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey, the state's biggest health insurer, introduced a tiered-network plan called Omnia for 2016, which created upheaval. Lawmakers in Trenton called hearings, and CentraState Healthcare System and other hospitals that were left out of the top tier filed lawsuits.

Winners and losers

As the model takes hold, it could leave winners and losers. Providers in Tier 2 would be on the outside looking in and could be forced to join a bigger health care system, said Linda Schwimmer, president and chief executive officer of New Jersey Health Care Quality Institute, a research group.

But it also could produce what Obamacare intended, she said. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act is trying to put the brakes on costs that in the 2000s rose by double-digits each year.

"I think this is the way things are going," Schwimmer said. "We're seeing more and more a willingness in the marketplace to trade away broader choice for a lower price."

The plans are finding support among consumers who are searching for ways to save money. Businesses have said rising health insurance costs are their biggest concern and they can't sustain huge increases each year, said Michele Siekerka, president and chief executive officer of the New Jersey Business and Industry Association, a business lobby group.

The idea of tiered networks "is a really healthy discussion everyone is having," she said.

Getting attention

"They definitely are getting the attention of consumers," Toby Stark, a Tinton Falls health insurance broker and president-elect of the New Jersey Association of Health Underwriters trade group. "There have been a lot of people attracted to the tiered plans."

The equation for health care providers is simple: They would be reimbursed less by insurers, but would get more business

More and more, Meridian is finding itself in the top tier of hospitals at the Shore. Meridian – along with Barnabas Health's hospitals – is in Horizon's Omnia network. And it is the Tier 1 provider for AmeriHealth New Jersey's Advantage plans that the insurer began selling to businesses and individuals last year.

The plan with Aetna is called Aetna Whole Health - Meridian Health. A customer, for example, would have a $10 co-payment to see a primary care doctor in Tier 1, compared with a $25 co-payment to see a primary care doctor in Tier 2.

Young said the companies expect about 4,000 members in Monmouth and Ocean counties will sign up in 2016. Raritan Bay Medical Center's hospitals in Middlesex County, which recently finalized a merger with Meridian, aren't included.

Michael L. Diamond; 732-643-4038; mdiamond@gannettnj.com

Watch the video to find out what's next for Meridian Health.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Hackensack University Health Network and Meridian Health hold a press conference at the East Brunswick Hilton to announce a merger of the two health companies. STAFF VIDEO BY MARK R. SULLIVAN

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1X394QQ