In three weeks, millions of the nation's uninsured will be able to go online and shop for health insurance.

It will mark the most visible implementation of the much debated Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act since it was signed into law three years ago.

Five Louisiana companies have asked to offer dozens of plans to Louisiana residents looking for coverage in the online marketplace, often called an "exchange." But how much consumers will be asked to pay remains to be seen.

To get the word out, federally funded groups across Louisiana say they are preparing to storm the state with trained counselors who can help residents enroll beginning Oct. 1, when the exchanges launch.

Insurance companies Humana, Coventry, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Louisiana, Vantage and a new organization, Louisiana Health Cooperative, have applied to participate in Louisiana's marketplace and submitted as many as 90 proposed plans to the state Department of Insurance, officials said this week.

Story by

Katherine Sayre and Rebecca Catalanello

People in every state have the opportunity to enroll through March for coverage in 2014. The mandate requiring individuals to be insured goes into effect Jan. 1.

In November, Louisiana health officials declined to create a state-run exchange, leaving it to the federal government to operate a marketplace for Louisiana residents.

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has said it plans to finalize agreements with insurers and release rates later this month.

About 1 in 5 people in Louisiana are uninsured. But people already covered can also turn to the marketplace for options. The Urban Institute estimated that as many as 317,000 would participate in Louisiana's exchange, with more than 209,000 -- or about two-thirds of them -- qualifying for subsidies.

Five groups have applied to participate in Louisiana's federally operated health insurance exchange: - Humana

- Coventry

- Blue Cross Blue Shield

- Vantage

- Louisiana Health Cooperative

HumanaCoventryBlue Cross Blue ShieldVantageLouisiana Health Cooperative

How it will work

The health reform law established four levels of coverage, allowing consumers to compare plans. The levels -- bronze, silver, gold and platinum -- are based on the percentage of costs covered by the insurance plan: 60 percent, 70 percent, 80 percent and 90 percent. Although individuals are required to be covered next year, there are many exceptions.

Those with household incomes of 100 percent to 400 percent of the federal poverty level will qualify for subsidies to help offset the cost of required insurance coverage, including people who are currently insured. That's $11,490 to $45,960 per year for a single person and $23,550 to $94,200 for a family of four.



While the federal Department of Health and Human Services has authority over Louisiana's exchange, the state Department of Insurance is reviewing and must approve the proposed plans.

Insurance Commissioner Jim Donelon said he welcomes the addition of the Louisiana Health Cooperative to the marketplace. The cooperative is a new kind of non-profit, member-directed insurer created under the health reform law.

"We have a desperate need for more competition in our health insurance market," Donelon said.

In 2005, Donelon said, Blue Cross Blue Shield, the major player in the state, held 45 percent of the market. Today, the company's market share is 75 percent.

He said that isn't meant to diminish Blue Cross Blue Shield, a quality company with a good record. But more options are needed.

"My top priority in the insurance marketplace would be to get more competition any way I can in the health insurance arena," Donelon said.

While some government officials promote the idea of competition on the exchanges, insurance companies have calculated whether it's worth it to join in. Some companies have opted to sit out, at least for now. United Healthcare, which the Department of Insurance says has more than 10 percent of Louisiana's market, did not apply to the exchange.

Donelon said he predicts the process of rolling out the exchange in Louisiana will go smoothly and on-time. "I think there will be a gradual uptake from shoppers, and it will become more and more popular as people learn they may qualify for a tax credit or a subsidy and the only way to access that is to buy your coverage through the exchange," he said.

His major concern, he said, will be how shoppers navigate the complicated nuances of the law, such as the formulas for whether someone qualified for a subsidy or a tax credit.

"The number one concern I have is the complexity of the choices that consumers will have to make, that's my primary concern at this point," Donelon said.

Trying to make it easy

Four organizations in the state were granted federal money to train and deploy people able to give eligible residents the in-person assistance they may need to enroll.



Southern United Neighborhoods in New Orleans, Martin Luther King Health Center in Shreveport, Southwest Louisiana Area Health Education Center in Lafayette and Capital Area Agency on Aging District II in Baton Rouge received nearly $1.8 million between them from the so-called "Navigator Grant" program.

Margaret "Bootsie" Durand, executive director of the Southwest Louisiana Education Center, which received nearly $1.1 million, said her agency plans to deploy people across the state and has a goal of holding on-site presentations in every community of more than 5,000 people.

"Navigators will carry laptops with printers and we'll enroll people on-site," she said.

But with only weeks to go before the enrollment period begins, such organizations are up against a tight deadline. On Thursday, Durand said she wasn't ready yet to even say how many boots-on-the-ground folks her organization would employ using the grant funds.

Key dates under the health reform law: Oct. 1: Health insurance marketplace open enrollment begins

Jan. 1: Health coverage begins

March 31: Open enrollment ends

The marketplace will be accessible at Health insurance marketplace open enrollment beginsHealth coverage beginsOpen enrollment endsThe marketplace will be accessible at www.healthcare.gov

Michael Bertaut, healthcare economist and exchange coordinator for Blue Cross Blue Shield of Louisiana, said his firm has spent tens of millions of dollars over the past five years preparing to take part in the exchange, despite any concerns about the uncertainty of a new marketplace. He said the company considered it "almost business malpractice" not to participate. Blue Cross Blue Shield of Louisiana is a nonprofit organization.

"We think that it would it be an opportunity that we just can't pass up because we have a lot of customers, hundreds of thousands of customers, who could potentially benefit from the marketplace, from shopping with federal subsidies," Bertaut said.

He said consumers will be offered Blue plans on the exchange statewide, in every zip code, with an average of five to 10 plans on the table, or as many as 20 plans in some areas.

Vantage is a doctor-owned plan based in Monroe that has focused on northeast Louisiana. Humana and Coventry, which was recently acquired by Aetna, operate across the state on a smaller scale than Blue Cross Blue Shield.

The Louisiana Health Cooperative was formed by Ochsner Health System and other business entities with a $65 million loan from the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. More than half of its governing board will be made up of members, a co-op spokesman said.

"We're a non-profit health plan, meaning any revenues over and above costs will go back into our health plan to hopefully help keep our members costs down as well as in programs to keep our members well" through preventive care, spokesman Jim Pittman said.

The cooperative is headed by Republican state Rep. Greg Cromer, chairman of the House insurance committee.



Pittman said the cooperative has been putting together a network of hospitals and doctors and using grassroots efforts through meetings and social media to get word out about the co-op.

Leaders of the organization met last month over lunch with members of Jeremiah Group, a coalition of the city's religious congregations, at Christian Unity Baptist Church. Tanzania Jones, community outreach coordinator for the co-op, told pastors about the online marketplace and encouraged them to pass the word on to their uninsured congregants.

"At some point in our lives, this will be as mainstream as Medicare," Jones said.

Under the law, the U.S. Office of Personnel Management is tasked with taking steps to ensure competition on the exchanges by contracting with private insurers to offer two nation-wide plans. Donelon said in Louisiana, one of the national plans is being offered through Blue Cross Blue Shield.

An exchange for small businesses is also slated to open in October. Only businesses with 50 or fewer employees have the option to buy insurance on the exchange in the first year. The Obama administration delayed to 2015 a mandate requiring businesses with 50 or more employees to offer affordable coverage or pay penalties.

Beginning next year, plans must cover what the law deems essential benefits: ambulatory care, emergency service, hospitalization, maternity and newborn care, mental health and substance abuse services, prescription drugs, rehabilitation, lab tests, preventive care and pediatric care.