The coalition of voters responsible for President Obama's 2012 re-election did not show up at polling booths around the country on Tuesday. Mark Wilson/Getty Images

The “Coalition of the Ascendant” crashed and burned on Tuesday. Two years ago, bolstered by black, Latino and single female voters, President Barack Obama swept into history as the only president to win reelection with fewer white votes than his opponent. At the time, party leaders and political analysts also saw the emergence of a powerful voting bloc, one Democrats could use to trump Republican strength among older white voters ahead of a incredibly tough 2014 midterm election cycle. But a majority of that diverse coalition - disillusioned with Obama over his handling of immigration, the economy, the Affordable Care Act and threats like the deadly Ebola virus - never showed up at the polls Tuesday, paving the way for a GOP juggernaut. In a surprisingly dominant performance, Republicans seized control of the Senate, tightened their grip on the House and captured the lion’s share of contested governor’s races, leaving angry, frustrated Democrats pointing fingers at the White House for alienating their promising new constituency.

[READ: Midterm Turnout Decreased in All but 12 States]

White House senior adviser Dan Pfeiffer seemed to acknowledge, albeit inadvertently, that the coalition his boss put together might not work without a Democratic presidential nominee on Tuesday's ticket.

“There’s basically two Americas — there’s midterm America and there’s presidential-year America,” Pfeiffer told the Washington Post in a lengthy post-mortem analyzing the Democrats’ Senate defeat, published Wednesday. “They’re almost apples and oranges. The question was, could Obama voters become Democratic voters?”

The answer, obviously, was a resounding no. But even before the Midterm Massacre, analysts predicted Democrats, forced to defend Senate seats in Republican territory without a presidential campaign to draw voters, faced long odds even before the first ballot was cast.

NBC News’ exit polls confirm the coalition's wreckage: only about 40 percent of all eligible persons voted in yesterday’s midterm elections. Jocelyn Kiley, Pew Research Center’s associate director for research, says those who voted yesterday skewed older and white - similar to the electorate that gave Republicans control of the House in 2010 and established the Tea Party as a political force.

“Young voters and nonwhite voters didn’t go to the polls at the same rate” as they did when Obama was on the ballot, Kiley says, although she noted Democrats performed well among women voters. Midterm elections, she said, “tend to favor groups that are more politically engaged year round. This electorate looks a lot like the 2010 electorate. What it didn’t look like is the 2012 electorate.”

[ALSO: Obama's Unpopularity Affected Democrats in Midterm Elections]

Kiley says she wasn’t surprised at the turnout demographics compared to 2012, and one Pew survey of people intending to sit out the election - released in late October -- supports that notion. The average “nonvoter,” the survey predicted, would be a young person of color who earns less than $30,000, has a positive view of government programs and is more likely to need health care, a custom fit for the Democrats’ message.

Darrell M. West, vice president of the Brookings Institute’s Department of Governance Studies, says members of the Obama coalition are all less likely to vote in midterm elections because they feel less urgency about the nation’s problems, more apathetic and cynical about the political system - and far less enthusiastic about a battered, imperfect president who’s been in office for nearly six years. Latinos in particular, he says, were turned off by the stalemate over immigration reform and Obama's broken promises to get something done.

Though the economy’s rebounded from its recession meltdown, West says, not everyone’s feeling good about it and wages are essentially stagnant, so “the president has gotten a lot less credit for that.” Meanwhile, he said, the rocky health care rollout, stymied progress on the immigration conundrum and the perception the world is in crisis have stained Obama’s once-pristine, superstar image. Further, Republicans fielded disciplined, gaffe-averse candidates - including several high-profile women - who have largely kept quiet on hot-button issues like abortion and gun control, West said. That stood in marked contrast to some of the GOP candidates who ran for Congress in the 2012 elections.

“[Obama coalition] voters are not motivated to vote because things aren’t going well, the president is unpopular and people were not as scared of the Republicans this year as they were two years ago,” West said, adding that new GOP-led voter ID laws capitalized on deep-seated apathy. “People perceived that it would be more difficult to vote, and that was enough to keep them from voting.”

Benton Strong, associate director of the Center for American Progress, agrees that Obama's winning coalition never achieved full liftoff yesterday, but he disputes the notion that it’s in flames on the political runway. He points to a number of successful, progressive ballot measures - several in the GOP's conservative, southern bastions - as proof that the ideals embodied in that coalition are alive and well, including a gun control measure in Washington and initiatives to raise the state minimum wage.

[MORE: Obama Coalition-Building Again, This Time on Ebola ]

“The minimum wage passed in five states - and we’re not talking about Oregon or Washington. We’re talking about Nebraska, South Carolina, Arkansas,” he says. “Is the Obama coalition falling apart? No, that’s what midterm elections look like. They’re older, whiter.”

The challenge for Democrats, he says, is “how to get the electorate to remain the same election after election. We always knew [2014] would be challenging. But one of the biggest challenges is retaining the kind of participation that makes elections reflective of the [demographics] of the country.”

It's a challenge the Democrats have two years in the political wilderness to figure out how to solve.