Target CFO John Mulligan testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee Feb. 4. Getty Images

Recent data breaches at Target and other retailers have lawmakers wondering whether companies are doing enough to safeguard sensitive consumer information.

But Washington doesn’t seem quite ready to force retailers’ hands.

This week, congressional committees are holding four different hearings on issues related to data security. Yet despite growing concern, Congress has yet to find agreement on national data-security legislation.

Areas of common ground seem to be emerging, including the need for prompt disclosure by companies when security for customer data has been breached. Both Democrats and Republicans backed the notion that retailers notify consumers promptly when their data has been compromised. The Obama administration has previously proposed federal notification requirements.

At a hearing Tuesday, Sen. Mike Lee (R., Utah) said that while he believed the marketplace can create incentives for retailers to protect consumer data, such a process can only work if consumers are kept informed.

“They have to receive notification in order to take the steps they need to take to protect their identity. And they also need notification so that they can decide where to take their business,” Sen. Lee said during a Senate Judiciary Committee hearing Tuesday.

Federal notification also could have an upside for the business community if it pre-empts 46 state laws that impose an array of notification requirements.

After the issue of notification, things get trickier. Among the key questions in the debate is whether the federal government should impose national data-security standards on companies and organizations that handle sensitive consumer information.

Sen. Al Franken (D., Minn.) expressed concern at Tuesday’s hearing that there’s no law “setting out clear security standards that merchants and data brokers need to meet.”

Republicans countered with concerns that rigid federal data-security standards could impose burdens on businesses and quickly become outdated, given the rapid evolution of technology and tactics by hackers.

“I do not believe that we can solve this whole problem by codifying detailed, technical standards or with overly cumbersome mandates,” Rep. Lee Terry (R., Neb.) said during a House Energy and Commerce subcommittee hearing Wednesday. “Flexibility, quickness and nimbleness are all attributes that are absolutely necessary in cybersecurity but run contrary to government’ abilities.”

Another key issue in this week’s hearings centers on the role of the Federal Trade Commission in policing corporate data-security practices. The FTC has brought about 50 data-security cases alleging companies haven’t taken appropriate steps to secure consumer information.

Nearly all of the FTC cases have resulted in out-of-court settlements in which the companies pledge to adopt additional safeguards. The commission’s authority, however, is being challenged in court, including in a closely watched case involving the hotel chain Wyndham Worldwide Corp., which has argued that it’s inappropriate for the FTC to take action against a business victimized by hacking.

FTC Chairwoman Edith Ramirez, who testified in two of this week’s hearings, said the commission doesn’t require that companies have perfect security. “The mere fact that a breach occurred does not mean that a company has violated the law,” she said. But a company’s data security measures “must be reasonable in light of the sensitivity and volume of consumer information it holds,” she said.

Ms. Ramirez called on Congress to give the FTC new powers in the data-security area, including the authority to write new regulations. She also said the agency could be more effective if it could impose civil penalties on companies that adopt unreasonable data-security practices.

Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D., Mass.) voiced strong support for the FTC at a Senate Banking subcommittee hearing on Monday, saying the commission’s limited enforcement authority was “a real problem.”

“Data security problems aren’t going to go away on their own, so Congress really needs to consider whether to strengthen the FTC’s hand,” she said.

Target, for its part, denied that its data-security practices were to blame for the holiday data breach that affected tens of millions of customers. Target Chief Financial Officer John Mulligan said during Tuesday’s hearing that his company invested hundreds of millions of dollars on data security and constantly assessed its protections.

The company received strong backing from Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse (D., R.I.), who said the company had robust IT and security practices. “When a company like that can be hacked without knowing it, the wrong reaction is to say that, well, Target must have done something wrong,” he said.

Follow @wsjwashington on Twitter