­­— Seeking to exploit his advantage over Gov. Rick Scott among women voters, Charlie Crist is launching a new ad attacking Scott as “wrong every single time” on women’s rights and abortion rights, backed by an endorsement from the Planned Parenthood PAC.

The ad, titled “Extreme,” accuses Scott of opposing abortion rights, failing to back equal pay for women and undercutting women’s health care, including contraception coverage.

Its statements about Scott’s issue positions on abortion are accurate, though some other claims are questionable. But Crist’s accusations could also raise questions about his own mixed history on the issue.

The ad features several women, including lawyer and former Democratic political operative Ghada Skaff of Tampa, St. Petersburg psychologist Angela Horvath and other Crist supporters stating the accusations.

The text:

Skaff: “Rick Scott wants to take away a woman’s right to choose.”

Libby Burke: “He wants to overturn Roe v. Wade.”

Migdalia Beronda: “And restrict access to abortions ... ”

Skaff: “Even for victims of rape and incest.”

Monica Harris: “He signed laws that require mandatory ultrasounds.”

Horvath: “And thinks employers should be able to deny women coverage for birth control.”

Dayana Rincon: “Rick Scott even refused to support new laws for equal pay.”

Horvath: “When it comes to doing what’s right for Florida women ... “

Rincon: “Rick Scott has been wrong every single time.”

Analysis

The ad is designed to exploit the partisan “gender gap.”

In a recent poll by Mason-Dixon Polling & Research for the Florida Press Association and others, for example, Scott won 49 to 37 percent among men, while Crist won 44 to 37 percent among women, who make up a growing majority of Florida voters.

A recent national poll and focus group study by prominent GOP strategists said the party is failing to heal the gender gap, and women tend to view the party as “intolerant,” “lacking in compassion” and “stuck in the past.”

It’s true that Scott has advocated repeal of the Roe v. Wade Supreme Court decision and signed a bill, previously vetoed by Crist, requiring that women undergo and pay for an ultrasound procedure before having an abortion.

Scott also signed a law prohibiting abortions after “fetal viability,” the point at which a fetus can live outside the womb, usually considered to be about 24 weeks. That replaces the previous time limit, the end of the second trimester of pregnancy, or 27 weeks.

The bill also allowed no exceptions other than danger of death or major disability to the mother, and specifically prohibited any exception for her emotional or mental health. At least two legislators, Reps. Dennis Baxley, R-Ocala, who co-sponsored the bill, and Amanda Murphy, D-New Port Richey, who opposed it, said they understood that meant no rape or incest exceptions.

The Crist campaign’s basis for saying Scott “thinks employers should be able to deny women coverage for birth control” is a 2012 lawsuit by seven states, including Florida, against a requirement in the Affordable Care Act that health insurance cover contraception with no co-pay, as a preventive measure.

Attorney General Pam Bondi, who’s elected and doesn’t work for Scott, joined that suit on behalf of Florida. Scott opposed the Affordable Care Act and is a political ally of Bondi, but his name wasn’t on the lawsuit.

To back the claim that Scott “refused to support new laws for equal pay” for women, the Crist campaign cited the Scott campaign’s response to Crist’s promise to issue an executive order requiring equal pay in state government and for state contractors.

Five legislators backing Scott, all men, called it “dangerous” for Crist to suggest making policy by executive action instead of legislation. They didn’t advocate any equal pay measures, however.

The Scott campaign gave no direct response when asked about the ad’s accusations.

Instead, it released a Web ad Wednesday of Crist in the past proclaiming himself “pro-life” and saying in speeches that he backed a ban on “partial-birth” abortions and a law requiring parental notification for minors to get abortions.

Crist proclaimed himself “pro-choice” early in his political career and “pro-life” at other times, apparently depending at least in part on the political circumstances. He declared himself pro-life, for example, during his 2006 Republican primary campaign against Tom Gallagher, when each claimed to be the most conservative.

Crist has also said, however, that he has consistently preferred to avoid government regulation of reproductive and other medical issues even while opposing abortion personally.

“I’d rather change hearts than change the law,” he has said. He cites actions of his, including blocking an abortion waiting period bill while in the Senate early in his career, and the ultrasound veto.

“He personally has his own religious beliefs, but he doesn’t believe the government should interfere in a woman’s right to choose,” Crist’s running mate Annette Taddeo said on the subject in a conference call with reporters.

Planned Parenthood PAC Treasurer Barbara Zdravecky, asked to square the group’s endorsement with Crist’s past, said the pro-choice and pro-life labels “don’t really reflect where people are in America, the complexity of how people feel about abortion.”

Zdravecky said she has talked to Crist, who “still says he’s pro-life, but as to legislating, will support a woman’s right to make her own decisions” and “is really clear on all of our issues.” This includes sex education, contraception coverage and access to prenatal care.

She said Scott, on the other hand, “has cut funding for community clinics, rape crisis centers, services for women with AIDS, testing for STD’s, health services for teen mothers. I’ve never seen the kind of blatant attacks on women’s health care that I’ve seen in the last four years since Rick Scott took office.”

wmarch@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7761