AP

It has been a bit of a roller coaster for Caterpillar’s CEO Doug Oberhelman, who took the top job at the construction and mining equipment giant during a global mining boom and construction recovery. Now, just a few of years after he rose to the CEO seat, the mining industry is looking much less rosy, and so are Caterpillar’s order books.

Via the WSJ’s James R. Hagerty:

When Doug Oberhelman took over as chief executive of Caterpillar Inc. in July 2010, one of his worries was that the company and its suppliers wouldn’t be able to increase production fast enough to keep up with demand. Now the big question is whether the world’s biggest maker of construction and mining equipment can cut costs fast enough.

In an earnings call today, Mr. Oberhelman said the company is on a “cost lockdown binge,” as it works to limit the damage of falling demand from the mining industry for its equipment. What does that look like in practice? According to to Michael I. DeWalt, the Vice President of the company’s strategic services division:

We’ve had numerous temporary plant shutdowns, a reduction of more than 13,000 of our global workforce since this time last year. We’ve had temporary layoffs for thousands of salaried management employees. We’ve had reductions in program spending, substantially lower incentive pay, and we’ve implemented general austerity measures across the company. In addition to lower cost, we’ve also cut CapEx. And through the first 9 months of ’13, it’s down nearly 20%.

That sounds tough, and it could drag on for some time. Mr. Oberhelman told analysts on the call that he has been speaking with mining company CEOs about their view of how the industry is likely to fair in the coming years. “Any expansion in the nearer term is dead,” he said, although the CEOs were “fairly optimistic on existing mine production also in the medium term.”

And as for the bigger picture:

If you get back to what’s going to happen with the world economy, nobody knows. And I’m not going to forecast it here today. As — we took a pretty benign view of all that in our release this time because we don’t know. But they’re feeling, I think, for the most part, that even 1 to 3 years out, the world will grow. China will not implode, it will continue to track iron ore and some coal. And they feel that, but they want to get that out of existing resources. And at some point, that plays right to our hand, just not right now.

See also:

Caterpillar Earnings: Costs Put on ‘Lockdown’ – WSJ