Three truths fuel Donald Trump.

One, Barack Obama is the Dr. Frankenstein of the supposed Trump monster.

If a charismatic, Ivy League-educated, landmark president who entered office with unprecedented goodwill and both houses of Congress on his side could manage to wreck the Democratic Party while turning off 52 percent of the country, then many voters feel that a billionaire New York dealmaker could hardly do worse.

If Obama had ruled from the center, dealt with the debt, addressed radical Islamic terrorism, dropped the politically correct euphemisms and pushed tax and entitlement reform rather than Obamacare, Trump might have little traction. A boring Hillary Clinton and a staid Jeb Bush would most likely be replaying the 1992 election between Bill Clinton and George H.W. Bush -- with Trump as a watered-down version of third-party outsider Ross Perot.

But America is in much worse shape than in 1992. And Obama has proved a far more divisive and incompetent president than George H.W. Bush.

Little is more loathed by a majority of Americans than sanctimonious PC gobbledygook and its disciples in the media. And Trump claims to be PC's symbolic antithesis.

Making Machiavellian Mexico pay for a border fence or ejecting rude and interrupting Univision anchor Jorge Ramos from a press conference is no more absurd than allowing more than 300 sanctuary cities to ignore federal law by sheltering undocumented immigrants. Putting a hold on the immigration of Middle Eastern refugees is no more illiberal than welcoming into American communities tens of thousands of unvetted foreign nationals from terrorist-ridden Syria.

Advertisement

In terms of messaging, is Trump's crude bombast any more radical than Obama's teleprompted scripts?

Trump's ridiculous view of Russian President Vladimir Putin as a sort of "Art of the Deal" geostrategic partner is no more silly than Obama insulting Putin as Russia gobbles up former Soviet republics with impunity.

Obama callously dubbed his own grandmother a "typical white person," introduced the nation to the racist and anti-Semitic rantings of the Rev. Jeremiah Wright, and petulantly wrote off small-town Pennsylvanians as near-Neanderthal "clingers." Did Obama lower the bar for Trump's disparagements?

Certainly, Obama peddled a slogan, "hope and change," that was as empty as Trump's "make America great again."

Two, the Republican establishment also jolted Trump to life.

Trump supporters apparently don't believe that Chamber of Commerce, Wall Street or Republican Party grandees offer many antidotes to Obamaism.

Three, Trump is a nihilist, but he is a canny nihilist unlike any we have seen in recent campaigns.

In about a day, Trump wrecked Hillary Clinton's planned "war on women" talking points that had helped to win the election for Obama in 2012. "If Hillary thinks she can unleash her husband, with his terrible record of women abuse, while playing the women's card on me, she's wrong," Trump declared recently.

Street fighter Trump has an uncanny ability to spot these apparent contradictions. Trump's unkind "low-energy" label of Jeb Bush stuck.

Politicians really do pander in shameless fashion to big-money donors. Who better than Trump to know that? He claims he used to lavish cash on lots of them. Trump does not play by any political rules because he has always made up or bought his own rules.

How does the establishment derail an out-of-control train for whom there are no gaffes, who has no fear of The New York Times, who offers no apologies for speaking what much of the country thinks -- and who apparently needs neither money from Republicans nor politically correct approval from Democrats?

Victor Davis Hanson is a syndicated columnist.