For ATI retirees, it's about health care

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Fran Arabia figured the Wednesday meeting for ATI retirees generated enough interest to attract about 100 people.

But almost 700 retirees showed up at Highlands Middle School in Harrison to hear Arabia, president of United Steelworkers Local 1196, update them on the union's contract talks with ATI.

“I was in awe,” Arabia said. “I never imagined that many. It shows you how this contract can affect so many people.”

Todd Barbiaux, Local 1196's vice president, counted 665 people and said more were standing in the hall outside the auditorium. He said the balcony was opened to accommodate the crowd but there were still more than 100 people standing along the walls.

“It was really undivided attention,” he said. “You couldn't hear people breathing, that's how quiet it was.”

Negotiations are dormant since the union and ATI last week agreed to keep working under terms of the previous contract, which expired July 1.

According to the union, the company issued a proposal seeking 140-plus items on contract language, many of which the union claims will adversely affect hours, wages, working conditions and benefits for its members.

The company has refused to comment on the negotiations.

Local 1196 in Brackenridge is one of two locals that represent about 1,100 local workers at ATI specialty steel plants in Harrison, Gilpin and Vandergrift.

Although the negotiations will affect 2,500 workers overall at 11 ATI Flat-rolled Products plants in four states, the retirees also have a big stake in them: health insurance.

That was on the minds of many retirees entering and leaving the meeting, which was closed to the public and lasted nearly two hours.

“I'm afraid it is getting to the point where it is going to be too expensive,” Tom Cichello, 69, of Harrison.

Cichello worked at the Harrison mill for 30 years before retiring in 1999. He said he has had his share of health problems, which makes coverage essential. But the increases in what retirees pay monthly from the last two contracts have made for a more difficult financial situation.

“It changes it a lot,” Cichello said. “Everything goes up — I never knew what a fixed income really meant until I retired.”

Cichello said ATI deducts the premiums out of his pension check. He has a job now to help keep up and is considering getting a second job.

“Sad, isn't it?” he said.

Tom Burkett, 83, of New Kensington worked 44 years in the mill before he retired in 1994. He's also worried about a possible increase in health care premiums.

“It was $30 (per family member) and now it's $100,” Burkett said. “We're getting along, but we aren't getting a

cost-of-living increase from the mill, and everything keeps going up.”

Retirees don't get to vote on approving contracts, which falls to active union members.

That bothers Eugene Symionof, 73, of Upper Burrell. Symionof, who has been retired for 11 years, also is concerned about health insurance premiums.

“They could raise our health care by $200, and we have no say so in it,” he said.

“This is the first thing they go after, health care,” said Tony Slomkoski, president of Steelworkers Organization of Active Retirees (SOAR) for Local 1196. “I'm just hoping we can hold onto the status quo.”

Arabia said he was honest and straightforward with the retirees in regard to their concerns and the negotiations.

“We don't know what's going to happen, but I'm not going to tell them everything is hunky-dory,” Arabia said.

He said he told the retirees that the union the leadership would fight for them.

Alan Brzezinski, president of SOAR at the other ATI local, Local 1138 in Leechburg, is convinced of that.

“We're behind our union leaders 100 percent,” Brzezinski said. “They have our best interests in mind. They are fighting to keep (health care premiums) down.”

All of the retirees interviewed applauded Arabia for keeping the retirees informed. That included Larry Gezo, 62, of Lower Burrell who retired in 2009.

“I'm glad they did it,” Gezo said. “It was nice that they thought of the retirees.”

He also thinks it will go a long way to bringing the retirees and the active members together.

Arabia said that's good to hear — since the last two contracts pitted the interests of active members against those of the retirees and created animosity.

Jack Richards, a former Harrison resident and an ATI retiree, said, “I believe that if we want our benefits to continue, the retirees have to support the guys who are working.”

Tom Yerace is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at 724-226-4675 or tyerace@tribweb.com.