Religious freedom. It’s the newest trend in legislation, and it’s not going anywhere soon. As Irin Carmon reports at MSNBC.com: ”Welcome to the new culture war, this time rebranded as a battle over religious liberty or freedom. There are the same longstanding debates about sexuality and gender at the center of it. But this time, Christians – often business owners – are cast as the downtrodden victims of secularized government encroachment. And the rhetorical strategy, replete with references to liberty and the desire to have a debate, sounds downright progressive.”

Carmon cites the growing creep of “religious liberty” objections seeping into otherwise secular issues, and how now it is becoming a theme that religious liberty means not just personally avoiding an act that allegedly violates one faith, but demanding that others change their actions in order to more easily accommodate your desire to practice your faith unfettered.

Those requests, frankly, are beginning to go past justified and are now bordering on ridiculous.

We already watched that occur during the jockeying over the Obamacare birth control mandate. Anti-abortion groups and even businesses who do no religious work or outreach but still consider themselves to be “religious” because their leadership belong to churches, continue to fight the mandate claiming violation of faith, even as the government comes up with numerous accommodations to allow them to not offer birth control themselves in their insurance plans.

None of them have been good enough. No, even signing a slip of paper is a violation of the right to practice religion freely, according to Priests for Life. “As Father Frank Pavone, the national director of Priests for Life told the Washington Times, his organization will not comply with the law because they believe that doing so would amount to cooperating “in the government’s plan to expand access to birth control and abortion-inducing drugs,’” reports Think Progress.

If that seems pretty extreme, well, at least Priests for Life bothers to show up in court. According to the Fort Wayne-South Bend Diocese, their religious freedom extends so far that they don’t even have to show up for trials for legal cases they are involved in. Molly Redden at Mother Jones reports that a Catholic grade school is being sued after a teacher was fired for undergoing in vitro fertilization, which the church considers a sin. Citing their right as a religious entity as a justification for violating federal employment rules, the diocese also claimed that it didn’t even need to come to court and defend itself.

“The diocese argued that a trial on this question would violate its freedom of religion and appealed the judge’s decision to a three-judge panel on the 7th Circuit Court of Appeals,” writes Redden. “‘[If] the diocese is required to go through a trial,’ attorneys for the diocese and school argued, it would ‘irrevocably’ deny Fort Wayne-South Bend the benefits of religious protection.”

In other words, being forced to defend its discrimination under religious liberty violates the church’s religious liberty.

Obviously, the right to practice religion freely is one of our country’s greatest assets, and that means all religions. However, with that right comes the understanding that religious freedom does not trump all. While religion can be practiced freely, it does not protect one from legal challenges when it tramples other people’s constitutional rights, nor does it mean that those religious rights get to be protected from blow-back from people who disagree with you. You have the right to practice religion freely, yes, but you do not have the right to be shielded from contempt or criticism.

Your right to religious expression or free speech is “protected,” but you are not protected from criticism or consequences.

Photo credit: Thinkstock