Letters to the Editor (Photo: GWM)

If cuts happen, people will be hurt

Thousands of retirees have recently received letters that their pensions are going to be cut in half.

Some will be cut as much as 70 percent. I am one of them. After working 31 years in the warehouse and driving semis for Piggly Wiggly warehouse, putting a part of my wages into a pension fund, I have been notified that the pension fund is going to run out of money within 10 to 15 years.

After hours of investigation, it seems as though this has happened for many reasons and many people are responsible. Unfortunately, if these cuts go through, the people who are going to be devastated are not the people who are at fault.

In 1982, following a lengthy probe, the Teamsters entered into a consent decree with the U.S. Justice Department to cede control of its retirement funds to a consortium of banks. The arrangement remains in force today.

In 2006-2007, prior to the 2008 market collapse, a named fiduciary to the Central States Pension Fund, Goldman Sachs was “Betting Big” that the real estate market would collapse. The big banks have paid out $251 billion in fines since 2008 for its misdeeds. Where is that money? It should go to the victims. In 1982, the U.S. government took our money from the mob and gave it to Wall Street. From one crook to another.

The federal government isn’t any better. Money was taken out of my wages for Social Security benefits when I retire. That money is gone. All that’s left are IOUs — IOUs that the government has no intention of paying back.

If these pension cuts go through, this is just the beginning. It will be like dominoes, and it won’t stop until they take away Social Security.

The Wisconsin-Sheboygan Committee To Protect Pensions will meet at 10 a.m., Dec. 4, at the Schleswig Town Hall, 21935 Rockville Road, Kiel. This meeting is for retirees and active members. These cuts will affect everyone. If this isn’t stopped, they can come back in a few years and take some more, including those older than 75.

Steve Kupsch

Sheboygan

Kohler's tactics wrong

When I moved to Sheboygan in 1965, families were just beginning to move back after fleeing during the violent Kohler strikes throughout the previous decade.

Fear and shock were still vivid in memories shared quietly, under the breath. I was such an optimist then — I certainly never expected to see what happened in 2010, essentially breaking the skilled workforce and limiting, for new hires, the potential to rise in the future. The economy was dire in 2010, and the lure of off-shoring — union-busting for the 21st century, really — darkened everyone’s expectations.

It shocks me to see the company try to force the company’s workers out of the middle class in 2010, and hold them there now. Kohler is not on life-support as a company and I begin to think it was a strategic lie to say so in 2010.

I am a big user of Kohler arts and hospitality spin-offs, and I seem to have secured a place for myself in the middle class, but I have not forgotten that it is the community of Sheboygan that I love — and my own position in the world cannot be sustained at the expense of others. The company’s position tells me they have abandoned this part of the American Dream and want to push the community down to assure their own position.

Already, it is getting hard for me to drive to shops and events I care for in Kohler, and I can live without them if the cost is aligning myself with corporate greed.

Keep that in mind, Kohler Company, as you decide what is a “fair offer.”

Julie Furman-Stodolka

Plymouth