FOX NEWS INSIDER

The Washington Post has released its annual roundup of the year’s “biggest Pinocchios.”

One of the biggest Pinocchios of 2014, according to the article, is President Barack Obama’s repeated claim that he never referred to ISIS as “JV.”

The list of top Pinocchios also includes:

Sen. Rand Paul’s statement that John McCain met with ISIS terrorists.

Obama’s claim that the GOP filibustered 500 pieces of legislation.

Rep. Paul Ryan’s story about a little boy who rejected a school lunch because he wanted one in a brown paper bag.

Alison Lundergan Grimes’ accusation that Sen. Mitch McConnell took $600,000 from anti-coal groups.

An Agenda Project Action Fund ad, which alleged that GOP spending cuts undermined the nation’s ability to combat Ebola.

The hosts of “The Five” weighed in on their “Pinocchios of the year.”

Kimberly Guilfoyle chose the Agenda Project Action ad, listed above, while Eric Bolling’s “Pinocchio of the year” was when Hillary Clinton said that she and Bill were “dead broke” when they left the White House.

---

By Glenn Kessler, The Washington Post

It’s time for our annual round-up of the biggest Pinocchios of the year.

The midterm elections, of course, dominated our coverage of false claims, as an avalanche of negative ads tumbled across televisions screens. Some of those ads, which made it onto our list of the worst campaign ads, have the dubious honor of also appearing on this list.

This year, we are also highlighting the bipartisan failure of politicians in both parties for failing to accurately describe the impact of the Affordable Care Act. Democrats such as President Obama and Republicans such as House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) either inflated or deflated the numbers to a ridiculous extent. (Before anyone asks, Obama’s “if you want to keep your plan” was on last year’s list.)

While The Fact Checker generally focuses on domestic politics, this year Russian President Vladimir Putin gets a special international honor (or dishonor) for his speech on Crimea.

As always, that and other rulings were met with vehement objections from some readers. The Fact Checker thanks the readers who have offered thoughtful rebuttals to our conclusions. In some cases, in light of new information, we adjusted Pinocchio ratings.

In compiling this list, which has no particular order, we primarily focused on claims that had earned four Pinocchios during the year. We also tried to focus on issues of broad interest, such as terrorism, health care and the size of government. To keep it simple, we have shortened the quotes in the headlines. To read the full column, click on the link embedded in the quote.

President Obama repeated a claim, crafted by the White House communications team, that he was not “specifically” referring to the Islamic State terror group when he dismissed the militants who had taken over Fallujah as a “JV squad.” But The Fact Checker had obtained the previously unreleased transcript of the president’s interview with The New Yorker, and it’s clear that’s who the president was referencing.

READ THE FULL STORY AT THE WASHINGTON POST