Judge Frederick J. Scullin Jr. on Saturday declared that the law in Washington, D.C., preventing individuals from carrying handguns in public is unconstitutional.

In his ruling, the federal judge concluded from previous decisions that “there is no longer any basis on which this Court can conclude that the District of Columbia’s total ban on the public carrying of ready-to-use handguns outside the home is constitutional under any level of scrutiny.”

A senior U.S. District judge, Scullin is typically seated in New York.

The lawsuit filed against D.C. challenging the ban was instigated by four individuals along with the Washington state-based Second Amendment Foundation.

According to The Washington Post, the lawyer representing the plaintiffs, Alan Gura, insisted that Scullin’s ruling will immediately take effect in the city.

“The decision is in effect, unless and until the court stays its decision,” asserted Gura. “This is now a decision that the city is required to follow — the idea that the city can prohibit absolutely the exercise of a constitutional right for all people at all times, that was struck down. That’s just not going to fly.”

He also called the city “safer” as a result of the ruling because individuals will now be able to defend themselves on the streets of D.C. should they need to.

“I believe the city is absolutely safer,” Gura declared. “Make no mistake about it. This is a fantastic improvement in public safety. Yes, we have a problem in America with gun violence. But no, that problem is not the result of law-abiding people carrying guns.”

Many individuals took to Twitter to express their relief at and support of the ruling.

“D.C. is one of the worst crime-ridden cities in America. It’s about time that a ban on conceal carry is overturned! #2A #moregunslesscrime,” wrote the Leadership Institute’s Gabriella Hoffman.

“D.C.‘s flagrantly unconstitutional carry ban struck down in no uncertain terms. Hell. Yes,” said Charles C.W. Cooke of National Review.