Buy Photo Frank Daniels III (Photo: File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

"What's sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander."

The meaning of the old English proverb is lost on the members of the Tennessee General Assembly.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, in 2013, only 24 percent of part time workers could participate in employer-subsidized health care plans. Members of our legislature are among that privileged class.

The General Assembly finds itself in the company of some of America's most enlightened and respected employers, including Starbucks, Whole Foods, Costco, Lowes, UPS, Staples, Nike, Land's End and U-Haul, which see regular part-time employees as valuable contributors to their organizations' success.

Our legislature is, by law, part time. It limits itself to no more than 90 "legislative days" per two-year term and 15 organizational days at the start of the term. Legislators get an annual base salary of $19,009, plus a per diem of $171 each legislative day (for up to the 90 legislative days, no more expense money if the legislature meets longer). Legislators also get $1,000 per month to subsidize an office in their district.

Though not a pittance, it is not a lot of money for the time most legislators dedicate to their part time job. It is commendable that voters value their elected legislators sufficiently to offer participation in the state's health insurance plan as part of their compensation package. Legislators who participate pay 20 percent of the premiums, the state pays the rest.

Since 2008, legislators have paid $1.4 million in premiums to participate in the plan; taxpayers contributed $5.8 million toward the premiums.

When I took early retirement in 2009, I was forcefully reminded of the value of employer-provided health insurance benefits. So, I understand intimately why legislators appreciate this part of their compensation package.

But given the legislature's abrupt dismissal of Gov. Bill Haslam's Insure Tennessee plan to use federal Medicaid expansion funds to create a program for Tennessee's working poor, it seems that legislators' appreciation of subsidized health insurance is selfish.

The governor, mindful of the political unpopularity of President Barack Obama's Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act in Tennessee, crafted a plan to offer health insurance coverage for Tennesseans who made too much money to qualify for TennCare and not enough to meet the means test for federal subsidies on the health insurance exchanges.

The plan would have been paid for by federal funds under a deal reached with hospitals to expand Medicaid insurance in exchange for lowering reimbursement on Medicare patients — a deal the Supreme Court nullified in 2012, when it made the Medicaid expansion optional to the states.

The governor wanted to create a plan that could help lower the cost of health care in Tennessee. The main components of Insure Tennessee would encourage participants to get preventative health care and make healthier lifestyle choices, both of which are essential to lowering costs.

The governor also struck a deal with the Tennessee Hospital Association that would cover the planned reduction in federal funding to 90 percent of the program's costs in 2020.

The governor delivered a plan that met the demands of the legislature but still foundered on the politics of the Republican supermajority.

As Speaker Beth Harwell, R-Nashville, told The Tennessean on Wednesday:

"We are dealing with a political issue. This is Barack Obama, he is not popular in this state. There is no sugar coating that. And even less popular than him is Obamacare," Harwell said.

"I think the governor went out of his way to try and distance as much as he could from it, but it's a hard sell. It's just a hard sell in the legislature."

The overt politics played by Insure Tennessee opponents opens them up to inquiries like the one Tennessean reporter Dave Boucher made on Wednesday, when he was allowed to review state records on legislators' health insurance premiums, which he had been seeking since February. His initial, cursory review of those records for three hours Wednesday set off a firestorm of protests from legislators who decried the access as illegal and political.

House Republican Caucus Chairman Glen Casada, R-Franklin, released a statement Thursday accusing the Haslam administration.

"Whoever authorized the release of this information showed a clear lack of judgment and, at the very least, should be reprimanded immediately," Casada said. "If this is the executive branch's way of negotiating with the legislative branch about Insure Tennessee, I would encourage them to strongly and swiftly rethink their strategy."

Commissioner Larry Martin of the Department of Finance and Administration told lawmakers in a letter Thursday that the information requested by The Tennessean isn't subject to federal health privacy rules, and his department was obligated to release the records.

The hyperbolic ventilation from some legislators about the nefarious nature of The Tennessean's request is entertaining. Our reporters and editors have no interest in the specifics of any state employees' health conditions — that is not our concern, nor any of our business. But we are very interested in understanding the compensation package of our lawmakers.

And we are particularly interested in contrasting the health insurance participation of legislators to their decision not to even debate the value of a health insurance plan for the state's working poor, whose sales taxes help pay for the state's share of legislators' health insurance and whose Medicare/Medicare payroll taxes are helping to fund the expansion of Medicaid in other states.

We are, as Harwell says, dealing with a political issue, which makes a statement from Sen. Janice Bowling, R-Tullahoma, in response to an email sent out by Connie Ridley, director of legislative administration for the state, warning lawmakers that The Tennessean was allowed to review records showing the cost and enrollment information for state lawmakers, so rich:

"I am saddened, shocked and disgusted by this flagrant display of disregard for the rule of law. The same disregard for the rule of law expands as it shows no regard for the elected lawmakers representing the people of Tennessee," Bowling said. "This culture of lawlessness must be exposed and pulled out by the root."

I love gardening.

INSURE TENNESSEE

Here is the contact information for Tennessee's legislative leadership and those who did not vote to pass Insure Tennessee when the proposal was revived in March.

Executive

Gov. Bill Haslam, 615-741-2001, Bill.Haslam@tn.gov

Leadership

Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey, 615-741-4524, Lt.gov.ron.ramsey@capitol.tn.gov

House Speaker Beth Harwell, 615-741-0709, Speaker.beth.harwell@capitol.tn.gov

Senate Commerce and Labor Committee members

(No votes or abstentions on Insure Tennessee)

Sen. Todd Gardenhire, 615-741-6682, Sen.todd.gardenhire@capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Mark Green, 615-741-2374, Sen.mark.green@capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Dolores Gresham, 615-741-2368, Sen.dolores.gresham@capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Jack Johnson, 615-741-2495, Sen.jack.johnson@capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Steve Southerland, 615-741-3851, Sen.steve.southerland@capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Jim Tracy, 615-741-1066, Sen.jim.tracy@capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Bo Watson, 615-741-3227, Sen.bo.watson@capitol.tn.gov

Special Session Health and Welfare Committee members

(No votes on Insure Tennessee)

Sen. Frank Niceley, 615-741-2061, Sen.frank.niceley@capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Janice Bowling, 615-741-6694, Sen.janice.bowling@capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Rusty Crowe, 615-741-2468, Sen.rusty.crowe@capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Todd Gardenhire, 615-741-6682, Sen.todd.gardenhire@capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Kerry Roberts, 615-741-4499, Sen.kerry.roberts@capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Mike Bell, 615-741-1946, Sen.mike.bell@capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Brian Kelsey, 615-741-3036, Sen.brian.kelsey@capitol.tn.gov

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1bFUhsI