The results of the New Hampshire primary and Iowa caucuses point to a level of mass populist disaffection with both the Democratic and Republican establishments that has little precedent in modern American history. On the left, the view that both parties amount to partners of the billionaires and corporations that control Washington and Wall Street has become close to the core belief of millions of Americans five years after the Occupy movement appeared to peak in 2011. On the right, the tea party’s rise since 2009 has been built on the notion that most elected Republicans are sellouts and phonies without the courage to fight for real change.

Yet even as the evidence has piled up of this disconnect between America’s political parties and much of the electorate, many politicians and pundits have treated the popularity of bomb throwers Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump (and, to some extent, Ted Cruz) as more of a comment on voters’ flakiness, irrationality and/or racism than anything of lasting consequence.

Sanders’ popularity is derided by those who see his promises to make college and health care free as fantasies peddled to people who want to be given things by government. That is not why Sanders demolished Hillary Clinton in New Hampshire. He won big because he shares the view of most liberals that not only were Wall Street machinations responsible for the Great Recession, but that tax, fiscal and regulatory policies coming out of Washington are intended to produce income inequality — this result is a feature, not a bug.

President Obama seems to generally be given a pass from this indictment, perhaps because of his personal popularity and his frequent expressions of dissatisfaction with the status quo. But that pass doesn’t extend to all the many Democratic politicians who have been associated with Bill Clinton-style centrism and who backed bold policy ventures meant to stave off a global depression in 2008 and 2009, moves that seemed to value the financial industry’s interests over average Americans’.

It’s a mistake to boil down Trump’s success to nativism and lazy nationalism, even if they are major factors. On immigration, Trump’s go-slow approach is far more in tune with the Republican rank-and-file than the GOP senators who embrace comprehensive immigration reform. Much like Sanders, he depicts Washington as corrupt and run for the benefit of the very wealthiest Americans. He ridicules the idea that the wars launched by President George W. Bush went well or made us safer. He talks about creating a better version of Obamacare, repealing and replacing it “with something terrific.”

Trump’s success suggests that the old Republican recipe of pushing tax cuts and a macho foreign policy is way past its expiration date. And it strongly suggests that GOP voters are increasingly open to the idea that plutocrats have too much control of American democracy.

Both parties need to tamp their populist wildfires by responding to the concerns and fears of their angry followers. An America that has lost faith in its political class — an America that has given up on the American Dream — is not a nation that’s going to be able to take on big issues or act cohesively in times of national crisis.

We hope responsible leaders figure this out before a bomb thrower moves into 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue.

Next editorial: California Coastal Commission owes us all an explanation

See also: New opinion page editor takes the reins, a Q&A

See also: How the U-T opinion section will change, and change you