CU law student, Silver Creek senior join forces for event

A high school senior and a University of Colorado law student are teaming up to help school children in Uganda.

If you go What: Cars for the Community When: April 18, 8 a.m. to noon Where: Silver Creek High School, 4901 Nelson Road, Longmont Cost: free, donation recommended More info: visit http://www.enduring-communities.org/

Chris Robbie, a Longmont resident and law student at CU-Boulder, started Enduring Communities in 2013 after visiting Uganda to help build a school. He was compelled to keep helping so, along with three other people (Adam Lozinski, Danny Robinson and Sililo Woo Ching) from Longmont, he decided to turn that desire into a nonprofit — Enduring Communities.

The nonprofit has a staff in the village of Kito, Uganda, where they help run a school for children. The school teaches students from pre-kindergarten through seventh grade, and Enduring Communities pays for a staff to help grow the school there, as well as provide breakfast and lunch for the students and any school books or supplies they may need.

"Right now this is our first year we have seventh graders over in Uganda," Robbie said. "It's a big year in Uganda, because after seventh the students have a big test to see where they can go to high school. We can keep setting those kids up to succeed."

To help raise funds for the charity, Robbie has teamed up with Collin Peterson, a high school senior at Silver Creek working on a Capstone project.

Peterson met Robbie two years ago at a talk Robbie gave to a youth group Peterson was part of.

"I liked what he had to say about Enduring Communities and how he was committed to helping others improve their lives," Peterson said. "What struck me most about his talk, was that he wasn't just going to throw money at the Ugandan people, but instead delegate how the money was to be spent, through Olive and Sam (native Ugandans), who oversee the nonprofit in Uganda."

For his capstone, Peterson is having a car show at Silver Creek, with donations going to Enduring Communities.

"It's an exciting opportunity for us," Robbie said of the partnership. "We can work with other people in the community and connect people in Longmont with people in Uganda. We're excited to work with a school here since we work with a school over there."

Last year, Robbie made headlines running 15 marathons in 15 days to raise money for Enduring Communities, so this car show is just another part of his continuing efforts to help out his nonprofit.

"A lot of our support and donors are in this area," Robbie said. "I really want it to be about this community helping that community."

The car show will feature a bunch of cool cars from collectors in the area, as well as music, food trucks and Enduring Communities booth where people can learn more about what they do. Both Peterson and Robbie hope to raise $5,000 from the event, and almost 100 percent of that will go straight to Uganda for food, supplies and teacher salaries.

"It's going to enable to provide much more stuff for these kids," Robbie said.

Isa Jones: 303-684-5274, jonesi@timescall.com or twitter.com/theisajones