Texas is No. 1 in minimum-wage workers and isn’t pushing to improve that record. Might the Democrats help?

Last week’s Democratic presidential debate offered a sliver of hope.

“Yes, of course, raise the minimum wage,” Hillary Clinton said matter-of-factly, citing a centerpiece of her campaign.

Top challenger Bernie Sanders again called for doubling the federal rate. And Martin O’Malley touted his record of raising the minimum in Maryland.

For Democrats, at least, the issue seemed settled and the only question was how much. Should they push for $10, $12 or $15 an hour?

Any increase would have major consequences in Texas, because we have so many low-wage workers and a high poverty rate. If the pay floor rose to $12 an hour by 2020, almost 3.5 million Texans would get a bump, according to the Economic Policy Institute in Washington.

That’s over 29 percent of Texas workers, and two-thirds would be full-timers over the age of 25.

“This would go a long way toward reversing the wage stagnation we’ve seen in recent years,” said Paul Sonn, general counsel of the National Employment Law Project in New York, which advocates for low-wage workers.

That may be wishful thinking in today’s political climate. With strong Republican opposition in Congress, any increase in the minimum rate faces long odds, even if a Democrat wins the White House in 2016.

There is another path, through Austin, and a majority of states have gone that route. About two dozen cities also have raised their minimums to over $10.

But most Texas lawmakers oppose the idea. In May, the House rejected a proposal to let Texas voters decide on raising the state minimum. The vote was 92-50 against, and it required a two-thirds majority to pass.

That sentiment goes all the way to the top. When Gov. Greg Abbott was campaigning last year, he called a higher minimum wage a job killer.

Most people have another take. In a Pew survey last year, 73 percent supported raising the minimum from $7.25 to $10.10. And in four “red” states — Alaska, Arkansas, Nebraska and South Dakota — voters approved raising the minimum, often by a large margin.

Galvanizing public support and keeping the issue in the spotlight are necessary to make changes here, Sonn said.

“Until that happens, it’s hard to see a road forward in Texas,” he said.

Texas had 361,000 workers who earned $7.25 an hour or less last year. That’s about 1 in 8 such workers in the nation, in large part because other states have adopted higher levels. Texas also leads the country in the share of residents without health insurance.

The common link in both is politics and ideology. Just as Texas leaders rejected an increase in the minimum wage, they turned down an expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, even with the feds offering to pick up most of the costs.

Most other states have moved in the other direction on both Medicaid and the minimum wage. Cities, counties and school districts are also pushing on pay.

Since 2014, 14 states and Washington have raised their pay floors, sometimes through ballot initiatives. At least 20 cities have adopted much higher hourly rates, rising to $15 by the end of the decade for Los Angeles, San Francisco and Seattle. Higher pay has passed in smaller cities, too, including Birmingham, Ala., Las Cruces, N.M., Louisville, Ky., and Kansas City, Mo.

Even in Texas, a handful of local governments have adopted higher minimum pay for employees and contractors. But Texas cities aren’t permitted to go further and set a higher minimum wage for all employers; the Legislature prohibited that practice over a decade ago.

Leaders in Dallas and Dallas County have talked about the need for higher pay. They’ve pointed out that their lowest rate is over $10 an hour, but they’ve stopped short of adopting higher minimums for contractors.

One reason is higher costs for taxpayers. Dallas estimated that it could spend almost $13 million more over the next five years to adopt that plan.

Such trade-offs are often glossed over, said Bill Hammond, CEO of the Texas Association of Business. It’s easy for people to support higher wages, in part because that helps push up their pay scales. But ask if they’re willing to pay extra for a hamburger and the response will be different, he said.

“At $15 an hour, you’ll hurt the people you’re trying to help,” Hammond said, adding that he already sees automation replacing some fast-food workers in Austin. “We believe the marketplace should decide this.”

Most research shows a small impact on jobs from moderate increases in the minimum wage. A proposal to gradually raise the minimum to $10.10 would reduce employment nationwide by about 500,000, according to a study by the Congressional Budget Office last year.

But about 16.5 million workers would get a raise and 900,000 would be lifted above the poverty line, the report said.

The current minimum wage has affected fewer employees as the economy has improved. In Texas, the number of minimum-wage workers declined by almost 200,000 from 2010 to 2014, while the number of hourly workers rose.

To Hammond, that’s a sign that wages are rising for all but the most low-skilled jobs. To others, it indicates that it’s time to update the minimum wage for the first time since 2009.

“If you leave it in place a long time, it becomes less and less relevant,” said Harry Holzer, a public policy professor at Georgetown and fellow at the Brookings Institution. “The market will gradually pull people up, but a higher minimum wage would do it more quickly.”

Twitter: @mitchschnurman