Mental health reform appears to be gaining momentum in Congress, but not quickly enough to prevent incidents like the on-air murders in Virginia.

Self-proclaimed “powder keg” Vester Lee Flan

ROANOKE SHOOTINGS BELONG ON THE FRONT PAGE, IMAGES AND ALL

Flanagan never received any counseling.

Lawmakers and advocacy groups, outraged over yet another senseless gun attack, have spent the hours since the shocking shooting decrying the effectiveness of existing mental health laws.

'We will never know if the tragedy could have been prevented if the killer had received appropriate mental health treatment,' said Paul Gionfriddo, president of Mental Health America. (Mental Health America)

“We will never know if the tragedy could have been prevented if the killer had received appropriate mental health treatment,” said Paul Gionfriddo, president of Mental Health America. “But we do know that too often in this country, we wait until Stage 4 to address mental illness, and often only through incarceration.”

Flanagan, in a 23-page letter sent to ABC News, said job and societal stress had put him on the verge of explosion.

“My anger has been building steadily...I’ve been a human powder keg for a while...just waiting to go BOOM!!!!” Flanagan wrote.

TV REPORTER, CAMERMAN, FATALLY SHOT DURING LIVE BROADCAST

The shootings outraged lawmakers, who feel as though they are repeating themselves every time the bullets fly.

“We have to deal with the challenge of mental health if we're going to stop the scourge of this random violence,” said Mayor de Blasio.

Public and private spending on mental health has generally increased in recent years, according to a federal study.

Already, Obamacare and a less well-known 2008 law barring insurers from putting up financial barriers to mental health care have increased access to mental care.

Sen. John Coryn (R-Texas). (Eric Gay/AP) 'This gut-wrenching tragedy that played out on live TV and over social media is just the latest in a long string of tragic gun violence that is far too common in this country,' Schumer said (Andrew Burton/Getty Images) Sens. John Cornyn (R-Texas) and Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) are pushing bills that would require states to do a better job reporting criminal and mental health information to the federal background check system.

SEE IT: INSIDE VESTER FLANAGAN'S BARREN APARTMENT

The Affordable Care Act requires all insurers who sell on the exchanges to include such treatments in their benefit packages.

Meanwhile, U.S. Sens. John Cornyn (R-Texas) and Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) are pushing bills that would require states to do a better job reporting criminal and mental health information to the federal background check system.

“This gut-wrenching tragedy that played out on live TV and over social media is just the latest in a long string of tragic gun violence that is far too common in this country,” Schumer said in a statement to the Daily News.

"We must redouble our efforts to pass serious and significant gun safety legislation in Congress.”

New York’s Safe Act mandates that mental-health professionals file reports on patients "likely to engage in conduct that would result in harm to self or others."

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? WATCH THE VIDEO HERE.

With Erin Durkin