Parent Whines After School Sends Out Hilarious ‘Hurt Feelings Report’

Blake Neff

A school district in Delaware scrambled to apologize Wednesday for accidentally sending parents a humorous “hurt feelings report” sheet that appeared to make light of bullying.

The sheet was sent as an email attachment to parents whose children attend Lombardy Elementary School in Wilmington. At first, the document looks almost indistinguishable from the various bureaucratic reporting forms used by the government across the country. But at a closer glance, the irreverent tone of the sheet quickly becomes apparent. The principal purpose of the document is “to assist whiners in documenting hurt feelings.” Various fields to fill out include the “whiner’s name,” “type of whine used,” and “name of person who hurt your pansy ass feelings.”

School emails ‘Hurt Feelings Report’ that makes fun of whinershttps://t.co/DMQpu2on7T pic.twitter.com/8mKEggBdN8 — WGRZ (@WGRZ) February 17, 2016









The document isn’t a new one, and both it and several close imitators can be found in various locations on the Internet. The form doesn’t appear to be mocking children, but instead whiney employees, as the form is clearly supposed to be filled out by the alleged “whiner” themselves, and options on the “Reasons for filing this report” section include: “Two beers is not enough” and “The Dept. needs to fix my problems.”

At least one parent was unable to take the humor in stride and, ironically, whined to the news about the document.

“[It’s] completely offensive and mocks children who are bullied in schools,” the anonymous parent told The News Journal.

It’s not clear whether any other parents were genuinely offended, but school officials have still raced to apologize. A recorded message of apology was quickly sent to the phones of all parents, and a corrected email went out by Wednesday night.

The school said the form had been mistakenly attached by a school employee who received it from “a person external to the school.”

“This was an embarrassing mistake, but it was just that – a mistake,” the school said, according to NBC Philadelphia. “It should not have happened, and we apologize for the error.”

Many parents appear to have taken the accident in stride.

“If the children didn’t see it, what is the problem?” a father told The News Journal. “It was a dumb prank, but I don’t think it was malicious.”

Send tips to blake@dailycallernewsfoundation.org.

Click here for reuse options! Copyright 2016 Daily Caller News Foundation

Content created by The Daily Caller News Foundation is available without charge to any eligible news publisher that can provide a large audience. For licensing opportunities of our original content, please contact licensing@dailycallernewsfoundation.org.