Sioux Falls, SD

This weekend, a local photographer is snapping pictures in Falls Park to benefit the family of Natasha Adams, who recently died in a car bicycle crash in Sioux Falls.



Kittie Heimdal was a close friend to Adams, and once she heard about the crash, she wanted to find a way to help. Now, she's doing just that by taking photos of families, friends and individuals on a free-will donation basis to assist the family with funeral costs.



This photographer has been set up at Falls Park for the last two days, and she says the turnout and support for Adams has been amazing.

"I went out to where it happened and there's so many flowers, there's so many balloons. It's just awesome to know she was cared about," Heimdal said.

After raising nearly $300 on Saturday, Heimdal is able to help out Natasha Adams' family with anything from funeral costs to travel expenses.

The money even gave Adams' brother a way to get to the funeral.

"He had a post on Facebook, and I messaged him and told him we have money for you. And I cut out yesterday a little bit early so I could go down to Walmart, help him out and get to where he needed to be so he could say his goodbyes and everything," Heimdal said.

And even though Heimdal has already helped out in a big way, the donations are still coming in from people. Marcia Sunderman was taking her nightly walk around Falls Park yesterday when she saw Heimdal taking pictures. Today, she and her husband came back for more than just a photo.

"Thought it would be for a good cause to help out because it was such a tragic situation that happened, and I just like to help out other people," Sioux Falls Resident Marcia Sunderman said.

Which is exactly what Heimdal wanted to do for a woman who was known as a loving mother and friend.



"She's been there for me. Through thick, through thin, one of my best friends. So, just being able to do this to help her family out is enough for me," Heimdal said.

Heimdal will be taking pictures and accepting donations in Falls Park until 9 p.m.