Topics: Israel, israeli settlers, Palestine, Palestinians, West Bank arson, News

In the early hours of July 31, my husband, Mamoun, received a phone call from his brother: Our home in the West Bank village of Duma was on fire. Mamoun and I jumped in our car and drove from Nablus (where we had been spending the night with our five children) to Duma, where we found the first floor of our two-story house entirely decimated by fire. Our neighbor’s house (Sa’ad and Reham Dawabsheh, distant relatives and close friends) had also been burned. Hebrew graffiti on our walls reading “The Messiah King lives” and “Revenge” indicated that the fire had been set by extremist Israeli settlers.

My immediate family was lucky: We were not at home when the settlers doused the two houses in flammable liquid and threw Molotov cocktails inside. Tragically, Sa’ad, Reham and their two children (18-month-old Ali and 4-year-old Ahmed) were home. By the time Mamoun and I reached Duma, Sa’ad, Reham and Ahmed had been pulled from the blaze, but neighbors were still searching for toddler Ali. His tiny, charred corpse was located in the house soon thereafter. Sa’ad, Reham and Ahmed were rushed to hospitals inside Israel, in critical condition. Sa’ad died of his wounds a week later. Reham, a math teacher, succumbed in the early hours of Sept. 7, just a day after her birthday. Her 12- and 13-year-old pupils were among those marching at her funeral, demanding justice for the murder of their teacher. Little Ahmed, though improving slowly, is still in the hospital.

The world, including the Israeli government, cried out against the attack that killed baby Ali and his parents, and burned our houses, labeling the perpetrators as Jewish terrorists. Last Sunday – five months after the attack – two Israelis were charged in the deadly arson. One of the young men, Amiram Ben-Uliel, age 21, spent many of his formative years indulged by the Israeli government as he lived in settlement outposts regarded as illegal by both the international community and, putatively, Israel itself.

Yet, despite the indictments, the residents of Duma have still not been granted the one thing that we desperately need: protection.

In the months since the attack that claimed the lives of my neighbors, settlers have tried to return to Duma repeatedly. Twice, villagers called the Israeli army to thwart them. On several other occasions, a night patrol composed of young men from the village deterred the settlers. My 17-year-old son has stood guard on the roof of our house until 2 or 3 in the morning, monitoring the main road where settlers have parked their cars, trying to approach Duma on foot through the olive trees.