(Jim Cole/AP)

“Let’s remember a couple statistics. … You know, in the last 25 years, Medicaid has grown over 800 percent, while the economy in the last 25 years has grown 200 percent. Now, I was a political science major, not a math major. But even a political science major can do that math, OK? Even I can do that math. It doesn’t work.”

–New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie (R), New Hampshire Republican leadership summit, April 17, 2015

Overhauling long-term entitlement programs has become a major talking point for Christie, and it is expected to his centerpiece of his potential presidential campaign.

Christie recently unveiled his plan to make sweeping changes to government spending and structure of entitlement programs, especially long-term programs such as Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid. Such programs have grown out of proportion and taken up too much of the federal budget and debt, according to Christie.

During his speech at the summit, Christie compared the growth between Medicaid spending and the economy to make his point on the growth of entitlement spending. Is he correct? What is the necessary context behind this claim?

The Facts

The New Jersey governor called the current status of entitlement programs a “crisis” and a “hard truth” that Washington politicians avoid. During his April 14, speech at the New Hampshire Institute of Politics, Christie introduced a 12-point proposal to reduce the federal deficit by $500 billion over the next 10 years. The changes would not apply to current recipients.

Christie proposed to raise the eligibility age for Medicare and Social Security retirement age; change how cost of living adjustments are calculated; better manage recipients who have dual eligibility for Medicare and Medicaid; and restructure Social Security disability benefits.

For Medicaid, Christie proposed placing a cap on each enrollee, with the per capita cap set differently for each category of recipients (elderly, disabled, children, and non-elderly, non-disabled adults). The cap would be allowed to grow each year with the inflation rate, which would take into account any growth in cost or population. He also would require a co-pay for recipients with incomes above the poverty level.

Christie’s PAC, Leadership Matters for America, pointed to gross domestic product figures from the World Bank and Medicaid spending figures from the Office of Management and Budget data. Those figures show GDP grew by 231 percent from 1987 to 2012, and Medicaid spending grew by 814 percent from $27.4 billion in 1987 to $250.5 billion in 2012. (Christie’s Medicaid spending was not adjusted for inflation, which would decrease that percent growth to about 500 percent.)

The most reliable way to compare the growth in Medicaid spending over a 25-year period is to compare it as a percentage of the GDP, as that method adjusts for inflation and population growth. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services manages historical data, which show that in federal expenditures for Medicaid were nearly 0.6 percent of the GDP in 1987. In 2012, they represented 1.5 percent of the GDP. (Medicaid expenditures are projected to continue to grow as a percentage of the economy in coming years.)

In other words, while Christie suggests Medicaid is growing four times faster than the economy, the growth amounts to about 150 percent increase when measured as a percentage share of the economy.

Moreover, it is important to put this growth in context and consider what drove up Medicaid costs. Stuart Butler, economics expert at the Brookings Institution, called it a “perfect storm” that resulted from several factors.

Health-care costs generally increase faster than the economy. Medicaid has increased at a significantly faster pace than the U.S. economy, according to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. The general increase in health-care costs has slowed down in the past decade or so — and at a slower rate than previously projected — but it is still running above general inflation and economic growth, experts said.

While the elderly and disabled population makes up a relatively small portion of total enrollees, they comprise about two-third of Medicaid spending. That means a significant amount of the growth in Medicaid spending has been the aging Baby Boomer population, and the increased long-term expenses due to the aging population or enrollees with disabilities. The most expensive part of the program — and the main expenditure for this population — goes toward nursing homes, home care and home health aides. (Part of this cost is shared by Medicare, which is the dual eligibility that Christie wants to change.)

Medicaid is affected by cycles in the economy. During the recession that began in 2007, millions of people lost jobs and income — and gained Medicaid eligibility. Recession-related spike in enrollees was the key driver of Medicaid spending between 2007 and 2013, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation. Enrollment growth has slowed since 2010, after economic recovery began. But many low-income enrollees continue to feel the impact of the low recovery.

The demand for services like Medicaid grew during the recession, yet states had less revenue to pay for them. That meant the federal government had to increase its matching rate so that states would pay a lesser share of the cost — which took further toll on federal spending.

On a per-person basis, Medicaid spending grew at a much slower rate compared to the overall program cost and private insurance. Spending on prescription drugs and long-term institutional care declined, because many of the costs were spread out into managed care contracts and community-based services. Medicaid has cost less than private insurance to cover comparable enrollees for 20 to 30 years, said Edwin Park, vice president for health policy at the left-leaning Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, which has disputed claims by critics of entitlement programs.

Many states also have decided to expand Medicaid eligibility — including Christie’s own state in 2013, when Christie became one of the few Republican governors to align himself President Obama on the Affordable Care Act. Christie had said he was making the best decision for his state, and that accepting federal funds to expand the program would save money for the state’s taxpayers.

The Pinocchio Test

While it is correct that Medicaid spending has grown disproportionately to the size of the economy, Christie’s numbers give a misleading impression of the magnitude. We attempted to engage his representatives about his calculations, but they did not answer our follow-up questions. While Christie says he was not a math major, that is not an excuse to throw out this misleading comparison. We recommend he use the growth in Medicaid spending as a percentage of the GDP. Reciting raw numbers from the federal budget is quite misleading, when looking at growth over a quarter century.

Moreover, it is important to consider the variety of factors that have contributed to this growth — including the increased demands of the aging population, the recession and slow recovery and Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act.

Let us remember that the astronomical growth in spending on Medicaid nursing home care is an unintended, long-term consequence of lawmakers who sought to keep the program limited and focused on “poor mamas and babies” in rural and southern states, rather than to large industrial states. One of The Fact Checker’s favorite examples of good intentions gone awry is an article by former Lyndon Johnson aide Joseph A. Califano Jr., which we have embedded below. It’s a good reminder to politicians like Christie to be careful when proposing ideas to overhaul large federal programs like Medicaid — lest they result in effects that end up being more costly than intended.

Two Pinocchios





(About our rating scale)

Send us facts to check by filling out this form

Follow The Fact Checker on Twitter and friend us on Facebook

Article on birth of Medicaid by Joseph Califano by The Washington Post