A scene from the 2011 Paint the Town Pink & Human Pink Ribbon Ceremony event in Pack Square park to mark Pink October breast cancer awareness month. (citizen-times photo) (Photo: Erin Brethauer, ebrethau@citizen-times.com)

Breast cancer strikes at millions of people every year. There are the 296,000 women who will be diagnosed with the disease, women whose lives will be changed forever. So will the lives of their parents, children, husbands and others.

That makes breast cancer everybody’s concern. Each of us needs to do what we can, especially in encouraging early detection, which is the best hope for survival.

In Buncombe County, the effort is spearheaded by Ladies Night Out, a program started eight years ago by Mission Health, Mission Foundation, the Asheville Breast Center and Buncombe County Department of Health.

Many insurance companies have included mammogram coverage, and the Affordable Care Act has increased that number. The mammograms must be offered at no cost to the patient. Still, there are women with no coverage, and the average cost of $200 is beyond the means of many.

That’s where Ladies Night Out comes in. The program is offered on the first Thursday evening of every month at Asheville Imaging. It includes cervical exams and Pap smears, and also blood pressure and cholesterol screening.

“We want to make sure every woman in Buncombe County has access to a mammogram,” said Ingrid Hansen, a grant writer at Mission Foundation and Ladies Night Out volunteer.

A mammogram remains the best means of early detection. “It can detect breast cancer up to two years before the tumor can be felt by you or your doctor,” according to cancercare.org.

The American Cancer Society and other groups urge annual mammograms beginning at age 40. “Findings from a large study in Sweden of women in their 40s who underwent screening mammograms showed a decrease in breast cancer deaths by 29 percent,” according to the Mayo Clinic.

What if the test shows a cancer? How do these women pay for treatment? That is no problem, Hansen said.

“If you come in through Ladies Night Out and get that unfortunate diagnosis of breast cancer, you automatically qualify for a federal Medicaid card that will pay for entire cost of treatment, up to and including breast reconstruction,” Hansen said.

“It’s bad enough to get the diagnosis, but to have to worry about the cost ... it removes that concern for these women. So many have said ‘If it weren’t for this program, I’d be dead or bankrupt.’”

Ladies Night Out got a major boost from yesterday’s Pink in the Park 5K at Biltmore Square Town Center. The event, the first of several running events during Breast Cancer Awareness Month, raised more than $10,000 to help underwrite the program.

The Power of Pink Relay 5K at MedWest Health and Fitness Center on Oct. 25 will benefit the Haywood Regional Medical Center Foundation to provide mammograms for underserved women in Haywood County. The Making Strides Against Breast Cancer 5K at Pack Square Park the same day will aid American Cancer Society efforts to find a cure.

The idea of these races is not to excel, but to raise money. “It’s a little hilly, but the whole event is pretty laid back,” said Jessica Lee, Pink in the Park race coordinator with iHeartMedia Asheville. “Most people are just strolling, walking with their kids and baby strollers and dogs.”

If you can’t participate in any of these events, there are others ways to help. The National Breast Cancer Foundation suggests you give $100 to help provide a mammogram for a woman in need, get involved with friends and family to start or join a fundraiser, partner with a nationally-recognized charity, or volunteer to help educate women about breast cancer.

Remember, breast cancer affects everyone and everyone should help.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1x7z5lh