Ted Cruz has received the support of three current and former members of Congress. ( Reuters photo )

This week, just hours before the vital South Carolina Republican Primary, two more congressional Republicans—and one former member of Congress—have announced they're backing U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) for president.

U.S. Rep. Raul Labrador (R-Idaho) said: "Senator Ted Cruz has always been a stalwart defender of the constitution and a tireless advocate for conservative principles. Americans know Washington is broken. Ted Cruz is the only candidate that will truly change the way Washington works, restore the balance of power between the presidency and the American people, and advance the principles of freedom and liberty for all Americans, not just the privileged few. It's time for all conservatives to unite behind the one candidate that can win in November and defeat the Washington establishment."

U.S. Rep. Tim Huelskamp (R-Kan.) said: "Ted Cruz is a full spectrum conservative that the people of Kansas should rally behind. I have seen Senator Cruz stand up for conservative principles in Washington time and time again. Whether it's President Obama's illegal executive amnesty, Obamacare, or massive deficit spending, we can count on Ted to start making positive reforms his first day in office. He is not one of those 'campaign conservatives' who are all talk—he is a proven, principled conservative."

Former U.S. Rep. Jack Kingston (R-Ga.) said: "Ted Cruz is a trusted, consistent conservative. He's led the charge on many of the critical battles for conservative values in Washington over the past few years and has defended those same values before the Supreme Court. I saw Ted fight in the Senate to kill amnesty, repeal Obamacare, protect the 2nd Amendment, advance religious liberties, make America safe, and stand up for our Constitution. Ted has the record and the conviction to right the course that the liberal agenda has set our country on. I'm proud to endorse Ted Cruz because I know he'll fight as President for the same conservative values he's fought for his entire life."

Cruz thanked each man for his endorsement, and lauded their individual accomplishments as conservative leaders in the House of Representatives.

Georgia voters go to the polls March 1 during the "SEC Primary," also referred to as "Super Tuesday I." The Kansas Republican Caucus will be held March 5. Idaho Republicans hold their presidential preference primary on March 8.

Draw closer to God. Experience the presence of the Holy Spirit every month as you read Charisma magazine. Sign up now to get Charisma for as low as $1 per issue.

Has God called you to be a leader? Ministry Today magazine is the source that Christian leaders who want to serve with passion and purpose turn to. Subscribe now and receive a free leadership book.

-

See an error in this article? This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it.