It's something that could have a real impact on hundreds of area students and families next school year. We're talking about longer days in the classroom. On Wednesday night, the first of five town hall meetings was held to discuss the possibility of increasing the school day by length.

In July the Utica School District finding out they will be one of nine districts state wide to receive a grant that would allow for an extra 90 minutes a day of curriculum. The district decided to defer to grant until July 2015--but a slew of questions came about.

"Primarily how are those extra hours going to be used?"

"I wanted to know about the sports. My son had a concern about snacks and stuff like that."

And to answer all of those questions the school district is having open forums so parents and students can come ask those questions directly. They also get a packet. It's filled with an outline of everything that would happen hypothetically if this were to pass.

“We wanted to solicited public input from the parents and teachers and the community on whether or not to move forward with this program. Because a program like this with the New York State mandatory 90 percent attendance requirement we would need the full support of the parents and teachers in order for this program to be successful,” says Bruce Karam, superintendent.

And for some who attended tonight's meeting, they say it worked.

“I think just having the initial presentation was helpful based on some of the rumors or conversations that were just kind of taking place in the beginning. Some of the things that were banded about that were not accurate. Some of those questions were answered tonight,” says Dannelle Parker, parent.

But some also say the next question is what does all of this mean? Will their voices really be heard or will their suggestions fall of deaf ears?

At theend of the meeting, there was a vote. The parents attending voted 2 to 1 to not extend school days. Superintendent Karam says that vote will be taken into consideration on whether to move forward or not.