WASHINGTON — Some of President Obama’s closest advisers are rethinking their plans to leave the White House, to help him regain his political standing and to avoid perceptions that staff members are either escaping or being forced out in a time of duress.

Among them are Alyssa Mastromonaco and Rob Nabors, both deputies to the White House chief of staff, Denis R. McDonough. Ms. Mastromonaco and Mr. Nabors have been with Mr. Obama from the beginning of his presidency, and Ms. Mastromonaco since the start of his Senate career. Both had wanted to leave at the end of the year but have decided to stay indefinitely, officials said.

Others who have indicated that they have put off their departures include the White House counsel, Kathryn Ruemmler, and Gene B. Sperling, who as director of the National Economic Council is Mr. Obama’s chief economic adviser. Jeanne Lambrew, an architect of the Affordable Care Act, had also been hoping to leave but might remain for months more, according to officials familiar with her thinking.

In any White House, the end of the year typically brings staff changes, especially as exhaustion sets in during the later years of an administration. But the Obama team has been as tested as any in decades: by economic calamity, the winding down of two wars, an expansive domestic agenda, various international crises and, lately, the trouble-filled execution of the most ambitious health care program since Medicare.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Controversy over the health care law has helped drive Mr. Obama’s approval ratings to new lows, a trend that the White House is scrambling to reverse. Longtime aides who stayed with the president into the second term — thinking that they would remain for months or a year to help with the transition — are now feeling pressured to extend their service, officials said.

“Everybody is sensitive to making sure that you don’t put the president in a position where he doesn’t have a team,” said one official, who like others interviewed declined to be identified while discussing personnel issues that are fraught with political overtones. "We’re not at war with each other. We actually like each other, and we are loyal to the president.”

Photo

And at a time when White House critics are looking for Mr. Obama to fire someone after the debacle over the health care website, “none of us want to look like we’re being forced out,” the official said.

Ms. Mastromonaco, 37, the deputy chief of staff for operations, had long talked privately of leaving by 2014, said those familiar with her thinking, but she has been reconsidering her decision after discussions with Mr. Obama. She recently took just two days off to marry David Krone, the chief of staff to the Senate majority leader, Harry Reid.

Mr. Nabors, 42, who is the deputy chief of staff for policy, had been less open about his plans but was contemplating leaving after this year, officials said. He is responsible, in particular, for strategy on the budget and climate change and has been pressed by the president and Mr. McDonough to significantly extend his service.

Ms. Mastromonaco was among the young aides who joined Mr. Obama’s presidential campaign in 2007. She had been Mr. Obama’s Senate scheduler and director of his fund-raising committee. In the campaign, she directed scheduling and advance work for his appearances, a job she then held in the White House before her promotion three years ago to deputy chief of staff. Her broad responsibilities grew to include advice on strategy.

Both she and Mr. Nabors, who is African-American, have stood out in an Obama inner circle that is mostly male and white. Mr. Nabors, a longtime senior aide to House Democrats, has served in the administration as deputy budget director, the chief liaison to Congress and, this year, deputy chief of staff.

Some advisers’ change in thinking has also been prompted by colleagues’ exit plans. In particular, the departure of Pete Rouse, 67, Mr. Obama’s longest-serving Washington adviser, will leave a void that will take several aides to fill given Mr. Rouse’s broad contacts and expertise, said Democrats in the administration and Congress. Mr. Rouse, who will leave by Jan. 1, has worked especially closely with Ms. Mastromonaco and Mr. Nabors.

Ms. Lambrew, the health policy aide, had been planning to leave as deputy director of the White House Domestic Policy Council before the bungled rollout on Oct. 1 of the health insurance website, according to people close to her. The hiring last summer of Chris Jennings, a former top Clinton White House adviser, to help with the health care program made her departure more likely. But White House officials said that they had urged her to stay.