By Errol Castens

Oxford Citizen

OXFORD – City of Oxford officials will consider on Tuesday a contract to conduct the city’s next annexation study, which could include several areas of the city including land along the planned extension of West Oxford Loop, among others.

Mike Slaughter, whose Oxford-based urban planning firm has conducted several annexations for the City of Oxford, is expected to offer a contract to the city for consideration at the Board of Aldermen’s meeting on Tuesday following a informational presentation to the board and mayor earlier this month.

Slaughter worked with the city on the petition with Baptist Hospital to bring that into the city in 2013 and on the Callicutt property south of there that was brought into the city in May of last year.

At last week’s meeting, Slaughter took questions and concerns about annexation from city leaders.

“We had pretty much unanimous agreement about our annexation areas,” Mayor George “Pat” Patterson said. “I believe we agreed our first priority was out in the northwest quadrant,” referring to land along the planned extension of West Oxford Loop.

Alderman Robyn Tannehill added, “I’m pretty sure we had two tied for first place – Sisk and west of town where the new roads are,” referring to the West Oxford Loop project and an extension of Sisk Avenue eastward and then southward to University Avenue/Highway 6.

Among other areas targeted for consideration are those long Highway 30 from Highway 7 to Campground/Woodson Ridge Roads and two southwestern portions – one along Old Taylor Road and eastward, the other surrounding Thacker Heights and The Links.

Another area was added to the list during the initial meeting – just south of the site of the old Whirlpool plant, which the University of Mississippi aims to transform into a recreation center and transportation hub in the near future.

“I think down there in the southwest quadrant that within the last few weeks some things have evolved that would bring that up in priority to a close second,” Patterson said. “The university is doing some expansion down there, and the neighborhoods are worried. I’m pretty sure we want to go ahead and look at that. That’s not many rooftops, if any.”

Slaughter said it would be advantageous for the study to look at more areas than the city is sure it wants to annex.

“You’re not annexing one square inch if you commission me and my firm to conduct this study until you adopt an annexation ordinance,” Slaughter said. “I recommend from a pure planning standpoint, the earlier a city includes potential growth areas in the city, the better, because if they develop under substandard ordinances, regulations, water, sewer, drainage, street design, you’re going to inherit a problem if you ever annex it.”

Several city officials voiced an understanding the city is required to extend full utility service to any annexed area within five years, but Slaughter said that is not accurate.

“We may have a large enough area here where it could impact your public works department, your police department, maybe your fire department. We want to make sure we don’t have a negative impact on that,” he said. “We’ll calculate where we may need to extend water and sewer. There’s no requirement that says we’ve got to run water and sewer everywhere within the first five years.”

Slaughter said utility extension could be offered to the court in two phases.

“We’ll tell the court, in the Phase 1 area, ‘This is where we promise we’re going to put water and sewer in during the first five years,’” he said. “For the more rural areas in Phase 2, we say, ‘Water and sewer may or may not go in during the first five years, depending on where development warrants it, it’s necessary and it’s economically feasible to do so.’

“You’re going to run it like a business, just like you do today.”

errol.castens@journalinc.com

Twitter: @oxfordcitizenec