By

Issuing his weekly address Saturday, President Barack Obama said that his Affordable Care Act, more popularly known as Obamacare, had “finished the job” that Medicare and Medicaid started almost 50 years ago to this day.

Medicare and Medicaid were launched in 1965 by then-President Lyndon B. Johnson, and according to Obama, his Affordable Care Act kicked off where those two programs’ legacy left off. “If one of the best measures of a country is how it treats its more vulnerable citizens – seniors, the poor, the sick – then America has a lot to be proud of,” said the president, adding that Obamacare ensures Americans can easily access basic medical services.

“These promises we made as a nation have saved millions of our own people from poverty and hardship, allowing us new freedom, new independence, and the chance to live longer, better lives,” Obama continued, addressing the media. “That’s something to be proud of. It’s heroic.”

In celebration of Medicare and Medicaid’s 50th anniversary, Obama promised to protect the programs from conservative lawmakers who insist that the government should dial down on them, if not completely eliminate them. He said that critics of the programs who believe they are “in crisis” are merely searching for a “political excuse” to reduce funding, privatize them, or eliminate them altogether.

Going forward, Obama hopes that more Americans, particularly aging Baby Boomers, will take advantage of Medicare and Medicaid. He also noted that Obamacare’s criticism from Republicans is nothing new as far as government programs are concerned. “When FDR created Social Security, critics called it socialism,” said Obama. “When JFK and LBJ worked to create Medicare, the cynics said it would take away our freedom.

“But ultimately, we came to see these programs for what they truly are – a promise that if we work hard, and play by the rules, we’ll be rewarded with a basic measure of dignity, security, and the freedom to live our lives as we want.”

Laugh of the day: