The federal government can’t get a darn thing through Congress, so states have to take matters into their own hands. As the midterm elections approach, they’re shining a spotlight on the public policy issues of the day: immigration, the minimum wage, and women’s access to reproductive health care, for starters.

Five of the largest states, representing 37 percent of the U.S. population, are in the midst of gubernatorial elections. Here’s a look at some of the most important domestic issues being debated in these elections and how each candidate would handle them.

Who Has Control Over a Woman’s Body? Texas Candidates Square Off Over Abortion

Democratic state Sen. Wendy Davis became a progressive superstar back in the summer of 2013 when she filibustered a Texas state bill to place draconian restrictions on women’s access to abortions. For better or for worse, much of the Texas governor’s race—or at least the coverage of it—has been about Davis’ battle to give women reproductive choices and allow them to terminate unwanted pregnancies.

Republican candidate for governor, Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott. (Photo: Erich Schlegel/Getty Images)

Republican candidate Greg Abbott, the state’s attorney general, opposes abortion. If Davis wins, which is a long shot in the traditionally red state, it would make a huge statement about the importance of reproductive rights. That’s only one of many differences between the two candidates when it comes to topics being debated at a national level. Davis also supports raising the minimum wage to $10.10, arguing that working Texans need a living wage. Abbott opposes the hike because he believes it will be bad for business.

California Candidates Face a Crisis at the Border With Illegal Minors

President Obama may be waiting until after the election to act on immigration reform for fear it will upset the political calculus for Democratic candidates, but states such as California don’t have that luxury. What to do about the influx of unaccompanied minors fleeing into California to escape gang violence in Central America is one of the most pressing issues in the state.

Democratic Gov. Jerry Brown, the incumbent, put forth a proposal to provide these minors with legal representation. Because the federal government has failed to act on the matter, these children are left to face deportation without any legal help to guide them.

The Brown plan would allocate $3 million in taxpayer money for legal assistance to minors. Neel Kashkari, the Republican challenger, who has a background in finance, said at a recent debate that he is “pro-immigration.” However, immigration reform is not one of the issues that Kashkari is running on, and he has not revealed many details about how he would govern on this matter. Kashkari is exclusively focused on creating jobs and fixing the education system. It’s almost a certainty that Brown will be reelected, given how heavily the state leans Democratic.

A Cuomo Reelection Means More Opportunity for New York Immigrants

New York Governor Andrew Cuomo. (Photo: Andrew Burton/Getty Images)

Like California, New York has a lot of immigration problems that can’t wait for federal action. The incumbent, Democratic Gov. Andrew Cuomo, has a strong record of advancing immigration reform. Last month he signed into law legislation that will help protect immigrants from fraud and other mistreatment as they seek immigration-related assistance.

Staunch immigration reform advocates argue that Cuomo needs to do more to help newcomers. A bill to provide tuition assistance to the children of undocumented immigrants died in the state senate this year. Some faulted Cuomo for not lobbying hard enough for the legislation.

Cuomo’s challenger, Rob Astorino, has taken a much tougher stance on immigration. He opposed New York City’s plan to issue ID cards to illegal immigrants. Astorino has taken a lot of heat for remarks he made back in 2009 suggesting that illegal immigrants were the reason property taxes were rising at an unsustainable level in the suburbs of New York. Since then he has praised the contribution immigrants have made to the state but warned that “Democrats want to entrap them in benefit programs to engender perennial fealty.” In the heavily Democratic state, Cuomo is expected to win reelection handily.

Illinois Candidates Argue Over State Cash

Because of a particularly weak economy, some of the most contentious issues in the Illinois gubernatorial race revolve around money. Democratic Gov. Pat Quinn signed a deeply unpopular pension reform bill into law last winter, and now it’s being challenged by organized labor in court. Republican candidate Bruce Rauner, who made millions in private equity and is often compared to Mitt Romney, wants to reform the pension system by preventing state employees from receiving big pay increases shortly before retirement, capping the current system, and moving toward one where employees put their own money in a retirement savings account with special tax privileges, such as a 401(k).

Former Florida Governor and current Democratic Party candidate for Governor, Charlie Crist . (Photo: Joe Raedle/Getty Images)

Quinn favors raising the minimum wage to $10 an hour, arguing that nobody who works 40 hours a week should live in poverty. Rauner opposes an increase to the minimum wage unless it’s coupled with other business-friendly reforms on taxes and overall worker compensation packages. It’s a tight race. Recently, Rauner led in the polls by a small margin.

Florida Race Could Be a Matter of Life or Death for Some

The governor’s race in Florida could be a matter of life or death. Republican incumbent Gov. Rick Scott favors keeping the “Stand Your Ground” law, which gives Floridians the right to use deadly force if their lives are in danger of grave harm, even if they’re in a public space and have the ability to retreat. In the wake of Trayvon Martin’s death in 2012, African Americans and other minorities have lobbied aggressively to reform the law, arguing that it enables lethal acts of racial profiling.

Republican-turned-Democrat Charlie Crist, the state’s former governor and Scott’s challenger, is open to reforming the controversial self-defense law. However, his position should be viewed skeptically. Before becoming a Democrat, Crist had a long history of supporting gun rights. So far the race is neck and neck.