In 2014, the nomad coach couldn’t get a sniff of a job, or even an interview, in the NFL.

In fact, a year ago last week, he barely could secure a ticket to see Dallas play at AT&T Stadium, where he was the head coach when the imposing edifice opened. He sat among the folks in fifth-deck section 404, had to be concerned his nose would bleed and watched on the mammoth TV scoreboard as his son coached the Washington tight ends.

Harold Phillips was out of the game he loved and had spent all of his life around. He was 67, and nobody in football cared about hiring him.

But he wanted back in.

At 68, “Wade” (his middle name) Phillips is all in and deserves to be the NFL coach of the (first half) of the year — by acclimation.

Wade has produced the No. 1 defense in the NFL — the defense that held Green Bay to 10 points and the great Aaron Rodgers to 77 yards passing, and the defense that primarily is responsible for the Broncos’ immaculate record, which will ascend to 8-0 with a 30-16 victory over the Colts.

“We’re playing pretty good,” the self-effacing, unassuming coach of 45 seasons says. “I don’t do a lot.”

I was having dinner with friends at Shanahan’s when Wade suddenly materialized in a stylish checked shirt and a pair of dress pants, and said hello. I introduced him as the “S.O.B.” — “Son of Bum” (his Twitter handle).

Yes, Wade likes to interact with fans and media. However, he rankled sensitive Packers loyalists by tweeting that he likes “chicken parm … especially with Cheese.”

Some stupid people don’t get Wade’s wry sense of humor and “aw-shucks,” good-ol’-boy attitude reflective of his home state — Texas.

Thirty-two head coaches didn’t get Wade in 2014. They thought he was too ancient and yesterday’s defensive coordinator. He couldn’t get a phone call. In early January, Washington did interview him — but made no offer.

Then, finally, after new Broncos coach Gary Kubiak sought another defensive coordinator, he turned to his former defensive coordinator at Houston. “I’m used to being second choice,” Wade said.

Is everyone obtuse? Wade has been a defensive coordinator for eight teams. All improved considerably in his first season. There was sound reasoning why he became the highest-paid NFL assistant.

The unintelligencia didn’t understand. Wade had trained under two of the premier defensive coaches in history — his father and Buddy Ryan, architect of the Bears’ defense in 1985. Perhaps they didn’t comprehend that Wade has proven himself over and again since he was a defensive coordinator at Luther Stark High School in West Orange, Texas. Maybe they looked at Wade as failed since, he says in that syrupy Texas accent, “I was a lousy head coach.”

Sorry, Wade. He won 56 percent of his games when assuming control, and every team he was head coach of made the playoffs. He was fired in Buffalo, Dallas and, yes, Denver because owners wanted a coach who had footballs flying out of his skull, and Wade was not a screamer or a dreamer. He is a sound, fundamental, hard-working, smart-scheming football man for whom players crave to play.

Bum Phillips was Wade’s idol. Wade played for his father, coached for his father, replaced his father as interim coach in New Orleans when Bum decided to step down. Bum died in 2013, just weeks before Wade took over as interim coach of the Houston Texans when Kubiak experienced a health problem, then was fired. (“Look at the teams I became interim coach,” Wade says. The three were 9-29. Wade was asked to go naked into a blast furnace.)

Wade is a kid at 68, I told him. I was born the same month a year earlier. Wade certainly feels young again with this defensive bunch. “Best talent I’ve ever taken over.”

When Wade really was a kid, his father moved eight times as a high school and college coach. One day, Wade was called into the principal’s office and thought he was in trouble. As he sat there, he could see his house down the street. A moving van pulled up. Wade knew he was transferring again.

In his life, Wade has moved 22 times and lived in 11 states. He settled long enough once to be an exceptional high school quarterback and middle linebacker, and ask the head cheerleader on a date. Wade was recruited by Bear Bryant at Alabama, but decided to join dad at the University of Houston. A few years later, he reconnected with his high school sweetheart, and Wade and Laurie have been married 38 years. Their son, Wes, is an NFL assistant, and their daughter, Tracy, is an actress who has appeared in several major movies.

In his wandering career, Wade has rejoined only one team — the Denver Broncos. He cherishes his five years before (one Super Bowl as coordinator, and as head coach for two seasons) and these incredible Broncos now.

He has a job again. He doesn’t have to pay to get in. He’s not too old.

And Harold Wade Phillips is continuing to prove that he is a brilliant defensive coordinator … especially with Cheese.

Woody Paige: woody@woodypaige.com or @woodypaige