Published: Monday, 10/6/2014 - Updated: 1 year ago



Two candidates vying in northern Ohio's 9th Congressional district square off in debate



Enlarge Republican challenger Richard May is vying for Democrat Marcy Kaptur's seat in Congress.

CLEVELAND -- Two candidates vying in northern Ohio's 9th Congressional district faced off today in a debate that featured disagreements on immigration reform, Congressional redistricting, and the future of Obamacare.

U.S. Rep. Marcy Kaptur (D., Toledo) said comprehensive immigration reform is ready in bill form in the House, controlled by Republicans.

"We need the Speaker of the House, who is from Ohio, to bring it to a vote. It has festered too long," Miss Kaptur said.

Republican Richard May of Cleveland disagreed, saying flatly, "we don't need that much change. Enforce the laws that we have."

"We have plenty of people here to do the work. We don't need thousands and millions of people coming in from Mexico," Mr. May said.

He told Miss Kaptur to tell Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid to allow 380 bills that are sponsored by Republicans to be brought to a vote.

The debate was held at a luncheon of the Cleveland City Club in front of about 70 people. It is only the second joint appearance of the two candidates so far.

Mr. May is retired on disability after 23 years of working in warehouses. He said his disability won't prevent him from working. He also acknowledged that his medical care is covered by the Medicaid expansion under Obamacare, officially the Affordable Care Act. But he criticized the arrangement saying his care is being paid for by borrowing, which will be imposed on future generations.

By contrast, when his health care was covered by Metro Health, the Cuyahoga County health care program, it was paid for each year by the taxpayers because the county is not allowed to run a deficit.

He said Social Security needs to be reformed, including a later retirement date, while Miss Kaptur said the program is sound through 2040.

Mr. May said that if he is elected he would advocate for a change in welfare laws to give bigger benefits to families that engage in productive behavior, such as staying in school and not committing crimes.

Miss Kaptur blasted the Congressional redistricting done by Republicans that she said has caused Ohio, a "50-50 state" in presidential elections, to have 12 Republican House seats and only four Democratic House seats, including hers. She also said redistricting should not be allowed to break up communities, such as Parma.

Miss Kaptur also called for campaign finance reform to prevent a few wealthy individuals from spending millions of dollars to defeat a candidate.

"The Republican Party nationally has engaged in the most calculated strategy of voter suppression I have ever seen," said Miss Kaptur, who is in her 32nd year in Congress.

Mr. May said the United States will have to send troops to defeat the Islamic State that has taken over large parts of Iraq using brutal methods, including beheading. Miss Kaptur didn't rule out boots on the ground but said the only way for the United States to be successful militarily is to have a broad coalition and not appear to be siding with the Sunni or Shiite Muslim sects.

The Republican candidate promised to repeal the Affordable Care Act and replace it with some bipartisan legislation. He said Miss Kaptur voted for the bill "without reading it." That brought a quick retort from Miss Kaptur, who said she read the 900 pages in order to be able to offer amendments. She said later that Congressional bills have far fewer words per page than a typical printed page.

Contact Tom Troy at: tomtroy@theblade.com or 419-724-6058.