Alzheimer's Association, Orange County, based in Irvine, provides information, resources, referrals and services to more than 30,000 individuals and families dealing with a disease that is the fourth-leading cause of death in Orange County.

Jim McAleer’s experience with Alzheimer’s disease has been both a personal and public part of his life.

McAleer, 48, is approaching his 10th anniversary as president and CEO of Alzheimer’s Association, Orange County.

But when he was in his 20s and just starting his career in the nonprofit sector, both his grandmothers died from Alzheimer’s.

“What attracted me to this job,” says the native Georgian of his position, “was not that my grandmothers had this disease, but that my mother was primary caregiver for both.”

In addition to overseeing an organization that serves people with the most common type of dementia, McAleer also meets with 10 families personally on a regular basis.

Coinciding with his 10-year anniversary is the upcoming open house in September for the new headquarters of Alzheimer’s Association, Orange County, made possible by a $27 million bequest in 2012. (The local chapter kept $17 million; $10 million went to help people nationwide.)

The new building is a few miles south, off Interstate 405, of the current Irvine location near John Wayne Airport.

We spoke with McAleer about what he has witnessed over his tenure in dealing with a disease that claims an estimated 84,000 people in Orange County.

Q. What do we know now that we didn’t know in 2004 about this disease?

A. We know its presence when somebody has the disease. We know some of the pathology. What we don’t know is what causes it. We didn’t know what caused it then.

We’re still arguing about what helps and doesn’t help. We’re becoming increasingly clear that the hope is in prevention, more than in cure.

But we were arguing about fish oil 10 years ago; we’re still arguing about fish oil today. We’re still arguing about vitamin E. A lot of the treatments have not progressed much.

Q. Can you talk about why it’s so significant to participate in clinical trials?

A. Without bodies, research doesn’t happen. Without participants in clinical trials, we don’t have research. We don’t find new drugs; we don’t find new treatments of any kind. Nothing that will slow or prevent it.

We have to have people who are at risk and not affected to see if preventive stuff works. There’s a huge study, called the A4 study (a4study.org) they are trying to populate. They want over 10,000 people.

Q. Who’s doing that?

A. It’s an international study. What it’s looking at is, let’s find people who have risk factors, right? Obesity is a risk factor. Smoking – 147 percent increased risk. If you have a first-person relative, it probably increases your risk.

It takes those people, where it doesn’t show up at all clinically, and it’s going to treat them with the same medications we give people with the disease today. Maybe it will stop that beta amyloid (plaque-forming proteins) from aggregating.

That’s a long-term study. It’s prevention. It’s not like you’re treating something today; it’s trying to stop it from happening. ... That’s the only way we’re going to advance.

Q. An earlier story in the Register said that the association helps about 25 percent of the people in Orange County affected by Alzheimer’s. What’s going on with the rest?

A. We’re now probably pushing between 28 and 30 percent. The problem is, the population total is creeping up. ... Twenty-five percent don’t know they have it. So why would they seek help? There may be some changes in their life happening, but they think it’s normal aging and that sort of thing.

There’s probably another 25 percent that’s in strong denial or culturally, you don’t talk about it.

Q. Early detection is important yet doctors don’t routinely check for signs of Alzheimer’s at any particular age, do they? Why not?

A. They’re supposed to. Right now, Medicare requires after 65 that you have an annual screen for memory issues. The people that we are working with, the plans and health systems, aren’t doing it.

We still have a huge number of physicians who think memory loss is a part of normal aging. We have an even greater number of physicians who think that nothing can be done about it.

Q. You’re saying Medicare requires screenings but it’s not happening?

A. Right. Definitely not happening to a great extent. Those requirements are new under the Affordable Care Act and are actually embedded in some of the changes attached to that. So we’re talking two years that’s been required.

But there’s no teeth to it; no penalties if you’re not doing it.

Since this disease is largely diagnosed with change over time, that annual screen can tell you if your memory is changing over time.

Q. What are some recent innovations here to move forward on this issue?

A. We’re fortunate that we live in a county where research is going on every single day, in a number of different places, most notably UCI. There’s some world-class research going on there.

Our patient referral program – going to the different plans like Kaiser, St. Joe’s and Memorial Care and trying to get them to do these screens and refer to us. That’s unique in the nation. It’s not happening anywhere else.

We’re one of the few chapters that are HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act) compliant so we can take that patient information safely, guard it and still communicate with medical-care providers. That’s probably one of our most signature programs.

We also have a couple of different social programs for the earliest stages of the disease that are unique. We do a lot of connecting to culture. We have partnerships with Bowers Museum.

When folks are (diagnosed) really early – still working possibly, still driving – they don’t want to sit in a support group many times. But they do enjoy socializing, hanging out with, commiserating with other people in similar situations.

Q. You’re moving to new headquarters. How is that going to help the people you serve?

A. Visibility and awareness – knowing we’re here. The new building will help accomplish that. It’s a giant billboard for us. All those people driving up and down the 405 will at least know there is a thing called the Alzheimer’s Association.

The other thing it does is it gives us more internal ability to host events to bring people into us, where our resources are strongest. Our material resources, social workers all over the place – we can help you better, closer to home.

The third is for a nonprofit in Orange County it shows stability. It shows we’re here, committed, long term. We’re not going anywhere.

Contact the writer: 714-796-7793 or twalker@ocregister.com