House Speaker Beth Harwell announced on Wednesday the formation of a task force to study expanding health insurance coverage to more low-income Tennesseans. Though the proposal has some puzzling dimensions, it represents a welcome step toward providing more people in our state access to health care.

Tennessee is one of 19 states that have opted not to expand their Medicaid programs as allowed under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Last year, after 18 months of planning in consultation with the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Gov. Bill Haslam pushed Insure Tennessee as an alternative to simply expanding TennCare, the state's Medicaid program. The bill died in Senate committees, leaving an estimated 280,000 low-income Tennesseans without access to insurance coverage and placing rural hospitals at financial risk.

Conceived as a two-year pilot program, Insure Tennessee consists of two plans. One would provide financial assistance to people with access to employer-provided insurance but who cannot afford coverage. The other would feature a combination of TennCare benefits and health care accounts containing credits that could be applied to copays and premiums. Participants could earn additional credits for healthy life choices such as quitting smoking.

Importantly, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services has already given provisional approval of the plan and the Tennessee Hospital Association pledged to cover any costs not borne by the federal government. The state could opt out if the federal government or the hospital association back out of their commitments.

With Haslam at her side, Harwell said on Wednesday her "3-Star Healthy Project" task force would apply "conservative Tennessee principles" to come up with a plan to take to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services in June. She envisions the plan would largely consist of experimental pilot programs, with limited enrollment and features like health savings accounts, premiums and incentives for healthy behaviors by enrollees and "circuit breakers" that would halt the programs if costs exceed projections.

In other words, it would be a remixed and hopefully politically palatable version of Insure Tennessee.

The task force members either opposed Insure Tennessee or hold key House committee positions. They are Cameron Sexton of Crossville, the task force chairman, who chairs the House Health Committee; Steve McManus of Memphis, who chairs the Insurance and Banking Committee; Roger Kane of Knoxville, who is in the insurance industry; and Matthew Hill of Jonesborough. All are Republicans. There are no senators on the task force.

Coming just after the qualifying deadline for the August primary, the timing of the announcement seemed based on election-year politics. All the task force members are unopposed in the primary and now are safe from challengers who could count on an avalanche of negative advertising from ultra-conservative groups opposed to any type of Medicaid expansion.

Democrats, who by and large supported Insure Tennessee, were unimpressed with Harwell's effort. "What a sad political joke. What a political charade," said House Democratic Caucus Chairman Mike Stewart of Nashville.

Harwell's proposal could be seen as an indication GOP lawmakers are looking for a politically acceptable way to overcome their aversion to anything connected to the Affordable Care Act. Polls show a solid bipartisan majority of Tennesseans support Insure Tennessee.

The task force is charged with achieving in two months what the Haslam administration spent a year and a half doing — arriving at a plan the federal government would approve that would not cost the state a single additional penny. Task force members would be wise use the governor's sound, fiscally and socially responsible plan as the centerpiece of their effort.