Jane Anderson, MD - California

Karl Anderson, MD - California

Steven Boyce, MD - North Carolina

Donald Carmichael, MD - Alabama

Merlynn Carson, MD - Maryland

Rosemary Fernandez-Stein, MD - North Carolina

Gerard Gianoli, MD - Louisiana

Alma Golden, MD - Texas

Kris Held, MD - Texas

Robert Henderson, pharmacist - Maryland

Jeff Hook, MD - South Carolina

Jane Hughes, MD - Texas

Tim Jordan, MD - North Carolina

Chris Leggett, MD - Georgia

Jane Orient, MD - Arizona

Dee Parsons, nurse - North Carolina

William Parsons, MD - North Carolina

Evan Reasor, MD - California

Juliana Reasor, nurse - California

Ezra Riber, MD - South Carolina

John Rosemond, psychologist - North Carolina

Robert Sewell, MD - Texas

Carrie Shapiro, patient advocate - Maryland

Kevin Speight, MD - North Carolina

Jennifer Stanislaus, MD - South Carolina

Dave Stein, MD - North Carolina

Michael Strickland, MD - Ohio

Christina Taylor, MD - Iowa

Clark Warden, MD - Louisiana

Craig Wax, DO - New Jersey

John R. Whiffen, MD - California

Kumar Yogesh, MD - Tennessee

Retired neurosurgeon and 2016 GOP presidential candidate Dr. Ben Carson announced Friday that a group of doctors will lead his "National Medical Coalition."Carson said in a statement that the group of medical professionals "will include authors, lecturers, and policy experts whose respective medical specialties range from dentistry to anesthesiology to ophthalmology."The statement notes that the group of doctors will help spread Dr. Carson's message of "liberty, simplicity and personal responsibility for healthcare reform."Carson's "Nationals Medical Coalition" team includes:"I'm thrilled and grateful that these distinguished professionals have agreed to join me to give voice to We the People," said Dr. Carson. "Together, we will craft real solutions to the grave healthcare challenges confronting Americans."Dr. Jennifer Stanislaus of South Carolina added, "I have long admired Dr. Carson for his distinguished medical career.... I respect his strong values and commitment to holding Washington accountable to the voters. We need his leadership to repeal and replace Obamacare, and I'm excited to participate in the effort to restore the doctor-patient relationship and help end the distortions created by vast government intrusions into our healthcare system."