Wesley the puppy has a lot to smile about.

The puppy from Michigan has become a viral sensation after Harborfront Hospital for Animals posted photos of him with braces on their Facebook page.

"Orthodontia in pets is normally not for aesthetic purposes, but because of health concerns," the animal hospital wrote. "The good news is, the correction he needed will be brief, perhaps only a few weeks."

While some may be skeptical of "doggie braces," the animal hospital wrote that Wesley needed tooth alignment because he could not close his mouth completely. That's where veterinarian Dr. James Moore came in.

According to the Harborfront Hospital for Animals website, Dr. Moore, DVM owns Veterinary Dental Solutions (VDS), a division of Harborfront Hospital for Animals located in Spring Lake, Michigan.

"When people hear that Dr. Moore is a "doggie dentist," they immediately say things like: 'What? Does he put braces on dogs, too?'" the Harborfront Hospital wrote. "The answer is . . . yes. Yes, he does."

The Harborfront Hospital said on its website that Dr. Moore also does Endodontics on animals, which includes root canals, often necessary because of pain, and oral surgery for things like fractured jaws.

He lectures to veterinarians and veterinary technicians at dental seminars around the country on topics including maxillofacial surgery, oral surgery, endodontia and surgical endodontia, surgical extraction and dental cleaning, scaling and polishing, the website said.

Harborfront Hospital said the reason they posted about Wesley and his braces is because February is National Pet Dental Health month, and they thought it was a good time to let people know about the importance of oral health when it comes to their pets.

Wesley has become such a huge hit on the Internet, with the original Facebook post shared more than 250,000 times, that the hospital followed up with another Facebook post on Monday night.

They wrote that they are overwhelmed with the support and interest they have received in Wesley.

"He is happily enjoying some of the benefits of his celebrity (although he already had ample hugs, kisses and belly rubs)," the hospital wrote. "Most importantly, he is eating well, playing, and feeling wonderful."

One thing is for sure, Wesley is adorable.