Photo

WASHINGTON — The Affordable Care Act survived another major test at the Supreme Court this week, all but assuring its place in the social safety net, but the legal challenges to the law are far from over.

One of the more significant tests is a lawsuit filed by Speaker John A. Boehner and other House Republicans who contend that the Obama administration is spending billions of dollars without the necessary appropriations from Congress.

The government is also trying to fend off dozens of lawsuits challenging rules that require health plans to offer women coverage for contraceptives without co-payments or deductibles.

The suit filed by Mr. Boehner, in the name of the House of Representatives, is not just a bookkeeping dispute. It involves fundamental questions of executive power and Congress’s power of the purse.

At issue is a provision of the health care law that requires insurance companies to reduce co-payments, deductibles and other out-of-pocket costs for certain low-income people. The federal government reimburses insurers for the “cost-sharing reductions.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In their lawsuit, House Republicans say the Obama administration needed, but never received, an appropriation to make these payments to insurance companies. As a result, they contend, the spending violates the Constitution, which says, “No money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in consequence of appropriations made by law.”

President Obama requested the money as part of the budget he sent to Congress in April 2013, but Congress did not act on the request. Seeing the issue as an urgent priority, the administration began making the payments in early 2014, using money from a separate account established for tax refunds and tax credits.

More than seven million people have insurance purchased through the federal marketplace. About 60 percent of them receive cost-sharing reductions, which lower their out-of-pocket costs for doctors’ services, hospital care and prescription drugs.

The discounts are available to people with incomes from 100 percent to 250 percent of the poverty level (roughly $11,700 to $29,300 a year for an individual).

This type of assistance is different from the subsidies upheld by the Supreme Court on Thursday. The subsidies, in the form of tax credits, help people pay insurance premiums.

The Congressional Budget Office estimates that the government will provide $599 billion worth of premium tax credits and $136 billion in cost-sharing payments to insurance companies in the coming decade.

In their lawsuit, House Republicans say, “Congress has not, and never has, appropriated any funds” for the cost-sharing reductions.

The Obama administration contends that the House does not have standing to sue because its members have not suffered a concrete injury or specific harm. The case is “a generalized institutional dispute between the executive branch and one chamber of the legislative branch,” the Justice Department said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But at a hearing in Federal District Court here in May, Judge Rosemary M. Collyer expressed skepticism about the government’s argument that she should dismiss the lawsuit.

The government is also juggling more than 50 cases involving the requirement for coverage of contraceptives. The Supreme Court ruled last year that family-owned for-profit corporations like Hobby Lobby could not be required to provide coverage of contraceptives for their employees if the companies objected on religious grounds.

After that decision, the administration issued a rule that it said was intended to accommodate the objections of religious groups.

At least four federal appeals courts have sided with the government, saying the new rule does not violate rights protected by the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993. The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, in New Orleans, upheld the rule this week, saying it did not place a substantial burden on religious employers or require them to “authorize or facilitate the use of contraceptives.”

Courts elsewhere are considering similar lawsuits, including one filed by the Little Sisters of the Poor, an order of Roman Catholic nuns.

Mark L. Rienzi, senior counsel at the Becket Fund for Religious Liberty, which represents plaintiffs in several of the cases, said Friday: “With its contraceptive mandate, the government is trying to take over the health plans of religious ministries and use them in ways that violate their beliefs. The government can give out contraceptives in other ways without conscripting the Little Sisters of the Poor and their health plans.”

Administration officials said they were confident that they would prevail in those cases, as they did this week in the subsidies case, King v. Burwell.

Sylvia Mathews Burwell, the secretary of health and human services, described her relief when she learned of the decision allowing subsidies for people in more than 30 states that use the federal exchange.

“It was very emotional,” Ms. Burwell said Friday, because she had “met all these people” who benefited from the law in the last year.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Ms. Burwell said she hoped to persuade more states to expand Medicaid. She said she believed that she could work out agreements with officials from Montana, Tennessee and Utah, for example.