Photo

A confession: I am a health economist, and I cannot rationally select a health plan.

I buy health insurance through the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program, or F.E.H.B.P., which is very similar to the Affordable Care Act’s exchanges. Like the exchanges, the federal employee program runs an online marketplace with a choice of plans, which vary by region.

Most workers don’t have a lot of choice among plans offered by their employer. But the federal employee program offers me about 20 plans to choose from, and a similar number to almost all other federal employees. This puts me in a position akin to a consumer selecting among many plans in an Affordable Care Act exchange or a Medicare beneficiary selecting among many Medicare Advantage plans.

I have a lot of sympathy for consumers in these markets. Comparing health plans is hard, even for a health economist like me. (And it’s arguably harder on the Affordable Care Act exchanges, where consumers may also need to report income and apply for subsidies. Federal employees just need to choose a plan.) Each year when I shop for coverage through my employer, I feel like I’m buying myself at least as much grief as I am insurance.

In one sense, buying health insurance is not different from buying any other product, like a laptop computer or a refrigerator. There are two things to consider: how much you pay (the price) and what you get (the quality). Quality can mean a lot of things for a health plan, and your criteria may differ from mine. For me, the most important aspect is which doctors and hospitals are in its network and, hence, most generously covered. (Some plans cover out-of-network providers less generously; some not at all.)

A health plan’s price is more amenable to quantitative analysis, but still hard to assess.

Each laptop has a sticker price, as does each refrigerator. Health insurance has not one but many price-like characteristics. The premium is the most salient price, perhaps. But there are lots of others like co-payments (fixed dollar amounts you pay each time you visit a doctor, get a lab test or pick up a prescription), co-insurance (a percentage of the cost you pay for each visit, test or prescription), and deductibles (how much you pay before your plan pays a single dollar). Complicating matters, deductibles do not apply to every service, and co-payments and co-insurance can vary by service — a different amount for a hospital stay vs. a primary care visit vs. a visit to a specialist, for a brand-name drug vs. a generic, and so forth.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Given all this, computing something like a sticker price for a plan is daunting. The actual amount an insurance plan will cost me next year is its premium plus a complex interaction of its various other prices with the specific types of health care services my family will use. Fortunately, for federal employee plans, there is an online resource that helps simplify this calculation. Using The Guide to Health Plans for Federal Employees & Annuitants, federal employees can compare the total cost of premiums and cost sharing of plans for low, average and high levels of health care spending. (Low is about $3,000 in annual health care spending, and high is about $30,000.) This guide, which I have used, also includes plan quality ratings. A similar guide exists for the Illinois Affordable Care Act exchange, but for no others.

One problem is that I don’t know how much or what kind of health care services my family will use next year. But based on past experience, I can make a reasonable guess as to whether it will be low, average or high. Seeing how my total cost for each plan varies across that range helps me understand the consequences of increases or decreases in use.

The Upshot In a weekly e-mail newsletter, get the best of The Upshot's analysis about politics, policy and everyday life.

But I would find it helpful to supplement that approach with a more precise calculation based on the level of health care my family tends to use. For instance, how much would each plan have cost me last year? The answer is a much closer analog to the type of sticker price one sees for refrigerators and laptops. I’m aware of no online insurance market that provides this type of information.