After spending 12 precious, unpaid weeks with a newborn baby, many moms head right back to work. Along with setting up child care and functioning on limited sleep, nursing mothers have to navigate office pumping policies.

Pumping at work just became far less stressful for some moms in Texas. Starting Sept. 1, a new bill requires all public employers to allow reasonable breaks and accommodation for salaried workers who need to express breast milk.

Hourly workers across the nation are already guaranteed this right. The Affordable Care Act of 2010 amended section 7 of the Fair Labor Standards Act, requiring employers to grant breaks for pumping up to one year after a child is born, and workers are able to use a private location other than a bathroom. Texas’ law is similar, although it lists a single-stall bathroom as an acceptable lactation location.

With the federal law protecting only hourly workers, it’s up to each state to institute its own laws for salaried workers. Twenty-seven states have established laws for moms who need to pump at work, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures.

That coverage varies across the nation. Texas’ legislation doesn’t include salaried workers in the private sector. Georgia’s law allows employers to opt out of pumping breaks if they “unduly disrupt workplace operations.” Colorado requires pumping breaks for up two years after a child is born, and employers must make a “reasonable effort” to establish a private space other than a bathroom stall. California requires all employers to grant breaks to any mother who wants to pump, with no age requirement listed for the child. Twenty-three states—including Massachusetts, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania—do not require employers to allow breaks for salaried employees.

Moms who pump at work are likely to continue breast-feeding longer than those who don’t, according to a 2011 study on the law’s impact on nursing. Not only is skipping pumping sessions or not pumping for long enough uncomfortable for nursing moms, but it can also lead to a diminished milk supply. Because of breast milk’s protective antibodies, the World Health Organization recommends that infants be breast-fed exclusively for the first six months of life and with supplemented food for the first two years. WHO also notes that breast-feeding helps reduce a child’s risk of becoming obese or developing type 2 diabetes.

Although Texas’ law doesn’t extend to all nursing moms, advocates feel it is a step in the right direction.

“This new law will make sure that more babies will get off to a healthy start in life,” Alice Bufkin, policy associate at Texans Care for Children, told the Texas Observer. “It’s incredibly important that we have workplaces that are supportive of moms and their decisions to breastfeed.”