Sioux Falls, SD

A shortage of skilled laborers in the United States has President Obama and others turning toward apprenticeships to fill the gaps. A firm with four locations including Sioux Falls already has an in-house program underway.

After working as a mechanic, Josh Olberding wanted to try a new career in plumbing and pipe fitting but he didn't want to be saddled with student loans.

"I know a lot of people that went to school for four years and they come out and they've got $80,000 in debt for school loans. I came out of apprenticeship school with zero debt," Olberding said.

Olberding went through four years of on-the-job training at Midwestern Mechanical. The company's apprenticeship program is approved by the U.S. Department of Labor. Christine Therkildsen is in charge of the training that prepares workers to take a state exam at the end.

"You're ready to have a journeyman's license. You haven't accrued college debt. You have the training and you have the earning potential a college graduate would have," Therkildsen said.

Her passion for apprenticeships is sending her to meetings across the country to discuss the benefits with other businesses. She'll travel to Dallas for a regional event at the end of the month and Washington, D.C. in September.

"I really would love to share some things that have worked for us but then also get some feedback from other corporations or organizations or companies to find out what's working for them and what works with the apprenticeship program so we can make it last and grow," Therkildsen said.

Already a foreman with Midwestern Mechanical, Olberding is glad he took the time to complete 8,000 hours of training as well as classroom time. It's led him to where he is today.

"There's a lot to learn so you're never getting bored. You always have something new you can learn," Olberding said.

Midwestern Mechanical's apprenticeship program trains workers to be journeyman, teachers, foreman, superintendents and estimators.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.