Mike Fitts, who succeeded Scott Cowen as the president of Tulane University in July, says that incoming presidents typically arrive with one of two agendas. One involves laying out a rigid 10-point plan for success. The other involves a more passive approach, engaging in what he called "listening tours" and letting others explain what a school needs.

"I'm not going to do either of those things," Fitts, 61, recently explained inside a conference room in Tulane's Gibson Hall. Rather, he said, he came to Tulane with clear ideas about what areas distinguish it from other universities in the United States. "I'm interested in engaging the campus in discussions of those areas to figure out: 'In what ways can Tulane be a leader?'"

Chief among Tulane's distinguishing characteristics, Fitts said, is the school's policy of allowing students to major in multiple fields of study at more than one of Tulane's five undergraduate schools. This model, he said, better prepares students to become leaders in today's society, where problems do not fall neatly into one academic area or another.

Fitts is familiar with this interdisciplinary approach. Before joining Tulane, he served as the dean of the University of Pennsylvania Law School for 14 years. In that time, he expanded the school's number of degree and certificate programs, encouraging law students to earn separate degrees related to their field of interest. Today, about 70 percent of Penn law graduates receive an additional degree or certificate.

Fitts said this philosophy should not be confined to prospective lawyers. "If you're going to be a doctor, you ought to understand finance, given the introduction of the Affordable Care Act," he said. "If you're going to be an engineer, you should have an understanding of how management issues play out in that profession."

Fitts is in many ways a product of the University of Pennsylvania system, whose progressive reputation extends to its founding by Benjamin Franklin in 1740. Fitts was raised in Philadelphia, where his grandfather was the dean of Penn's Wharton School of Business and his father was the chief of surgery at Penn medical school.

Fitts graduated from Harvard, earned a law degree from Yale, and later worked as a clerk at the 3rd U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Philadelphia and Office of Legal Counsel at the U.S. Justice Department. But he eventually returned to Penn, where he taught law for 15 years before accepting the role of dean.

While initially reluctant to stop teaching, he quickly embraced his new role.

"I came from family of academic administrators, and I saw the emotional and public rewards it conferred," he said. "It gives you the ability to actually make an impact on a place, as long as you think long term and stay focused on the goals you think will move the institution forward."

One of those goals involves integrating technology more deeply into Tulane's curriculum. At Penn, Fitts took part in studies of the so-called "flipped classroom model," in which lectures are made available online and professors engage directly with students during class time.

The studies showed that, while the median exam scores remained the same, the scores showed greater distribution -- suggesting that while some students embraced the model, others rejected it. For Fitts, such findings typify the pros and cons online learning presents for universities like Tulane, which recently began its own experiment with flipped classrooms.

Part of Fitts' mission, he said, is to figure out "how changes in technology will allow us to be more efficient, while retaining those things that make us distinctive and different."

Fortunately, he said, Tulane does not lack for distinctiveness. Besides its location in New Orleans, it attracts more students from more than 300 miles away than any other college in the United States.

The school's geographic diversity enhances what Fitts sees as the very reason for the undergraduate experience: the chance to engage with people from vastly different backgrounds along a broad range of intellectual and social areas.

Fitts also noted that Tulane's strong sense of place is getting stronger. On Saturday, the school hosted its first football game inside its new $73 million, 33,000-seat Yulman Stadium, on campus, which Fitts said will allow students, faculty, staff and alumni to unite more regularly.

Moreover, the economic rebirth of New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina has persuaded more graduates to remain in the city, Fitts says, allowing current students to connect with local alumni for internships and career advice.

Three months into the job, Fitts characterized his transition from Penn to Tulane as busy, exciting and relatively smooth. Weather-wise, life in New Orleans has required a bit more of an adjustment.

"July and August in Philadelphia are hot and humid, but not as consistently hot and humid as New Orleans," he said, laughing. "Luckily, the air-conditioning here is second-to-none."