Health insurance is good, but having it does not mean you no longer have to worry about the cost of getting sick.

Many health plans, including most sold on the new insurance exchanges such as Access Health CT, come with high deductibles. That means you should be prepared to pay thousands of dollars out-of-pocket before your insurance kicks in.

People with employer-based health insurance generally have lower deductibles that are set as part of the negotiated price of the insurance plans. But people looking for insurance under the Affordable Care Act, a.k.a. Obamacare, are likely to pay more.

For 2016, the deductible is capped at $6,850 for an individual insurance plan and $13,700 for a family plan. That's the amount you'll have to pay out of pocket for such things as diagnostic tests, prescriptions, hospitalization, outpatient services, etc. before your health insurance starts to cover part of your care.

Most health insurance plans pay for preventive services such as check-ups, vaccines, and routine cancer screening, including mammograms and colonoscopies. But if these tests find a problem, you may be on the hook.

"Let's say your plan's deductible is $5,000. It's a huge sticker shock," said Karen Pollitz, a senior fellow at the Kaiser Family Foundation, a non-profit in California that studies health policy issues. And, she said, it may well prevent people from seeking necessary care.

"Lots of times this is a surprise," Pollitz said of sudden medical bills. "You find a lump while in the shower … and as soon as you do'' the bills start piling up. "They all want to be paid in 90 days."

With many smaller companies no longer offering health insurance benefits to their employees, the exchanges have become popular for those seeking health insurance for themselves and their families. By February 2015, about 11.2 million Americans had signed up for health insurance, much of it heavily subsidized by tax credits when income levels allow.

The federal government has tried to drive home the point that having health insurance is not only financially prudent, it's the law. The federal penalty for not having health insurance in 2016 is $695 per person, $2,085 per family, or 2.5 percent of income, whichever is greater.

Federal tax credits help reduce the cost of insurance premiums on the exchange, yet the cost is still typically higher than those negotiated by insurers and large employers.

Tax credits and penalties aside, deductibles are really just a method of cost shifting that some believe will bring a little price sensitivity to health care spending that reached just over $3 trillion in 2014, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation.

Dr. Victor G. Villagra, a researcher with the Health Disparities Institute at University of Connecticut Health Center, studies the cost of health care and health insurance. He said high-deductible health insurance is designed to rein in the cost of health care by raising awareness about the cost of care. The theory is that those with a $5,000 insurance deductible would make, or at least try to make, smarter choices when spending their health care dollars.

"That is easier said than done," Villagra said.

To make smarter choices, people first need accurate and complete information so they can comparison shop. But unlike buying a car or a washing machine, health care rarely has a visible price tag. And there are few buying guides such as Consumer Reports to help you find the best deal.

When it comes to determining the real cost of your health care and health insurance — good luck!

Villagra said buying insurance has become too complex, and because of that, many people shopping for insurance on the exchanges buy plans without having any idea what they are purchasing. As a result, many bought plans that they did not use. Villagra pointed to a recent survey of people who purchased "qualified health insurance" through Access Health CT. It showed that 36 percent of the enrollees "have not used their [health insurance] at all."

One challenge for consumers on the exchange is finding a plan that best fits their budget and their health care needs. To find that, people must wade through hundreds of pages of legalese and fine print — a task that can be daunting for insurance professionals and downright impossible for the rest of us.

"A 45-year-old, single man making $45,000 per year living in New London … would face a choice of 38 different plans through Access Health CT," Villagra said, adding that benefits are frequently explained "using terminology that surveys show an insurance-naïve person usually would not understand."

Then there's the deductible itself. Those who must pay the first $6,000 or so up front for themselves and up $13,700 for their family will likely think long and hard about seeking medical care.

Already "one in four Americans is struggling with medical bills they cannot pay," Pollitz said. A survey of personal bankruptcy filings in 2007 found 62 percent were the result of medical debt.

"It may prevent people from seeking care if they know they must pay for it," Villagra said. "It's a huge problem."