Students' viral video, local fire chief abroad and Congressional junkets in this week's editorial roundup.

The Nekoosa High School community made a school pride video (Photo: Video still image)

Nekoosa High School students and staff members really got some school spirit going during homecoming week. They lip-synced to four songs, which they videotaped in one continuous shot throughout the school. Everyone was involved. Every area of the school was highlighted. When you watch the video, you can see how much work went into planning the route, timing it out and getting the "singers" to keep it moving.

Senior Ben Melke coordinated the project with the help of Paul Hahn, a teacher at NHS, who planned the route, and Eric Peterson, an Alexander Middle School teacher who filmed it.

Nekoosa High shows Papermaker pride with lip-sync video

"In my 14 years of teaching at NHS, I've never seen our school come together and have so much spirit, and I'm proud of the hard work and vision that Ben Melke brought to our school. I didn't know we had it in us," said Abbe Bredl, a teacher at NHS.

"The amount of school spirit that was shown in the 14-minute video was unreal. It was really cool to see all the clubs, sport teams and teaching staff come together and show that Nekoosa is more than just the pumpkin fest and (the) mill," said Jake Pech, senior at NHS.

What an awesome way to celebrate their school and show their Papermaker pride.

Watch the video:

Local firefighter trains others abroad

Pittsville Fire Chief Jerry Minor traveled to Ecuador recently, but it wasn't just a vacation. He and six other firefighters from the U.S. traveled to South America to share knowledge and demonstrate firefighting equipment, donated by fire departments across the U.S.

After the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, a surviving firefighter from New York City formed an organization called Gear Up Foundation to replace outdated gear and equipment. But those older items aren't without value, so they are donated to communities of the world that lack equipment or regulations for old, donated equipment.

Story: Pittsville fire chief helps train in Ecuador

Minor and his fellow fire personnel were chosen to help train about 200 firefighters from Columbia, Ecuador and Peru.

"We were treated royally, and I was amazed how hungry they were to gain knowledge so they could do a better job with the limited equipment they have to work with," Minor said. "They provided us with five interpreters so we could communicate wherever we went. Much of our teachings involved training of vehicle extrication and handling of breathing equipment.

"It was an unforgettable lifetime experience that was sprinkled with an opportunity to not only teach approved procedures of fighting fires and saving lives, but it was also a gratifying experience to view the beauty of the country, its people and to get a taste of different foods, language and their culture. The open arms reception and their thirst for knowledge left a lasting impression on me."

Thanks to Minor for sharing what he believes in to help other parts of the world be safer places to live.

Congressional junkets don't stop

The millions of dollars' worth of free travel gifted to members of Congress each year by special-interest groups attracts attention from good government groups and watchdog journalists, but the arrangements continue. Our colleagues at Appleton's Post-Crescent Media gave the practice a big thumbs down:

"There have been 1,600 such trips this year," Post-Crescent Media writes, "including 27 — at a value of $80,000 — taken by members, families and staff of the Wisconsin delegation.

"Defenders say the trips are meant to be educational for congressional representatives. Surely they are, to some extent. But they're also meant to advocate for the trip funders' organization and their positions. And that's not in the public's interest.

"Public Citizen, a nonpartisan consumer-rights group, says privately sponsored travel should be banned. That sounds like a good idea."

Read or Share this story: http://wrtnews.co/1xAMRNi