Not happy with pushing Christians to the back of the bus, President Obama has tossed a vast majority of them under the bus - then backed up over them.

WASHINGTON, April 12, 2015 – Americans will soon mark the day when a new war of cultural terrorism was launched against Christianity. That day occurred when President Obama denigrated Christianity, an event that occurred at a recent Easter prayer breakfast.

Obama said, “On Easter, I do reflect on the fact that as a Christian, I am supposed to love. And I have to say that sometimes when I listen to less than loving expressions by Christians, I get concerned. But that’s a topic for another day,” according to Breitbart.

The audience responded with laughter and applause instead of outrage. But does this president show contempt for Muslims on their holidays? The answer is no!

Obama’s disrespectful attitude toward Christians and Christianity makes a mockery of the words he uttered when he took the oath of office. Twice. Obama’s attitude toward the closing words of this oath − “So help me God” − has to leave Christians wondering what God was he truly referring to: the God of Christianity or of Islam.

Warnings have been raised in the past concerning Obama’s casually dismissive attitude toward Christianity. Our first clue occurred in 2007 when then-Sen. Obama stated to Christian Broadcasting Network News,

“Whatever we once were, we’re no longer just a Christian nation; we are also a Jewish nation, a Muslim nation, a Buddhist nation, a Hindu nation and a nation of nonbelievers.”

According to a December 2013 national survey an overwhelming 85 percent of Americans still consider themselves to be Christians. This in effect would still make America a Christian nation. The same logic applies in Israel. Since a majority of its citizens are Jewish, it is a Jewish nation. It is called logic and commonsense.

Unfortunately, what the president has revealed since taking office in 2009 is that logic and commonsense are not his partners. Instead, his purpose has been to strip Christians of the integrity of their religious beliefs, principles and values by rendering all of them null and void. The harsh reality is that the president has not only sent Christians to the back of the bus. He has actually attempted to kick followers of Jesus Christ off of the bus.

Examine the facts:

In 2009, Obama orders that a monogram symbolizing Jesus’ name be covered at a Georgetown University speech.

be covered at a Georgetown University speech. The Obama administration announces that the rights of religious conscience for individuals will not be protected under the Affordable Care Act.

for individuals will not be protected under the Affordable Care Act. Obama’s White House avoids noting or celebrating traditional Biblical holidays but recognizes major Muslim holidays Ramadan, Eid-ul-Fitr, Hajj and Eid-ul-Adha.

Ramadan, Eid-ul-Fitr, Hajj and Eid-ul-Adha. Under the Obama administration, Maxwell Air Force Base bans Bibles being handed out to willing recruits.

For two years Obama refuses to fill the post of religious freedom ambassador , an appointee whose primary task is to confront religious persecution across the world.

, an appointee whose primary task is to confront religious persecution across the world. Obama refuses to attack Islamic extremists for murdering Kurdish Christians, for beheading Egypt’s Coptic Christians or for raping, burning and beheading Iraqi Christians.

Obama refuses to defend a Houston Christian pastor’s right to preach in accordance with his beliefs.

Obama refuses to protect the right of Indiana pizzeria owners to practice their Christian beliefs in the way they run their business.

“Whoever then annuls one of the least of these commandments, and teaches others to do the same, shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven; but whoever keeps and teaches them, he shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.… .” − Matthew 5:19

For many true Christians, and in particular for those in the black community, the president’s words and requests for them to ignore their Christian faith to support same-sex marriage and abortion have felt like acid dripping upon their heads. In effect, Obama was telling them to disregard the word of God, which would essentially eviscerate the very essence of their Christian faith.

The time for tolerance and turning the other cheek by Christians is over in this presidency. There is an evil that is attempting to rot the very fruit of the Word of God, and the blame for this lies squarely on President Obama. The time to merely sit at our kitchen table passively with our heads bowed is over. Now, each man, woman and child of Christian faith has to call this president out.

On Communities Digital News’ recent Standing at Freedom’s Gate show, guests the Rev. Owen Alston and civil rights leader and national radio show host Lonnie Poindexter stressed that the truth and the word of God were being held hostage. This president has ordered his officials to put a legal gag on the Word of God. One can only conclude that his intention is to un-resurrect Jesus Christ.

According to the Rev. Alston and Lonnie Poindexter, America’s Christians insisted that millions of Christians in America are unwilling to witness or permit the undoing of their Christian faith any longer. They are locked and loaded for religious freedom. They are locked with faith and loaded with the word of God.

Obama has seriously miscalculated the warrior spirit of the faithful in Christ. 2015 is not the end as he would want and expect it to be. Instead, 2015 is only the beginning. Obama’s words have unleashed the birth of a Religious Christian Civil Rights Movement.

“Do not think that I came to abolish the Law or the Prophets; I did not come to abolish but to fulfill. For truly I say to you, until heaven and earth pass away, not the smallest letter or stroke shall pass from the Law until all is accomplished.” − Matthew 5:17-18

God is at the center of this resurrection, and it is his love and the power of Jesus Christ that arms the Religious Christian Civil Rights Movement March that begins in each home and on each street.

Today we are standing at the very entrance of Christianity’s Freedom’s Gate. Obama may have taken his oath of office on the Bible. But the soldiers of faith will be guided to re-energize, regain and restore the Word of God contained with for America…so help us God.