On Friday, Jack Wright stands next to Rolex Bar Twister, the son of the No. 1 lifetime leading performance stallion. ( Sarah Rose / Daily Record )

A horse stands in Jack Wright's barn on Friday. Wright said the horses he has trained have received about 30 world and reserve titles since the late 1980s. (Sarah Rose / Daily Record)

Penrose — A Penrose man is the trainer of the current top two lifetime leading performance stallions in the world.

Tru Rolex has been the leading horse for several years, and Gay Bar Drummer became No. 2 last year, said Jack Wright's wife, Holly.

The Paint Horses received the honors after accumulating points from various shows.

Wright said he has received a total of about 30 world and reserve titles since he started showing horses in the late 1980s.

In November at the 2014 APHA World Championship Paint Horse Show in Forth Worth, Texas, Wright added to his collection of awards. The titles included the high point all around horse, high point all around reserve, the high point western horse, the high point exhibitor award and more.

"I also won five world titles and two or three reserves," Wright said. "That was in each event. We do the tie down roping, calf roping, the head and heeling steer stopping and then I was in the working cow horse and the reigning."

At the event, he received $500 cash, a custom trophy, saddle pad, accessory tote, splint boots, bell boots, accessory tote and a bridle bag.

He said his favorite part of show business is training the horses.

"My biggest thing is finding a job the horse likes," Wright said. "If he doesn't like his job, he isn't going to be very good at it. I consider a horse like a person. Each person is different, every horse is, too."

On average, it takes one to two years to get a horse ready to compete, he said.

Advertisement

Wright said some horses require training every day, while others need less.

"It just depends how hard they try and their ability to do it," he said.

The 53-year-old said he has been showing horses for more than half of his life.

"My high school sweetheart kinda got me into it," Wright said. "She had been showing a little bit before she met me, and I kind of just followed the pursuit of it. It ended up growing into a great thing."

He said his relationship with Christ has helped him succeed.

Sarah Rose: 719-285-5157, roses@canoncitydailyrecord.com or twitter.com/sarahfaithrose