Stock market update:

Stocks closed at new highs today as investors reacted positively to remarks from Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen and Greece won EU approval for its proposed budget reforms. The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 92.35 points to 18,209.19, while the Standard & Poor's 500 gained 5.82 points to 2,115.48, both eclipsing Friday's record closes. The Nasdaq composite finished up 7.15 points to 4,968.12. (USA Today)

Europe's benchmark stock index closed at the highest level in more than seven years today, as European officials approved an extension of Greece's bailout. (MarketWatch)



Crude oil futures fell today as expectations that this week's reports will show U.S. crude inventories rose again countered supportive news of Libyan oilfields being shut. (Reuters)

Business news:

JPMorgan Chase plans to close 300 bank branches over the next two years, about 5 percent of the total, as more customers move online and the bank seeks to cut costs. (Associated Press)

Las Vegas-based Allegiant Air will expand its route system by nearly 9 percent with the addition of 22 new round-trip flights in May and June, the company announced today. (cleveland.com)(Las Vegas Review-Journal)

Tough questions aimed at Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen from a rising force in the Democratic Party today showed how the U.S. central bank is facing increasing pressure from both sides of the political aisle. (Reuters)

DreamWorks Animation posted a loss of $263.2 million in the fourth quarter, as the company was buffeted by restructuring costs and impairment charges from its recent film releases. (Los Angeles Times)

Consumer confidence fell more than forecast in February as the initial elation over a drop in fuel prices waned and Americans grew less optimistic about prospects for employment and income. (Bloomberg News)

Two new reports underscore how much the Affordable Care Act has affected the number of people without health insurance in the U.S., even as a big threat to that goal looms next week. (CNBC News)

The State Department and FBI today announced a $3 million reward for information leading to the arrest or conviction of Russian national Evgeniy Bogachev, the highest bounty U.S. authorities have ever offered in a cyber case. (Reuters)

Technology news:

Hewlett-Packard forecast quarterly and full-year profit that will miss analysts' estimates, saying a rising U.S. dollar will hurt results as it prepares to split into two companies. (Bloomberg News)

Apple and Google's mobile operating systems -- iOS and Android -- accounted for 96 percent of the smartphones shipped worldwide last year, according to research firm IDC. (USA Today)

Lenovo and adware maker Superfish came under more legal fire Monday as two new lawsuits were filed in California federal courts taking the firms to task for putting consumers at risk of hacker spying and information theft. (Computerworld)

Pebble is returning to its roots today with the Kickstarter launch of its new Pebble Time smartwatch. (PC Magazine)