Some quarterbacks headed for the Super Bowl for the second straight year might want to talk trash.

Others might be looking to cash in on endorsements.

Some might even be envious of all the attention the other team is getting over the national scandal of “Inflate-gate.”

Not Seattle Seahawks quarterback Russell Wilson.

He just keeps tweeting about God.

“All I want is to be closer to You Lord!!!” he wrote Sunday. “That’s my only heart’s desire!”

And it would seem true based on all of his activity on Twitter since clinching his second Super Bowl appearance in as many years.

Hours earlier he tweeted: “Filled up with so much #Peace this morning! Gratefulness!!!”

Praying hands and a smiley face with a halo on top are his favorite icons.

He also likes quoting the Bible: “Turn away from evil and do good; seek peace and pursue it. (Psalm 34:14 ESV).” Well, it is Sunday, after all.

This one came hours earlier: “By wisdom a house is built, and by understanding it is established; (Proverbs 24:3 ESV).”

Proving he also loves Proverbs: “My son, give me your heart, and let your eyes observe my ways. (Proverbs 23:26 ESV)”

On Friday night, just before turning in, he tweeted: “He who loves purity of heart, and whose speech is gracious, will have the king as his friend. (Proverbs 22:11 ESV)”

And, just to prove he’s versatile in the Old Testament and New and not just in the pocket: “John 3:30 Too Blessed to be Stressed. Super Bowl Winning QB Seattle Seahawks.”

Even in the wake of his momentously exciting NFC-clinching victory in overtime last week, Wilson was talking about God. He credited his Creator with making the game interesting through four turnovers: “That’s God setting it up, to make it so dramatic, so rewarding, so special,” he said.

Wilson’s faith was on display on the field following the win over Green Bay. He joined a few other teammates who knelt on the turf – praying and crying in jubilation.

“To see him in the middle of the field, immediately after the outcome of the game, kneel and to become so overwhelmed with emotion and to give God glory for giving him the ability to come back was just an amazing thing,” says his pastor, William Murphy. “That’s what our faith is really all about. It’s about connecting with God in a way that no matter how far away you are from a win, God always has a way of bringing you back and allowing you to come out the winner.”

Does all this public faith give Wilson and the Seahawks an advantage over New England next week?

Not even his pastor will make that suggestion.

Murphy says he’s not sure that God picks a side in such competitions, but adds, “I think there is some significance, though, to Russell’s public display of his Christian faith and his relationship with God. I think that is substantial and I think it has some bearing on the fact that them coming back from such a major deficit was a great thing for our Christian community. I wouldn’t say that God chose a side, but I would say it was a major boost.”

What’s his advice to Wilson in the big game next week?

“I think as Russell’s pastor, if I could give a word of encouragement, I’d just say to him, ‘Russell, you just be who you are, continue to be authentic’ because I believe that is what the world needs is an authentic Christian and not a Christian who is trying to play this role of the perfect man in such an imperfect world.”

And, at the end of the day, it’s just a game.