Topics: 2016 Elections, Editor's Picks, Foreign policy, Iran, isis, Jeb Bush, Marco Rubio, Mitt Romney, Russia, Sanctions, Ukraine, Elections News, News, Politics News

Jeb Bush is bolstering his foreign policy credentials by taking a plane ride to Europe and delivering speeches to friendly parties. There’s this fellow, Putin, over there in Russia, he told attendees at a speech in Berlin on Tuesday ahead of visits to Poland and Estonia. And guess what? Jeb Bush simply does not care for this Vladimir Putin guy. Some really bold foreign policy stuff here — though oddly enough, one area where his foreign policy judgment may differ from that of his brother.

So Jeb Bush hates Putin and wants to check Russian regional aggression, got it. He does not believe that the Obama administration is doing enough to show Putin that there will be consequences to Russia violating the territorial sovereignty of its neighbors, got it. If he is President, Jeb Bush will stand up to Vladimir Putin, by doing various unspecified things! Got it?

“Putin, [Bush said], must know in advance that there will be consequences to his actions,” the AP writes, “because the Russian president is a ruthless pragmatist who ‘will push until someone pushes back.'” Indeed, this is the precise psychological diagnosis that practically every person in the world has made of Vladimir Putin — including the current spineless president, Barack Obama. So what does Bush want to do differently re: Putin? He wants to impose sanctions on Russia until it curbs its abuses! As in… the precise path that the Obama administration is following now.

Bush was critical of what he termed a reactive approach to crisis in Eastern Europe by the Obama administration. But his prescriptions were largely along the lines of what the U.S. is already doing, primarily pushing economic sanctions on Russia and sending military equipment and economic aid to Ukraine.

This, of course, came just after Obama visited Germany himself and dangled the threat of tougher sanctions before Russia.

This is only the most recent example of a Republican presidential candidate criticizing the Obama administration for not taking a hard enough line, and then pledging to take a harder line that’s more or less exactly what the Obama administration is already doing. (Plus a few extra touches, like boldly calling for Ukraine’s entry into NATO, which continues to not seem like a good or properly thought-out idea.)