Validic, a health IT company that developed a way to desilo data from medical devices and activity trackers, has signed a deal with electronic medical record provider Cerner, according to an emailed company statement. The deal is a major milestone for Validic and signals a significant expansion of its influence in the market.

The deal will give Cerner’s consumer-facing portal HealtheLife the ability to integrate clinical, fitness, wellness and nutritional data. If the patients agree to it, this information will be sent to their electronic medical record. The data will be used to give nurses and physicians a better understanding of patient’s health on a daily basis.

It’s an interesting move for Cerner, particularly because physicians have previously expressed concern on how they would be able to integrate reviewing additional patient data on their activities into their workflows.

In the statement, Cerner senior director and general manager for personal health, Brian Carter, said the deal with Validic was part of its interest in developing ways to support personalized health care.

Advertisement

“Given Validic is device- and platform-agnostic, our alignment provides a much broader reach to clinical and wellness data to help

propel our digital health strategy to health care organizations we serve, including the acceleration of remote patient monitoring, telehealth, and wellness initiatives.”

The ability of hospitals to integrate personal activity data and clinical data has been the source of a lot of discussion. It will be interesting to see how Cerner will integrate the data generated through Validic’s platform and what doctors and nurses will do with that information.

Diabetes is probably on their radar. Validic’s technology was part of a collaboration Glooko launched with Joslin Center for Diabetes recently that aggregated patient data from activity trackers with individual’s notes about when they ate to predict whether they were likely to experience a hypoglycemic attack. The goal is to use that information to help patients avoid these events.

Validic has worked with providers such as Kaiser Permanente, UPMC and Sutter Health along with big pharma companies Pfizer and Merck.