Orange County’s economic summit highlighted the Orlando region’s steady growth in the number of jobs Thursday. But there was also more concern expressed about the slowing national economy, and the need for more high-paying jobs and education in the region.

“The economy nationwide is close to stall speed,” UCF economist Sean Snaith said in his keynote address to hundreds at the Orange County Convention Center. He cited slowing growth nationally and globally, and stock market woes this year.

Snaith politicized his speech more than usual, slamming the Dodd-Frank Act and the Affordable Care Act as burdensome regulation. He was even more pessimistic than he was during in-depth interviews just last week with the Sentinel.

“Yes, my antennae are up and I have been watching the signals,” Snaith said after his speech. “The stock market is of particular concern now. It may not have immediate effect on consumers, but it effects retirement planning, company hiring and so forth.”

Snaith said Central Florida’s attractions, like the Harry Potter themes at Universal and Star Wars’ plans at Disney, are the region’s "shale oil deposits," but he studiously avoided any mention of concerns over lower-paying jobs or growing poverty rates in the metro area. He referred only to a desire for “employment diversification” in the area.

Snaith said he acknowledges that something had to be done to reform health care in the U.S., but he said the ACA was too much and the timing was off.

Angel de la Portilla, a local lobbyist for hospitality businesses, said he enjoyed hearing about the booming tourism economy. But he also applauded efforts to attract more diverse jobs here. He said he is now concerned about the impact that the coming national election will have, particularly if Donald Trump is the Republican nominee.

Rick Weddle, director at the Orlando Economic Development Commission, made the pitch for more funding to offer incentives that attract higher paying jobs.

Weddle said the area is lagging in new patent filings, venture capital, education, STEM employment.

County Mayor Teresa Jacobs unveiled a new initiative to name the greenest business in Central Florida, and announced that the next Modeling, Simulation and Training summit would be held Sept. 22.