Here to help

Comcast and Frontier both have Colorado-based customer service centers. Xcel, too, has Colorado-based customer service, but those employees are focused on corporate accounts rather than general consumers. Here, some customer-service agents share their insights and experiences.

John O’Day

Company: Comcast

Where he lives: Colorado Springs

Where he works: Colorado Springs

Years on the job: One

Age: 31

Tip for callers: I just want the customers to be aware of the many platforms we can be addressed on. You can go online — it’s basically for the do-it-yourself generation — at comcast.customer.com. We do also have applications for Android or an iPhone.

Memorable recent call: A female had called in and she was just very frustrated that a representative had set up an appointment for a tech to come out, and the technician didn’t make it. It happens from time to time. I talked to her about that, and she voiced some concerns and wanted to leave and I said, “Let me do something for you.” I got her rescheduled, got her credited for the missed appointment. She just wanted to be heard out.

Joanna Green

Company: Frontier Airlines

Where she lives: Denver

Where she works: Denver

Years on the job: About 1.5

Age: 24

Tip for callers: If (callers) have the information at hand, that does help. Their flight, reservation, the credit card they used for the purchase, that would help.

How many calls she fields in a day: It can vary, depending on what the weather’s like, 50 or 70 … if there’s weather, sometimes we get more.

Tracé Killam

Company: Frontier Airlines

Where she lives: Commerce City

Where she works: Denver

Years on the job: About 1.5

Age: 56

Tip for callers: We have what is an IDR system, so when they call in, they get an automated voice. And if they can take the time to listen to the choices, then we see it when it comes in. If they can really take the time to answer some of the questions, it does pop in all of the information that we look for.

Memorable call: When I started, I had a mother of an 18-year-old call in, and the 18-year-old was on our flight from St. Louis to DIA and she had her brand-new infant baby on with her. There was a tragedy in her family and the mother wanted to get to her 18-year-old before she got onto her cellphone.

I was amazed. I called my help desk. The help desk immediately called the (staff at the airport) and they go a hold of the flight crew, and the flight crew was able to escort this 18-year-old off the flight before she was able to check messages on her phone. We got the mother and the father of the 18-year-old gate passes.

Brenda Schwartz

Company: Frontier Airlines

Where she lives: Southeast Aurora

Where she works: Denver

Years on the job: 11.5 years

Age: 49

Tip for callers: Right now, it’s pretty much booking on our website at flyfrontier.com. Going through our website, you get all of the e-mails and the flight alerts.

Dave Burdick: 303-954-1957, dburdick@denverpost.com, twitter.com/daveburdick