Topeka police vehicles lined the streets around Topeka High School on Saturday morning.

Inside the school at 800 S.W. 10th St., nearly 20 officers and 100 residents and business owners from City Council District 1 interacted and discussed the best ways to fight crime during the Strategic Anti-Crime District 1 Summit.

Topics of discussion included crime statistics, how crimes get counted and crime reduction strategies.

“We were shooting to have 100 people, and we did,” said Karen Hiller, who represents District 1 on the council. “We are really pleased. There are people from all parts of the district.”

There are about 11,000 people in District 1, Hiller said.

The summit was sponsored by the Topeka Police Department, City Council District 1, the city’s Department of Neighborhood Relations, Topeka Unified School District 501 and the Safe Streets crime prevention organization.

Hiller is hoping other neighborhoods get on board with the idea and host their own anti-crime summits. Topeka City Councilwoman Sylvia Ortiz, representative for City Council District 3, attended the summit, Hiller said, and other districts have shown interest.

The anti-crime summit didn’t take place just to address crimes in District 1, Hiller said. The summit was a chance to educate people about driving crime out of neighborhoods and building neighborhood strength.

Attendees were able to select from breakout sessions, including what happens when someone calls 911, what happens when a report is made, neighborhood strategies that work and community policing.

After the breakout sessions, people were asked to get into small groups to discuss ideas. Each group had a resident facilitator, a note taker and a police officer, Hiller said. The ideas will be compiled and provided to TPD and the Department of Neighborhood Relations.

Elmer Garlock, who owns about 55 properties in District 1 through Key Associated Rental Management, received a flyer about the summit and decided to spend Saturday morning learning more about what he can do to help fight crime in neighborhoods where he as properties.

“I have apartments, duplexes and houses,” Garlock said. “I have 140 properties across Topeka. Nighttime crime is one of the biggest problems.”

Garlock said getting to know neighbors is important.

“I introduce myself to my neighbors,” he said. “Call your neighbors. Get to know them. You can make your own (neighborhood watch) group — it’s not hard to do. Just don’t turn a blind eye.”