More than 140 people filled Baltimore Hebrew Congregation Sunday night to hear U.S. Sen. Ben Cardin (D-Md.) talk about foreign relations and domestic policy.

Coming just hours before Congress was scheduled to return from a five-week vacation, Cardin’s address headlined the opening dinner of the BHC brotherhood’s 96th year.

Cardin, who sits on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, opened his talk by discussing the recent conflict in Gaza.

The de-militarization of Gaza must be one of Congress’ top priorities this session, said Cardin. The United Nations is “anything but objective when it comes to these accusations,” he added, referring to the international organization’s criticism of Israel. Consequently, he suggested NATO be tasked with the de-militarization process.

Cardin later elaborated on his criticism of the U.N. when, after the floor opened for questions, a dinner attendee asked why the U.S. did not just leave the organization.

“There’s no question that the U.N. is just horrible to Israel,” said Cardin. Part of the reason behind the international body’s harshness toward Israel, he suggested, has to do with the religious and cultural makeup of the U.N.

“They do that because there are more Muslims in the world than there are Jews,” he said.

However, Cardin pointed out, he will be on the next Senate delegation to the U.N. and he wants to address this hostility

“There must be a price to pay for countries that blindly follow this anti-Israel sentiment in the United Nations,” he charged. Another major topic of conversation was healthcare.

“Was it perfect? No,” Cardin said of the rollout of the Affordable Care Act last fall. But the ACA will not be repealed, he continued, so Democrats and Republicans will need to find a way to cross party lines and work together to make sure the American people receive the maximum benefit.

One dinner attendee who also works at a local hospital asked Cardin about Maryland’s health care wavier, which rewards hospitals for keeping people out of the hospital rather than tying funding to the volume of people admitted. The questioner charged that the new system essentially requires hospitals to cut their budget every year.

Cardin responded by defending the waiver, which he played a role in approving while he was still in the Maryland state legislature.

“How’s it going to play out? I’m not sure, because there’s risk factors,” he said. “But if we do it right, we’re going to be a model for the whole rest of the country.”

Another questioner asked about the criticism President Barack Obama has faced from many in the Jewish community over Israel. In recent months, some have accused Obama of being unsupportive of Israel and an August survey by the Pew Research Center for People and the Press revealed that 45 percent of Republicans believe Obama had been favoring the Palestinian side too much over the course of the summer conflict.

“It’s hard for me to understand,” Cardin told the brotherhood and their guests.

He said he has talked to Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and that the leader has been nothing but pleased with Obama’s handling of the situation.

He added that part of the fuel contributing to the anti-Obama fire might be politicians and partisans trying to use the international conflict to advance their own politics.

Cardin was 96th in a long line of past speakers at BHC that include people from all kinds of professions, from politicians to sports personalities to religious figures. While brotherhoods are struggling to maintain membership in other parts of the country, the men of BHC’s brotherhood say their organization is thriving.

“It’s wonderful comradery,” said Ira Kolman, a past-president of the brotherhood. The group has seen numbers drop in the past few decades, but has still stayed strong in comparison to other brotherhoods, he said.

“You can’t help but to become embedded,” past brotherhood president Joe Boccuzzi said of the effect of becoming involved in the organization. “In the end, you have a tie to the Jewish community.”

hnorris@jewishtimes.com