Buy Photo Former deputy and DARE officer Kevin J. Vanden Heuvel (Photo: File/Press-Gazette Media)Buy Photo

When someone closely associated with a program like DARE is charged with stealing from that program, it has a ripple effect.

It affects the accused, obviously, but it also impacts the program, those who might benefit from it as well as those who donate to it.

In this case, we hope the Drug Abuse Resistance Education program and the students it helps don't bear the negative effects of criminal charges that were issued Thursday against a former DARE officer and a substance-abuse counselor.

Ex-deputy Kevin J. Vanden Heuvel of Wrightstown was charged with two counts of theft by employee and two counts of misconduct in office in the alleged theft of up to $74,000. Vanden Heuvel faces over 10 years in prison if convicted. Early Fuller of Howard, a substance abuse counselor, was charged with theft and obstructing an officer. He faces up to 10 years in prison.

PDF: Read the complaint against Kevin Vanden Heuvel

PDF: Read the complaint against Early R. Fuller

The two are accused for their parts in a parking pass scheme in the former Kmart parking lot near Lambeau Field during Green Bay Packers games. The DARE program, which is self-funded through donations and fundraisers, sells the parking passes for events at Lambeau and uses the money as its main fundraiser.

The Brown County district attorney and the courts will sort out the criminal charges.

Meanwhile we hope the DARE program doesn't become an unintended victim.

Not only has the program lost money, but it's lost some of the trust of those who donate to the program.

We're sure some of the private donors and businesses want some assurances that their donations — such as money and frequent flier miles to cover costs of attendance at national DARE conferences — are being properly safeguarded.

The Packers, too, might want some assurances. They generously let the DARE program park vehicles in the old Kmart lot as a fundraiser.

Finally, we hope that the students who could benefit from the program don't lose out.

The DARE program was first billed as an anti-drug program, but it has grown over the years. The two full-time officers go into about 60 area public and parochial schools, meet with fifth-graders and talk about the perils of drugs and alcohol as well as bullying, making the right choices and standing up for themselves.

That alone is a worthwhile pursuit, but it also builds rapport between the officers and students.

The DARE program develops a positive relationship between police and youth. The two deputies are there to educate and listen, not to punish, and it allows these students to see the law enforcement officers in a light different from what they see in popular culture.

That's why it's devastating for the sheriff's department to have one of its own charged with stealing from such a valuable program.

We applaud Sheriff John Gossage for being transparent about the issue, and we hope the alleged thefts are an isolated incident. We also believe that the sheriff's department must step up audits and oversight of the parking program to restore public trust.

It would be a shame for the DARE program to suffer because of the actions of those entrusted to carry it out.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1NxCrFX