UC Irvine Health encompasses clinical, research and educational operations in Orange and Irvine. UC Irvine Medical Center, a nonprofit teaching hospital, is located in Orange. The School of Medicine is on the Irvine campus. Physician offices are located around the county.

UC Irvine and MemorialCare Health System have formed a partnership to open new primary care offices in anticipation of an influx of patients insured because of the Affordable Care Act, hospital officials announced Wednesday.

Terry Belmont, chief executive of UC Irvine Medical Center, said UCI will provide the doctors and contract MemorialCare for support staff and administration. The exact number of offices is yet to be determined but Belmont said at least two will open in Orange County next year.

UCI is the county's only teaching hospital, but has previously focused more on specialty care and hospital operations rather than primary care, Belmont said. The new health reform law places strong emphasis on primary and preventative care as a way of not only reducing costs but promoting health. For instance, insurers can no longer charge co-pays for annual wellness visits or screenings such as mammograms.

“I think with all the attention right now on the ACA and healthcare exchanges and people wondering, ‘Where will I get my care?' this expansion fits beautifully,” said Barry Arbuckle, chief executive of Fountain Valley-based MemorialCare. “We've got two long-standing, quality organizations coming together with a focus on providing affordable care. That's what the public wants.”

The collaboration between UCI and MemorialCare differs in scope from the new health company formed by St. Joseph Health and Hoag Hospital earlier this year. In February, they completed a so-called “affiliation” between their six local hospitals, networks of doctors and outpatient clinics which provide roughly one-third of healthcare in Orange County. The deal required approval by the state Attorney General's office, while the UCI and MemorialCare partnership does not.

Belmont said that in the late 1990s, UCI moved away from primary care in favor of specialty care in preparation for building the new hospital that opened in 2009 in Orange. He said MemorialCare, which has 30 primary care offices, has the skill to set up new offices, which will also offer urgent care and basic diagnostic services. Both UCI and MemorialCare are nonprofits.

“It would take us a lot longer to build that,” Belmont said.

Michael Cousineau, a professor at USC's Keck School of Medicine, said university medical centers are looking to expand their primary care capacity but lack the know-how because they've focused on major surgeries, transplants and academic research.

“There's going to be more of an emphasis on primary care and now these academic medical centers are trying to catch up,” Cousineau said. “We need to rely on community hospitals that have had more experience doing that.”

The Affordable Care Act has also reduced Medicare payments to hospitals that have too many readmissions of patients within 30 days, making primary care doctors all the more important.

“The name of the game in post-Obamacare is really keeping (patients) out of the hospital,” Cousineau. “The key to success in keeping people out of the hospital is good primary care. That's really what's driving it.”

Cousineau said the shortage of primary care doctors will only grow worse with more patients entering the healthcare system.

“We're years behind,” Cousineau said. “In the '60s, 80 percent of doctors were primary and 20 percent were specialists. Now that's flipped. We have this structural problem.”

Belmont said about a dozen faculty members out of 575 see primary care patients full-time in Orange and Irvine, but more doctors will be hired and existing practices may be acquired. The new offices will offer employment opportunities for doctors who complete their residency training at UCI. He said nurse practitioners and physician's assistants will also provide care.

“We need to be out where patients live,” he said.

Contact the writer: cperkes@ocregister.com 714-796-3686