Much is at stake in political struggle over size of tax break for Main Street developer

Buy Photo Tuesday’s Bound Brook Council Meeting will feature a political showdown over how to avoid a 14 percent tax increase. (Photo: File Photo)Buy Photo Story Highlights Mayor says proposed tax break for developer is too large

Democrats say agreement will avoid huge tax increase, attract developers

Council meeting is 7:30 p.m. Tuesday

Republican Mayor Bob Fazen and the Democrats on the Borough Council are headed to a political showdown this week over how to bridge a budget gap that could raise municipal property taxes by 14 percent.

The Democrats, who hold a majority on the council, have passed an ordinance restructuring the Payment in Lieu of Taxes (PILOT) agreement with the developer of the Meridia Main Station apartments that would require the developer to pay $800,000 upfront in a 30-year agreement. That amount would close the budget gap.

But Fazen has vetoed that action, saying that it concedes too much money to the developer. Fazen said the agreement with Meridia needs to be re-negotiated.

The showdown will come to a head at the council meeting at 7:30 p.m. Tuesday in Borough Hall.

But the fireworks may begin at 6 p.m. Monday when the council’s finance committee will conduct an open public meeting at Borough Hall to discuss the budget gap and the PILOT proposal.

The showdown comes at a critical time for Bound Brook.

Because NJ Transit’s Raritan Valley Line has a station on East Main Street, developers have started to show interest in redeveloping parts of the downtown in the hope that the commuter line will offer more one-seat rides into New York City.

Municipalities, including Somerville, along the Raritan Valley Line have been offering PILOT agreements as incentives for developers.

Developers’ interest in downtown Bound Brook has also been sparked by the completion of the long-awaited Green Brook Flood Control project.

The downtown has never fully recovered from several catastrophic floods dating to 1971. With the completion of the flood control project, developers can believe that their properties won’t be washed away.

Adding to the dynamics of this struggle is this year’s mayoral race between Fazen and Councilman Anthony Pranzatelli, whose wife Beverly also sits on the council.

In last year’s election, Bound Brook voters delivered a split partisan verdict, choosing Fazen to fill a one-year unexpired term while returning control of the council to Democrats.

Those factors have set the stage for an old-fashioned power struggle in the borough known for its bare-knuckled political tactics.

What triggered this showdown earlier this year was when officials began drafting this year’s municipal budget and discovered a $1 million gap.

Beverly Pranzatelli said officials managed to whittle the budget gap to $800,000, but that would cause a 14 percent increase in municipal taxes.

Bound Brook, with a total tax rate of $3.42 per $100 of assessed value, has the highest property tax rate in Somerset County. Its school tax rate, $1.97 per $100 of assessed value, and municipal tax rate, $1.08 per $100 of assessed value, are also the highest in the county.

As officials pondered how to avoid the tax hike, Meridia came to the borough with a proposal to restructure its existing PILOT agreement.

Because the developer was seeking a 30-year mortgage to complete the apartment project, a bank was now requesting a revised PILOT agreement lasting the term of the mortgage.

To sweeten the pot, Meridia offered to pay $800,000 up front, which would have wiped away the budget gap.

But Fazen objected, saying that in the long run, the borough would lose money because the revised PILOT numbers in later years of the agreement would be lower because of the larger initial payment.

The mayor also said that the $800,000 would solve only this year’s budget gap, but not close a possible budget gap in 2016 and only delay the large tax increase.

Fazen has also contended that the PILOT agreement is too generous to Meridia, whose property tax bill is calculated by the amount of rents collected.

But the Democrats say that Meridia needs the revised agreement because it has also shown interest in building another apartment house on Main Street near the train station.

The Democrats also say that the borough has to be aggressive in drafting PILOT proposals because all towns along the Raritan Valley Line are competing for developers.

“Without the PILOT we will have nothing,” Beverly Pranzatelli said.

An override of Fazen’s veto requires four votes. Democrats have a 4-2 margin on the council.

But Beverly Pranzatelli said she suspects the Republicans will try to disqualify she and her husband from voting because her husband’s Main Street business is near where Meridia wants to build its second apartment building and their votes would be a conflict of interest.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1Iw0u9x