Contribution

Wayne Allyn Root is a bestselling author. His latest book is: “ The Power of RELENTLESS! ” Dubbed by the media as “the Capitalist Evangelist,” Wayne is a former Libertarian Vice Presidential nominee, international business speaker, serial entrepreneur and conservative media personality – appearing on over 5,000 interviews in the past five years. Wayne’s web site: ROOTforAmerica.com .

They call the Trans-Pacific Partnership the TPP. But it’s really a bi-partisan Ponzi scheme – and should be called “Trans-Pacific Ponzi.”

It’s a trillion dollar rip-off of the American people and American workers. President Barack Obama wants “fast-track authority” because he wants to put the end of America as we know it on a fast track.

Trust me, neither TPP or the TPA (ie fast track authority for the president) are dead. Like Freddie Kruger of “Nightmare on Elm Street” they will keep coming back from the dead. Because the billionaires and billion dollar multi-national corporations want TPP … badly. The powers that be will not rest until it passes – come hook or crook. And since they are all crooks, they’ll use any means necessary to get it passed.

But TPP makes Obamacare look open, honest and transparent. Share:

My book, “The Murder of the Middle Class,” describes the unholy alliance of the socialists and communists like Obama and the crony capitalist corporations who own both political parties. The TPP is the perfect example of “the murder of the middle class” in one devastating treaty. Passing it requires secrecy and fraud carried out by both Obama and his partners in the Republican Party. Fraud and treachery certainly makes for strange bedfellows.

The worst part isn’t even what’s in it – and it contains a toxic brew that will destroy millions of middle class jobs. More on that later.

But the worst part is how it’s been hidden from the people by Obama and the Republican leadership – working as a tag team like this is a World Wrestling Federation match.

Remember when Nancy Pelosi said, “We have to pass Obamacare to find out what’s in it.” We all know how that turned out. Obamacare is killing jobs, dramatically increasing the national debt and bankrupting the middle class with gigantic increases in health insurance premiums. That’s precisely why no one wanted you to read it, study it, or take the time to analyze it.

These disastrous billion dollar bills need to be hidden and then passed quickly before anyone has a chance to understand their implications. They are written by lobbyists and lawyers, and never read by the very politicians voting for them. It’s all about dollars. Corporations and fat-cat donors make billions and the politicians collect millions in legal bribes (also called “campaign contributions”) and million dollar lobbying jobs after they retire.

That was the real storyline of Obamacare.

The exact same scenario is playing out with the TPP. Do you know what’s in the details? I don’t. Neither do any of the Republicans voting for it. They openly admit it. Members of Congress need a “security clearance” to be “allowed” to read it.

Leading GOP TPP supporter Sen. Orrin Hatch admits he doesn’t fully know what’s in it.

GOP Majority Whip Steve Scalise and GOP Rules Committee Chairman Pete Sessions both admit they haven’t read it.

Paul Ryan channeled Nancy Pelosi when he said, “It’s classified. You’ll find out what’s in it after we pass it and it’s declassified.”

Credit: AP

Are you kidding me? The GOP now thinks it’s own voters are as dumb and ignorant as Democrats? Paul Ryan thinks he should be allowed to pass bills the citizens aren’t “allowed” to read? Really? Then it’s time for the citizens to remove Paul Ryan from office.

Folks Obamacare was 2,000 pages of legalese that no average citizen could understand. The regulatiions of Obamacare contain over 2 million words. That was the tip off that it was a rip off. But TPP makes Obamacare look open, honest and transparent.

TPP is kept under lock and key. No citizen has access. No citizen has a clue what’s in it. Only senators and representatives with security clearance can walk into a room in the Capital Building to read it – alone. Then they are required to leave without making copies or taking notes.

Does this sound strange to you? Does it sound surreal? Does it sound like it’s good for the people?

Because to me it sounds like a scam. A Ponzi scheme. Only criminals want their victims to sign contracts without reading them. It’s quite clear – the ruling class and the corporate elite think we are serfs, and they are our masters.

At this point I don’t care what’s in it. If they don’t want us to read it – if Congress thinks they should pass it without knowing what’s in it – then our job is to burn it down. Stick a knife in its heart. Stab it until it can never again rear its ugly head.

But what is actually in it? Well Wikileaks has leaked small parts of it. It appears it is a killer of American sovereignty. The TPP appoints a commission of soul-less corporate lawyers with sweeping authority to override U.S. laws and our Constitution.

That commission will have sweeping power over U.S. trade, labor, immigration, environmental and commerce regulations. In other words, foreign and corporate powers will be running the United States of America. Unelected foreign lawyers representing multi-national corporations will have more power than American citizens and even our politicians. And America only gets one vote on this commission. We’ll have no more power or importance over rules regulating our lives than Brunei or South Korea.

How does that sound to you?

But I don’t need to know all that. All I need to know is it’s supported by Barack Obama. Heck its been nicknamed “Obamatrade.” If Obama created it, it must be a toxic brew of onerous job-killing government regulation, insane job-killing climate change rules, illegal immigration amnesty that opens our borders to the poor and dependent of the world (future Democrat voters), and higher minimum wages that will drive small businesses out of business and guarantee millions more jobs are shipped overseas (where they can pay employees pennies on the dollar).

Obama doesn’t support free trade. He supports Big Brother government and “the murder of the middle class.” He loves to fool and defraud you by using cute cuddly names. The bill that made your healthcare unaffordable was named “The Affordable Care Act.” Now the bill that destroys America’s free trade economy is disguised as “free trade.”

For once the unions are right. This is a treaty that will destroy good-paying American jobs. It will destroy middle class lives. It will make the American Dream unaffordable. How do you know I’m right? Because the government has banned the citizens from reading it. It’s time to rise up and kill it. And if the GOP won’t listen to its own voters and supporters, then it’s time to kill the GOP.

–

TheBlaze contributor channel supports an open discourse on a range of views. The opinions expressed in this channel are solely those of each individual author.