Stryker settled a long-running U.S. foreign bribery case, agreeing on Thursday to pay $13.3 million to the Securities and Exchange Commission to resolve the allegations — without admitting or denying them.

The Kalamazoo, Mich.-based medical device company first disclosed in 2007 that the SEC and the U.S. Justice Department had made inquiries regarding possible violations of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, which bars the use of bribes to foreign officials to get or keep business.

An SEC investigation found that Stryker’s subsidiaries in Argentina, Greece, Mexico, Poland and Romania made about $2.2 million in illicit payments, describing them in company books as legitimate expenses such as charitable donations, service contracts, travel expenses and commissions. The company made about $7.5 million in profit as a result of the payments, the SEC said.

“Stryker’s misconduct involved hundreds of improper payments over a number of years during which the company’s internal controls were fatally flawed,” said Andrew Calamari, director of the SEC’s New York office, in a statement.

Joe Cooper, the director of communications for Stryker, said in an email the company has enhanced its company-wide anti-corruption compliance program, and was advised that the Justice Department closed its investigation.

A Justice Department spokesman declined to comment.

The SEC issued an administrative order (pdf) against Stryker requiring the company to pay $13.3 million within 10 days. The payment includes $7.5 million in disgorgement, $2.2 million in interest and a $3.5 million penalty.

The order details illicit payments made by the company and its affiliates as far back as 2003.

In one instance, Stryker’s Mexico unit, after learning that a local agency threatened to revoke a contract, directed its outside counsel to make a $46,000 payment to an employee of the agency, the order said. The law firm then billed Stryker for legal services rendered and Stryker Mexico recorded the payment as legitimate legal expenses, the order said.

The company earned more than $1.1 million in illicit profits on that contract alone, it said.

In Poland, Stryker’s local unit made 32 payments totaling about $460,000 to get or keep business at public hospitals, resulting in more than $2.4 million in illicit profits, the SEC said.

For example, in exchange for the promise of future business from the director of a public hospital there, Stryker paid travel costs in May 2004 for her and her husband, the order said. Though the trip was for a one-day tour of a Stryker facility in Mahwah, N.J., the company paid for a six-night stay at a hotel in New York City, attendance at two Broadway shows and a five-day trip to Aruba.

Stryker declined to comment on the status of an investigation in Poland of its local unit.

Write to Samuel Rubenfeld at Samuel.Rubenfeld@wsj.com. Follow him on Twitter at @srubenfeld.