Republican State Sen. Tim Neville cast his U.S. Senate bid in strong conservative terms Tuesday evening as he hosted an official kickoff event that drew about 100 people to his campaign headquarters in Littleton.

The first issue he listed in describing his motivation to run: abortion.

“We all know we have a lot of problems in Washington. When an organization like Planned Parenthood ignores the law, kills the unborn, sells their body parts for profit and we have both parties that can’t even come together to end this tragedy, we have an issue with leadership,” he said referencing some of the debunked claims based on videos about the health care provider. Neville said he would support a bill to declare that life begins at conception and outlaw abortions.

In a roughly 20-minute speech, Neville went on to blast Democrats — particularly President Barack Obama and U.S. Sen. Michael Bennet — on a litany of issues, including immigration, Iran, energy regulation, Obamacare, Common Core, unions, spending, religious freedom, gay marriage and the Second Amendment.

“It is extremely important that we never waver in our Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms,” the Littleton lawmaker said in the first stop of a statewide tour to kickoff the campaign.

The remark came on the day the White House announced new gun control measures, but the candidate didn’t directly address the topic. His campaign is backed by Dudley Brown, the executive director of Rocky Mountain Gun Owners (RMGO) and the president of the National Association for Gun Rights.

The state lawmakers at the event to support for Neville included Reps. Lori Saine, Steve Humphrey and Justin Everett and Sen. Laura Woods.

Neville’s focus is no surprise given his reputation as one of the most conservative members for the GOP-led state Senate. His son, state Rep. Patrick Neville, introduced him with this line: “He loves God, guns and babies, and his records proves it.”

Neville is one of a half-dozen candidates in the 2016 contest (or considering a bid) to challenge Bennet in a seat that polls suggest is a tough race. So far, no Republican candidate has established himself as the front-runner — and the national party is publicly staying out of the fray after its top picks bowed out of the race.

“As Washington Republicans continue their scramble to find anyone to run for Senate in Colorado, far right anti-choice warrior Tim Neville is officially throwing his hat in the ring, making for an even more crowded and divisive primary,” remarked Democratic Party spokesman Andrew Zucker.

In Colorado, Neville’s voting record may prove difficult to sell to a middle-of-the-road voter, but the candidate is undeterred, vowing to repeat his 2014 state legislative campaign when he unseated a Democratic leader in a swing district.

“We were able to prove the pundits wrong who said a conservative like me couldn’t win a race like that in that district,” he said, adding later, “I know how to run tough races and I know how to win.”

In an interview after his speech, Neville declined to commit to supporting U.S. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell if elected, saying he “would have some questions.”

Neville debuted his campaign Oct. 1 and spent the last three months raising money. His campaign said it did not have its fundraising tallied, but Neville said he is encouraged. “I think we are definitely going to attain our goals and a little more,” he said.

The reports are due later this month.