In a significant move that builds on federal guidelines under the Affordable Care Act, Maryland’s insurance oversight body has issued directives saying that insurers must cover gender-transition related surgeries for trans people.

Until relatively recently most if not all care for trans people was either given very poor coverage under health insurance plans or was not covered at all. That changed with new federal guidelines under the Affordable Care Act as well as subsequent determinations based on that law and other existing federal laws, with the Obama administration stressing that trans identity cannot be used as a basis to deny someone the medical care their physicians say they need.

Despite this though, insurers in many states have still dodged offering things like gender affirmation surgery under their insurance plans. Many states have allowed this to continue, usually under the misunderstanding that as surgery isn’t required by every transgender person, the surgeries can be considered elective or cosmetic. This creates monetary barriers to surgeries and treatments, which can cost anywhere up to $30,000 or more, that many trans people cannot afford, meaning they are either forced to go without those treatments, get loans and other forms of credit, or in some circumstances opt to use the services of people who may be dangerously unqualified. As a result, campaigners have worked hard to get states to examine federal guidelines and to use their power to bring insurers within the state into line with the law.

Now, the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) has done just that. In two separate bulletins dated December 7 and December 10 of 2015, the MIA informs health insurers that transition-related care is no longer an allowable exemption, though this news was only recently revealed to the press. This comes as part of the agency’s overall review of small group health plans and student health plans for 2016-2017.

The MIA specifically says that, based on federal regulations that were issued in 2012 that prohibit discrimination on grounds of gender identity, “federal guidance has determined that this type of exclusion is a discriminatory benefit design,” and so cannot be accepted in small-group health plans.

“We applaud the Maryland Insurance Administration for prohibiting this discriminatory exclusion that has become a fixture in health insurance plans and that has significant harm to the transgender community,” Patrick A. Paschall, executive director of FreeState Legal and Equality Maryland, is quoted as saying. “Transition-related care exclusions serve no other purpose than to discriminate against transgender people. To deny life-saving medical care to an entire population based solely on the fact that they identify as transgender is not only unconscionable, but we believe a violation of federal law.”

This builds on FreeState Legal’s previous work ensuring that transgender state employees could not be denied the treatment that should rightfully be theirs under state coverage plans. Specifically in that case, it was announced in the later months of 2015 that Maryland will do away with the “Sex Reassignment Exclusion” that had been present in state employee care, and instead offer as part of the healthcare plans a “Gender Dysphoria Benefit.” This meant that far more state employees were able to access transition-related care. The newly publicized determinations expand that coverage in a similar way by making clear that gender affirmation surgery is not an acceptable exclusion. Oregon and California offer similar trans-inclusive health care coverage for state employees.

Certainly this fight is not just a problem for Maryland. Insurers up and down the country are still disqualifying trans people from accessing transition-related care or are not offering it at all. Obviously though, just ensuring that coverage is available isn’t the only step that’s needed here either. Insurers, like our doctors, must also know enough to offer relevant care to trans people.

This perhaps demonstrates that barriers and significant issues that can come up for trans people looking to get the healthcare they need to live their lives gender affirmed. Hopefully, it also shows that while some states are doubling down on anti-trans rhetoric, others are taking steps to be more trans inclusive.

Photo credit: Thinkstock.