Part of the Kilblaan Farm herd out for an afternoon romp. (APRIL GUILMET/Union Leader Correspondent)





NH alpaca farms A sampling of the 30 New Hampshire farms registered with the New England Alpaca Owners and Breeders Association:



Acapella Alpaca Farm: 183 Silver Lake Road, Hollis, 465-6338.



Hampshire Highland Alpacas: 683 Milan Road, Milan, 448-2295.



Juniper Knoll Farm: 307 Bean Hill Road, Belmont, 267-5905.



Kilblaan Farm: 402 Spring Hill Road, Sharon, 924-6113



Kings Highway Alpacas: 108 Kings Highway, Middleton, 473-8341.



Purgatory Falls Alpaca Farm: 195 Purgatory Falls Road, Lyndeborough, 654-7690.



Sleeping Monk Farm: 116 Ashbury Road, New Ipswich, 878-2183.



For a complete list of farms, visit www.neaoba.org.





Like many expectant mothers who have gone past their due date, "Tammy Wynette" was feeling slightly under the weather and in need of an afternoon snack one recent fall afternoon.Tammy, one of the 32 alpacas living at Kilblaan Farm, was expected to give birth any moment, an occasion her owners, Liz and John MacEachran, hoped would be the start of successful days to come on their Sharon farm...Last year, there were no babies, known as crias, born at Kilblaan, though in previous years the farm had seen up to 16 births in a single year.But fluctuations in the economy, along with an increasingly crowded barn, led the couple to put a temporary halt on their breeding program..."We've had over 50 alpacas living here at one time," Liz MacEachran said as she watched her herd wander up over the hillside. "So last year we decided we needed to cut back a bit."According to statistics provide by the New England Alpaca Owners and Breeders Association, the market for alpacas continues to be moderated by the effects of relatively slow herd growth - mostly due to the animal's slow reproduction rate...Females generally are bred for the first time when they are approximately 2 years old, with an alpaca pregnancy lasting 11 or 12 months.In 2004, there were approximately 50,000 alpacas registered in the United States. Since then, the United States has banned the importation of alpacas, all but ending an influx from South America and protecting bloodlines of alpacas bred in the U.S...The animals - which look like a half-sized version of a llama - are considered desirable for ranchers due to their hardiness, their gentle nature and their ability to produce a luxury fleece fiber that's in high demand. While most prefer humans to love them from a distance, those who tend to them say their alpacas' comical antics provide constant entertainment...In New Hampshire, around 30 farms are registered with the New England Alpaca Owners and Breeders Association.The farms range in size, with Susan Nadler's farm, Powder House Alpacas, among the smaller ones...Nadler, who started her farm in 2008 with four alpacas, currently has nine."I purchased my first alpacas at very high prices compared to today's market," she said. "I could probably get the same animals for a quarter of that price today."..At Powder House, alpacas are raised for both breeding and fiber, though Nadler doesn't produce her own products, instead opting to sell the fleece to an outside vendor or contribute to a fiber pool for large-scale production...While the business presents ongoing challenges, such as finding good hay and overcoming a shortage of veterinary medicines manufactured specifically for alpacas, Nadler said she's found amazing support in the farming community..."The friendships you make are unbelievable," she said. "And the animals themselves each have such unique personalities and are magical."Sandown resident Beverly Carpenter, owner of Owl Brook Alpacas, said she's been raising the animals for seven years, beginning around the time when the price of alpacas peaked..."Being a longtime knitter and animal lover, I fell head over heels with these fuzzy creatures with huge expressive eyes (while) at a fiber festival," she said.Carpenter produces her own fleece products after the animals are sheared each spring, and she sells her yarn, hats, mittens and scarves online, at fairs and on site at the farm..."In today's economy, I strongly feel an alpaca owner needs to breed as well as sell and promote fleece and end products," she said. "It's a great product, being two or three times warmer than wool and hypoallergenic."..Barbie Tilton, owner of Someday Farm in Canterbury, hopes better days are soon ahead."I think the business and the industry is still strong but maybe not as strong as when it started," she said. "Animal sales are still happening in good fashion, but I think some folks have dropped process due to the economy - either due to feeding costs or high overhead."..Tilton said a major challenge she grapples with is finding enough hours in the day to care for her 48 alpacas while working a full-time job."I love spending time with them as much as I can," she said. "We take them to nursing homes, parades and fairs and have many farm events here. But there are days that time is limited, and it seems I spend time with them only when caring and cleaning up after them."..Kathy Reczko, owner of Acapella Alpacas in Hollis, is still relatively new to the business, having started her farm in early 2011.Still, she's noticed a few changes to the industry in that short time period..."I've noticed less activity at some of the alpaca shows but an uptick in the fleece-judging events because it costs less to send fleece to a show than it does to send an animal to an event," she said.While Reczko enjoys spinning her own alpaca fiber, she says it would be too difficult to process the fleece from all 37 of her animals on her own..."With a full-time job on the outside, that would be impossible," she said.Breeding the animals remains a significant part of Reczko's business, though she also sells her fleece directly to hand spinners or sends it to a local yarn manufacturer. She also contributes to the New England Alpaca Fiber Pool..."I absolutely love these animals," she said. "This lifestyle is a calm and gentle one ... and being able to know an animal then harvest their fleece, prepare it, spin it by hand and make things out of it is the most rewarding experience."..This past summer, business at Kiblaan Farm began to pick up again. The MacEachrans sold 14 of their adult alpacas, and they're now hoping that more crias will be born by the springtime.Prices for a show-quality adult alpaca easily can range into the thousands, while pet-quality animals can be purchased for several hundred dollars...Like many of the state's alpaca farmers, both MacEachrans have jobs outside of their farm, which for them works out just fine."Fortunately, these are animals that aren't very hard to take care of," Liz MacEachran said, noting that the daily care and feeding of her alpacas takes about 20 minutes each morning and another 20 minutes each night...Originally, the MacEachrans were interested in raising sheep, but an encounter with a couple of alpacas at a local festival quickly changed their plans, said Liz."Each one has its own personality," she said, noting that one of her alpacas has been known to do a little happy dance when dinner time is near. "It's pretty easy to fall in love with them."..AGuilmet@newstote.com..