Aren’t “seasonal workers” and “seasonal employees” the same thing? While the terms may seem interchangeable, they are used in different contexts when interpreting the employer shared responsibility provisions under the Affordable Care Act.

Compliance with the provisions is required beginning in 2015, after a 1-year delay and other transitional relief. An employer will not risk having to pay under I.R.C. §4980H unless its workforce averaged 50 or more full-time and full-time equivalent employees in the previous year, increased to 100 or more under transition relief for 2015. This workforce count generally includes seasonal workers. Nonetheless, if the employer's workforce exceeds this threshold for 120 days or less during the calendar year and the employees that cause the workforce to exceed the threshold are “seasonal workers,” then the employer is not subject to pay-or-play.

Who is a seasonal worker? It is someone who performs labor or services on a seasonal basis as defined by the Secretary of Labor. This includes agricultural workers, holiday season retail employees, and other workers whose “employment pertains to or is of the kind exclusively performed at certain seasons or periods of the year and which, from its nature, may not be continuous or carried on throughout the year.” Fortunately, the IRS permits employers to apply a reasonable, good faith interpretation of the term’s statutory definition and the DOL’s regulatory standard.

“Seasonal employee” status comes into play when an employer counts the number of full-time employees for purposes of the payment calculation using a look-back measurement method instead of making the determination on a monthly basis. The IRS defines a “seasonal employee,” for this purpose, as an employee who is hired into a position for which the customary annual employment is six months or less.

Gain in-depth analysis of federal tax issues with more than 200 Portfolios, daily breaking news and developments, and commentary on emerging trends with a free trial to U.S. Income Portfolios Library.