LONDON--(BUSINESS WIRE)--According to the latest research report by Technavio, the global laparoscopic devices market is expected to grow at a CAGR of over 8% until 2020.

In this report, Technavio covers the present scenario and growth prospects of the global laparoscopic devices market for 2016-2020. To estimate the market size, our researchers have considered revenues generated from the sales of laparoscopes and laparoscopic instruments, and accessories worldwide.

“Among device types, video laparoscopes are becoming increasingly popular. Video laparoscopes are disposable, cause few complications, and reduce endoscopy-related infections. However, our researchers observe, the sales of devices for alternative diagnostic procedures such as hysterosalpingography, ultrasound, gynecology endoscopy, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may marginally affect the sale of laparoscopes during the forecast period. Olympus Medical Systems, Karl Storz, and Stryker were the leading manufactures of laparoscopes in 2015,” said Brahadeesh Chandrasekaran, Technavio’s industry analyst for orthopedics and general medical devices research.

Americas: largest revenue contributor of the global laparoscopic devices market

The Americas region has emerged as the largest revenue contributor for the laparoscopic devices market and will continue to grow at a CAGR of over 8% until 2020. A rise in the population of people aged 60 years and above is expected to increase the prevalence of chronic diseases such as obesity in the region, which will result in a higher demand for laparoscopic procedures and associated devices. Advances in the design, structure, and function of these laparoscopic devices will further augment the demand for laparoscopic procedures among medical facilities during the forecast period.

The market remains buoyant in anticipation of the Affordable Care Act. On its implementation, many price-sensitive patients in the US will start affording minimal invasive procedures. The Affordable Care Act reforms are envisaged to create a favorable reimbursement policy environment for minimally invasive surgeries. This in turn will lead to an increase in the number of individuals undergoing laparoscopic surgeries in the region during the forecast period.

EMEA: the second largest revenue contributor to the laparoscopic devices market

Governments in EMEA countries are initiating various strategies to spread the awareness of laparoscopies and its benefits in the region. EMEA is also the hub of many reputed vendors and active distributors present in the global laparoscopic devices market. Countries such as, the UK, Germany, France, Italy, and Spain emerged as top revenue contributors for this market in 2015.

With the introduction of new devices and declining price of non-invasive surgery, the EMEA market is expected to witness a surge in the sales of laparoscopic devices. Increasing cases of people with chronic diseases will further increase the demand for laparoscopic devices in the region until 2020. Western Europe will continue to dominate the market in the EMEA region until 2020.

The laparoscopic devices market in APAC valued at USD 730 million in 2015

Japan emerged a major revenue contributor to the market in 2015. Robust government initiatives in the APAC region are leading to many prominent vendors such as Medtronic, Stryker, and Ethicon Endo-Surgery making their way into emerging markets, such as China and India. Simultaneously, local manufacturers in APAC are expected to introduce low-cost products and services during the forecast period. This trend is predicted to result in a decline in the prices for laparoscopic surgeries, thus making it more affordable to the people of this region.

Browse related reports:

-- Global Non-invasive Fat Reduction Market 2016-2020

-- Global Hospital Stretchers Market 2016-2020

-- Global Plastic Surgery Products Market 2016-2020

Purchase three reports from our library for the price of one by becoming a Technavio subscriber. Subscribing to Technavio’s reports allows you to download any three reports per month for the price of one. Contact enquiry@technavio.com with your requirements and a link to our subscription platform.

About Technavio

Technavio is a leading global technology research and advisory company. The company develops over 2000 pieces of research every year, covering more than 500 technologies across 80 countries. Technavio has about 300 analysts globally who specialize in customized consulting and business research assignments across the latest leading edge technologies.

Technavio analysts employ primary as well as secondary research techniques to ascertain the size and vendor landscape in a range of markets. Analysts obtain information using a combination of bottom-up and top-down approaches, besides using in-house market modeling tools and proprietary databases. They corroborate this data with the data obtained from various market participants and stakeholders across the value chain, including vendors, service providers, distributors, re-sellers, and end-users.

If you are interested in more information, please contact our media team at media@technavio.com.