Rural hospitals struggle to stay open, adapt to changes







































Photo: Orlin Wagner /Associated Press Image 1 of / 11 Caption Close Image 1 of 11 The entrance to Sac-Osage Hospital stands empty in Osceola, Mo. After 45 years of providing health care in rural western Missouri, Sac-Osage Hospital is being sold piece by piece. The entrance to Sac-Osage Hospital stands empty in Osceola, Mo. After 45 years of providing health care in rural western Missouri, Sac-Osage Hospital is being sold piece by piece. Photo: Orlin Wagner /Associated Press Image 2 of 11 Remaining equipment and supplies are stacked for sale in a hallway at Sac-Osage Hospital in Osceola, Mo. Sac-Osage Hospital is being sold piece-by-piece. Ceiling tiles are going for 25 cents, the room doors for an average of less than $4 each, and the patient beds for $250 apiece. less Remaining equipment and supplies are stacked for sale in a hallway at Sac-Osage Hospital in Osceola, Mo. Sac-Osage Hospital is being sold piece-by-piece. Ceiling tiles are going for 25 cents, the room doors for ... more Photo: Orlin Wagner /Associated Press Image 3 of 11 Chris Smiley, the hospital's last chief executive, stands next to some leased equipment still located at the Sac-Osage Hospital in Osceola, Mo. Chris Smiley, the hospital's last chief executive, stands next to some leased equipment still located at the Sac-Osage Hospital in Osceola, Mo. Photo: Orlin Wagner /Associated Press Image 4 of 11 A salvage contractor removes leftover equipment and supplies from the Sac-Osage Hospital. A salvage contractor removes leftover equipment and supplies from the Sac-Osage Hospital. Photo: Orlin Wagner /Associated Press Image 5 of 11 Chris Smiley, the hospital's last chief executive, checks on how to remove a plaque from the wall of Sac-Osage Hospital in Osceola, Mo. Chris Smiley, the hospital's last chief executive, checks on how to remove a plaque from the wall of Sac-Osage Hospital in Osceola, Mo. Photo: Orlin Wagner /Associated Press Image 6 of 11 Chris Smiley, the hospital's last chief executive, stands in the empty emergency room of Sac-Osage Hospital. Chris Smiley, the hospital's last chief executive, stands in the empty emergency room of Sac-Osage Hospital. Photo: Orlin Wagner /Associated Press Image 7 of 11 Mayor Adam O'Neal stands near the blank sign for the community's now-closed hospital in Belhaven, N.C. The hospital is one of a growing number of hospitals closing across the country in rural communities. Mayor Adam O'Neal stands near the blank sign for the community's now-closed hospital in Belhaven, N.C. The hospital is one of a growing number of hospitals closing across the country in rural communities. Photo: Gerry Broome /Associated Press Image 8 of 11 Belhaven Mayor Adam O'Neal is organizing a march to Washington, D.C., to protest the closing of the community's rural hospital. The board in his office lists walkers from other states affected by rural hospital closures who will join him for the walk. less Belhaven Mayor Adam O'Neal is organizing a march to Washington, D.C., to protest the closing of the community's rural hospital. The board in his office lists walkers from other states affected by rural hospital ... more Photo: Gerry Broome /Associated Press Image 9 of 11 A sign hangs at the emergency entrance at the now-closed hospital in Belhaven, N.C. A sign hangs at the emergency entrance at the now-closed hospital in Belhaven, N.C. Photo: Gerry Broome /Associated Press Image 10 of 11 Mayor Adam O'Neal stands near the emergency entrance to the rural community's now-closed hospital in Belhaven, N.C. Several people have died before they could make it to farther away hospitals since the hospital closed. less Mayor Adam O'Neal stands near the emergency entrance to the rural community's now-closed hospital in Belhaven, N.C. Several people have died before they could make it to farther away hospitals since the ... more Photo: Gerry Broome /Associated Press Image 11 of 11 Rural hospitals struggle to stay open, adapt to changes 1 / 11 Back to Gallery

OSCEOLA, Mo. — After 45 years of providing health care in rural western Missouri, Sac-Osage Hospital is being sold piece by piece.

Ceiling tiles are going for 25 cents, the room doors for an average of less than $4 each, the patient beds for $250 apiece. Soon, the remnants of the hospital that long symbolized the lifeblood of Osceola, population 923, will be torn to the ground.

Sac-Osage is one of a growing number of rural U.S. hospitals closing their doors, citing a complex combination of changing demographics, medical practices, management decisions and federal policies that have put more financial pressure on facilities that sometimes average only a few in-patients a day.

“Money just kept drying up,” said Chris Smiley, a former operating room nurse who was the last chief executive of Sac-Osage and now is overseeing its liquidation.

A total of 50 hospitals in the rural U.S. have closed since 2010, and the pace has been accelerating, with more closures in the past two years than in the previous 10 years combined, according to the National Rural Health Association. That could be just the beginning of what some health care analysts fear will be a crisis.

An additional 283 rural hospitals in 39 states are vulnerable to shutting down, and 35 percent of rural hospitals are operating at a loss, according to iVantage Health Analytics, a Portland, Maine-based firm that works with hospitals.

Most of the rural hospital closures so far have occurred in the South and Midwest. Of those at risk, nearly 70 percent are in states that have declined to expand Medicaid coverage under the federal Affordable Care Act, although some experts are hesitant to draw a cause-and-effect correlation.

Big city hospitals have been closing at about the same rate as rural ones during the past five years, but an abundance of alternatives in most major metropolitan areas typically reduces the effect on patients. When a rural hospital closes, people may have to travel dozens of miles to reach the nearest hospital, an inconvenience that potentially is a matter of life or death.

When 18-month-old Edith Gonzalez choked on a grape in August 2013, her parents rushed to Shelby Regional Medical Center in their hometown of Center, unaware that the hospital had closed several weeks earlier. Their daughter was dead by the time an ambulance had taken her to the next nearest hospital, more than 45 minutes later.

In rural North Carolina last summer, 48-year-old Portia Gibbs died from cardiac arrest after waiting 90 minutes for a medical helicopter to arrive. She could have been at a hospital in less than half that time, had not the Vidant Pungo Hospital in Belhaven closed just six days earlier.

Her death prompted Belhaven’s mayor to walk 273 miles to the nation’s capital in an attempt to raise awareness about the plight of rural hospitals. Mayor Adam O’Neal plans to lead a similar march June 1 with supporters from at least 41 states.

The city now is trying to acquire the old hospital through eminent domain and is seeking $6 million in federal loans to reopen it. Since Gibbs’ death, O’Neal said, several others have died before they could make it to farther away hospitals, including a 16-year-old boy hurt in a farming accident in April.

“We have people needlessly dying,” O’Neal said.

Declining populations and stagnant economies make it hard on rural hospitals. Rural areas tend to “have older, poorer, sicker populations,” said Michael Topchik, senior vice president of iVantage.

That means they often have a higher percentage of patients covered by Medicare and Medicaid, a pair of government health care programs that pay a lower reimbursement rate than private-sector insurers. Hospitals that rely heavily on those government programs have been particularly hard hit by federal budget cuts and provisions in the 2010 federal health care law that reduced charity care reimbursements and changed other payment criteria.

At Sac-Osage, poor management also played a role in its financial ruin. Some of its doctors, for example, never were approved to be paid by particular insurance companies. And it lost what some staff estimate was $1.5 million to $2 million because the clinic had failed to send out thousands of bills to insurers and patients since 2012.

For state Rep. Warren Love, a local cattle rancher who tried to help save Osceola’s hospital, its passing now seems sort of inevitable.

“Everything has evolved to the big gets bigger and the littlest disappears,” Love said, “and that’s really what’s happened with these hospitals.”