Here’s at look at coverage of the first debate between U.S. Sen. Mark Udall, and his GOP challenger, Congressman Cory Gardner, which was held Saturday in Grand Junction:

The Denver Post: Democratic U.S. Sen. Mark Udall and the man who wants to take his seat, Republican Congressman Cory Gardner, squared off Saturday night in their first debate, touting their own achievements while questioning those of their opponent. At one point, Udall challenged Gardner on the relentless attacks. “I’m curious what problem facing the nation I haven’t caused,” Udall said. “Me, too,” Gardner quipped to laughter. By Lynn Bartels.

The Colorado Springs Gazette: U.S. Rep. Cory Gardner talked rapidly and aggressively Saturday night in the Republican’s effort to unseat U.S. Sen. Mark Udall, and at times the incumbent’s slower, deliberate answers came across like he was a deer caught in the headlights. By Megan Schrader.

The Colorado Independent: Let’s cut to the chase. Debates are notoriously hard to judge, but here’s my best guess: In the big Saturday night showdown here with Mark Udall, Cory Gardner won the debate and lost the fight.

Column by Mike Littwin.

Fox 31: Republican U.S. Senate candidate Cory Gardner took every opportunity to tie Democratic Sen. Mark Udall to President Obama and his vote for the Affordable Care Act during their first debate Saturday night here at Club 20’s fall meeting. By Eli Stokols.

The Associated Press: Health care and the partial government shutdown underscored the first debate between U.S. Sen. Mark Udall and Republican challenger U.S. Rep. Cory Gardner, who are deadlocked in a pivotal Colorado contest that could determine control of the U.S. Senate. By Ivan Moreno.

Other debates between Gardner and Udall:

Denver Post: 6 p.m. Oct. 7 in the Denver Post auditorium. It is sold out, but the debate is being live streamed. The paper has scheduled three debates for three different races.

9News: 7 p.m. Oct. 15. The hour-long show will air commercial free on KTVD Channel 20. The station has scheduled three debates for three different races.