BOULDER — Josh Scott was saved by a faulty microphone.

Scott and fellow senior Xavier Talton issued each other a no-tears challenge before Colorado’s senior-day game against Arizona State on Sunday, and the rest of the Buffaloes were watching closely to make sure there would be no crying in basketball.

After Colorado’s 79-69 victory — its 21st of the season, tying a school record for regular-season wins — Scott took to the microphone to thank fans, teammates, coaches and everyone else who watched the 6-foot-10 forward from Lewis-Palmer High School author one of the great careers in the history of the CU program.

Just as Scott’s voice started to crack, a loud screech of microphone playback pierced the Coors Events Center air, providing a moment of comic relief that allowed him to finish an emotional day without any crying.

“No tears,” said Scott, who finished with 15 points and six rebounds in a Pac-12 victory that gave CU a 16-1 record at home. “I was close a few times, but it didn’t happen. Thank goodness. I don’t need all you guys taking pictures of me that way.”

RELATED: Rushing the floor in college basketball poses too many risks

It was an emotional week for the Buffs (21-9, 10-7 Pac-12). They upset No. 9 Arizona on Wednesday, a victory that added a huge bullet point to their NCAA Tournament résumé. Then came Sunday’s ceremony, which also honored, in addition to Scott and Talton, reserves Eli Stalzer and Brett Brady.

So perhaps it was no surprise that Arizona State, coming off a 35-point loss to No. 22 Utah on Thursday, was a thorn in CU’s side for much of the afternoon.

The hot-shooting Sun Devils (14-15, 4-12) used a 20-5 run to erase CU’s 14-point lead in the first half, then tied the score midway through the second half after being down by eight points.

But the Buffs had enough firepower to keep ASU at an arm’s length. CU hit 11-of-21 3-pointers. Josh Fortune (team-high 17 points), Tre’Shaun Fletcher (13) and George King (nine) each hit three 3-pointers, and Dom Collier contributed two.

It all added up to a victory that left the Buffs with a nearly perfect record at home for the season. Their only loss in Boulder was by two points on a buzzer-beating basket by Utah in CU’s home Pac-12 opener almost two months ago.

The Buffs visit the Utes on Saturday with a chance to set a program record for regular-season wins and potentially improve their seeding in the Pac-12 Tournament, which begins March 9.

“This team could be the winningest team in the regular season in the history of Colorado,” said coach Tad Boyle. “That’s pretty special.”

Still, players suggested those are secondary missions to a more raw goal for the Buffs.

“The word for us (against the Utes) is going to be payback,” Scott said. “They beat us on our home court. We’d like to get them back, and I’m not going to shy (away) from saying that’s something all of us want.”

First, the Buffs will have a couple days off to savor a special Sunday afternoon. Brady and Stalzer entered the game in the final seconds to the roar of the crowd, which numbered 10,325. After the game, Boyle introduced each player to the remaining fans.

When he got to Scott, who has helped Boyle grow the Buffs into an almost perennial NCAA Tournament team, the coach kept his comments brief in order to hold off his own waterworks.

“He’s a stud,” Boyle said of Scott in the bowels of the building after the ceremony. “I keep looking for other adjectives to describe him, but he’s the kind of guy you want your son to grow up to be. He’s also a (heck) of a player to boot.”

Nick Kosmider: 303-954-1516, nkosmider@denverpost.com or @nickkosmider