While it will have to swallow some cost increases, the city of Sun Valley will renew its health insurance plan with Regence BlueShield of Idaho.

At its meeting last Thursday, March 3, the City Council tentatively voted 4-0 to approve renewing the plan.

The city will look into possibly adding an option to its dental plan; if it’s not available, the renewal takes effect. If the option is available, the council will hold a special meeting before April to amend the plan.

The city’s health insurance has to be renewed before April to prevent risking a loss of coverage, albeit temporarily, City Treasurer Angela Orr said.

Last week’s action came less than seven months after the carrier threatened to cancel the plan. In September, Regence sent a letter to the city objecting to a system of payments that three members of the City Council received to purchase their own health insurance outside the city’s group plans.

The issue created a dispute between former Mayor Dewayne Briscoe and the council, including council members Keith Saks, Michelle Griffith and Jane Conard, who received the payments.

The three said they ended the payments after getting clarification on their legality from an outside law firm hired by the city. Under guidelines enacted with the Affordable Care Act, local governments and other organizations are barred from offering employees cash compensation to buy individual plans.

The council members disputed that they should be considered employees. However, they agreed to stop the payments, and Regence dropped the threat to cancel the plan.

Conard said the city has been in compliance since then, but officials plan to sit down with a company about potentially resuming a similar form of payments.

Conard said payments could continue for retired council members through a type of health reimbursement account called a “voluntary employees beneficiary association plan.” Those plans are available to retirees to pay for medical costs, and Conard said city officials plan to meet with representatives from Gallagher VEBA to discuss setting up the accounts.

Conard said Regence helped set up the meeting and has no problem with the accounts, which are allowed under section 501(c)(9) of the IRS code to municipal governments.

Conard said the city’s premiums have risen since last year. In 2015, the city paid a monthly premium of $21,457. To renew the plan for this year would cost $25,158 per month.

Broken down to a per-employee basis, the premiums for the $21,475 plan cost $476 per month for an individual and $570.90 for an employee and spouse, according to the city’s insurance broker, Starley Leavitt.

Conard said she recommended renewing with Regence versus finding a different insurance carrier. She said the cost increases are minor when broken down to a per-employee basis, and Idaho municipalities have limited options because the market is so small.

In shopping for insurance companies, Conard said, she expected to find six to 10 options, when it was actually three to four.

“This is a message to our city employees,” she said. “You’re going to have to pay a little bit more for your health insurance. It’s not the good old days. Times are tough.”

Mayor Peter Hendricks said the Regence plan offers more providers and more access to complementary care such as visits to a chiropractor or acupuncturist.