AUSTIN (KXAN) – The Austin Code Department’s Repeat Offender Program has “major flaws” when it comes to identifying unsafe rental properties, monitoring code violations and the length of time it takes to address dangerous and hazardous conditions at repeat offender properties, a new report contends.

“The City is still failing to take swift and aggressive enforcement actions against rental property owners to repeatedly fail to fix dangerous building conditions,” the report’s authors write in its Executive Summary released Monday with the full report which is linked here.

The study from the Entrepreneurship and Community Development Clinic at the University of Texas School of Law examined the 29 landlords now listed on the City’s nearly two year-old Repeat Offender Program (ROP). Apartment complexes and businesses must register for the city’s “2-5-2” repeat offender list if they meet the following criteria:

Two or more separate notices of violation for conditions that are dangerous or impair habitability, and were not corrected within the time required.

Five or more separate notices of violation for conditions that are dangerous or impair habitability which are issued on separate days regardless of whether the violation was corrected or not.

Two or more citations for conditions that are dangerous or impair habitability within 12 consecutive months.

The program was established in October 2013 in response to a incidents of collapsing balconies and walkways at local apartment complexes that displaced dozens of low-income tenants.

The ROP is intended to create safer living conditions for tenants by having landlords with multiple code violations register with the City Code Department, pay a $100 fee and post notices at the property. City ordinance also requires annual inspections for any outstanding violations. An example of the ROP Notice to Register is here.

But UT Law student researchers under the guidance of the Clinic’s Director Heather K. Way find:

the ROP is complaint-driven, creating the potential many serious and life-threatening conditions are missed

average response time for initial inspections based on citizen complaints at ROP properties takes longer (12.6 days) than for other code violations (1.89-3.57 days)

few smaller rental properties qualify under the ordinance, leaving out duplexes and quad-plex units

many ROP property owners fail to register after receiving notice (19 of 29)

‘most’ ROP owners are missing Notice of Violation (NOV) deadlines

Code is not penalizing those owners creating an environment where landlords can ignore initial NOVs

The average time to carry out a follow-up inspection after a repair deadline at an ROP property is 83 days. The average time to address a code violation – 159 days, the study found.

Austin Code’s stated time to close out a code violation from complaint to voluntary compliance is 90 days. Compare that the study’s authors suggest to San Antonio where the voluntary compliance rate in 2011 was 29 days and in Dallas, 33 days.

The Clinic’s report also finds by the time Code refers a case to the City’s Building Services Commission months have gone by “leaving tenants exposed to dangerous living conditions for many months” and several instances where landlords have failed to act on Commission orders, “posing on-going safety risks to the tenants who remain in the units.”

Recommendations

The study’s authors put forth 16 recommendations. Among them:

allowing Code Officers to issue Violation Notices during drive-bys; not just after complaints

adopting a rental registration program so most properties are subject to routine health and safety inspections

putting in place a High Impact Landlord Program to show which owners of smaller-sized properties such as duplexes are putting tenants’ health and safety at risk

conducting inspections of ROP properties immediately after they register

carrying out follow up inspections and ensure owners are held to deadlines (extending to civil fines, criminal citations or Chap 54 lawsuits against owners who violate BSC orders)

implementing a community prosecutor program to enforce actions against problem properties

The City’s response

KXAN reached out to Code staff for their reaction to the UT study which was sent to Code Department executives in mid-July, a week before the official release Monday the 27th, according to Randy Teich President of the North Austin Civic Association which commissioned the report.

A City spokesperson emailed this response:

“We’re currently unable to comment on specific aspects or conclusions until we’ve had to time to fully review their analysis but do appreciate the Civic Association’s diligence and commitment to improving the City. We’ll include their findings as yet another voice in the on-going discussion concerning dangerous rental properties. It will take a collaborative effort from both the public and the City to identify and address gaps in current programs and turn them into opportunities that benefit the community at large. We look forward to taking these challenges head on to make Austin the most livable city in the country.’ – David Green, City of Austin

FY 2014-15 budget records show Austin Code created􀀃 a􀀃 Multi Family􀀃 Inspection􀀃 Unit,􀀃 in light of recent incidents where balconies or walkways threatened to collapse at rental complexes. Code "increased􀀃 resources􀀃 assigned􀀃 to􀀃 investigate􀀃 these􀀃 cases􀀃 and􀀃 allowed􀀃 inspectors􀀃 to􀀃 routinely􀀃 patrol􀀃 commercial􀀃 and􀀃 multi-family􀀃 structures􀀃 for􀀃 code􀀃 violations􀀃 and􀀃 to􀀃 handle 􀀃complaints.􀀃􀀃􀀃," records show.

Late Monday, The Code Department shared a memo from Asst. City Manager Ray Arellano to Mayor and Council.

In part it reads: "Austin Code staff openly shared data, information and provided ride‐alongs to University of Texas researchers. Austin Code has a number of questions related to the researchers’ interpretation of the data and recommendations. The recommendations to the issues highlighted in the report likely have legal and budget implications that extend beyond the purview of the Austin Code Department. Austin Code will work with stakeholder departments to evaluate and address the report’s findings."

KXAN also reached out to City Council Members Greg Casar and Sabino Renteria in whose district some of the problem properties are.

Watch KXAN News at 6 tonight for more analysis and reaction on this developing story.