Why is GE hurting its retirees?

The recent decision by General Electric to drop its health care coverage for Medicare-eligible retirees was met with a silence that was deafening.

Approximately 65,000 retired GE salaried workers and their spouses will be affected by the decision. GE is forcing the retirees to find their own supplemental Medicare insurance through private insurance exchanges. The move has nothing to do with the Affordable Care Act, aka Obamacare, whereby people without health insurance, or who are underinsured, were allowed to find better coverage through public exchanges.

All of this raises several fundamental questions, such as: Why did GE do it? Does it need the money? Is it in trouble?

Hardly. GE's financial reports show it recorded a 20 percent increase in fourth quarter earnings of $5.4 billion in 2013. And what has happened in 2014? GE profits rose another 13 percent in the second quarter, prompting Chairman and CEO Jeff Immelt to state, "GE had a good performance in the quarter and in the first half 2014 ... and nearly $6 billion returned to shareholders. The environment continues to be generally positive."

With all this positive news regarding corporate profits, for GE to stick it to its retirees, the very people who built the company, is morally repugnant. All those affected by GE's decision are at least 65 years old, and many are certainly in their 80s and 90s. They are at a point in their lives where they cannot absorb large increases in health insurance premiums.

It was not that long ago when people that age were referred to as our "greatest generation." What changed? Is this the way we want to treat them?

This is not a case of employee greed, but merely recognizing that people planned their retirement based on commitments in place at the time. If GE wants to change its policy regarding retiree benefits, it should do so only for those who have yet to retire.

While my organization, the Retired Public Employees Association, represents public employees, we are all in this together. The principles being breached are the same. It makes no difference if your former employer is a public or private entity.

While GE is recording impressive profits, those on the board of directors, who have ridiculous salaries — independent directors were paid at least $250,000 each last year — are so out of touch with the ordinary people that they cannot understand how their actions will affect their former employees who are living on fixed incomes, and are relying on promises the company had made. These board members obviously have no empathy.

Furthermore, in announcing its decision, GE noted that other companies, such as IBM and Time Warner, were doing the same thing. Such an explanation is pathetic. It's like your teenager giving you a reason for bad behavior by stating that "everyone else was doing it." To which the sage parent responds, "If everyone else jumped off a bridge, would you?" The bottom line is that jumping off a bridge is the wrong thing to do, no matter what everyone else is doing. Cutting benefits for those already in retirement is also the wrong thing to do.

GE has to recognize that retirement benefits previously earned must be honored. These retirees can least afford to pay additional premiums, and with GE profits skyrocketing, one has to ask: Is there no end to corporate greed?

GE's slogan used to be "We Bring Good Things To Life." It should be amended to add "unless you are a retiree".

Edward C. Farrell is executive director of the Retired Public Employees Association Inc.