At the 2012 marathon Olympic trials, former University of Colorado star Dathan Ritzenhein ran 26.2 miles in 2 hours, 9 minutes, 55 seconds — and missed making the marathon team by eight seconds. At next Saturday’s marathon trials in Los Angeles he will attempt to make his fourth Olympic team, at age 33 and knowing it could be his last, a point driven home last month by the abrupt retirement of Ryan Hall.

They had been contemporaries since college — Ritzenhein won the 2003 NCAA cross country title by finishing 1.3 seconds ahead of Hall — and they were teammates on the 2008 Olympic marathon team in Beijing. Hall’s body just can’t take the marathon anymore, and Ritzenhein knows how fortunate he is to be running Saturday.

“For me to be 33 and to feel as good as I do right now,” Ritzenhein said, “that’s a blessing.”

Ritzenhein is a favorite to make Team USA. Brianne Nelson, a mother of two who lives in Golden, is hopeful but realistic. Kara Lubieniecki of Boulder, meanwhile, knows she probably won’t make the team, but she’s training hard to give it a try anyway.

Nelson wanted to make the 2008 Olympic team in the marathon but then became pregnant. She took three years off, gave birth in 2008 and again in 2010, then ran at the 2012 trials more to participate than compete because caring for girls ages 3 and 1 was hardly conducive to training at an elite level. The Fort Lewis College graduate will run the marathon trials knowing that at age 35, this is probably her last chance to be an Olympian.

“The marathon is a distance I respect,” she said. “To be able to put everything you’ve been training for, all that time and effort, and to execute it on that one day is going to be a challenge.”

Lubieniecki, a graduate of Bear Creek High School, works as a research assistant in a CU exercise physiology lab.

She’s never had the luxury of being a full-time runner, and at age 26 she’s torn between her aspirations in running and her long-term career goals. She knows she’s unlikely to make the Olympic team.

“Anything is possible,” Lubieniecki said. “But if I were betting on it, I wouldn’t bet on me being in the top three. I’m going to give it the best shot I can give. That’s part of the fun of it.”

They call it fun, running up to 110 miles a week in the winter while knowing all sorts of things can go wrong in a marathon. Only the top three make the Olympic team, and in 2012 Ritzenhein finished fourth. Eight seconds from third.

Following is a closer look at their stories.

Ritzenhein

Ritzenhein ran the 10,000 meters at the 2004 Athens Olympics with a broken foot. He was the top American in the marathon at the 2008 Beijing Olympics, finishing ninth (34 seconds ahead of Hall). In 2009 he broke Bob Kennedy’s hallowed 13-year-old American record in the 5,000 meters (12:56.27). He’s proudest of what he did after not making the 2012 team in the marathon, though.

He had only five months to recover from the marathon trials and train for the 10,000 at the track and field trials. Finishing in the top three there wouldn’t guarantee him a spot on the team, because he didn’t have a current Olympic qualifying time. He would have to finish in the top three and get the qualifying standard (27 minutes, 45 seconds) at the trials on a cold, rainy night. He made the team by finishing third and beating the standard by nine seconds.

“That was probably the hardest thing I’ve had to do,” said Ritzenhein, who lives in Rockford, Mich. “It was like the odds were against me the whole time and all the way up to the start of the race, when it was pouring rain and 50 degrees and I didn’t have the standard. That day was about overcoming my own demons of missing the team, having surgeries, feeling like I was maybe at the end of my career in running. To be able to come back and make that team in the 10K was really the biggest thing for me.”

Last year he was the top American man at the Boston Marathon, finishing seventh, and was ranked the No. 2 American for the season by Track & Field News. He is healthy and is coming off some of the best training of his career.

“From an age standpoint I can train as hard as ever, I just have to recover a little bit better,” Ritzenhein said. “I feel like I’m at a great spot at 33. I think I can still run as good or better than I ever have at the marathon distance.”

Nelson

At the 2012 marathon trials, Nelson finished 61st, more than 17 minutes behind winner Shalane Flanagan, but she was proud just to be there. First she had to qualify for the trials, which she did by training on a treadmill while keeping an eye on her toddlers because her husband works 24-hour shifts as a paramedic/firefighter. Sometimes the baby would wake up early from a nap.

“I’d still have 15 minutes left in a run,” Nelson said. “I’d have to block the treadmill with the couch, throw toys and watch her play. Everything was very challenging.”

Despite those complications and being a sleep-deprived mom, Nelson ran 1:14:36 in the 2011 Rock ‘N’ Roll Philadelphia half marathon to qualify for the trials.

“I was just pumped to get there (the trials). It’s kind of nice to know what I’m expecting now, going with a totally different mind-set than I was in 2012.”

Her girls are now in kindergarten and second grade. That carves out some time for her training, but her husband’s work schedule is still a complication.

“We just make it work,” Nelson said. “He knows I need to get my runs in. There’s been some times when the kids have been sick and he had to work, so I just know I have to get on the treadmill. If that means I’m doing two hours on the treadmill because the kids are sick, that’s what I’m going to do.”

Nelson finished second last year in the USA Road Circuit but concedes she is “probably a longer shot” to make the marathon team.

“It’s a championship-style race. You’re going to have a lot of people going in there with different race plans — some going for broke from the gun, some hanging back, (then) sweeping and picking everybody up. I’m coming off a really good season. I’m feeling pretty fresh.”

Lubieniecki

Lubieniecki can’t help but wonder what kind of runner she would be if she devoted herself fully to running after graduating from California State University-Chico. Instead she went to CU for a master’s degree and got a job there which included helping out with research and teaching exercise physiology.

“I have a lot of professional goals in the health world that I do want to pursue,” said Lubieniecki, who is not quite 5 feet tall. “Part of 2016 is going to be for me to decide how far do I want to take running, how far do I want to pursue a further career? I’ve considered a Ph.D., or going to some kind of professional school, but to do that I would need to commit more of my time to that rather than running. I don’t know if I’m ready to give up running just yet. I still love running, I still love feeling fast and working out.”

She concedes her chances of making the Olympic team are “not real high,” but she might continue to train for the 2020 Games.

“Oh, man, I would like to think so,” Lubieniecki said. “I would definitely go for another Olympic year if 2016 proves to be really positive.”

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or @johnmeyer

Marathon Olympic trials

Where: Los Angeles

When: Saturday, men starting at 11:06 a.m., women at 11:22 a.m.

TV: Channel 9, 11 a.m.

Format: Top three men and top three women make the Olympic team in the marathon, provided they have the necessary Olympic qualifying standard (2:19 for men, 2:45 for women).

Men to watch: Luke Puskedra, Salt Lake City; Meb Keflezighi, San Diego; Dathan Ritzenhein, Rockford, Mich.

Women to watch: Shalane Flanagan, Portland, Ore.; Desiree Linden, Chula Vista, Calif.; Annie Bersagel, Oslo, Norway (formerly of Greeley).