Paul Casey tees off on the first hole during the final of the Travelers Championship golf tournament on Sunday in Cromwell. (AP Photo/Jessica Hill)

Bubba Watson, front left, tees off the first hole as Brian Harman, far right, looks on during the final of the Travelers Championship golf tournament on Sunday in Cromwell. (AP Photo/Jessica Hill)

Bubba Watson, right, and Brian Harman stand on the first tee during the third round of the Travelers Championship golf tournament on Saturday in Cromwell. (AP Photo/Jessica Hill)

Bubba Watson tees off the second hole during the final of the Travelers Championship golf tournament on Sunday in Cromwell.(AP Photo/Jessica Hill)

Bubba Watson won the Travelers Championship for the second time in his career.

The rain played a major factor throughout the final round at TPC River Highlands in Cromwell on Sunday and even slowed the pace of day.

Georgia left-hander Watson shot - 3 for the day and Paul Casey shot -5. Both finished at -16 and after 18 holes, they went to a playoff. After both paring the 18th hole, Casey struggled and double bogeyed the 18th hole for the third time.

Watson, who won the Travelers in 2010, hit back-to-back birdies on the first two holes to take the lead, but was caught by a surging Casey. Watson, who was leading the tournament after round one and round two, dropped to a tie with Casey after he bogeyed the 17 hole.

Sunday's Travelers Championship win was Watson eighth win on the PGA tour. Watson's win at the Travelers Championship was his first win on the PGA tour.



Brian Harman, who was the leader at the start of Sunday, finished at -15. Graham DeLaet finished the tournament at -14.



Instead of tee times starting at 9:30 a.m., golfers teed off between 11:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. The delayed start allowed grounds crew to have enough time to clear the course for the golfers, according to tournament officials. Golfers were in threesomes instead of groups of two to help speed up the game.



Copyright 2015 WFSB (Meredith Corporation). All rights reserved.