WASHINGTON – The National Right to Life Committee today reinforced its endorsement of Kansas Sen. Pat Roberts for re-election to the United States Senate, noting that “independent” candidate Greg Orman would be “just another pro-abortion, anti-life Democrat vote” if elected.

“Greg Orman has the same extreme abortion position as Barack Obama,” said Carol Tobias, National Right to Life president. “Both Greg Orman and Barack Obama support a policy which allows abortion on demand for any reason.”

National Right to Life’s Tobias observed that, if elected, Orman, who previously ran for the U.S. Senate as a Democrat, and who supported Barack Obama’s 2008 presidential campaign, “would support the Obama-Harry Reid pro-abortion, anti-life agenda, which is out of touch with most Kansans and mainstream America.”

The Associated Press reported on September 4 that Orman “supports abortion rights.”

In sharp contrast, Sen. Pat Roberts has compiled a 100% pro-life voting record and, as National Right to Life noted in its April 21 endorsement, Roberts “has been a key supporter of every major pro-life initiative” during his tenure in the U.S. Senate.

Roberts is a co-sponsor of S. 1670, the “Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act” – groundbreaking legislation to protect unborn children at 20 weeks, a point by which the unborn child is capable of experiencing great pain when being killed by dismemberment or other late abortion methods.

Roberts voted against enactment of Obamacare, which provides government funding for insurance plans that pay for abortion on demand, and will lead to the rationing of lifesaving medical treatments. On April 1, 2014, he introduced the “Repeal Rationing in Support of Life Act,” which targets the four key rationing components of Obamacare identified in a March 2014 report issued [www.nrlc.org/communications/healthcarereport] by National Right to Life.

“Greg Orman would be one more pro-abortion, anti-life Democrat vote in the U.S. Senate,” Tobias said. “No one should be fooled by Greg Orman’s ‘independent’ charade. Kansans should vote to re-elect Pat Roberts.”