Hookers 4 Hillary: Dennis Hof's 'Bunny Ranch' workers form political group ahead of Nevada caucus

With the relatively new Nevada caucuses set for Saturday, Hookers for Hillary is grabbing media attention.

The group touting Hillary Clinton's campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination launched in April, shortly after the former U.S. secretary of state announced she would run.

Its members are workers at the Moon Lite Bunny Ranch in Carson City, Nev., where prostitution is legal.

Dennis Hof, owner of the Bunny Ranch and six other Nevada brothels, told the Daily Mail that Hookers for Hillary was his idea. He announced the group's Clinton endorsement with a tweet on April 15.

PHOTOS: Go inside Dennis Hof's 'Moonlite Bunny Ranch'

Taylor Lee, a 26-year-old former cake decorator from Houston, has worked at the Bunny Ranch for six months. She told The Guardian that she's happy to have health insurance to pay for anti-seizure medication.

Lee, however, confessed to having divided loyalties. While the thinks Clinton would be an "excellent candidate," she said she would be caucusing on Saturday for Bernie Sanders.

SEX TRADE: 24 charged with felony prostitution in one month in Houston

Hof acknowledged that not all of his employees are backing Clinton, and he's not going to force anyone to vote a certain way.

"I have 540 girls," Hof said Tuesday by phone. "My guess is probably 480 are supporting Hillary. They're looking out for their rights."

BREAKING NEWS: @BunnyRanch @DennisHof endorses @HillaryClinton for president! WATCH the video: http://t.co/9I2tHNTmry #HookersForHillary — Dennis Hof (@DennisHof) April 15, 2015

A big factor in the discussion, Hof said, is health insurance.

"They're all making six-figure incomes and before Obamacare they could not buy health insurance," Hof said. "The insurance industry in their ignorance painted them with the same brush as illegal prostitutes, which is like comparing (the pharmaceutical giant) Pfizer with the drug cartel."

At that point, he broke off the conversation to take a call from Geraldo Rivera.

As stated on its website, Hookers for Hillary has a four-point platform (predictably unimpeded by constraints of parallel construction):

- Protecting health care reform

- Foreign policy experience

- Support for agencies that protect the public's health

- Prevention of a return to supply side economics

Hof was also in the news in October, when former basketball star Lamar Odom was found unconscious at another Nevada brothel.