By Sean Batura, Kerrville Daily Times, Texas McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

July 26 --The family of a boy said to have been touched inappropriately in Kerr County by two former Camp Stewart counselors has dropped a lawsuit against the camp and the staffing agency that screened the counselors.

Bill Arnold , the attorney representing and paid by Camp Stewart , said the parties settled on Wednesday but he wouldn't disclose the amount. Ralph Lopez , who also represents the camp but is paid through its insurance, declined to disclose the amount, but noted the camp will pay less than a third of the amount due from Camp America , the staffing agency.

The boy in question was

6 years old in 2009, when he was said to have been touched above a towel by Scott Zirus, who's in prison serving a 40-year sentence after having been convicted in 2010 of molesting three other boys ages 6 to 8 at the camp. The boy felt comfortable returning to the camp in 2011, but in the following year, another counselor was accused of inappropriate touching and was fired, although prosecutors declined to press charges due to a lack of evidence. In the second case, the counselor, an 18- or 19-year-old man, was accused of slapping the boy's butt, but tearfully denied doing anything wrong, Lopez said. By contrast, Zirus was arrested at the San Antonio airport as he attempted to flee the country and confessed to molesting at least two boys.

The boy's family is the seventh one to settle with the camp and the staffing agency. Previous settlements totaled at least $6.65 million . All seven families claimed Camp Stewart and Camp America negligently caused Zirus to be hired and to hold authority over numerous boys as leader of a cabin and camp counselor.

The camp, which has operated for 92 years, was bought by the Ragsdale family in 1966, and since that time more than 2,500 counselors and 10,000 boys have been through it without an incident on the order of Zirus, Lopez said.

Lopez said Camp America still is being used to hire counselors.

"We would hope that by this point, Camp America might be the one that would be against all these predators," Lopez said.

In 2009, the year allegations against Zirus surfaced, camp owner Silu Ragsdale died, and is survived by his wife, camp owner Kathy Ragsdale .

" Kathy Ragsdale has been grieving over this all these years and lamenting that this sort of thing happened," Lopez said. "It's been hard on everybody involved; it's been an open wound."

Zirus this year filed an appeal of his case in federal court, alleging his guilty plea was not voluntary and his defense ineffective, among other claims.

Last month, he made a plea to Australian Foreign Affairs Minister Julie Bishop to help his appeal, according to the The Western Australian.

___

(c)2014 the Kerrville Daily Times (Kerrville, Texas)

Visit the Kerrville Daily Times (Kerrville, Texas) at www.dailytimes.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 485

[jetpack-related-posts]