Teenager holds a cigarette (Photo: Saia Prudkov, Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Wisconsin’s smoking age should be 21. Maybe it should be older than that, I don’t know. Maybe the best possible smoking age is, like, 93. So I say let’s start by raising the legal age from 18 to 21 and see where that gets us.

On Thursday California’s Legislature voted to raise the legal age for cigarette and e-cigarette and chewing tobacco purchases from 18 to 21. Hawaii passed a similar law last year. A handful of cities around the country, including Boston, Cleveland, New York City and Evanston, Ill., have passed local laws to do it.

Not many public health initiatives have been as successful as quickly as smoking cessation efforts. Many, many fewer people smoke in Wisconsin and across the country than did even 10 or 15 years ago. Wisconsin has been part of a broad multi-pronged effort to discourage people from smoking that has included steeply raising taxes on smokes, banning workplace smoking, sponsoring smoking cessation programs and education efforts, especially those aimed at young people.

These efforts are good for everyone. Smoking is really, really bad for you. It saps your endurance in the short term and gives you cancer in the long term. And it's not even one of the fun addictions. A lot of long-time smokers hate the fact that they smoke, hate it and want to stop. You never hear of people who are miserable about having developed a physical need for a morning cup of coffee. That's because coffee is the best addiction, and nicotine is one of the worst.

As recently as 2000, 12.2 percent of Wisconsin middle-school students — grades 6 through 8 — said they smoked cigarettes, according to the Wisconsin Youth Tobacco Survey conducted by the state Department of Health Services. Eighth-graders! By 2014, it was 1.6 percent. Almost one-third of Wisconsin high schoolers, 32.9 percent, in 2000 said they smoked. By 2014 it was down to 10.7 percent.

That is still a lot of high school kids who are regular smokers. Not a stretch to think some are sharing what they buy with their younger friends.

Like a lot of people my age, I tried cigarettes as a high-school kid, then dabbled briefly with being a regular smoker in college. Like a lot of people, as a teenager I was extremely stupid. It is sheer stupid luck that kept me from being saddled with a decades-long or lifelong nicotine addiction, because that is essentially the risk one is taking when one bums his first smoke from an older friend at a party in somebody's basement in Normal, Ill.

But public health studies show that teenagers are especially susceptible to policy changes that discourage smoking. When states, including Wisconsin, were hiking cigarette taxes to try to discourage people from buying them, the effect was especially marked among teens. (There is some evidence suggesting that, now that the taxes are quite high, this effect has become less pronounced.) An extensive 2015 study by the Institute of Medicine found that raising the smoking age to 21 would decrease the rate at which 15- to 17-year-olds start smoking by 25 percent, which is a huge number. That study found it would also decrease rates among 18- to 21-year-olds, though less sharply.

There's no great mystery about why this works. High-school seniors are 18 and, being teenagers, are often willing to buy cigarettes for their younger friends. It's a bit harder to picture a college senior buying a pack of smokes for some ninth-graders.

There does not seem to be much appetite in the Wisconsin Legislature to copy California and Hawaii on this policy. But individual municipalities could do it, as many did with workplace smoking bans before that became a statewide policy. It would be interesting to see whether an enterprising city council somewhere might take this up. Research shows the policy works, and its goal — keeping cigarettes away from teenagers — is a good one, so let's try it.

Robert Mentzer is central Wisconsin storytelling coach and a columnist for USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin. Contact: robert.mentzer@gannettwisconsin.com, 715-845-0604; on Twitter: @robertmentzer.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share The healthiest state in the U.S. is cracking down on smoking. Newslook

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1pksW76