David Kilts, president of the Weiz Guys Loveland Homebrew Club, takes the temperature of mash, crushed malt mixed with hot water as part of the brewing process, Saturday during the Learn to Homebrew Day hosted by Grimm Brothers Brewhouse in Loveland. ( Shelley Widhalm )

Mark Boelman of Loveland used to walk into the liquor store and get euphoric at the cooler of beer.

"It was almost euphoria of, oh my gosh, I've got all these choices," said Boelman, who works as an accountant for Left Hand Brewing Co. in Longmont and is a member of two homebrewing clubs.

Boelman, who began homebrewing three years ago, expanded his repertoire of beers by being creative with grains, hops and yeast, he said.

"I love to cook. Homebrewing is the same from a process standpoint -- the ability to transform something you can share with others," Boelman said.

Boelman and members of the Weiz Guys Loveland Homebrew Club and the Berthoud Barn Burners shared their beer knowledge and brewing techniques Saturday during the Learn to Homebrew Day hosted by Grimm Brothers Brewhouse, 623 N. Denver Ave.

"We're introducing people to the brewing process," said Eric McDermid, a member of the Loveland and Berthoud brew clubs. "If you can make mac and cheese from a box, you can make great brew."

The brewing process involves five steps that include mashing, boiling, fermenting, aging and finishing.

Brewers can start with an extract brew to skip the first step, or use an all-grain brewing process by mixing crushed malt with hot water to create a mash, McDermid said. The choice of grain results in different colors, flavors and body, he said.

The mash is stirred to convert the starches in the grain to sugars, creating a bittersweet liquid called wort, according to a handout on the brewing process from the homebrewersassociation.org.

The wort is boiled and hops are added to provide bitterness, flavor and aroma before being transferred to a fermenter, where yeast is added. The yeast converts the sugars into alcohol and carbon dioxide.

The beer is aged and then finished through a natural carbonation process with yeast in the bottle.

"You can buy grain and steep it yourself, or buy an extract with the steeping done. It's concentrated malt syrup with the grain already steeped," McDermid said.

Homebrewing can be as simple as buying a $40-50 starter kit or a cooking pot and five-gallon bucket to buying all different kinds of equipment and gadgetry, McDermid said.

"If you brew yourself, you can make choices a big brewer can't," McDermid said, explaining that spending $4-5 extra on a 5-gallon batch isn't a big deal for one batch, but can be costly for an entire production. "In some cases, you can make better beer than the big guys."

Loveland resident Heather Cochran, a beer lover who wants to learn to make her own brews, attended the one-day event with her friend, Angie Bayer.

"It's the idea of being able to play with it and make it your own," Cochran said. "You can have your own flavors. You can have your own spin on it."

Bryant Lambert of Loveland and his friend Jon Colby, who lives in Fort Collins, are interested in homebrewing as a hobby they can do together to save on ingredient costs.

"There's lots of good beers coming out," Lambert said. "It's kind of fun to see what it's all about."

Lambert likes the idea of refining recipes and figuring out which ingredients bring out the tastes he likes, he said.

"I have an appreciation for craft beer," Colby said. "It's the idea you can make something unique."

The Weiz Guys meet the third Tuesday of the month at Grimm Brothers. The Berthoud Barn Burners meet the first Tuesday at City Star in Berthoud.

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.