Former Gov. Jim Edwards stayed active in GOP politics long after his official retirement, endorsing Mitt Romney, Jim DeMint and other Republican politicians. This group shot is from January 16, 2008.

Former Gov. Jim Edwards gained national attention as the first Republican governor elected in South Carolina since Reconstruction. Locally, he is equally remembered for leading the Medical University of South Carolina to national prominence.

Edwards passed away early Friday at age 87 following a period of declining health. The funeral will be 1 p.m. Monday at St. Philip's Episcopal Church in Charleston.

Funeral arrangements The funeral service for former Gov. Jim Edwards will be 1 p.m. Monday at St. Philip's Church, 142 Church St., Charleston. Burial will follow at Christ Church Cemetery in Mount Pleasant, 2304 U.S. Highway 17. On Sunday from 5:30 to 7:30 p.m. will be a visitation at St. Luke's Chapel on the campus of the Medical University of South Carolina, 181 Ashley Ave., Charleston.

Edwards, a Charleston oral surgeon, traded dentistry for political office in 1974 when he was voted into the Governor's Mansion - a shocking turn of events made possible after the favored Democratic front-runner was disqualified. His victory heralded the rise and dominance of the Republican Party in the state that lasts to this day.

During his tenure, from 1975 to 1979, the Patriots Point Naval and Maritime Museum was dedicated and the death penalty was reinstated in South Carolina. The General Assembly also passed landmark legislation designed to redistribute education funds for the benefit of poorer schools in the state, the Education Finance Act.

He also backed legislation that protected marsh and tidelands.

After serving what was the then-gubernatorial limit of one four-year term, Edwards became Secretary of Energy under President Ronald Reagan. Following a brief two years in Washington, he returned to the Lowcountry to take over as president of MUSC, a position he would keep for the next 17 years.

His achievements leading the school were numerous. The university completed more than $240 million in construction and renovation projects, including the Institute of Psychiatry, the Student Life Center and the Children's Hospital.

Even after stepping down, Edwards would be closely identified with the school for the rest of his life. Following a stroke in June 2013, he joked to The Post and Courier about the operation at MUSC that cleared a potentially debilitating clot.

"Most people go around showing pictures of their grandchildren," he said. "I go around showing pictures of a clot that they took out of my brain."

He was quick to spread credit for MUSC's success. "I happen to be the one who carries the banner, but the credit goes to the team of employees here," he told the newspaper in 1992. "No one person could do it."

After leaving the MUSC helm, Edwards stayed active in politics, endorsing Mitt Romney in his run for the White House and Jim DeMint when he served as the state's junior U.S. senator, among many others.

News of his death was disclosed by family members, drawing an outpouring of support from friends and political successors.

Gov. Nikki Haley issued a statement of condolence. "As someone who appreciated the opportunities and challenges of this office, Gov. Edwards always offered kind words of support and encouragement - and we are forever grateful for his friendship," she said.

Haley and her husband, Michael Haley, will attend Monday's funeral service.

Former S.C. first lady Iris Campbell also issued a message noting Edwards' many contributions.

"South Carolina has lost a statesman and the Republican Party has lost a true pioneer," said Campbell, widow of former Gov. Carroll A. Campbell Jr., who had run for lieutenant governor while Edwards was seeking the top post in '74.

"He was truly one of the most decent men to have ever served as governor of South Carolina," added U.S. Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C.

As news spread of the loss, other local Republicans praised Edwards as an example.

"Gov. Edwards has always been extraordinary not only for all that he has accomplished but the way in which he did so," said U.S. Rep. Mark Sanford. "He had an ever-warm spirit that was infectious for the way that he showed concern and care for so many of us in the Lowcountry and across the state, and in that regard, he will be particularly missed."

Said U.S. Sen. Tim Scott, R-S.C.: "No matter if he was serving as a Cabinet member for President Reagan or on a board for President George H.W. Bush, we always knew that Jim's heart was here at home with the people of South Carolina."

Edwards' death leaves five surviving former S.C. governors: Fritz Hollings, Richard Riley, David Beasley, Jim Hodges and Mark Sanford.

The early years

Edwards lived a remarkable, traveling life. He was born June 24, 1927, in Hawthorne, Fla., a son of O.M. and Birtie Hieronymus Edwards. They were both schoolteachers in the town of 600, located 15 miles east of Gainesville.

The Edwards family moved to Charleston County in 1929. His father began teaching vocational school and soon was named principal of St. Andrews Grammar School.

In 1938, his parents bought a farm in Mount Pleasant. In his elder years, Edwards often spoke of hunting, fishing and playing in the woods of the property during his youth, around what was then a sparsely populated East Cooper section of Charleston County.

While a student at Moultrie High School, Edwards held part-time jobs at the Isle of Palms, including a paper route and setting up pins in a bowling alley. After graduating high school in 1944, Edwards convinced his parents to sign a form allowing him to join the U.S. Maritime Service. He made 22 Atlantic crossings with ports of call in war-torn England and France.

After the war, Edwards settled back into life in Mount Pleasant and enrolled at the College of Charleston, majoring in chemistry and biology and minoring in history and physics. He graduated college in 1950, and the next year married his lifelong partner, Anne Norris Darlington, an Edgefield native who had moved with her family to Mount Pleasant.

Edwards and his bride moved to Kentucky where he enrolled at the University of Louisville's Dental School.

During the Korean War, Edwards again found himself in uniform, serving as a dental officer in the Navy from 1955 to 1957. From 1957 to 1958, the Edwards family, including a son and a daughter, lived in Philadelphia where he did postgraduate work at the University of Pennsylvania. Edwards established a dentistry practice in 1960 that specialized in oral surgery.

Politics comes calling

Until 1974, Edwards practiced on Gadsden Street in downtown Charleston. But GOP politics increasingly sparked the interest of the medical professional. He became chairman of the Charleston County Republican Party from 1964 to 1969 at a time when Republicans were growing in numbers under the likes of Sen. Strom Thurmond, but were still in the minority.

Edwards represented the state as a delegate to the Republican National Convention in 1968 and 1972. In 1972, he was elected state senator from Charleston County's District 176, defeating incumbent Robert Scarborough. Later on, gubernatorial politics came calling.

In 1974, Edwards successfully ran against former Vietnam commander and handpicked GOP favorite retired Army Gen. William C. Westmoreland in what was the state's first-ever Republican gubernatorial primary. He then defeated Democrat William Jennings Bryan Dorn in the general election, becoming the state's first Republican governor since Daniel Henry Chamberlain in 1876.

That election season was particularly memorable for the disarray on the Democrats' side of the ballot; the state Supreme Court ruled that presumed Democratic frontrunner Charles D. "Pug" Ravenel did not meet the five-year residency requirements to run for governor. Edwards won the November finale by a margin of about 17,500 votes out of 529,000 cast.

Robert G. Liming, Edwards' former press secretary as governor, said that at the beginning of 1974, the odds seemed so stacked against Edwards that to win would be considered the wildest of political flukes.

"He never expected to be governor," he said. "He didn't plan on being governor. But Jim did it; he pulled it off." Edwards offered to run, Liming said, because he was "truly, in every sense of the word, a patriot."

As governor, Edwards' strength was that he was a conservative but not an ideologue, Liming said. That made him nonthreatening to the Democrats in charge of the Legislature. "They knew he was a true conservative, but they could talk to him," Liming added.

With Reagan, then MUSC

After serving his lone term in Columbia, President Reagan asked Edwards to join his Cabinet as Secretary of Energy in 1981. Edwards was called on to advocate for Reagan's plan to shutter DOE, an effort that went nowhere in D.C. He resigned shortly into his service to return to the state as president of MUSC.

On his watch, MUSC performed its first heart transplant, liver transplant, combination pancreas-kidney transplant and pediatric liver transplant. The MEDUCARE emergency air and ground transportation system was initiated. Edwards increased private giving to the school and initiated its first capital campaign that raised $16.2 million. He increased alumni support.

Current School President Dr. David J. Cole issued a statement Friday noting Edwards' many accomplishments.

"Dr. Edwards took over the reins as president at a time when MUSC was a locally and regionally respected institution with finite resources, limited impact nationally, and a small but dedicated faculty," he said. "With his leadership and vision MUSC started to transform and grow in scope, scale, and quality - a legacy and momentum that even today is still evolving."

Cole continued, "As an individual he was universally liked and respected - he had a personality that filled the room - truly he never met anyone that he did not like."

Edwards' roles were also varied. In 1990, the Senate Commerce Committee approved Edwards as President Bush's designee to the Communications Satellite Corp.'s board of directors or COMSAT, which deals in space communications satellites. In 1991, he became chairman of the board of directors of the S.C. Sea Grant Consortium. In 1997, Edwards was inducted into the S.C. Hall of Fame for his contributions as governor.

Reach Schuyler Kropf at 937-5551.