Tom Westfall Guest columnist

As most of you who read this column know, my grandchildren are a source of nearly infinite delight to me. Their perspectives on life are innocent and refreshing and living through their eyes helps keep me young at heart. Additionally, they are wonder "column fodder." A recent conversation with Katherine, age 7, struck a responsive chord with me, one that was column worthy.

Katherine is a voracious reader. Each week when we talk with her on the phone, she regales us with the latest books that she's reading. She's moved from Dr. Seuss to chapter books, including "Ivy and Bean," "Junie B. Jones," and others of that ilk. Most recently however, she's become fascinated with stories of heroes who have made a significant contribution to their world especially young people.

Her favorite book thus far has been "I am Malala: The Girl Who Stood Up for Education and Was Shot by the Taliban." Katherine was impressed with her courage and the impact she had upon her world. As she was nearing the completion of telling me about this book she got quiet and said, "Grandpa, I'm sort of sad after reading this book." I began to interject something about how it was sad that she had to suffer the way she did, but Katherine said, "No Grandpa, that's not what I'm talking about. I'm sad because I'm 7 years old and haven't done anything yet to make my world a better place."

Later that week, Katherine's mother sent me a picture of a poster Katherine had made and put on the door to her room. It said, "Donate money to help others." A worthy sentiment to be sure and I hope it helped Katherine with her existential malaise.

Advertisement

What Katherine's parent said to her, and the message that I reinforced to Katherine, is that every day she goes to school, every day she interacts with kids at the swimming pool, every time she's in contact with anyone, (including her sometimes pesky little sister) she is making a choice about whether or not her world is going to be a kinder, better place.

At the age of 7, no one expects children to cure cancer, or eradicate poverty. But what we should be telling children is that the way they can contribute to a better world is through the interactions they have with those around them. I reminded Katherine of the time I came to sing at her school and how the shy refugee girl from Somalia sat down on the floor beside Katherine and how Katherine had reached out and held her hand. I reminded her of how she always makes sure that the child in her class who is confined to a wheelchair is included in recess activities. I reminded her of how kind she is to her baby sister, and how she looks out for her.

This past week has been one of often loud and angry rhetoric. The Super Court upheld the Affordable Care Act and later determined that same-sex marriage was legal in all 50 states. Following the horrific shooting in South Carolina, efforts are underway to remove the Confederate flag from the state capitol, along with other vestiges of slavery, one of our nation's collective sins.

Many people were angry about all of these decisions. Their postings on social media were defiant and vitriolic. And, for many of those on the "winning" side, these wins have been taken with anything but graciousness. A southern pastor had said he would set himself on fire if same-sex marriage became the law of the land, and more than one person on social media offered to bring the matches.

We're celebrating the signing of the Declaration of Independence this week. We'll have fireworks and moments of reflection on our nation's rich heritage. We will celebrate our freedoms. One of the beauties of freedom is that we can all have differing opinions. We can share these opinions in any manner we choose as long as it doesn't impinge upon the rights of others.

And that's all well and good, but for many of us, we yearn for more. We want more thoughtful discourse. We want more altruism. We want more beneficence. We want less violence, less hatred and less polarization.

Want to change the world? Practice kindness. Whether you are 7 or 77, kindness is the key. It seems like such a simple concept, but in actuality, it's difficult because it means being kind to everyone, not just those with whom we share similar values or ideas — not just our inner circle.

Kindness should start in our homes, extend to our communities, and then like ever widening circles of affection, it can envelope the world.

Tom Westfall teaches parenting classes at Family Resource Center.