By William Moore

Daily Journal

TUPELO – As a training officer for the Mississippi Department of Transportation, John Dennis Daugherty has spent the last decade on the road.

“I was driving somewhere every day,” Daugherty said. “Most weeks, I would leave home Sunday evening and get back Thursday. It was time for me to come home and help my community.”

Entering politics for the first time, Daugherty knocked off three-term incumbent Tishomingo County Sheriff Glenn Whitlock in the Democratic primary run-off and then bested Republican Mike Higginbottom in the general election.

He will not be sworn into office until January but will head to the Jackson area in early December to attend a two-week school for new sheriffs. He has not had a chance to meet with the current staff of the Tishomingo County sheriff’s department but he has started mapping out a direction.

“I want to get community-oriented policing back into the daily routine,” said Daugherty. “I would like to see more neighborhood watch groups.

“Right now, there are just two in the county. I want people to feel comfortable contacting a deputy to report a suspicious person.”

He wants to have an increased public presence. That includes more deputies on county roads and expanding the D.A.R.E. program to all schools.

“I want people to see guys out on patrol,” Daugherty said. “I want people to see us investigating crime, and I want them to see an end result. You can’t win every case, but I want people to see we are working hard and doing everything possible to get an arrest and conviction.”

The sheriff-elect plans to increase both the amount and the frequency of training the officers receive. Training would include not only officer safety but also policy, forensics and investigation practices.

“Any time an officer has to place his hands on an individual, he needs to be trained,” Daugherty said. “We train once or twice a year on firearms but don’t do defensive tactics, even though we are handcuffing people every day.

“If you are not reminded of the proper way to do things, it is easy to get complacent. I want to implement continuing education and training to combat complacency.”

Throughout his 26 years in law enforcement, Daugherty has developed working relationships with many different agencies across the region and the state. He hopes to continue that as sheriff, working closely with surrounding agencies for both investigations and training.

Daugherty also plans on being a hands-on sheriff.

“I will be in uniform and be there for my men, and I will be out in the public,” he said. “One thing I know is there will not be a chief deputy. Instead, we will have two shift supervisors. If something comes up, the deputies won’t have to look far to find someone in charge and on duty.”

He plans on interviewing people for all of the jobs at the sheriff’s office, including corrections officers at the county jail. That includes re-interviewing current employees as he tries to put the best people to work for the county.

“I want to build the best department possible for my daughter, for my family and for the people of Tishomingo County,” he said. “This is my home.”

Daugherty is a local boy but he still used all three names – John Dennis Daugherty – in his campaign materials.

“My uncle was the mayor of Iuka and my aunt owned a dress shop when I was growing up. Back then, everyone knew me as Dennis,” he said. “When I went to school, I was known by all my classmates as John. Then I had some folks who called me J.D.”

“They told me I needed to use all three names or folks might not recognize me.”

william.moore@journalinc.com