Thought you might find this interesting Submit

The global healthcare analytics market is currently estimated at $4,430.9 million in 2013 and is expected to reach $21,346.4 million by 2020, growing at a CAGR of 25.2% from 2013 to 2020, according to a new market report published by Market and Markets.

Analytics solutions help healthcare systems in regulatory compliance, reduction of hospital readmissions and hospitals stays, prediction and prevention of chronic diseases, quality care, claims processing, and fraud detection. Collectively, this helps the healthcare industry in reducing costs and providing quality care. With the stringent regulations and initiatives being taken by the governments across the globe to reduce healthcare costs, analytics is increasingly being adopted by healthcare systems to serve this purpose and to gain a competitive edge (PR Newswire, 12/13).

As of 2013, the three highest growing areas during the forecast period are descriptive analytics, predictive analytics and prescriptive analytics.

Key U.S. Market Drivers

Report findings show that healthcare providers, health information exchanges (HIE) and accountable care organizations (ACO) as the key drivers of the global market growth. Based on the findings, the U.S. dominated the global healthcare analytics market largely driven by:

Meaningful Use

ICD-10 implementation

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) These mandated initiatives help to increase EHR adoption rates and health informaton exchanges to support interoperability. Fragmented Market The healthcare analytics market is a highly fragmented market with some major players such as IBM Corporation

Oracle Corporation

Truven Health Analytics, Inc.

Verisk Health, Inc.

Optum, Inc.

MedeAnalytics, Inc.

McKesson Corporation

SAS Institute, Inc.

LexisNexis Risk Solutions

Inovalon, Inc.

Predixion Software

iHealth Analytics, Inc.

Predilytics

Cerner Corporation For more information on the report, click here

Featured image credit: Social BIz Solutions via cc