WASHINGTON – House Majority Whip Steve Scalise, R-Jefferson, co-hosted the type of multi-purpose party Tuesday night (Oct. 6) that is becoming a Washington staple.

The birthday party was planned six months ago, but it ended up serving more purposes, given recent events. It turned into a combination of Scalise's 50th birthday party, fundraiser and, though not a stated reason for the party, it served as a way to promote his candidacy for House majority leader. At the same time, it also celebrated the upcoming 40th birthday of Rep. Patrick McHenry, R-N.C., the deputy whip who is running to replace Scalise as majority whip – should Scalise be victorious in his effort to move up the No. 2 House leadership position. Majority whip is No. 3 in the House leadership.

The monetary beneficiary of the evening was the "The Whip it Good JFC," a joint fundraising committee established by Scalise and McHenry for their campaign and leadership PACs.

The party was held at Eastern Market, the combination farmers' market and arts and crafts outlet one subway stop from the Capitol. It featured charbroiled gulf oysters from Tommy Cvitanovich of Drago's. Gumbo, from the "Cajunator" food truck, along with po-boys, according to Scalise staffers. Music was provided by the '80s cover band the "Spazzmatics." House members and their chiefs of staffs were invited gratis.

The race for majority leader pits Scalise against Rep. Tom Price, a physician from Georgia. With the election now postponed from Thursday until after Oct. 29, it's possible that another candidate, backed by some of the most conservative House GOP members, might also enter the race.

Scalise told supporters in a conference call Sunday that he now has 124 confirmed supporters, enough to win the race for majority leader. Of course, that assumes those making the commitments were sincere (yes, some members have been known to say they're for you when they aren't really for you) and his support remains firm in the weeks leading up to the vote.

Scalise's run is only possible if the current majority leader, Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., wins his race Thursday to replace John Boehner, R-Ohio, as speaker. McCarthy is the clear frontrunner. Boehner created the leadership turnover when he unexpectedly announced Sept. 25 that he's giving up the speaker's job and his Ohio House seat on Oct. 30.

The leadership elections take place as the 247-member House caucus is divided between two factions: Those who want to confront the Obama administration by aggressively moving to stop funding for Planned Parenthood and the Affordable Care Act, even if it leads to a government shutdown, and those who believe that the GOP is destined to lose such battles and get blamed if the government shuts down. Congress recently approved a stop-gap funding bill, but that runs out on Dec. 11.

Scalise's Louisiana Republican colleagues are backing Scalise for majority leader, not only citing his leadership skills but the importance to Louisiana of having a state lawmaker in the No. 2 House position, especially given the delegation's current lack of seniority.

Read about what a majority leader does here.