Leading Obamacare critic linked to 2016 Blumenthal challenge

Photo: Chip Somodevilla, Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Betsy McCaughey, former lieutenant governor of New York from 1995 to 1998, has started showing up at an increasing number of GOP events in Connecticut. Betsy McCaughey, former lieutenant governor of New York from 1995 to 1998, has started showing up at an increasing number of GOP events in Connecticut. Photo: Chip Somodevilla, Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images Leading Obamacare critic linked to 2016 Blumenthal challenge 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

She's been compared to Sarah Palin.

The political right reveres her: a former lieutenant governor, policy wonk and unrelenting critic of Obamacare.

The left reviles her as a fearmonger who once walked off the set of "The Daily Show with Jon Stewart."

Love or hate her, former New York Lt. Gov. Betsy McCaughey is increasing her profile in the Republican Party in Connecticut, raising the question of whether she could run for office -- here -- in 2016.

McCaughey, 66, pronounced "McCoy," has made several cameos at GOP events in recent months, including an April 8 fundraising gala for Milford Republicans and a Feb. 28 roast for retired state Senate Minority Leader John McKinney in Fairfield.

"She's gotten more involved in figuring out what's going on in Connecticut," said Chris Healy, a former state GOP chairman and a friend of McCaughey. "I don't know what her plans are."

McCaughey owned property in Greenwich from 2011 to 2013, according to public records, which listed her primary residence as Park Avenue in New York City. She would have to move to Connecticut to serve in the Senate under the U.S. Constitution.

The Westport-raised McCaughey was introduced to state Republican Chairman Jerry Labriola Jr. at the First in the Nation Republican Leadership Summit in New Hampshire last month.

Connecticut Republicans haven't won a statewide or congressional race since 2006, and it is no secret they are hungry to draft a candidate to challenge U.S. Sen. Richard Blumenthal, D-Conn., in 2016.

"We enjoyed seeing Lt. Gov. McCaughey in New Hampshire and are looking forward to her future involvement in the Connecticut Republican Party," John Kleinhans, the party's executive director, said in a statement.

Reached by telephone, McCaughey briefly boasted of attending the GOP meet-up, but then declined to say more.

Standing by Pataki

Gary Rose, chairman of the Department of Government and Politics at Sacred Heart University in Fairfield, said McCaughey's resume would make her an appealing choice.

"If she's been in New York hardball politics, I wouldn't at all be surprised if there's some potential delegates that would think about her in the convention," Rose said. "I think it could offer somewhat of a spark that the Republicans need. Maybe she would not just be perceived as a sacrificial lamb, either."

From 1995 through 1998, McCaughey was George Pataki's lieutenant governor in New York, though he dropped her from his re-election ticket. At the time, Pataki wrote a letter to McCaughey chiding her for her "outright refusal to work as part of a united team."

McCaughey later unsuccessfully sought the Democratic nomination to challenge Pataki, who is considering a run for president.

McCaughey comes from humble beginnings. Her father worked as a janitor at a nail-clipper factor. Her mother struggled with alcoholism and died of liver disease at age 42. McCaughey earned a scholarship at Vassar College and a Ph.D. in constitutional history from Columbia University.

Warned of `death panels'

She burst onto the political scene in 1994, when she penned a scathing critique of President Bill Clinton's health care reform bill for The New Republic. The magazine has since distanced itself from McCaughey and the piece, which it said was "false."

The advent of the Affordable Care Act presented an opportunity for McCaughey to reprise her role as a leading opponent of government insurance mandates, which she said would diminish the quality of care received by the program's participants and lead to rise of so-called "death panels."

In October 2012, McCaughey was the keynote speaker at a Greenwich Republican Women's Forum discussion of Obamacare that was attended by 75 people.

"It was very powerful," said Dr. Rosa Fini, a local pediatrician and Republican Town Committee member who organized the event. "A lot of people were very interested in what she had to say. People were very engaged. She was very well received."

But during a 2009 appearance on "The Daily Show," host Jon Stewart mocked McCaughey for her interpretation of the Affordable Care Act and said it was full of distortions. In a 2014 interview with one of the show's corespondents, Jordan Klepper, McCaughey disconnected her microphone and walked off the set when Klepper opened with the line, "It's been a tough road for critics of this law."

neil.vigdor@scni.com; 203-625-4436; http://twitter.com/gettinviggy