Topics: AlterNet, athletics, Comedy, Feminism, Sexism, Sports, Life News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

Nearly everywhere we look, the media subject us to negative images of women. The same tired tropes seem almost indestructible—alpha bitch, bridezilla, clingy jealous girlfriend, femme fatale, the list goes on and on. Flip through the channels for a few minutes, and it may look like feminism never even happened. When I was growing up, my feminist role-model was, no joke, Lisa Simpson.

Many of us progressively minded people inevitably worry about the ways in which these images will influence young women and girls. Do these tropes encourage them to be vapid and boy-crazy? They certainly can. As the wonderful documentary Miss Representation put it, “You can’t be what you don’t see.” As a lonely Mexican-American feminist growing up in a working-class neighborhood, I was desperate for role models and encouragement, and I don’t think anyone else should have to grow up this way.

It’s certainly not hopeless. Whether we’re parents or simply concerned citizens, together we can encourage girls to cultivate their talents and love themselves. Though it’s impossible to shield girls from backward representations, it is possible to inspire them to be fearless, independent and productive members of society.

Here are ways five ways to do just that.

1. Support girls’ creativity.

Encouraging girls to express themselves and create things with their own hands is a great way to help them feel accomplished and develop a strong sense of self. This will help them seek validation in their work instead of male attention. Girls are too often rewarded for their looks instead of their skills. I always sound maudlin when I say that poetry saved my life, but it absolutely did. Had it not been for my creative outlet, I know I would have succumbed to the depression I grappled with as a teenager.

Not only does creativity help children feel good about themselves, it can prepare them for success in their future careers. Creativity develops critical-thinking skills, and is now considered to be the most valuable trait for managers, according to an IBM survey of 1,500 CEOs.

Research by Jonathan Plucker, professor of educational psychology at the University of Connecticut’s Neag School of Education, in Storrs, also found that creativity tests given to elementary-school students in the 1950s were three times better than IQ tests at predicting their success as adults more than 30 years later.

According to Center for American Progress, American women hold almost 52 percent of all professional-level jobs, but substantially lag behind men when it comes to their representation in leadership roles. Of course, much of this is a result of sexism in the workplace, but helping girls grow their creativity can help them thrive in their future professions.

Buy the girl in your life art supplies, puzzles, books, robots, beads, electronics, woodworking kits—anything to get her mind and hands working in new and surprising ways.

2. Volunteer with girls.

Though one should always be mindful about how and where to volunteer, giving back to the community is a great way for young women to learn empathy, gratitude, and establish a sense of morality. Understanding the needs and challenges of others can help girls realize that the world is much more complex and vast than they might have thought.

Helping others can also increase their self-confidence, self-esteem and life satisfaction. Volunteering helps them develop their skills and communicate and meet new people, therefore making their lives more fulfilling.