Selective Seconds Charity Breaks Quarter Million Dollar Mark in Sales

BELMAR, NJ - When Suzanne Divadi and Rick DelSordo of Wall walked into the Selective Seconds store in Belmar Plaza, they did not realize that their purchase would allow this well-known charity to reach over $250,000 in sales, which was accomplished in less than three years of operation. On Saturday, June 21, 2014, the train this couple wanted to catch out of Belmar to New York Penn Station to see their nephew’s play did not arrive, thus, they were able to take the time to explore the neighborhood and familiarize themselves w/local merchants. Suzanne was able to find a white wicker desk that fits the limited spacing for their home. “The drawers are deep and I’ll be using it as a vanity,” she pointed out. “Selective Seconds has a lovely variety of all things for the house from little decorations to furniture.” Fortunately for Suzanne and Rick, their nephew’s play also had an evening showing, so they were able to get there in time for that as well. “Everything just fell into place for the day,” Suzanne said.

Selective Seconds, as part of the St. Rose/Belmar St. Vincent de Paul Society, has become a model for other non-profit charities by demonstrating what can be accomplished when you combine a great idea with perseverance, dedication, hard work, and a little bit of luck. Selective Seconds collects donated, high-quality furniture and home décor from throughout the Jersey Shore area. The sale of these items generates proceeds to provide those in need with a hand up, not a hand out. What began with the simple observation of a couch being discarded at the curbside of someone’s house and the realization that someone else might need it has turned into a full-time, year-round charity service that includes a robust staff of dedicated volunteers who not only man the store but also help collect and deliver furniture. Since its inception in January, 2011, the furniture outreach ministry has helped financially support 1,333 families and 3,442 individuals by paying rent, utilities, groceries, gas, doctor office visits, etc.

The success of Selective Seconds is twofold: It has not only been able to provide sustained financial assistance to those who qualify but it has also literally turned empty houses and apartments into homes by providing quality furniture and other accessories that are not sold in the store. To date, Selective Seconds has fully furnished 105 families representing 260 family members who have received over $130,000 in free furniture and household items ~ all the essentials needed during the daily course in life.

The volunteer spirit generated by Selective Seconds has become contagious. Not only are people volunteering to help as well as donating furniture but people who have been helped are also paying it forward by helping others or paying it back by volunteering their time in one way or another. The accomplishments of this charity have exceeded everyone’s expectation, and there is a great deal of excitement as the charity continues to grow and serve.

For more information, please contact Margaret More at 732-775-6214 or This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it. . Feel free to visit our Facebook page at www.facebook.com/selectivesecondsfurniture.