Unless Republicans follow through on their threat to shut down the entire federal government, Obamacare will start delivering on its core promise — of providing decent, affordable health coverage to the uninsured — next Tuesday, Oct. 1.

That’s when so-called health exchanges around the country are due to start signing people up for health plans that take effect in January.

Here’s my free advice to the 2.3 million uninsured New Yorkers trying to make sense of the conflicting messages they’re being bombarded with these days:

Tune out the apocalyptic grandstanding in Washington. Ignore the fearmongering on TV and the Internet. Take the state-sponsored feel-good sales pitches with a grain of salt, too.

Instead, go to NYStateofHealth.ny.gov and use the tax credit and premium estimator to figure out the bottom line for you and your family.

Because the true test of the Affordable Care Act is whether it really is affordable for the people who are supposed to buy it.

There’s no one answer to the cost question because Obamacare offers a sliding scale of discounts based on income, and because different plans charge different premiums in different areas.

For each plan, consumers can also choose a benefit level, ranging from “platinum” (with higher monthly premiums and lower out-of-pocket expenses) to “bronze” (with lower premiums and higher out-of-pocket expenses).

Some adults up to 30 also have the option of a bare-bones plan that covers catastrophic medical coverage but not routine tests and office visits.

To boil down all these variables, here are a couple of typical scenarios, as provided by Elisabeth Benjamin of the Community Service Society:

A family of four in Brooklyn with income of $48,000 will be able to buy “silver” coverage for a net cost of about $315 per month. (That’s a $788 premium minus $473 in tax credits.)

A single woman in Queens making $27,000 a year, meanwhile, would pay just $112 a month for “bronze” coverage (a total premium of $308 minus tax credits of $196).

By the standards of New York City — where family coverage can cost $27,000 a year — these are huge bargains. Yet for a middle-class family living paycheck to paycheck, finding even a few hundred dollars a month can be a lot to ask.

Obama is betting that most people will bite the bullet and sign up — thus improving their access to basic care and gaining the security of no longer living one car accident or cancer diagnosis away from bankruptcy.

If enough people take the leap — as they did under a similar law in Massachusetts — Obamacare will be a historic success.

But if too many decide they’d rather pay the tax penalty — which, in the first year, will be $95 or 1% of family income, whichever is more — the President’s signature accomplishment will be an undeniable bust.

This is the pragmatic scale on which the law should be judged — not the absurd ideological arguments thrown around by Republicans in Congress.

Is Obamacare a government takeover of health care? Give me a break. The government is already up to its neck in health care — licensing doctors, inspecting hospitals, operating Medicare, etc. — without destroying the republic. This law is about helping people buy private insurance, not socializing medicine.

Does it take away freedom of choice? Uninsured New York City residents who buy insurance through the state marketplace can choose from nine health plans offering five benefit packages — a total of 45 choices.

Does it drive up costs? Health premiums have been soaring since long before Obama took office. The premiums being offered through the marketplace average 53% lower than what was previously available to individuals without employer-based coverage — largely because more people are joining the insurance pool. And that doesn’t include tax credits that bring prices even lower.

Some propaganda goes so far as to turn young people off on the whole idea of medical care. One series of ads features a creepy Uncle Sam preparing to perform Pap smears and rectal exams — preying on squeamishness about procedures that save lives.

What next Tuesday is really about is finally giving 45 million Americans a realistic chance to enjoy the health benefits and financial security of being insured.

“At 8 a.m., I will be enrolling people in my office, and I can’t wait,” the Community Service Society’s Benjamin says. “For people like me who’ve been trying to help consumers access health coverage for my entire professional life, . . . this is our Super Bowl moment.”

I, for one, hope that it works.

whammond@nydailynews.com