Former Rangers outfielder Josh Hamilton and his wife, Katie, are in the process of getting a divorce, according to court documents filed in Tarrant County earlier this year.

Josh and Katie Hamilton have been married since 2004. They have four children ages 3 to 14.

The Angels outfielder filed for the divorce in late February, around the time when reports of his offseason substance abuse relapse surfaced.

Josh Hamilton’s divorce petition doesn’t say much about the couple’s problems, but it cites conflict between them as a reason for the split.

Hamilton outlined 34 requests in the petition. Among the requests: prohibit her from using the Maserati and 1972 Chevrolet Blazer in his possession; prohibit her from “hiding” the children from him; prohibit her from making disparaging remarks against him or his family; prohibit someone who has an intimate relationship with her from staying in the same home as the children overnight.

In March, Katie Hamilton submitted in court a general denial to Josh Hamilton’s petition.

This month, the couple agreed not to communicate with each other as the case proceeds. They also filed a mutual injunction outlining dozens of rules about expenses, interactions with each other and their children for the time being.

Court records say Josh Hamilton can’t see the children without supervision. He is also prohibited from going to the couple’s properties in Westlake, Texas; Newport Coast, Calif.; and Valley Mills, Texas.

The $16.5-million home in Newport Coast went up for sale on Friday.

Josh Hamilton’s agent and Katie Hamilton’s attorney did not respond to a request seeking comment Saturday.

Katie Hamilton was reportedly cast in Real Housewives of Orange County for its 10th season, which will air this month. It is unclear whether or not the divorce proceedings will impact Katie Hamilton’s spot on the reality television show.

Her father, Michael Dean Chadwick, battled drug addiction for 15 years before becoming a faith-based motivational speaker. Chadwick helped Josh Hamilton deal with his substance abuse in the early 2000s.

Josh and Katie Hamilton married in 2004.

“God told me he was going to give Josh baseball back, but it wasn’t going to be for baseball,” Katie Hamilton said in a public talk in 2005. “It was going to be for something much bigger. He was going to give Josh a platform to help others. It’s not by accident that all the things that have happened in our lives have happened.”

Hamilton played with the Texas Rangers for five seasons, including both World Series appearances in 2010 and 2011.

He had two publicized relapses with public drinking while with the Rangers, the last coming before the 2012 season.

Hamilton and the Rangers engaged in superficial contract talks after the 2012 season, but Los Angeles owner Arte Moreno flew to Texas in December and pushed Hamilton on a take-it-or-leave-it five year, $125 million deal.

At Hamilton’s introductory press conference in Los Angeles, Katie Hamilton, criticized the Rangers’ approach.

“If you’re going to date somebody and that’s going to be your man or your woman, you make it official and you make it known pretty quick or at some point that you want to be with them,” Katie Hamilton said. “They let us date other teams.”

Josh Hamilton interjected: “She said, ‘You should have put a ring on it.’”

“In hindsight, I’m so glad they didn’t,” Katie said. “We feel so strongly that this is where God has moved us and planted us and we could not be more thankful to the organization and more excited about our family’s adventure out here.”

Hamilton’s time in Los Angeles, however, has not been productive nor happy. He had two subpar seasons with the Angels before the offseason relapse.

He acknowledged the relapse, then met with MLB officials about potential discipline. With MLB and Players’ Association officials unable to reach an agreement on whether Hamilton’s relapse constituted a violation of the Joint Drug Agreement between the league and the association, it was sent to an outside arbitrator for a ruling. The arbitrator ruled in favor of Hamilton, prohibiting MLB from suspending him.

Hamilton underwent shoulder surgery this offseason and has stayed outside Houston for most of the offseason. He was not assigned a locker in spring training. Merchandise with his name has been removed from the club’s stadium store.

The Angels, who still have $83 million left in their commitment to Hamilton, have been outspoken in criticism of both Hamilton and the decision. Last week, Moreno told reporters he could not guarantee Hamilton would again play for the Angels. He also threatened to pursue legal recourse, claiming that Hamilton’s contract had special language that allowed the team to terminate the deal in the event of a substance-abuse relapse.

Hamilton met face-to-face with some Angels teammates on Friday when the club visited Houston with long-time teammate and Players’ Association rep C.J. Wilson saying he felt Hamilton was ready to return to playing.

Staff writer Evan Grant contributed to this report.

More Josh Hamilton

Cowlishaw: Why the Rangers should trade for Josh Hamilton

Inside Josh Hamilton’s $16.5 million house for sale: Dream garage; 3-level elevator

Ex-Rangers star Josh Hamilton, wife getting divorce

Photos: Looking back at Josh Hamilton’s 10 greatest moments with the Texas Rangers

Report: How ex-Ranger Josh Hamilton relapsed into cocaine

Josh Hamilton: Critical reception from Texas fans hurt during return

Photos: The best pics of Josh Hamilton