Artistic Freedom is the Creator of Beautiful Things

How will you use your innate freedom? What stories will your life shout from the rooftop or quietly relay while sitting in nature?

The most important things in life are the stories we weave for ourselves. The truth of our lives, especially our deepest held convictions and beliefs, is first found in the fabric of our fictions.

And what a horribly wonderful and delightfully awful fabric the tapestry of human existence is!

Separate, seemingly mutually exclusive, threads wrap around one another–they together create a unifying, abiding series of tensions. The apparent paradoxes that trouble many of us each day are really deeply abiding harmonies. If only more of us had the eyes to see the surface for its tensions, we would be happier for it.









“We are all in the gutter,” says Oscar Wilde, “but some of us are looking at the stars.” This, despite my usual acerbic pose, is really the only elitism I allow myself. My cynical side flows forth from my disappointed sentimentality. I wish more of us looked with awe at the light of the stars rather than continuing to bicker over the shadows of the gutter–yet I fear bickering is much easier.

Thus, consider my elitism as an invitation open to all–an egalitarianism that respects distance and difference. It is an invitation I offer as a reminder to myself again and again while looking in the mirror. I now shout it from the rooftops.

Look to the stars!

Even they are surrounded in darkness. And when we see our existence tied up in theirs–that we are all made of stardust, as the secular evangelists like to say these days–we see the truth is found in our fictions–in the poetry we write for the stars. The lives we lead imitate the stories we create.

As Wilde says in his dialogue “The Decay of Lying”:

“Paradox though it may seem–and paradoxes

are always dangerous things–it is none the less true that Life

imitates art far more than Art imitates life… …And it has always been so. A great artist

invents a type, and Life tries to copy it, to reproduce it in a

popular form, like an enterprising publisher…The Greeks, with their

quick artistic instinct, understood this, and set in the bride’s

chamber the statue of Hermes or of Apollo, that she might bear

children as lovely as the works of art that she looked at in her

rapture or her pain. They knew that Life gains from art not merely

spirituality, depth of thought and feeling, soul-turmoil or soul-

peace, but that she can form herself on the very lines and colours

of art… …Hence came their objection to realism. They

disliked it on purely social grounds. They felt that it inevitably

makes people ugly, and they were perfectly right. We try to

improve the conditions of the race by means of good air, free

sunlight, wholesome water, and hideous bare buildings for the

better housing of the lower orders. But these things merely

produce health, they do not produce beauty. For this, Art is

required, and the true disciples of the great artist are not his

studio-imitators, but those who become like his works of art, be

they plastic as in Greek days, or pictorial as in modern times; in

a word, Life is Art’s best, Art’s only pupil.”

I once looked at the stars above and thought, “They are nothing to me.” Maybe the stars are an interesting intellectual pursuit, an enduring mystery of man, but they certainly lack practical meaning for my individual life.

“Leave the stars to the astronomists, astrophysicists, and astrologers,” I used to say, but now I see their being “nothing to me” was really something, a relation I had not yet fostered, a shallow story I had told myself. I had let the shadow of the gutter, of the cave, blind me. I now subscribe to a better story in regards to the stars. It goes something like this:

I say now, “no man is wiser than me!” We’re all fools. Well, at least we’re all fools in this regard: we want an answer to the existential question of our being, we want a reason for why we’re here to soon be gone. Why do we die? Why do we live only to perish in the end? Why are our lives so much like a song thrown to the wind? How do we deal with our mortality? Human beings long for integration. For an end, purpose.

If I had to venture an answer, the fiction I tell myself first and foremost is “look into the eyes of someone you love.” When I see their eyes with mine, informed by an enduring agape appreciation, I often forget time itself. I forget that we die. It is only for a moment, but what a glorious moment! What an eternal moment!

I used to think our existence was a sad situation, a chronic case of crash and burn. But now, I see the truth behind this relation: the stars above, they’re ours to learn. The wide world is ours to name because we’re all players in an eternal game. We seem to have sprung from nothing, yet we’re here to play, play, play!

It is in the face of a seemingly approaching nothingness that we must have the wherewithal to say nothingness is merely a trick of the mind, the gutter beckoning us to look down rather than to the heavens.









We can’t always be looking to the stars. Sometimes the abyss beckons our attention and cannot be ignored and should not be ignored. The dark side is real. The trick is to recognize you are free to look wherever you wish. You are free to craft any story you wish, especially in the face of events beyond one’s control. You are not inherently good or evil, but free. A creative, spontaneous being.

The question, then, is this: how will you use your innate freedom? What stories will your life shout from the rooftop or quietly relay while sitting in nature?

In the light of such fundamental questioning, we can then begin to see how we may tell the stories of not only our personal lives but that of our communities.

How do we build the just city?

When I look at the stories competing for our hearts and minds today, I must say their “Art” is completely lacking. They are copy cats in the worst way. Hand me down narratives often expressed in the traditional “masculine” and “feminine” virtues that seem to create less and less only to consume more and more. I worry those who rule over our nations are not social artists or even philosopher kings, seeking to bring about the best we have to offer as human beings, but charlatans who appeal to the average fear, envy, and eros of the average man or woman. They seek power by bickering over the shadow of the gutter. Their rhetoric is that of an army on the march–the War on Terror, the War on Drugs, the War on Poverty, the War to End All Wars, the War at the ballot box. These, my fellows, are the fictions of that “coldest of cold monsters,” the State.

As Randolph Bourne said of the State:

“Wartime brings the ideal of the State out into very clear relief, and reveals attitudes and tendencies that were hidden. In times of peace the sense of the State flags in a republic that is not militarized. For war is essentially the health of the State. The ideal of the State is that within its territory its power and influence should be universal. As the Church is the medium for the spiritual salvation of man, so the State is thought of as the medium for his political salvation. Its idealism is a rich blood flowing to all the members of the body politic. And it is precisely in war that the urgency for union seems greatest, and the necessity for universality seems most unquestioned. The State is the organization of the herd to act offensively or defensively against another herd similarly organized. The more terrifying the occasion for defense, the closer will become the organization and the more coercive the influence upon each member of the herd.”

This is, in my opinion, the most prominent way the dark side of the gutter sneaks into our lives and takes up residence as master of our minds and communities: War!

It troubles me that so many of our national heroes are only found in the midst of great evils and never in peacetime. I long for heroes who seek the good for its own sake rather than the good as conquest of the other. A hero that is always seeking to slay dragons to the point that he creates them in his own mind may very well be at least a fool and at worst a tyrant. The egalitarianism of wartime is no true condition for calling someone a comrade, for such a fellowship is often a case of “us” against “them” rather than an appeal to the fellowship of all. It is an appeal for death dressed up in high ideals.

Yet, the rhetoric of an army on the march undoubtedly still remains powerful and prevailing in our day and age. It perverts the best of our narratives. It turns the great religions’ eyes away from contemplating the stars and towards the impending fights here on earth. It makes nihilists out of Christians, Jews, and Muslims by offering them the great sin of unearned pride, which fills them with the false certainty that their orthodoxy is unquestionably true and, most ominously, that the end times are near. In truth, it will be these lost souls themselves who will bring about a man-made eschaton: in their pride, they are the ones truly engaged in a self-fulfilling prophecy of destruction. I hope they return to the good of their religions with haste.

The rhetoric of the army on the march: it perverts our values as a people, as Deirdre McCloskey would say, our bourgeois values. It renders us confused. Our understanding of our wealth as a people has been hollowed out into mere symbols, into ever-changing statistical short-hands, and ultimately simulacra of our former economic selves.

And accordingly, people–feeling this anxiety of our impoverished understanding–seek out snake oil remedies to cure their self-made problems. The beautiful, spontaneous order of the market is attacked. Private property is attacked. The innovator is attacked. And finally, human freedom itself is attacked as people with a sense of the well established seize upon original discoveries with hostility and war making rather than wonder and awe.

Yet, it is not control of wealth, or material resources themselves even, that makes us wealthier. It is innovation, the creative process of the entrepreneur that gets the job of prosperity done. When we respect and protect the innovator by culture and by law, we enable ourselves to reach for to the stars. When we offer celebration of these entrepreneurs through art, we bolster our ability to reach even greater heights. This is the great insight of Deirdre McCloskey’s The Bourgeois Era.

The rhetoric of the army on the march: it is our true enemy, if I may steal their language. So let us deal with this enemy for now with Art and not blows. Let us look to the poets. What fiction has been weaved around such dark things?

Well, when I think of the dark side, I can only think of one poet off-hand: the degenerate, misogynist drunk, Charles Bukowski. As much as he engaged in the dark-side himself, he was also a child of it, a victim traumatized by it, a domestic soldier who thought the war of all against all was pointless yet inevitable. I would like to share with you now Bukowski’s “The Genius of the Crowd.” It is a poem that encapsulates, in my mind, the rhetoric of the army on the march and the bickering of lost souls in the gutter:

“there is enough treachery, hatred violence absurdity in the average human being to supply any given army on any given day and the best at murder are those who preach against it and the best at hate are those who preach love and the best at war finally are those who preach peace those who preach god, need god those who preach peace do not have peace those who preach peace do not have love beware the preachers beware the knowers beware those who are always reading books beware those who either detest poverty or are proud of it beware those quick to praise for they need praise in return beware those who are quick to censor they are afraid of what they do not know beware those who seek constant crowds for they are nothing alone beware the average man the average woman beware their love, their love is average seeks average but there is genius in their hatred there is enough genius in their hatred to kill you to kill anybody not wanting solitude not understanding solitude they will attempt to destroy anything that differs from their own not being able to create art they will not understand art they will consider their failure as creators only as a failure of the world not being able to love fully they will believe your love incomplete and then they will hate you and their hatred will be perfect like a shining diamond like a knife like a mountain like a tiger like hemlock their finest art”

Ah, art. There’s that word again. What will be the art that you create or at least propagate? Will you be average or an egalitarian who respects distance and difference? This is the question that is the key to soothing the savage beast of the army on the march.

I beckon you once again to look at the stars, to behold the stardust within and without you. The way we resist the darkness is by creating new fictions and restoring that which is beautiful within our religious, civic, and commercial traditions.

I will do my part as the poet, as the mob orator, as the evangelist for human liberty. In that spirit, I leave you with a poem of my own, but in the mean time what will be your role? How will you help bring humanity to greater heights of freedom and prosperity?

Sitting upon a root Eyes to the sky Realizing my mind And heart in Harmony with All that is was will be The light moves upon the leaves And a voice trembles a melody Vibrating to plucked strings As the sun finds a new frame Moving amongst the trees Projecting the shadow of Curled, short hairs grown out of my Skin stretched upon my forearm, Upon my body, captured by eyes That belong to my mind’s restless union With itself and the world So much movement I Tried But It is impossible To Sit still Existence flows and will continue Even when you and I are gone Yet reality will not move on For reality Is a dance of existence to the music of consciousness A union that rises to fall Witnessing the eternal In passing snapshots until the jig is up But do not confuse something with nothing They do not share sides of the same coin Nada is merely a fool’s fallback, the dirty trick of the fallible, fleeting mind fighting change and trying to tell existence that it must be still. But it is impossible to sit still The only possibility is movement And for you and I this means We only choose how to move Yet too many of us are trying to create the phenomenon of movement itself, Trying to stop the heavens and the earth for the sake of certainty and security Soothing the savage beast of our fallibility Much like the peoples of old By placing it in many sacred forms Upon a hilltop mountain. But I say come down from the mountain Sit upon a root And witness the eternal all around and within as your music plays