And the Winners Are...

The editors of Human Resource Executive® announce their choices for the top 10 HR products of 2013.

Here's our list of the Top HR Products winners for 2013. We received this year an exceptional number of standout entries, which made choosing the winners that much harder. As in years past, we relied on a combination of staff picks and input from outside experts and analysts to narrow down the list to the 10 you'll read about below.

This year's Top HR Products run the gamut of HR, from benefits to payroll to recruiting to career development. One award winner is designed specifically around the Affordable Care Act and its many (and still evolving) rules and regulations, while another lets HR do a "deep dive" into employee engagement. Another uses gamification to spur employees into making more and better referrals. In keeping with recent trends, social and mobile are well-represented, but this year's crop makes exceptionally good use of these mediums in order to make HR's job easier. (To be considered, products had to be released between July 2012 and June 2013.)

In our estimation, the products you'll find in the next few pages are the best of the solutions we received, and can -- we think -- not only deliver on their promises but also make HR's job a little easier. As always, though, we encourage you to perform your own due diligence before making any investments.

Cornerstone Recruiting Cloud

Cornerstone OnDemand, Santa Monica, Calif.

Dayforce HCM: Payroll and Benefits

Ceridian, Minneapolis

ACA Management Platform

Equifax Workforce Solutions, St. Louis

Swarm

Findly, San Francisco

iMomentous Mobile Talent Engagement Platform

iMomentous, Horsham, Pa.

Newsletter Sign-Up: Benefits

HR Technology

Talent Management

HR Leadership

Inside HR Tech

HRENow

Special Offers

Email Address



Privacy Policy

SumTotal elixHR

SumTotal Systems, Gainesville, Fla.

Jobvite Engage

Jobvite, Burlingame, Calif.

Reflect by GMAC powered by Hogan

Graduate Management Admission Council, Reston, Va., and Hogan Assessment Systems, Tulsa, Okla.

Onboardia

Onboardia Inc., Massapequa Park, N.Y.

Sense

BlackbookHR, Cincinnati