Sioux Falls, SD

35 of the best bull riders in the world are stopping in Sioux Falls as part of their national tour.

It's part of the 2015 PBR Built Ford Tough Series, the premier bull riding circuit known around the world.

One of the riders is Stetson Lawrence. He has family from the White Horse and Eagle Butte area who traveled to Sioux Falls to watch him ride.

Despite the extra voices in the crowd, he doesn't feel any extra pressure.

"Just happy to see them. Life on the road, don't get to spend too much time with family so when they can come and hang out here and do it all at once where I can ride bulls and hang out. It's awesome," Lawrence said.

This is the first time this high level of bull riding has been in South Dakota's largest city. Assistant General Manager of the Denny Sanford PREMIER Center Chris Semrau says the event is a success.

"The demand is overwhelming. We're going to have two sold out nights of PBR this weekend which is the biggest strategy we have to bring events like this back to Sioux Falls. It's a big deal that they're here and we're glad that the community has supported the event," Semrau said.

Immediately after the Summit League Tournament was over, events center staff worked to take out the hardwood and replace it with dirt.

The riders will wrap up in Sioux Falls Saturday night before heading to Albuquerque for a competition on March 20th.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.