The Rio Grande Valley has no shortage of competition for medical services.

Most health care facilities are expanding. But when the doctor's offices are closed, there are few options to choose from other than a pricey visit to the emergency room.

Even with insurance, a visit to the emergency room isn't cheap, but there's another option catching on in the Valley.

"If you go to the emergency room you have to wait three, four, five hours sometimes, Vinod Puri said.

Unless Vinod has a life threatening health problem, he does not go to the ER.

If his primary doctor is not available, he goes to the only late night clinic he knows of, Urgent Care 4 U in McAllen.

Eight years ago, former ER doctor Carlos Moreno and his partners opened up the first urgent care center in Hidalgo County.

"The emergency rooms are overcrowded with minor emergencies," Moreno said.

Open in the evenings and on the weekends, Moreno says Urgent Care 4 U can handle non-life threatening injuries for a fraction of the cost.

"Our rate is much more affordable than what they pay in the ER, Moreno said.

Most patients will pay a small copay.

We have a $30 copay with our insurance, Vinod said.

But the selection of urgent care clinics in the Valley is sparse.

A Rio Grande Valley urgent care Google search will only lead you to four clinics.

Comparing the number to San Antonio, with a population of about 100,000 more than than the Valley, you'll find dozens of 24 hour health clinics.

"In the Valley, we have a large population of patients without insurance and those patients usually go to the emergency room, Moreno said.

Even with healthcare reform, 25% of those who live in the Valley are still uninsured.

Private doctors TM offices don't get paid by the government for indigent care, but hospitals can't turn away the uninsured.

When you have a high uninsured population, emergency rooms get overcrowded.

"A lot of patients, they don't have a primary doctor so when something is broken, sick or ill, they go to the emergency room as their doctor," said Jason Chang, CEO of McAllen Heart Hospital.

"When you don't have a physician that's the next best thing, the best alternative, said Dr. Melinda Rodriguez, Vice President of nursing administration at Doctor TMs Hospital at Renaissance.

To alleviate their hospital emergency room visits and cut down on wait times, South Texas Health System opened two free standing emergency rooms in 2015, one in Weslaco and another in Mission.

When the doctor's office is closed, the new ER's are busy.

"Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday's are some of your prime days and then anything after five o'clock till like three o'clock in the morning, Chang said. Anytime the doctors' offices close, pharmacies are closed, you have issues with the kids, medical emergencies. That TMs our peak time."

Owned by a hospital, the new urgent care at DHR in Edinburg may be a better alternative to the ER for the uninsured.

"We don't turn anyone away, Rodriguez said. We see patients with and without insurance. We have financial counselors to talk to families to discuss alternatives. We never turn anyone away and try to give them the best care."

With an average wait time of two to three hours at the emergency room, in February, DHR opened an off hours urgent care center across the street from their ER.

"Our ER is very, very busy, and it continues to be very busy so we are seeing our ER patients that didn't require ER services, Rodriguez said.

So when do you chose an urgent care over an emergency room visit?

"Anything that is not life threatening is a condition we can take care of here, said Dr. Diana Cortinas, a physician at DHR TM Urgent Care.

With preventative care now covered at 100 percent under the Affordable Care Act, doctors and health care workers hope to get more patients in to the doctor's office and stay out of the ER.

"We are a supplement to primary care, Change said.

DHR is considering opening a free standing ER and a second urgent care location in Hidalgo County.