Steve Stricker leaps into the air to check the location of the second green prior to hitting his second shot during the final round of the Masters on Sunday. Credit: TNS

By of the

Augusta, Ga.— Before he teed off in the final round of the Masters Tournament on Sunday, the thought crossed Steve Stricker's mind that it could be his last trip around Augusta National.

"It could be," he said. "I thought about that this morning. I've got some work to do to get back here."

Stricker of Madison qualified for a Masters invitation by being inside the top 50 in the Official World Golf Ranking at the end of 2014. He has since slipped to No. 75, mostly because he hadn't played in a tournament in 7½ months.

Healthy now after December back surgery, he closed with a 4-under-par 68 and finished in a tie for 28th place at 1-under 287. It was a remarkable performance considering doctors cleared him to start practicing just three weeks earlier.

"I really hit it nicely coming in," he said. "It was good to see. I progressively got better every day. Take Friday out of it; I was trying to make the cut and I didn't do so well. But then I hit it a little bit better each day on the weekend.

"I started hitting it pretty long coming in. I started flushing it. I tweaked my grip a little bit with six holes to play and it seemed to help."

Stricker birdied Nos. 1, 4, 6, 7, 15, 17 and 18. He bogeyed Nos. 3, 11 and 13, the latter after he hit his second shot in the water short of the green.

In the final round, only six others birdied the first hole, five others birdied the fourth, four others birdied the sixth and two others birdied the 17th.

"I played well today," Stricker said. "Mark (O'Meara) and I had a great time. It was fun. It was a relaxing, enjoyable round. One guy would make a putt and the other guy would make it on top of him. We pushed each other along."

Stricker finished the tournament tied with Dustin Johnson for fewest putts: 106 over 72 holes for a 1.47 average. Champion Jordan Spieth needed 108.

Even though the 48-year-old Stricker has played a part-time schedule in recent years and will do so again this year, he said his long break from competitive golf made him realize how much he missed the game.

"I still enjoy playing," he said. "I found out how much I really missed it when I wasn't able to play. It was good to get back, good to get under the gun again and see your tendencies. It's just different playing in front of people, tournament conditions, all of that...it was good to get back."

He said one of his goals for 2015 was to play his way back into the Masters next year. He would have to win a PGA Tour event, finish among the top four at one of the remaining major championships or climb back into the top 50 in the world ranking.

He also would qualify by making it to the Tour Championship but has said he would not play in the FedEx Cup playoffs this year.

"I've got to get the world ranking up (or) win again," he said. "That gets you back here. That would obviously be a great goal to shoot for the rest of the year and next year, to try to make it back."

Stricker has played in 15 Masters. His best finish was a tie for sixth in 2009. He also tied for 10th in 2001.

"I kind of have a love-hate relationship with this place," he said. "You want to be here, but I haven't had the best of records here. It's fun, nerve-racking, all of it. You have your good times going around here and you have some real horrible times, too. You're like, 'You idiot, why are you doing that?' Like hitting it in the water on 13.

"But it's so beautiful. I surely want to be back. There's no question about that."