The IRS has been besieged with concerns from Congress about the agency's handling of tea party groups — but not so much with worries about its ability to answer the telephone.

The Washington, D.C., headquarters of the IRS. (Photo: AP)

The closest thing to an official Internal Revenue Service motto is the late Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.'s quote inscribed on the agency's Washington headquarters: "Taxes are the price we pay for a civilized society."

But this year, another slogan might be more apt: "Don't call us. Period."

The IRS will answer within 30 minutes only about half of the calls it gets from taxpayers this fiscal year, IRS Commissioner John Koskinen said recently. He blames the problem on budget cuts.

The situation may get even worse, independent National Taxpayer Advocate Nina Olson has projected. The IRS may end up answering as few as 43 percent of the telephone calls it gets during fiscal year 2015, she wrote in her recent annual review of the agency's operations.

Some local tax preparers say they have become accustomed to fielding calls from people who just want a specific piece of information from the IRS but have given up trying to get through to the agency.

The problems come after a couple of years in which the IRS has been besieged with concerns from Congress about the agency's handling of tea party and similar groups — but not so much with worries about its ability to answer the telephone.

The House Government Oversight Committee and its subcommittees held 13 different hearings in 2013 and 2014 on issues pertaining to some IRS workers responsible for determining whether organizations should have nonprofit status targeting tea party groups.

Both House members representing Western North Carolina, Republicans Patrick McHenry and Mark Meadows, served on the 46-member committee during that period, although McHenry is no longer a member. Meadows became chairman of a subcommittee whose responsibilities include the IRS in January.

Several other hearings were held on identity theft, tax fraud or how the agency is handling the tax implications of the Affordable Care Act.

None, at least according to hearing topics listed in committee records, focused on the overall quality of service by the IRS. Other committees have looked at service issues as part of the process of reviewing the IRS budget.

Who's watching?

Olson's recent report implicitly criticizes Congressional priorities.

"Congress should exercise its oversight authority by holding regular hearings on IRS activity — not just on the issue du jour but on all the routine work the IRS does," she wrote.

Meadows could not be reached for comment for this story. But in a recent letter to Koskinen, he and the chairs of the full Government Oversight Committee and another of its subcommittees questioned Koskinen's explanation for the IRS' customer service problems.

"The basis for this claim is unclear" since the amount budgeted for IRS taxpayer services rose from $2.123 billion in fiscal year 2014 to $2.157 billion in FY 2015, they wrote.

That's an increase of 1.6 percent, twice the rate of inflation for 2014. But the IRS and others say the small increase is not enough to counter the effects of long-term budget cuts and an increase in the agency's workload.

The number of tax returns the agency handles has risen from 141.2 million in fiscal year 2010 to a projected 161 million in FY 2015, Olson reported in January. Over the same period, its budget fell from $10.9 billion to $9 billion, after adjustment for inflation.

Koskinen wrote IRS employees in January that once the effects of inflation are considered, IRS funding is at its lowest level since 1998. The agency may require that employees take days off without pay later in the fiscal year in order to balance its budget, he said.

Olson says the IRS could make better use of the money it does get and advocates simplifying the tax code as part of a long-term solution, but wrote that there is no substitute for paying a sufficient number of workers for taxpayers to talk to.

"The only way the IRS can assist the tens of millions of taxpayers seeking to speak with an IRS employee is to have enough employees to answer their calls," she wrote.

No magic door

Tax preparers themselves say it is routine for them to wait an hour or more to speak to a human being when they call the IRS to work out issues like a problem with a client's return or a payment schedule for back taxes owed.

Preparers have a different number to call than the general public, but it turns out that does not help much.

Jim Lowe, head of AVL Tax Professionals, said when he places a call to the IRS, he puts the call on his speaker phone, picks up other work to do and listens for a break in the elevator music that indicates an IRS employee is about to answer. He has become all too familiar with some of the songs played during the wait.

"Even on (tax preparers') phone lines ... we still can't get through. If I have a client who has an issue, I just have to sit on hold for an hour and a half," he said.

Dora Robinson, a supervisor at the H&R Block office on Patton Avenue in West Asheville, times some of her calls around the middle of the day so she can eat lunch while she waits for someone to answer.

"I block out at least an hour to an hour and a half," she said. "It takes forever to get through."

What's the right size?

Commentators disagree over whether the IRS is too small or the job it's given is too large.

Experts at the liberal-leaning Center on Budget and Policy Priorities say Congress has hurt taxpayers by not giving the IRS enough money to serve its customers and go after those who don't pay what they owe.

They cite an estimate from the Treasury Department that every additional dollar spent on tax enforcement yields $6 in extra revenue to the federal government. Koskinen, the IRS commissioner, said in April that each $1 added to the overall agency budget brings in another $4 to the federal government.

Lowe said starving the IRS of funds is nonsensical given the role it plays in the overall federal budget.

"It's like you have a cashier at the front of your business and you can't afford to keep her, so you just have people stuff money in a box," he said.

But he is not optimistic that will change.

"The new Congress, I think, has a little bit of a grudge with the IRS," he said. "It's all political."

Douglas Kellogg, spokesman at the conservative National Taxpayers Union, said the solution is to make the tax code simpler and get the IRS out of the business of dealing with policies like the Affordable Care Act.

"I don't think (bigger budgets) should be necessary. I think taxpayers want to see some reform here," he said.

The IRS provides, he said, an "obviously unacceptable level of poor service."

But Kellogg said changes like allowing people to file their returns electronically should have allowed the agency to be more productive to make up for some of the budget cuts.

The agency "just has way too much to do," including dealing with "a tax code that is unenforceable," he said.

Meadows and other Republicans in Congress have been raising concerns in recent weeks that the IRS role in administering penalties under the Affordable Care Act could cause problems for affected taxpayers.

The Associated Press reported Friday that about 800,000 HealthCare.gov customers got incorrect tax information from the federal government. The information accounting for subsidies consumers got to help pay their health insurance premiums did not come from the IRS, but the mistakes will complicate taxpayers' job of filing accurate returns.

Kellogg said it is hardly surprising that the tea party targeting scandal has distracted attention from other IRS issues and the agency has no one but itself to blame for that.

"You earned this in that you upset the GOP folks on the Hill," he said, referring to Republicans in Congress.

Need help?

Last year, the Internal Revenue Service stopped the practice of helping people fill out their tax returns if they visit an IRS office in person. But there are several places to get information to help you do it. And, in addition to commercial tax preparation companies, there are resources for people who need someone to help prepare their taxes and meet certain income guidelines.

Asheville office

The IRS has an office in the federal building at 151 Patton Ave. downtown. It's open 9 a.m.-12:30 p.m. and 1:30 p.m.-4:30 p.m. Monday through Friday and the telephone number is (828)271-4764.

Making the call

The IRS' toll-free number for individual taxpayers is 1-800-829-1040. For businesses, it's 1-800-829-4933. It is a smart idea to have something to do while you are waiting for someone to answer.

The web

The agency's website, www.irs.gov, contains tax forms and lots of information on tax law. A relatively new popular feature is the ability to check the status of your refund through the site.

Free file online

Anyone with annual household income of less than $60,000 can use commercial software available for free through the "Free File" section of the IRS website — www.irs.gov/freefile — that will compute your taxes for your and fill out the appropriate forms. The same site also contains electronic forms those with higher incomes can use to type in data to be submitted to the IRS, but users must figure out how to compute their taxes and what forms they need by themselves.

Volunteer Income Tax Assistance

VITA helps those with less than $53,000 or less in household income. Volunteers do not answer questions over the phone but will fill out tax forms for people who come in person. There are four VITA sites in Western North Carolina:

•On Track, a nonprofit financial counseling organization based at 50 S. French Broad Ave. Call (828)255-5166.

•Pack Library, 67 Haywood St. It is staffed by students from UNC Asheville as part of an economics class and operates 10:30 a.m.-3 p.m. until April 4.

•Qualla Financial Freedom, 876 Acquoni Road in Cherokee. Call (828)554-6931.

•YMI Cultural Center, 39 S. Market St. Also staffed by UNCA students, it operates 6-8 p.m. Thursdays through April 10.

More help locating VITA sites is available through www.irs.gov or by calling 800-906-9887.

Tax Counseling for the Elderly

There are 15-20 TCE sites in or near WNC coordinated by AARP. They target low- to moderate-income people, especially those over 50.

To locate TCE sites, visit www.aarp.org and look for the "Tax-Aide" link on the lower left side of the page, or call 1-888-227-7669.

What to do?

National Taxpayer Advocate Nina Olson said in her annual report to Congress on the state of the IRS, released in January, that the IRS and Congress share the blame for problems at the agency. But she places a particular emphasis on getting Congress to act. Here are excerpts from the preface to her report.

"In the short term, I urge Congress to take the following steps:

•"Enact a true Taxpayers Bill of Rights ... in order to protect taxpayers and help restore their trust in the fairness of the system;

•"Conduct meaningful oversight hearings into the nuts and bolts of tax administration that haven't captured public attention in the same way as certain other issues but shape the experiences of millions of taxpayers in critical ways every day; and

•"Along with proper oversight, provide the IRS with the additional funding it needs to answer taxpayer phone calls and otherwise do its job well."

"Over the long term, I urge Congress to enact comprehensive tax reform, with simplification as a key goal."

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1EzmwCo