Troupe's gala will feature Vail pianist

Natalia Sturgill, Christina Hazen, Trisha Martin Adams, Michael Foerster and Tricia Moreland are among the cast members for the Loveland Opera Theatre's "From London and Broadway with Love" at the Rialto Theater. ( DSt.John Images / Special to A&E Spotlight )

If you go What: Loveland Opera Theatre's "From London and Broadway with Love" gala event When: Saturday, Oct. 4; 6:30 p.m. silent auction, 7:30 p.m. concert Where: Rialto Theater Center, 228 E. Fourth St., Loveland Tickets: $32 per person Info: rialtoloveland.ticketforce.org Etc.: The celebration marks the 10th anniversary of the Loveland Opera Theatre and will feature music by concert pianist Micky Poage, "Vail's Piano Man."

The first time Juliana Bishop Hoch and her husband, Rob, met Micky Poage, they were on vacation and he was performing to a packed house at the Lodge at Vail.

"There he was with a grand piano playing 'Rhapsody in Blue' in Vail in October," Hoch remembered recently. "We were blown away by him."

Poage is a national pianist who is well-known for his renditions of popular music scores such as "Phantom of the Opera" and "Les Miserables."

Juliana Hoch, founder of the Loveland Opera Theatre, and her husband started working with Poage on music and formed a friendship that is going on 30 years.

Advertisement

But Poage will be making his debut with the Loveland Opera Theatre on Oct. 4 when he performs in a gala event celebrating the opera theater's 10th anniversary, "From London and Broadway With Love," at the Rialto Theater Center in Loveland.

"Mickey and I have been talking about a collaboration for years and this year it came to be," Hoch said.

The gala also will include eight soloists from across the Front Range as well as chorus members from the Loveland Opera Theatre.

Trisha Martin Adams, left, and Michael Foerster are part of the Loveland Opera Theatre's production of "From London and Broadway with Love." (DSt.John Images / Special to A&E Spotlight)

The first half of the evening will feature Poage, "like if you were to go into the bar and hear him play," Hoch said.

The second half will be a mixture of musical scores such as "Les Miserables" and "Miss Saigon."

"It will be a lot of fun," she said. "Gorgeous singing and fabulous piano playing."

The annual gala will raise funds for the troupe's spring musical, "Kismet."

"We have been blessed by generous donors and a generous community spirit," Hoch said. "When you're a nonprofit, you just try to stay in business and by the grace of God, we have."

Many of the troupe's singers have gone on to have major careers around the world, she said, crediting the Loveland Opera Theatre for being a good stepping-stone.

Opera is a multi-level art form that reaches down and grabs your heart, Hoch said. There is singing, diction, music, the beauty of the human voice, dancing, costumes and the orchestra.

The many elements reach deep into the soul.

"There's nothing like it, as far as I'm concerned," she said.

Hoch started the company after she moved to Loveland in 1994 and started giving music lessons while studying for her doctorate. She had great singers in her living room and realized there were enough to form an opera company.

"We have such a need here," she said. "So many great singers come out of our universities and they have nowhere to sing. The bigger opera companies hire from the East Coast.

"There was a need to give young grads and artists an opportunity to work on their craft."

There also is a need, Hoch said, to offer the community opera performances at an affordable price.

"You could go to (another opera house) and spend $125-$300," she said, "or you could come to Loveland and pay $32 for a gala."

In addition, the troupe practices community outreach: Its performers teach children about opera and try to spur interest in the art form through children's operettas such as "Mikado for Kids."

Contact Jessica Benes at 970-669-5050 (ext. 530), jbenes@aespotlight.com or twitter.com/jessicabenes.