4848922

Applications for the fall 2016 academic year are down at the University of Missouri after last semester’s eruption of Black Lives Matter protests, which caused some students to become so dizzy with racism that they saw imaginary people wearing Ku Klux Klan hoods. The professor who threatened a student journalist with mob violence and the famous poop swastika incident likely have not helped matters.

The year-to-year decrease from applications for 2016 enrollment compared to 2015 is nearly five percent, reports Columbia, Mo. ABC affiliate KMIZ.

Mizzou’s enrollment management office sent a memorandum detailing the application decline to professors and administrators earlier this week.

In terms of hard numbers, Missouri’s flagship taxpayer-funded university has seen 914 fewer freshman applications this year compared to last year.

Applications for fall 2016 from potential students who are black have dropped 19 percent compared to fall 2015.

Applications from prospective graduate students have also fallen 19 percent.

Mizzou has seen a 7.7 percent reduction in applications from students with composite ACT scores of 30 or higher (typically the 95th percentile).

Prospective students from Missouri are applying at about the same rate. However, deposits for actual enrollment among Show Me State residents are currently down nearly 10 percent.

Applications from would-be students from other states are down a whopping 25 percent compared to 2015.

The days-long protest on Mizzou’s Columbia, Mo. campus centered on Jonathan Butler, a twentysomething graduate student. The son of a millionaire railroad executive went on a six-day hunger strike in November.

Butler’s goal, which he achieved, was to force then-MU system president Tim Wolfe to resign.

Butler’s protest gained strong momentum when he convinced 32 University of Missouri football players to pledge to boycott all team activities until Wolfe quit his job. (Ultimately, the team missed a single practice.) (RELATED: University Of Missouri Football Players BOYCOTT FOOTBALL Over Black Activist’s Hunger Strike)

In a letter to school officials posted (but no longer visible) on his Facebook page, Butler indicated that he began his hunger strike because someone in a pickup truck allegedly shouted a racist insult at a black student government member, because state law prevents Planned Parenthood from performing on-campus abortions and because someone drew a swastika with human feces in a dormitory bathroom. (RELATED: Here Is The Police Report From The Mizzou Poop Swastika Incident)

Groups of protesters marched across the University of Missouri campus for several days — and camped out in tents on a quad — in response to Butler’s hunger strike. The protesters have called themselves Concerned Student 1950. (The name relates to the year the first black student matriculated at Mizzou.)

During the protests, Melissa A. Click, a taxpayer-funded assistant professor of mass media at Mizzou, was caught on camera threatening a photojournalism student with mob violence, shaking his camera and attempting to deprive him of his First Amendment rights.

“Hey, who wants to help me get this reporter out of here?” Click shouted to the crowd. “I need some muscle over here.” (RELATED: Meet The Sick Mizzou Media Professor Who Threatened A Reporter With MOB VIOLENCE)

“Racism lives at the University of Missouri,” a protester shouted during a typical day of protest, according to the Columbia Missourian. “Two black, female students — including myself — were called the n-word by four white males while being recorded outside of the rec center,” another protester yelled while standing on a chair in a crowded dining hall.

Delusional students eventually became so dizzy with racism that they saw imaginary people wearing Ku Klux Klan hoods. (RELATED: The Biggest, Dumbest Race Hoaxes And Fake Hate Crimes On Campus In 2015)

Are Students Who Lied About The Ku Klux Klan 'Delusional'? Yes No Completing this poll entitles you to Daily Caller news updates free of charge. You may opt out at anytime. You also agree to our Privacy Policy and Terms of Use.

Butler admitted in his Facebook letter that none of the issues he complained about were actually Wolfe’s fault. Nevertheless, Butler has concluded, “as a collection of incidents at the university, they are his responsibility to address.”

In the summer, prior to Butler’s decision to go on a hunger strike because of racism allegations, the graduate student’s substantially different agenda focused on a change in University of Missouri policy that ended subsidized health insurance for graduate students. To Butler’s chagrin, school officials also stopped offering some grad student tuition waivers and tore down some graduate student housing.

The Columbia Daily Tribune shows a robust-looking Butler acting as a self-appointed “chant leader” during a “day of action” on Aug. 26. He carried a large bullhorn.

School officials had cited the Affordable Care Act — Obamacare — as the reason they were forced to stop subsidizing grad student health insurance.

Follow Eric on Twitter. Like Eric on Facebook. Send education-related story tips to [email protected].