The jig may soon be up for the Let’s Fire TRUMP political action committee, as the Federal Election Commission is calling on the group to change its name.

ADVERTISEMENT

The group’s name uses the acronym Terrible Radicals Undermining Middle-class People as an attempt to squeeze past FEC compliance rules that bar an independent committee from using the name of an official candidate.

But it looks like the acronym didn’t placate the FEC, which sent the group’s treasurer a letter that says the group must become officially coordinated with Trump’s campaign, change its name or provide it with more information.

Jennifer Scofield, the treasurer at Let's Fire Trump, told The Hill that she believes the name complies with FEC regulations and that the group, which pans Trump as “the absolute worst part of politics,” will make that pitch to the FEC in a response.

"The rules have obviously sown quite a bit of confusion as to what is allowed, even for groups making a good faith effort to comply," she said by email.

The group’s first official act was to launch a Change.org petition calling on the Republican National Committee to bar Trump from the upcoming GOP debate. As of 2 p.m. on Wednesday, that petition has two signatures.

Let’s Fire TRUMP is not the most high-profile group to use a candidate’s name as an acronym in an attempt to show an alignment with a candidate. The main super-PAC supporting Carly Fiorina is called CARLY for America, with Carly an acronym for “Conservative, Authentic, Responsive Leadership for You.”

That group changed its name to include an acronym only after the FEC called on it to change its name from Carly for America by mid-June.

The FEC has not publicly released whether that move was sufficient, but the most recent letter to Let’s Fire TRUMP sheds doubt on the FEC approving that tactic.

A spokeswoman at the FEC could not comment on the specifics but said that the absence of any public letter to CARLY for America does not mean that the FEC has moved on, only that it hasn’t sent the group any new, formal request.

CARLY for America has not yet returned a request for comment as to whether the FEC has privately responded to the name change.

The FEC ruled on acronyms in a similar case regarding the Decidedly Unhappy Mainstream Patriots Rejecting Evil-mongering Incompetent Democrats Political Action Committee (DUMPREID PAC), created to oppose then-Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.).

The FEC’s legal analysis in that case found that the group can use Reid’s name in a special project that “clearly and unambiguously shows opposition to Senator Reid.” But it should not use his name in its committee name because the assertion that his name is an acronym still doesn’t “change the fact that Senator Reid’s name is listed as part of the official name of the Committee.”

Since the committee agreed to tweak its website disclaimers to include the full text of the acronym and refer to DUMPREID PAC as a project of the larger committee, the FEC chose to dismiss the complaint against it in 2010.