The holidays are a time to celebrate togetherness, to give thanks — and to hunt for bargains.

As you know, I prefer the more-obscure paths to deals.

Last week, I was handed a coupon to a Warminster store that sells gently used toys and some new toys, too.

With three kids, I was easily sold on a visit to the place that boasts of prices that are up to 50 percent off what you would pay at retail stores.

Shopping at places like RePlay Toys sheds some of the stress associated with so much spending this time of year.

Lauren Sands of Horsham was in the store for less than five minutes before she picked up two baby swings for a day-care center where she works.

Each swing was priced at $34.99, but she also qualified for a 30 percent-off discount because the store was offering specials to educators that day.

Each of the swings retails for more than $80.

“She’s getting two swings for less than what she would pay for one,” said Antoinette Alpart, co-owner of the store.

Rachel Kube of Warrington has three boys and visits the store regularly to shop for sports equipment and toys.

“You’re getting a lower price for toys that are just about new,” said Kube, eyeing up a plastic kitchen set.

Some of the collectible American Doll clothes were a bit out of my price range, but the board games and action figures were priced at less than one-third of what you’d find at retail stores.

Games that typically run from $20 to $40 were selling for $6 to $12. And in a big bin at the front of the store were hundreds of figures, including Batman and Polly Pockets, as well as Star Wars characters. The price: four for $1. Perfect for stocking stuffers.

Thomas the Train toys were bagged in bulk, with eight trains selling for $14.99, instead of what they’d go for in a retail store — between $8 and $17 each, according to Alpart.

The owners of the store at 1515 W. Street Road also go out of their way to package some of the items in plastic boxes or containers so they look new.

It’s an added touch that makes a difference — especially when you’re thinking of putting something that might have been played with before under your Christmas tree.

Another perk is you may find extra discounts once you get to the store.

If you’re a grandparent, you’ll get 10 percent off your purchase every Wednesday. If you’re an educator, you’ll get up to 30 percent off your purchase the first Thursday of each month. And every week, the store features a “surprise” sale on a certain type of product. The sale may include crafts, Barbie dolls or board games.

As you know, I’m all about getting the most from my money.

And nothing puts me in the holiday shopping mood more than a “special” on an already-good deal.