The KDHE says the water at Mulvane Mobile Home Park is not safe to drink citing several reasons.

Many residents tall KAKE News that they do not drink the water and never had because they say it smells bad; one woman said that she got sick when she drank the water.

"It smells like dirt and the water is murky," said Frannie Logue."I think he is neglecting, there is massive neglect here," she added about the mobile home park owner.

The Kansas Department of Health and Environment says there are four reasons why the water is not safe to drink; repeated loss of pressure, broken water lines, lack of well repairs and raw sewage on the surface.

The Mulvane Mobile Home Park owner says the sewage problem was not reported to him immediately and once he was made aware of the problem, he was making repairs.

The owner, Eric Henderson, says that he purchased the park when it was already in poor shape, and he has been working to fix it up.

"It was a bit of a nightmare. I use to flip houses...[this] was a task I was willing to take one that no one else was," Henderson said.

He says he is trying to clean up the park and enforce park rules of cleanliness and rent payments.

"I am the only guy they got down there that is willing to work with them and a lot of the tenants don't really have anywhere else to go. I've got the majority of those tenants down there owe me thousands of dollars back rent," Henderson said.

He says the sewer is now fixed.

For residents, the KDHE says to do the following to ensure they do not get sick from the water.

Boil water for one minute prior to drinking or food preparation, or use bottled water; Dispose of ice cubes and do not use ice from a household automatic icemaker; Disinfect dishes and other food contact surfaces by immersion for at least one minute in clean tap water that contains one teaspoon of unscented household bleach per gallon of water; Water used for bathing does not generally need to be boiled. Supervision of children is necessary while bathing so that water is not ingested. Persons with cuts or severe rashes may wish to consult their physicians; and if your tap water appears dirty, flush the water lines by letting the water run until it clears.