TRENTON — Dozens of youth volunteers picked up litter, cut grass, weeded overgrown areas and raked leaves on Spring and Passaic streets Saturday, smiling as they worked.

I AM RealTalk, a local nonprofit organization that supports inner-city youth, led the effort, along with other community groups. They cleaned from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m.

John Morton, the founder of I AM RealTalk, said the volunteers worked tirelessly and left the in better shape.

"Our organization wants to better inner-city youth and make them more successful," said Morton. "In order for that to happen, they have to have pride in where they come from – that's why we need to clean up the city and make it a better place."

"They need a clean living space. This is their city; I want it to look nice for them," Morton said.

In addition, Morton hopes that his organization's efforts will help bring the community together.

"The neighborhood became the hood when the 'neighbor' was taken out of it," Morton believes. "So we're hoping that this will help bring the neighborhood together."

Morton said his organization has a deeper goal, which comes through events like Saturday's cleanup.

"We want to see inner-city kids succeed," said Morton. "Most of them come from broken homes and live in bad areas. But just because they live in bad areas doesn't mean they have to succumb to them. We help them and let them know they can succeed, and it makes me happy when they do.

It's great to see kids improve in school, help their moms with chores around the house more often, and act better. I wouldn't trade that for anything."

Morton was happy that kids involved in his organization volunteered to help today.

"They have to give back to the city of Trenton," said Morton. "This is their neighborhood."

Morton added that his organization plans to conduct additional city cleanups in the future.

"We need to keep our city clean," said Morton. "This is just the beginning."

Rich Cuccagna may be reached at rcuccagna@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @RichCuccagna. Find The Times of Trenton on Facebook.