Make sure your smoke alarms work: The FDNY may be about to get a lot less reliable.

As The Post’s Michael Gartland reported Thursday, the department is tweaking its fitness exam for recruits in ways that will make it easier to pass.

This raises fears that new firefighters might be less fit — and less qualified for the grueling task of fighting a New York City-size blaze.

Trainees, for example, won’t be asked to complete as many exercises meant to simulate pulling down a ceiling. And a reordering of the tasks on the test — supposedly to better represent actual firefighting conditions — will “reduce the cumulative fatigue” for recruits.

When a fire breaks out, New Yorkers don’t care about the gender, race, religion or sexual preference of the firefighters who answer the call.

The changes were based on recommendations by a consultant, PSI Services, which reviewed the testing for the city to make sure it was “fair and safe.”

Fair? That should set off alarms right there.

The FDNY has taken heat for years from critics who slammed the tests as unfair. They claim there are “too few” blacks, Hispanics and women in the department — citing the fact, for example, that only 46 of the city’s 10,500 firefighters are women.

Some years back, a left-wing federal judge, Nicholas Garaufis, deemed the testing discriminated against blacks and slapped the department with restrictions. (An appeals court later ruled that it was Garaufis himself who’d shown bias.)

Just this month, the FDNY graduated a female trainee who hadn’t truly passed the fitness exam.

And on Thursday, the City Council passed a bill to force the FDNY to publish a count of its minorities and female applicants and the numbers who become firefighters. The obvious point is to further push the department to make hiring decisions based on bean-counting, not qualifications.

“Are we to believe, in a city of over 8 million people, that only 50 women want to be firefighters?” asks City Councilwoman Elizabeth Crowley. Well, maybe not. But there are lots more than 40 people — men or women — who want to play for the Yankees, too. The thing is, you have to pass muster.

Let’s face it: Being a firefighter takes special skills — strength, speed, endurance.

The fitness tests are supposed to determine if a recruit measures up. Most men can’t pass. Some women can — but overall, they’re at a biological disadvantage.

When a fire breaks out, New Yorkers don’t care about the gender, race, religion or sexual preference of the firefighters who answer the call. They just want someone physically able to fight through the flames and carry out their loved ones.

The FDNY, and its testing, need to ensure that every firefighter is up to the job.