Wisconsin-based Alta Resources plans to hire more than 1,000 employees in Fort Myers in the next 60 days. Many of those positions will be filled “on the spot” during a Saturday, July 25 job fair at its Fort Myers location.

Job seekers are encouraged to complete applications online before arriving. Hiring professionals will be on hand from 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. for immediate, one-on-one interviews, as well as to answer questions and provide information about Alta Resources.

Seasonal full- and part-time openings are available in customer care, inbound sales and team leadership, all to serve Alta Resources’ health-insurance clients that have expanding needs to support the Affordable Care Act’s annual enrollment period.

Those with bilingual skills (English/Spanish) are particularly needed. For those interested in inbound sales for health insurance, Alta Resources provides qualified candidates with training and licensing reimbursement, valid for the state(s) he/she will be servicing.

Fort Myers Managing Director Paul Makurat says Alta Resources offers “a fun, casual environment and a dynamic, team-based company culture.”

“Our people truly have a sense of camaraderie and are united by our guiding principles and our commitment to our communities. All of that makes working here a positive and rewarding experience,” Makurat said.

Makurat also added that positions come with schedule flexibility, making it ideal for parents, students, retirees, and career-seekers.

“Our focus is building long-lasting relationships between our clients and consumers, so we’re seeking people with, among other qualities, customer-focused personalities, strong communication skills and the desire to deliver a consistently high level of quality in every detail.”

Alta Resources’ Fort Myers campus is located on 12600 Gateway Blvd., just east of I-75 and north of Daniels Parkway. Additional career events will be scheduled and announced on the Alta Resources career events Web page. To learn more about career opportunities, visit JoinAlta.com or email HR@AltaResources.com.

© 2015 Naples Herald. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.