Topics: 2016 Elections, Benghazi, Benghazi attack, Benghazi conspiracy, congressional republicans, Conservatives, Hillary Clinton, trey gowdy, Politics News

House Benghazi Committee chairman Trey Gowdy appears to have given up his investigation into Benghazi. He won’t admit as much – just two days ago he insisted to reporters that “my interest is in the past, not the future. I’m trying to figure out what happened to four Americans in Benghazi.” That’s a noble statement of purpose, but it’s completely unconnected to what Gowdy is actually doing.

Gowdy made that statement after he and his committee had spent several hours interviewing longtime Hillary Clinton associate Sidney Blumenthal about emails Blumenthal sent to the former Secretary of State after the attacks had taken place. Those messages contained “intelligence” that Blumenthal passed on from a source he knew in Libya, and Clinton forwarded them on to State Department officials for further inquiry and vetting (Blumenthal’s missives were often met with skepticism or thinly veiled derision).

What does that have to do the attack that claimed the lives of four Americans? It’s an excellent question, and reporters asked Gowdy specifically if he’d learned anything new about the attacks from talking to Blumenthal. His response: “I think all information you didn’t know previously is new.” Well, no one can argue with that bit of lawyerly weasel-speak. Asked again if he’d learned anything new about the attacks from speaking to Blumenthal, Gowdy shrugged his shoulders and said “we’ll let the transcript speak for itself, when and if it’s released.” Democrats on the committee are demanding that the transcript be released, but Gowdy won’t say whether that will happen.

Gowdy’s interest in Blumenthal doesn’t have anything to do with his knowledge of the Benghazi attacks – Blumenthal doesn’t appear to have any. But Blumenthal is close to Hillary Clinton, and Gowdy is turning the committee into a taxpayer-funded opposition research outfit now that Clinton is in the 2016 race for the presidency. He’s already said that the issue of Clinton’s email correspondence is “broader than Libya and broader than Benghazi,” and after the Blumenthal deposition he seemed more interested in making Clinton look bad than anything else:

Gowdy framed Clinton as irresponsible for welcoming and forwarding the Blumenthal memos since the government never vetted their author or the sources behind his information. “You have an intelligence apparatus at your disposal. We have a CIA. Why would you not rely on your own vetted, sourced intelligence agency?” he said.