By Michael Collins of The Commercial Appeal

NATIONAL HARBOR, Md. - Tennessee and other states with limited resources to fight crime must make sure they are concentrating their efforts on the most violent offenders, state Sen. Brian Kelsey told a gathering of conservative leaders Saturday.

"Those are people who are committing murders, burglaries and robberies — those are the people we need to be focused on," he said.

Kelsey, chairman of the state Senate Judiciary Committee, was one of the members of a panel on criminal justice reform at the Conservative Political Action Conference, or CPAC, an annual gathering of conservative activists and elected leaders meeting just outside Washington.

Kelsey briefed the group on what the Tennessee General Assembly is doing to revise its public safety laws. Lawmakers are considering a number of changes, including increasing the penalties for those convicted of domestic violence, aggravated burglary or drug trafficking.

Many of the recommendations came from Gov. Bill Haslam's Task Force on Sentencing and Recidivism, which issued its report last September.

Kesley, R-Germantown, said one of the panel's most surprising findings was that 40 percent of the state's prison inmates are people incarcerated for violating their probation and parole.

Another surprise, he said, was that offenders convicted of aggravated burglary serve just 30 percent of their sentence.

A public safety bill that Haslam is pushing would create higher mandatory minimum sentences for people convicted of three or more charges of aggravated burglary or drug trafficking.

Kelsey said he expects the legislature to pass the bill this year.

Tennessee also needs greater clarity in its sentencing laws, Kelsey said.

Kelsey said he was stunned when a group of prosecutors, defense attorneys and other legal experts brought together by the governor's task force could not say definitively how much of their sentence convicted offenders would actually serve.

"Not one person in the room could answer the question of how long would someone serve who received a 10-year sentence," he said. "I found that to be amazing. "

The problem, he said, is "we have a very confusing sentencing matrix in Tennessee, and it needs overhaul and clarity to it."

Also Saturday, the American Conservative Union, which organized the conference, honored the Tennessee General Assembly as the most conservative legislature in the country. This is the first year the organization has given the award.

Kelsey and state Rep. Timothy Hill, R-Blountville, accepted the award.

"I'm proud of our record as the most conservative state in America," Kelsey said.

"We've balanced our budget," Kelsey said. "We've stopped Obamacare Medicaid expansion. We've cut taxes repeatedly. We've passed a constitutional amendment to forever ban the state income tax. This is a record we should be proud of, and I appreciate the American Conservative Union has recognized that success."