CU wins its three matches in Omni Hotels Classic

CU's Taylor Simpson hits over Georgia Southern's Leah Joseph in the Buffs' first match Saturday. More photos: www.BuffZone.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

The Colorado volleyball team may not be in midseason form yet, but the Buffs proven they know how to learn from their mistakes.

On Saturday night, the Buffaloes rebounded from a third-set loss to put Pittsburgh away in four, 25-18, 25-20, 20-25, 25-20, and win the Omni Hotels Classic at Coors Events Center.

"It's awesome for us," senior Taylor Simpson said of winning the tournament. "Going in 3-0 and we have another tournament next week and we have an opportunity to go 6-0 (at home)."

The Buffs (5-1) have won five in a row after a disappointing season-opening loss to Northwestern. In that match, the Buffs led 2-0, but lost the third set and never recovered.

This time, the Buffs lost the third set, but rallied to take care of business against the Panthers (5-1).

"We knew that we didn't want that to happen again and everybody was on the same page," Simpson said. "We took a big step forward knowing it wasn't going to happen this game."

Fighting through Pitt's impressive front line, led by Jenna Potts (nine blocks), the Buffs tallied 47 kills. CU also racked up 10 aces, five by Cierra Simpson.

It put a cap on a great weekend for the Buffs, who swept Portland State on Friday and Georgia Southern earlier on Saturday, 25-20, 25-19, 25-16.

Buffs setter Nicole Edelman was named the tournament MVP, while Joslyn Hayes and Taylor Simpson earned all-tournament honors.

Advertisement

Edelman had 41 assists against Pitt and added the match-winning kill.

"She set a really fine match tonight," CU coach Liz Kritza said. "It's difficult sometimes when you have a mix of players coming in and out, but she's very steady, very stable and she really knows how to get players going."

Hayes (career-high 13 kills) and Taylor Simpson (12 kills) benefited from having Edelman on their side.

"It was really fun," Hayes said of her big night. "Believe it or not, I look at the numbers on the board and I look at Tay's and I'm like I want to beat that tonight. I just have a good time and swing away."

The Buffs now look forward to another home tournament next weekend.

"We're pleased that we won, pleased that we came away with the tournament championship, but we're nowhere near satisfied with our level of play," Kritza said. "We know there's so much more."

Notable

Simpson had 37 kills during the tournament, while Hayes had 27. ... In Saturday's other matches, Portland State defeated Georgia Southern, 25-14, 23-25, 25-14, 25-19 and Pittsburgh defeated Portland State, 25-20, 28-26, 25-19. ... CU finished 3-0, Pitt 2-1, Portland State 1-2 and Georgia Southern 0-3. ... Sophomore Gwen Herring aggravated a previous knee injury against Georgia Southern and sat out the Pitt match. Kritza expects Herring to return soon, however.

Contact staff writer Brian Howell at howellb@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/BrianHowell33.