Topics: cassie, Destiny's child, kelly rowland, nelly furtado, R&B, shareefa, timabland, toya, Video, Entertainment News

There’s not a ton of nostalgia for 2000s pop R&B. What critical enthusiasm the music generated tended to come from rank poptimists, who are now on to the next new sound. Meanwhile, the backward-looking rockists haven’t identified much for the ages in the welter of retro-disco, one-hit-wonder, Beyoncé-wannabes who wailed hopefully amid gloppy washes of overproduction.

All of which is a shame, because the R&B of the 2000s was a bizarre and wonderful thing, as ’90s slow jams gave way to a bracingly slick stew of disco, funk, hip hop, and even some alternative and electronica snuck in there amidst the lacquered finish. Here’s some of the best tracks of an undervalued era and genre.

Destiny’s Child, “Apple Pie A La Mode”

Destiny’s Child’s 2001 album “Survivor” was a big step down from “The Writing’s On the Wall,” but it did have this marvelous ode to checking out guys. Beyoncé and co-producer Rob Fusari find the common ground between Beach Boys’ burping rhythmic vocals and Timbaland’s burping rhythmic soundscape. Good to the last dollop of “wah woh.”

Kelly Rowland, “Still In Love With My Ex”

Kelly Rowland’s post-Destiny’s Child career hasn’t been meteorically successful, but she’s made some good music. This is probably my favorite of her songs, a lazy mid-tempo Soulshock and Karlin production, with Rowland projecting a vulnerability that Destiny’s Child, and Beyoncé, rarely reached for. The repetitive “ex” in the background has a hopeless, inescapable quality to it, and that line about how she loves his family, too, always gets me.

Nelly Furtado and Timbaland, “Promiscuous”

Canadian singer songwriter Nelly Furtado sold all the way out on her 2006 album “Loose,” collaborating with Timbaland, sexing up, and making a (startlingly successful) bid for chart success. “Promiscuous” has the deliberately clumsy lasciviousness of a Loretta Lynn/Conway Twitty duet, with Furtado announcing, “chivalry is dead/but you’re still kind of cute,” while Timbaland volleys back with endearingly klutzy Biz Markie singing: “I want you on my team” (“so does everybody else!”) Meanwhile the quasi-Bollywood beats slink and slither along, a sneakily sensual background for all the cheerful cheese. Eroticism doesn’t get much more charming.

Toya, “No Matta What (Party All Night)”

Toya put out one amazing self-titled album in 2001 and then disappeared. “No Matta What” in particular is a stunning track, built around a glitchy, skipping beat that suggests Aphex Twin and layers of production that include (presumably synthesized) strings and classic rock guitar. Over it all, Toya and the multi-tracked chorus soar ecstatically, partying (as the video suggests) like it’s way past 1999.

Isyss, “Uh Uh Uh Uh”

One of many girl groups that tried to imitate Destiny’s Child’s success, Isyss was distinguished by lead singers Quierra Davis-Martin’s nicely nasal burr and an unusually ardent embrace of retro-disco. “Uh Uh Uh Uh” struts like no one told them the Bee Gees were out of style. Sadly, but inevitably, that obliviousness did not ensure them a long career; 2002’s “The Way We Do” was their only release.

Shareefa, “Need a Boss”

Shareefa tried to walk the line between Mary J. Blige neo-soul and the new 2000s pop. She had her greatest success on “Need a Boss,” where her vocals got run through Darkchild’s echoey production, complete with bonus stuttering effects and Ludacris doing his thing with “more verses than the Bible.” The lyric inveighing against “fake thugs” is nicely nonsensical; this isn’t keeping it real by a long shot. But the ersatz sturm-und-drung keeps things from turning into neo-soul default emoting slog, and Shareefa has enough authority to make the result sound playfully-rather-than-haplessly-trying-to-be tough. “How Good Love Feels,” also from her 2006 album “Point of No Return,” is highly recommended as well.