Buy Photo Neptune police Sgt. Philip Seidle (center) is taken into custody Tuesday in the fatal shooting of his ex-wife on an Asbury Park street. (Photo: Bob Bielk/Staff photographer)Buy Photo Story Highlights Abusive cops have advantages that other abusers lack

They have friends in law enforcement and the court system

They have access to databases and technology that can help them track down their victims

They may also know where domestic violence shelters are located

Long before her enraged, armed ex-husband cornered her on a street in Asbury Park last week , Tamara Seidle felt as if she had “no avenue of escape.”

That description, included in the divorce papers Seidle filed in 2013 against her then-husband, Neptune police Sgt. Philip Seidle, charged with shooting her to death in her car in front of their 7-year-old daughter and terrified bystanders, captures the fear and powerlessness many domestic violence victims feel when their abusers are cops, experts say.

These “batterers in blue,” as one victims advocate calls them, differ from other abusers in several key ways, says Jane Shivas, executive director of the New Jersey Coalition for Battered Women.

“The power. The badge. The gun. The brotherhood,” she said.

“I can’t speak specifically to Tamara Siedle’s death and her situation, but it’s a stark reminder of the challenges that are faced by victims whose partners are law enforcement officers,” Shivas said.

Afraid to call 911

Dozens of people, mostly women, are killed by their partners or ex-partners every year in New Jersey.

There were 38 such homicides in 2012, the most recent year for which statistics are available.

In the past decade, an estimated 902,000 New Jersey women have been victims of rape, physical violence or stalking by an intimate partner in their lifetime. That figure comes from an annual intimate partners violence survey conducted by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

In the past decade, domestic violence has resulted in hundreds of deaths across the state.

Each year in New Jersey, there are more than 70,000 incidents of domestic violence reported to police, according to the New Jersey Coalition for Battered Women.

When a gun is in the house, abused women are six times more likely to be killed than other abused women, according to a 2003 study cited by the National Institute of Justice, a research arm of the U.S. Department of Justice.

That makes abusive cops especially dangerous.

“Any population will have people who will abuse power and are abusive,” Shivas said. “Unfortunately, when there’s an abusive person who has access to the power and privilege of a police officer — and a gun — that increases the risk of lethality.”

Domestic violence in Central Jersey

Number of domestic violence calls reported to police and domestic violence-related homicides in each county from 2009 to 2012, the most recent year for which data is available from the State Police.

2009 2010 2011 2012 New Jersey 73,709 74,244 70,311 65,060 Homicides 39 38 40 38 Hunterdon 183 191 202 163 Homicides 0 0 0 2 Middlesex 1,517 1,416 1,552 1,709 Homicides 2 3 4 0 Somerset 553 565 570 548 Homicides 1 0 0 1 Union 1,193 1,203 1,167 1,197 Homicides 1 2 4 3

Abusive cops have other advantages that other abusers lack.

They have friends in law enforcement and the court system.

They have access to databases and technology that can help them track down their victims.

They may also know where domestic violence shelters are located.

Also, many victims, rightly or wrongly, believe their abuser’s fellow officers will cover for him, says family law attorney Bari Weinberger, who has represented clients on both sides of these cases.

“It’s super alarming. They literally fear calling 911,” she said.

With any continuing domestic violence situation, experts say, it’s common for victims to feel as if they’re trapped.

How common?

No one knows for sure how pervasive is domestic violence among police officers.

A pair of studies conducted in the 1990s, still widely cited today, showed that domestic violence was two to four times more common among police families than American families in general. The incidence rate ranged between 22 and 41 percent.

However, Laurence Miller, a clinical and forensic psychologist who has worked with police departments in Florida for the past 20 years, believes the studies citing a higher incidence of domestic violence among police are outdated and unreliable.

“My overall intuitive conclusion from the research I’ve seen is that the rate of domestic violence among police officers is probably no greater than the general population,” Miller said. “In fact it might be lower, because the consequences (of a conviction) are greater.”

Officers know that a domestic violence conviction will cost them their jobs, Miller said.

But domestic violence experts say that very fact is what keeps some victims from going to the police.

“Sometimes the woman is told, ‘How is your husband going to support you and the kids?’ if they get a restraining order,” Shivas said.

Victims’ advocate and author Diane Wetendorf, for one, believes the nature of police work can make officers more prone to abuse.

“Many of the characteristics required to be a police officer, such as the ability to take control of situations and people, the ability to exercise authority, and the willingness to use violence to gain compliance are the identifying characteristics of a batterer,” Wetendorf wrote in an article that appeared last year in a domestic violence periodical published by the New Jersey-based Civic Research Institute.

The International Association for Chiefs of Police, an influential advocacy and training organization based in Alexandria, Virginia, takes the position that the incidence rate is at least on par with the general public.

Laws, policies in place

Shivas and other experts say New Jersey’s domestic violence laws are as strong as any state in the nation.

They point to the enactment of the Domestic Violence Act in 1982 as a major turning point. The law has been amended numerous times since then to provide greater protections and penalties.

The number of domestic violence offenses statewide have gradually declined since at least the mid-1990s.

In 2012, the most recent year for which statistics are available, there were 65,060 offenses statewide, down 25 percent from 1995, according to State Police crime data.

At the same time, the state’s rules governing how police departments handle allegations of domestic violence, including cases where the suspect is an officer, have been toughened over the years. In 2009, the state Attorney General’s Office adopted a revised policy based on the detailed recommendations of the International Association of Chiefs of Police.

When police are called to the scene of a domestic violence case and they see physical signs of violence, such as a bruise, they must charge the assailant, says Weinberger, the family law attorney.

Anything else becomes a civil domestic violence case in the Family Division of Superior Court.

But domestic violence cases are rarely so simple, Weinberger said.

Police are sometimes called by a neighbor or even a spouse over what is no more than a common marital dispute, known legally as domestic contretemps. Police, of course, are not marriage counselors.

But when they arrive at a scene without signs of violence, their job is not done. They must look for signs of fear, Weinberger said, because fear can be well founded and signal immanent violence or danger.

At that point, they counsel the victim on options, such as going to a shelter. They may order the offending spouse or partner out of the home while the victim goes to the police station.

If the police see something that falls short of violence, like a broken cell phone because of a dispute, they file a report that can be included in a civil domestic violence case.

When a police officer accused of domestic violence, whether charged by responding police or served with a restraining order, must surrender their weapons, under a state Attorney General’s directive established in 1995.

Weapons must be seized even if there are no immediate charges, if a responding officer “reasonably believes that the presence of weapons would expose the victim to a risk of serious bodily injury.”

Any seizure is referred to the county prosecutor in the county where the act occurred.

The county prosecutor must investigate immediately. While the case against the officer is pending, the prosecutor can find that the guns should remain out of the hands of the accused officer, can be used under restrictions while on duty or be returned, according to the Attorney General’s directive.

If a charge or complaint is withdrawn, the chief of that officer’s department then must separately investigate to determine if the officer can carry a firearm, under the directive.

The pressure on victims of domestic violence takes a huge leap when the accused is a police officer, Weinberger said.

Their complaint could entail the loss of their partner or spouse’s job or embarrassment because he or she knows the officer’s colleagues. But there is also an added dimension of fear, she said.

There is no requirement under the law that allegations of physical abuse that turn up in a divorce complaint be reported to law enforcement agencies, she said.

In 2003, the chiefs organization promulgated a model policy guiding the internal handling of domestic violence offenses within police departments. After years spent studying the problem of domestic abuse among police, New Jersey adopted a similar policy in 2009.

The policy calls for departments to screen out job candidates with a history of domestic violence or sexual assault, and to provide officers with domestic abuse training on an annual basis.

Kim Gandy, who heads the National Network to End Domestic Violence, an advocacy group based in Washington, D.C., says the true extent of domestic violence within law enforcement circles simply isn’t known.

“Abusers are engineers and architects and janitors and police officers and any other walk of life. There's not a job or profession that is exempt,” Gandy said.

The key difference with domestic violence by police officers, she said, is that “it's harder to pursue (these cases) when the people committing the offense are the same ones charged with enforcing the law.”

DOMESTIC ABUSE HELP

If you or someone you know might be a victim of domestic violence, call New Jersey’s 24-hour domestic violence hotline at 1-800-572- SAFE (7233).

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1LmLknK