Austin police say the rapper incited a riot at the fest last Thursday

Rapper Tyler, The Creator, was arrested Saturday for allegedly inciting a riot during his show at the Scoot Inn at South By Southwest music festival.

Travis County Sheriff's spokesman Roger Wade said the Odd Future rapper, whose name is Tyler Gregory Okonma, was arrested at Austin-Bergstrom Airport and was to be arraigned later Saturday. If convicted of inciting a riot, which is a misdemeanor, he faces up to a year in jail and a $4,000 fine. His Bond was set at $25,000

"Specifically, the subject encouraged a large crowd on more than one occasion to force themselves past venue employees controlling access at the venue which was already at full capacity," read a statement from the police.

It continued, "Regardless of the size of a crowd, the encouragement of unruly and unlawful behavior is against the law and cannot be tolerated."

64 Musician Mugshots | Billboard at SXSW: Full Coverage

Officers arrived at the Scoot Inn, 1308 E. 4th Street, on Thursday and were told that the venue was at capacity at 999 people, according to the Austin police affidavit. The officers on scene heard Tyler the Creator, whose real name is Tyler Gregory Okonma, yell for those outside of the gates of the venue to be let in.

The calls from the artist led to a crowd of concert goers that "push[ed] through the employees working at the door which created an immediate danger of injury to persons," the affidavit said.

SXSW 2014: A Look Back at the Fest's Top Films

Austin police also released a video of the incident, which appears to show the artist saying to the crowd, "just run in right now ... do it, let's go."

Tyler and members of the Odd Future collective were denied a visa to travel to New Zealand in February after officials there said they were a potential "public threat" because of past troubles, "including incidents at past performances in which they have incited violence." They pointed to a 2011 incident in which police were called to a comic book store in Boston where fans became unruly.

The group's manager, Christian Clancy, defended them last month after the New Zealand decision, saying they were young at the time and were being judged too harshly.

Tyler the Creator's rep declined to comment about the arrest.

The 23-year-old artist, of the group Odd Future, had been listed as performing at several events over the course of the past week at the South By Southwest festival.

UPDATE: An earlier version of this story erroneously listed Tyler the Creator's bond at $3,500, it was subsequently updated after the Austin Police Department released a statement announcing the bond was set at $25,000.