Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La. is one of several Democratic incumbents who has been targeted by anti-Obamacare advertising. J. Scott Applewhite/AP

Republicans are literally betting millions on their Obamacare strategy. A tactic that may be evolving from all out repeal, to let's fix this thing.

Elizabeth Wilner, author of a nonpartisan report released earlier this month, said in a column today published by Cook Political Report that how some groups talk about the president's signature legislative achievement has shifted.

[READ: Democrats' Answer to the Obamacare Attacks]

Look no further than what the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, a vocal opponent of the law, has been up to.

An early ad buy in the 6th Congressional District of Massachusetts boasted how GOP candidate Richard Tisei wanted to “work in a bipartisan manner to fix health care.” Another chamber ad for Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, a vocal advocate for repeal in the Senate, highlighted how McConnell was trying to “fix this Obamacare mess.”

“It may be that not many other Republican advertisers follow suit … but you have to assume given the Chamber’s status as a leader on this issue that at least some will," Wilner says.

In four years, the Kantar Media CMAG analysis which Wilner authored earlier this month, groups have spent $418 million in negative political television advertisements against Obamacare. That is nearly 15 times what groups have spent promoting the positive aspects of the law. In states like North Carolina, Louisiana and Arkansas where incumbent Democrats are fighting to survive re-election after voting for the law, Republicans have really doubled down on their strategy.

In Louisiana, for example, 95 percent of the ad spots that have aired against Democratic Sen. Mary Landrieu have included some negative reference to Obamacare. In North Carolina, 100 percent of the total ads run against Democratic Sen. Kay Hagan have included criticisms.

But one reason the GOP may adapt, experts say is that polling shows voters are beginning to burn out on the all-out-repeal message. A CNN poll out this month found while 38 percent of Americans still want Obamacare repealed, another 49 percent would rather lawmakers pass fixes to make the existing law better. With some of the hottest Republican primaries behind them after Tuesday, Republican candidates will also no longer have pressure from the right to tout an all-out repeal message.

That’s not to say key Republicans are all on board. Monday Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal penned a piece for Fox News titled “Yes, we can still repeal ObamaCare-let’s get to work.”