The Obamacare program for small business in Illinois—known as SHOP—has been troubled from the start. Now it has become obvious that SHOP is a total flop.

Only two insurers sold health plans on the online marketplace to Chicago small businesses: startup Land of Lincoln Health and Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Illinois.

Now there's just one. Facing massive financial losses, Chicago-based Land of Lincoln has stopped signing up new small-business customers.

The lack of competition won't mean much for Chicago-based Blue Cross, the largest insurer in the state. Only 1 percent of its 20,000 small-group customers bought their policies through SHOP.

Beginning in 2016, businesses with at least 50 full-time-equivalent employees must provide insurance or pay a penalty. Small businesses—those with fewer than 50 workers—won't be penalized for not offering health insurance.

There were 232,683 small businesses in Illinois in 2014, according to the most recent data from the federal Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Of those, 32.8 percent offered health insurance.

SHOP, the Small Business Health Options Program, is designed to help those small businesses buy employee health insurance. But many prefer to use brokers. That's partly because the cost of exchange plans isn't much different from those off the exchange. And it's cumbersome for businesses to figure out if they qualify for a federal tax credit.

“I think, particularly in a market like Chicago, where outside the SHOP there's going to be multiple carriers for your business, why would you go into a market where there's just one?” says Sabrina Corlette, an expert on the Affordable Care Act at Georgetown University's Center on Health Insurance Reforms.

Like the online Obamacare exchanges created for individuals, the small-business marketplace established in 2013 was buggy from the beginning. Businesses initially couldn't sign up online and instead were relegated to paper and pen. And many states at first didn't offer “employee choice,” a feature in which workers could pick plans from multiple carriers instead of just one. Such choice, which is available in Illinois starting next month, could have made the plans more appealing both to businesses and to their employees. In addition, the Obama administration allowed small businesses to renew subpar health plans in 2013 that didn't cover benefits required under federal health reform (maternity care, e.g.). The federal government is allowing these “transitional” plans through 2017. That's another pool of potential SHOP customers who aren't shopping.

The problem isn't limited to Illinois. As of May, only 85,000 people nationwide, working for about 10,700 small businesses, had SHOP plans, according to the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. The total does not include businesses that started coverage in 2014 and hadn't yet renewed for 2015.

Experts say competition, or the lack thereof, is a big factor in the success of the exchanges. Some states have as many as 10 insurers vying for companies' business. Others have only a few or even just one carrier, says Austin Bordelon, a Salt Lake City-based manager at health care consultancy Leavitt Partners. Besides Land of Lincoln and Blue Cross, Urbana-based Health Alliance also offers SHOP plans. But in the six-county Chicago area, it sells plans only in Will County. Statewide, 45 people from eight companies had a Health Alliance plan as of Dec. 1, company spokeswoman Laura Mabry says.

Land of Lincoln, a federally subsidized co-op, insured about 8,000 people from 1,000 small businesses as of the end of October. Spokeswoman Janine Sheedy would not say how many of those businesses bought plans on the SHOP exchange. But given the experience of Blue Cross and Health Alliance, Land of Lincoln likely had similarly tiny totals.

'NATURE OF THE BEAST'

Nancy Daas, a Rosemont-based assistant vice president at brokerage Cottingham & Butler, calls the lack of competition in Illinois the “nature of the beast.” The small pool of insurers on the exchange means they can't spread out the financial risk of those who buy their plans, she says.

While Blue Cross is arguably deep-pocketed enough to take on the losses (its parent company had $27.7 billion in 2014 revenue), Land of Lincoln had $14 million in 2014 revenue and ended the year with a $17.7 million loss. It lost even more, $25.8 million, in the first six months of this year, according to a financial statement.

So Land of Lincoln President Jason Montrie decided in October to limit enrollment. The company said on Nov. 30 that it had hit the cap for new small businesses. Existing customers can still renew.

In a statement, spokeswoman Sheedy says, “As a startup business, we are faced with making difficult strategic decisions that may impact consumers, but we remain committed to our members and providing a high-quality health insurance option for years to come.”

Brian Cheney, Blue Cross vice president of small business, says the insurer “fully supports competition. The more of that the better.” He adds that competition for customers exists off the SHOP exchange.

Elliot Richardson, co-CEO of the Chicago-based Small Business Advocacy Council, was part of the grass-roots effort to create a co-op. “It's remarkably frustrating for the small-business community to not have options that should be available,” he says. Richardson's law firm isn't a SHOP customer. It bought Land of Lincoln health plans through a broker.