Topics: Books, Editor's Picks, John Cheever, Jon Hamm, Mad Men, matthew weiner, new york times book review, Television, TV, Entertainment News

If you are, like me, going through the pangs of “Mad Men” withdrawal (half a season? a whole year?), I have your methadone for you. “The Stories of John Cheever” won’t just get you through the next 10 months – they’ll make you forget that Don Draper ever took his shirt off, that Roger Sterling ever indulged his id, that anyone ever punched Pete Campbell in the face.

A year ago, John Cheever was one of my biggest literary gaps. As a short story writer, I was almost proud of this – in the way an English major friend was proud of graduating college without having read “Hamlet.” I understood Cheever to be iconic, understood even that I’d learn a lot from reading him, but I had no inkling that I’d adore him as earnestly as I adored a show like “Mad Men,” something I’d absorb not for its cultural import but for its brilliance and fun. And then, last summer, I picked up the fat red volume that had been in my “to read” stack for nearly a decade. I was awed to encounter not just a literary masterpiece, but the direct ancestor of some of my favorite current storytelling: If “Mad Men” was the river, these were the headwaters. If “Mad Men” was chocolate milk, this was a bar of 90 percent Lindt. If “Mad Men” was Honey Smacks, this was a swarm of bees.

Cheever was one of those writers I’d formed an opinion of without ever reading. I imagined all his stories to involve a businessman who got off the evening train drunk, stood in his yard peering in through the windows of his own house, and had some sort of sad revelation. And perhaps, in subject matter, I wasn’t far off. But that’s like saying all of Jane Austen is about women dating in mansions. True, but not fair.

Here’s what I found: In each story, a small world of alienation and humor and despair, a meditation on family or work, the city or the suburbs, travel or stasis, success or failure. Stories that resist neat epiphany. Stories that capture the pivot points of the 20th century. This last one matters very much; 14 years into the new century, we’re still processing the seismic cultural shifts of the last one. We live in the world the ’60s made, and made possible. And, whether we know it or not, we’re still seeing the mid-1900s through the lens Cheever created. We need his work for the same reason we need “Mad Men”; we may be at a historical and stylistic remove, but not nearly as much as we’d like to think.

That Cheever is an influence on “Mad Men” is no secret. In his New York Times Book Review “By the Book” interview on April 27, series creator Matthew Weiner said, “The fiction of John Cheever has a voice filled with irony and comedy and pain that, on some level, I’m always seeking to emulate. His short stories present themselves as episodes of TV do – with plenty of story and flawed characters presented without judgment.” Weiner – and his well-read viewers – have been saying as much for years. And it’s not just a tonal influence: Don Draper starts the series living in Ossining, N.Y., the town Cheever himself wrote from until his 1982 death. I dare you to read Cheever’s “The Enormous Radio” and not think of the Season 5 episode “Signal 30,” in which Pete Campbell projects all his suburban insecurities onto his giant stereo (and Ken Cosgrove writes a short story about it). Cheever’s “The Death of Justina” should put you instantly in mind of the demise of secretary Ida Blankenship in Season 4. At the end of that story, Cheever’s protagonist, an adman, commits a final act of defiance against his firm by turning in the 23rd Psalm as ad copy. I’m waiting for Draper to do the same.