With roughly 150 warrant cases processed, cleared or rescheduled within the first 90 minutes, court officials believe Saturday’s Warrant Day program exceeded expectations.

People were lined up along the sidewalk before the doors opened at 9 a.m., according to Court Administrator Christopher Hale. He said most of the people he spoke with waiting inside seemed to be appreciative of the weekend work.

Even though some worried that the event was an attempt to arrest people once they were inside, Hale said the program was more focused on helping people who might be confused or caught up in the legal system to the point that they’re unsure of what to do next.

"If we can get the defendant to take care of it on their time table, they won’t maybe lose their job because they have time in jail and they’re arrested," he said. "So that helps the community out at large."

Taxpayers are helped as well, according to Hale. He said many of the city’s approximately 40,000 warrants are failure to appear charges because of traffic-related incidents such as a suspended license or traffic tickets.

Every warrant that’s settled before an arrest saves the $279 booking fee plus $85 for every day that a person remains in jail after that.

"If we can avoid having people arrested and taken to jail, then the city and the taxpayers avoid that cost," said Hale.

Chris Benavidez said he and his wife did not want to pay that cost. He joined her Saturday at city court to make sure her case was on the right track. Some tickets caused her to have a suspended license, but Benavidez said the help they received Saturday was a relief.

"When you have a driver’s license, you can do a lot more things," he said. "It helps her work and thrive. You have a clear conscience and you’re able to take care of yourself."

Donald Memale said he was skeptical about Warrant Day, but was glad he showed up to straighten out some paperwork on a charge that he thought was cleared more than seven years ago. Before Saturday, Memale said he worried all the time about being arrested.

"Anything you do, you have to just sort of wonder if that’s the one thing that’s going to get you put in jail for something you thought was already taken care of," he said.

Friends of J.R. Mason would agree. He rounded up some of his friends for Warrant Day because he wanted to help them out, he said, and that would not have been possible if it were during the work week.

"It’s a positive thing, and they need to do it more often," he said. "It would certainly help clear things up more."

Anyone worried about a warrant or wanting to take control of their case can do so during a morning or afternoon session Monday – Thursday at Tucson City Court, 103 W. Alameda St.

Copyright 2015. Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.