GRAND RAPIDS, MI -- Joan Budden will take the helm of Priority Health, Michigan's second largest health insurance company.

She will succeed Michael Freed, who is retiring next month after three years as Priority Health CEO.

The appointment of Budden, who has served as Priority Health's Chief Marketing Officer since 2009, was announced Monday, Dec. 7, by Richard C. Breon, CEO of Spectrum Health, the parent company of Priority Health.

Budden is credited for leading the development of the Grand Rapids-based insurer's Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act strategy, which propelled Priority Health to being named the state's benchmark health plan and becoming a statewide leader on the topic of health reform.

"Given Joan's extensive experience in the health insurance industry and the results produced under her leadership as chief marketing officer, she is an outstanding choice to lead Priority Health in this new and ever-changing healthcare environment," Breon said in a statement.

Priority Health has a customer base of more 650,000, and annual revenues of more than $2 billion.

Spectrum Health is the majority owner of Priority Health, which was formed in 1992 with the merger of the former Butterworth HMO in Grand Rapids and Lakeshore HMO in Holland. The not-for-profit West Michigan health care system includes 12 hospitals, 183 ambulatory and service sites and more than 3,100 physicians and advanced practice providers.

While CMO, Budden's leadership is credited with helping to develop a number of innovative tools and programs that contributed to the company's unprecedented growth.

She has more than 25 years industry experience, and past positions include leading the individual consumer division, project management office and corporate strategy departments for Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan, which is the biggest insurance provider in the state.

Budden holds a B.S. in business administration from the University of Michigan and a Master's Degree from Wayne State University. She serves on a number of statewide boards and service organizations.

Shandra Martinez covers business for MLive/The Grand Rapids Press. Email her or follow her on Twitter @shandramartinez.