The merger of The A.I. Group and Regions Insurance had everything to do with the Affordable Care Act.

Regions Insurance Inc., a subsidiary of Regions Insurance Group and an affiliate of Regions Bank, announced last week that it had purchased The A.I. Group, previously one of the largest privately held employee benefits firms in Georgia. The company has headquarters in Watkinsville and Atlanta.

Whether Regions would have purchased The A.I. Group if Obamacare had not been implemented is impossible to know. But once the law went into effect, says A.I. CEO Dave Woodruff, a merger was practically inevitable.

“When it was signed into law, it was a seismic shift in the benefits business,” Woodruff told The Oconee Enterprise. “No longer can small operations do what is needed for their clients of any size. You can’t have a small, two-man or three-man operation and meet the needs, whether the client has under 50 employees, 50 to 100 or up 1,000 or above. If you do not have the resources, you are on the glide plain to irrelevancy.”

Woodruff said that the Affordable Care Act has added layers of complications to his industry.

“The law itself now has over 36,000 pages of rules and guidance,” he said. “There are multiple definitions of what is a small employer.”

Woodruff said that many people viewed the implementation of the Affordable Care Act as a disaster, his company treated it like a “tremendous opportunity.”

“We were already one of the largest privately held benefits companies,” he said. “We added 10 to 15 new positions. Since it came through, we have had double-digit revenue growth.”

Woodruff said that employers are craving information and guidance, and his company has strived to meet that demand.

The A.I. Group was large enough personnel-wise to handle the changes. It has clients in every state. Another insurance professional with personal knowledge of the company told The Oconee Enterprise that The A.I. Group is one of the most respected in the industry.

“We literally have clients from Miami to Milwaukee, from Long Island to Los Angeles,” said Woodruff. “A substantial portion of our clients are large regional companies. Some are Fortune 500 companies.”

Whereas Regions Insurance is the buyer, Woodruff said that The A.I. Group will be heading up Regions’ Georgia operations.

Woodruff and his partner, Dan Murphy, set some parameters when would-be suitors came calling to expand.

Whereas they were used to talking to three to four interested parties over any typical 60-day period, they decided to weed out the suitors by establishing five criteria that had to exist before they would even chat.

First, they wanted a company with a similar culture to The A.I. Group. Woodruff and Murphy were not interested in simply cashing a check. They both want to stay active in the business.

Second, all of their people had to be able to come with the owners.

“They have made us what we are,” Woodruff said. “In a lot of these deals, management gets cut out. Third, we wanted to provide more opportunities for our people who have been with us for 25 years already. We wanted them to have opportunities to grow within the organization.”

Woodruff said The A.I. Group keeps its employees. “We have people who were interns with us 17 years ago, and they are still with us,” he said.

Fourth, they would not talk to anyone who was operating in their existing market segment, which is the mid to large employer. The A.I. Group has moved beyond the small, benefits shop model.

Finally, the philosophy of business was critical. That included like-minded goals for the future.

Woodruff said the reaction to the merger has been excellent. He said 47 employees are staying with the company, including the 15 who work in the Watkinsville office on Julian Drive.