Russ Feingold pays a call to Hudson companies

Russ Feingold talks on Thursday, April 21, to Joseph Ward of RJA Dispersons and Kathy Enerson of Twin River about the business climate in this part of Wisconsin. The Hudson companies are located on Harvey Street in St. Croix Business Park. Feingold, a Wisconsin Democrat, trying to regain the U.S. Senate seat he lost to Republican Ron Johnson six years ago.

U.S. Senate candidate Russ Feingold, middle, listens to Kathy Enerson talk about losing her former business in the 2009 recession and starting her new company, Twin River, the following year. Her husband Lowell Enerson is in the background. (Hudson Star-Observer photos by Randy Hanson)

Former U.S. senator and current Senate candidate Feingold arrives at the Twin River company in Hudson on Thursday, April 21. Feingold said he was on a listening tour to hear ideas on how to best move Wisconsin's economy forward.

The media advisory said U.S. Senate candidate Russ Feingold would be discussing the importance of bringing high-quality broadband internet access to all Wisconsin communities when he visited with owners of two Hudson companies on Thursday, April 21.

But Hudson's St. Croix Business Park already has broadband service, and Kathy Enerson, owner of Twin Rivers, and Joseph Ward, a partner in RJA Dispersions, were more interested in talking about other things.

Enerson related how she lost her former company, Eagle Packaging, as a result of the 2009 recession and a divorce, and managed to start her new assembly, packaging and distribution company in a business condo building on Harvey Street.

After her previous company of 16 years failed, Enerson went without health insurance for three years because a pre-existing condition made it impossible to purchase a policy.

Then Obamacare was adopted and she has been able to buy coverage through the insurance exchange for the past three years.

“So you make sure that's there,” Enerson told Feingold.

“Oh, it's not going anywhere. Despite the fantasies of the incumbent senator, it's not going anywhere,” Feingold replied.

The reference was to U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson, a Republican who defeated Feingold in the 2010 election. Johnson has called and voted for a repeal of Obamacare.

Feingold, a Democrat who served in the Senate for 18 years before his loss to Johnson, is seeking his old seat back in a rematch with the current senator.

When Feingold inquired about the business climate in Hudson, Enerson said her business was hit hard by trade agreements with China that led to most retail products being manufactured there. That meant there were fewer products for her company to package and deliver, she said.

“China has hurt a lot,” Enerson said, “especially for those of us who are service-type businesses or in the manufacturing realm. … I have my high-speed, shrink-wrap machine, but I don't use it very often. It just kind of sits idle. But it's paid for, so what the heck. It can sit.”

Feingold said he voted against the North Atlantic Free Trade Agreement and other trade agreements that resulted in a loss of American jobs.

“Sen. Johnson thinks they are great. (He) said it has been a wash for Wisconsin -- 70,000 lost jobs,” Feingold alleged.

Joseph Ward, the vice president of RJA Dispersions, said business is good for his company. It makes the colorants for ink used in ink-jet presses that produce large-format advertising. The colorants end up on billboards, trade show exhibits, airplanes, shopping centers and any number of other things, Ward said.

“Printing presses are evolving from conventional offset litho to ink jet, and they are running just as fast,” he explained. “We provide very high reliability, and one of our specialties is UV curable materials. They are instantly dry and don't give off POC's (particulate organic carbon), which is much nicer from an environmental point of view.”

He added: “A lot of printing companies are adapting and moving to that, and we've been riding that wave. We're doing real well.”

Ward said he and his partner moved RJA Dispersions to Hudson in 2009 because rent was cheaper here than at their previous location in Maplewood, Minn. He and his partner are former 3M Co. scientists.

“Everybody talks about taxes. Frankly, it's a horse apiece,” Ward said. “Business real estate taxes are less here. Residential real estate taxes are more. Income tax on the money you earn is more here than in Minnesota.”

Ward credited Bill Rubin, executive director of the St. Croix Economic Development Corp., for encouraging and helping RJA Dispersions move to Hudson.

“He's a super, super guy, and he really works for people,” Ward said. “He has brought a lot of businesses over here.”

Returning to the conversation on health insurance, Ward said company employees who moved to Wisconsin found it more expensive here.

“I don't know all the reasons for that, but it's something about the regulatory climate for health insurance here,” he said. “It is more favorable for the insurance companies.”

“Well, clearly the leadership of our state has been more hostile to providing health insurance,” Feingold replied.

“Thank you. I did not expect this combination of things to be presented,” he said at the end of the half-hour visit.