Wisconsin Rep. Paul Ryan reminded conservative activists at the 2014 Conservative Political Action Conference Thursday that the GOP can win in November if it provides Americans with opportunities for prosperity – especially as the Democratic Party works to refocus itself from Obama’s failures.

“The party that gives opportunity will win in November; we are that party,” Ryan said. “The left is exhausted, our size is energized…2016 will not be a marathon, it will be a 50-yard dash.”

“We will look back in 2014 and say we got it right; we gave people choices and earned back their trust,” he added.

Ryan focused his remarks on the fact that Republicans have ideas that will help improve the country, rather than the Obama administration’s stale policies. He pointed out that President Obama has doubled down on his budget plans and continued his focus on income inequality because “they’re out of ideas…they can’t talk about economic growth.”

“Obama will fail in transforming the country, and his agenda will fail,” he added.

The House Budget Conference Chairman specifically referenced some of the policies that his conservative colleagues are promoting, including South Carolina Sen. Tim Scott’s push for school choice, Utah Sen. Mike Lee’s desire for more state-controlled highways, Alabama Rep. Martha Roby’s push for a more flexible work week and the “tons of alternatives” to Obamacare that the party has authored over the past few years.

Pointing out that “the GOP is where the action is,” Paul reminded listeners that conservative victories will be achieved with persistence.

“I saw it with my budget, he said. “When I introduced it in 2008, I had just eight co-sponsors. The political pros told everyone to stay away. Then the Tea Party members got elected, and now the House has passed it three years in a row. That’s how it always is – You fight it out. You figure out what works. You come together. Then you win.”

Ryan also addressed the growing concerns that the Republican Party is caught in a “civil war,” saying he doesn’t see a great divide in the party but rather “creative tension.” He noted that disagreements generally haven’t been over policies, but instead over tactics.

“We’re developing an agenda—a modern, pro-growth, principled agenda for our party. We are going to show the country there’s a better way,” he said.