Nicole Elliott to Holland & Knight

With help from Noah Weiland, Cogan Schneier and Brianna Gurciullo

H&K NABS ELLIOTT: Nicole Elliott, former IRS senior adviser for the Affordable Care Act, joined Holland & Knight as a partner in its public policy & regulation group. She was a key liaison with the Treasury Department and HHS, as well as the IRS point of contact for Congress on the law for Hill staff. She was previously a trial attorney in the Justice Department's Tax Division.

Story Continued Below

Holland & Knight's tax clients include GM, Comcast and the American Forest & Paper Association. “No one has more knowledge of the Affordable Care Act than Nicole, and we are thrilled that she has decided to join our firm,” Gerry Sikorski, the head of the firm's government section, said in a statement. “She will be of particular value in helping our clients navigate the nearly 50 tax provisions of the law, including the Cadillac tax, the employer reporting provision and the employer mandate, the health insurer provider fee, the branded prescription drug fee and the medical device excise tax, which affect not only every individual in the country, but also the majority of employers, health insurance providers, charitable hospitals, plan administrators and businesses in a variety of industries.”

The McCormick Group's Ivan Adler assisted with the placement.

YOU THINK WE NEED ONE MORE? Navient Solutions, the student lender in the CFPB's sights, hired another lobbyist: former Newt Gringrich aide Ed Kutler. The company already retained Mercury, Empire Consulting Group, Van Scoyoc Associates, Nixon Peabody and District Economics Group, and spent $410,000 on lobbying last quarter.

HAPPY WEDNESDAY! Honestly, those raw, spoiling steaks looked gross. Must be because they were not real Trump steaks. Trump steaks would have been beautiful. Sad!

Now accepting tips only in the form of Trump tweets, but the address is the same: iarnsdorf@politico.com.

HE'S GONNA NEED IT: The Podesta Group is holding a breakfast fundraiser tomorrow for Sen. Mark Kirk (R-Ill.), "the most endangered Republican in the country." The invitation names Peggy Binzel, Jim Dyer, Kimberley Fritts, Randall Gerard, Josh Holly, Matthew Johnson, Rachelle Johnson, Lauren Maddox, David Marin, Riley Moore, David Morgenstern, Amy Pellegrino, Mike Quaranta, Stephen Rademaker and Missi Tessier. The bipartisan powerhouse held similar events this year for Reps. Joe Heck (R-Nev.) and Erik Paulsen (R-Minn.), Sens. Ron Johnson (R-Wis.) and Orrin Hatch (R-Utah), and both the NRSC and NRCC.

‘AD’VANTAGE: The American Action Network kicked off an ad campaign lambasting the Obama administration’s planned cuts to Medicare Advantage, reports Pro Health Care’s Dan Diamond. The $500,000 campaign started with ads on CNN, MSNBC and Fox News during last night’s election coverage. Targeted ads are on the way — the group will run critical ads against Reps. Rick Nolan (D-Minn.) and Jan Schakowsky (D-Ill.) for their “silence” on the issue. Positive ads will run in the districts of Sen. Pat Toomey (R-Pa.) and Reps. Ryan Costello (R-Pa.), John Moolenaar (R-Mich.), Tim Walberg (R-Mich.) and Bob Dold (R-Ill.). http://politi.co/1QmvbhP

FEELING THE BERN: The Center for Public Integrity reports nearly two dozen registered lobbyists have given to Bernie Sanders’ presidential campaign, despite the senator’s repeated attacks on the government influence industry. Lobbyists at groups including the National Cannabis Industry Association, International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers and National Mining Association have donated to Sanders’ campaign. http://bit.ly/1TL6KQc

ROOM SERVICE: Eighty hotel industry leaders are gathering at the Hay-Adams today for the American Hotel & Lodging Association’s first Leadership Summit. Participating companies include Marriott, Wyndham, Omni, InterContinental, Carlson Rezidor, Starwood, Loews, Fairmont, Montage Hotels & Resorts, Best Western, Interstate Hotels & Resorts, Pebblebrook Hotel Trust, FelCor Lodging Trust, B.F. Saul Company Hospitality Group, Host Hotels & Resorts, LaSalle Hotel Properties, Ashford Hospitality Trust, and RLJ Lodging Trust. They'll hear from Sens. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.), Johnny Isakson (R-Ga.), Steve Daines (R-Mont.) and Brian Schatz (D-Hawaii).

MAKE DEMOCRACY GREAT AGAIN: Common Cause's conference,"Blueprint for a Great Democracy," at the NEA, began Tuesday and continues today. Topics include the Supreme Court, criminal justice reform, campaign finance reform, the Flint water crisis, big data and privacy, voting rights, redistricting, and environmental protection, with appearances from Edward Snowden (via Google Hangouts), The Washington Post’s Jonathan Capehart, Norm Ornstein, Caroline Fredrickson of the American Constitution Society, Gara LaMarche of the Democracy Alliance, Walter Olson of the Cato Institute, Common Cause President Miles Rapoport, The Intercept’s Dan Froomkin, and Maryland State Sen. Jamie Raskin.

FLOWER POWER: The Colombian Embassy and the Association of Colombian Flower Exporters marked International Women’s Day Tuesday by delivering bouquets to 250 prominent women in Washington, including Michelle Obama, Jill Biden, Supreme Court Justices Elena Kagan, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Sonia Sotomayor and Attorney General Loretta Lynch.

ADVOCACY GAP: The All in Together Campaign wants to help more women contact public officials, teaming up with Quorum Analytics to create a homepage where they can write, call or tweet at their lawmakers or sign petitions. (h/t 316 Group)

FED GOVERNOR GIVES TO CLINTON: In a legal but unusual move, Federal Reserve Board Gov. Lael Brainard gave $750 to presidential candidate Hillary Clinton’s campaign, Bloomberg reports. Brainard has family ties to Clinton — her husband Kurt Campbell served as assistant secretary for east Asian and Pacific affairs for the then-secretary of state. Still, Senate Banking Committee Chairman Richard Shelby (R-Ala.) said Brainard’s contributions “validate” his concerns about letting one president nominate every Fed board member. http://bloom.bg/24OkfC0.

NEW PAC REGISTRATIONS:

Black-Brown PAC (Independent expenditure-only committee — unauthorized)

Conservatives Unite for Marco Rubio 2016 Super PAC (Independent expenditure-only committee — unauthorized)

Fund for Progress PAC (Independent expenditure-only committee — unauthorized)

NEW LOBBYING REGISTRATIONS:

9b Group, Inc.: National Watershed Coalition

Arnold & Porter LLP: AT&T Services, Inc.

Bay Bridge Strategies, Inc.: Bloom Energy

Bay Bridge Strategies, Inc.: Plug Power

Bramer Group LLC: MSI-Defense Systems US, Inc.

Covington & Burling LLP: Kearney & Company, P.C.

Jochum Shore & Trossevin PC: New Venture Fund

Peck Madigan Jones: Bay Bridge Strategies (on behalf of Bloom Energy)

Peck Madigan Jones: Bay Bridge Strategies (on behalf of Plug Power)

The Franklin Partnership: Higgins & Associates

The Kutler Group: Navient Solutions

Thorn Run Partners: Radiology Business Management Association (RBMA)

Van Heuvelen Strategies, LLC: Citizens for Responsible Energy Solutions

Wiley Rein LLP: Homeowners Against Land Takings, LLC

NEW LOBBYING TERMINATIONS:

Mehlman Castagnetti Rosen & Thomas, Inc.: Marathon Pharmaceuticals, LLC

Mehlman Castagnetti Rosen & Thomas, Inc.: American Trucking Associations

Mehlman Castagnetti Rosen & Thomas, Inc.: American Catalog Mailers Association

TERMINATIONS — NO ACTIVITY:

Commonwealth Strategic Partners, LLC: The Bunker

Capitol Solutions: The Wireless Broadband Coalition (WBC)

Mehlman Castagnetti Rosen & Thomas, Inc.: Connect 4 Strategies, LLC (on behalf of Mast Therapeutics, Inc.)

Mehlman Castagnetti Rosen & Thomas, Inc.: National Restaurant Association

** A message from the National Retail Federation: Retail is more than great products, or the sound of a cash register. More than a storefront, or a website. It’s working together as a community, creating the things people want, today. It’s the smile at the end of every transaction and the effort and innovation that customers don’t see. Retail businesses – 98% of which are small businesses – are at the heart of many towns and neighborhoods nationwide. That’s why when retail thrives, communities thrive. Think you know retail? Think again: http://bit.ly/this_is_retail #thisisretail **

A previous version misstated Rep. Erik Paulsen's party.