This article is part of a series that examines predictions about the future. We’ve explored predictions about what technologies could be developed by 2025 with gigabit Internet, as well as 2004 predictions about the state of cyber security and online voting in 2014. If you want to discuss this series with us and potentially be included in a future article, join the U.S. News Futurology Facebook group.

Of all the areas experts made predictions about in a 2004 survey from the Pew Internet Project about how the Internet would change the world by 2014, health and medicine had the most room to improve people’s lives. Still, experts agree health hasn’t seen the changes they hoped for in the last decade.

If health was behind 10 years in 2004, we still haven’t caught up in 2014. Projections for 2025 look similar to what analysts thought would already be commonplace by now. Are we finally ready for telemedicine and other innovations, or will the future prove those predictions “over imagined” as well?

Health system change 2004 prediction: In 10 years, the increasing use of online medical resources will yield substantial improvement in many of the pervasive problems now facing healthcare—including rising healthcare costs, poor customer service, the high prevalence of medical mistakes, malpractice concerns, and lack of access to medical care for many Americans.

Almost 40 percent of survey respondents agreed with the prediction. When respondents ranked industries they thought would experience the most change, medicine and health care ranked fourth, outranked only by news organizations and publishing, education and workplaces.

While the Affordable Care Act has changed the health care landscape, many of these problems still exist: health costs continue to climb, many still don’t have access to health care, medical errors may be the third-leading cause of death in the United States and defensive medicine driven by malpractice concerns is still prevalent, increasing costs even more.

Charlie Firestone, the executive director of the Aspen Institute Communications and Society Program, was involved with the 2004 survey. Then, he predicted: “Public health has the potential to change the most with the widespread dissemination of public health information via the Internet (and eventually to the mass media), the earlier detection of the spread of communicable diseases, and the ability to treat people remotely – all increasing significantly in the next decade.”

Some technologies have taken advantage of the troves of data available online to supply information to public health officials. Most notably, Google Flu Trends used big data analytics to track the flu but has been off (putting it mildly) for several years. Recently, officials have used social media data to trace food poisoning to the restaurants responsible. These are just the beginning stages of the technologies Firestone imagined in 2004.

Americans have greater access to health information now than they did in 2004; that much is indisputable. The question is, has that information made a difference?

Take the Ebola crises: We have more information about the Ebola epidemic now than we would have had 10 years ago. We can plot cases on a map. We know the estimated number of cases. We know the symptoms. We know the faces of the Americans infected and what kind of dogs they have. Still, one in four Americans believe Ebola can be spread through the air, according to a recent survey. When an Ebola-infected man who had traveled to the U.S. from Liberia complained of symptoms and a high fever arrived in a Dallas hospital, no alarm bells sounded and hospital staff sent him home.

Technologists have long heralded the benefits of telemedicine. With the rapid development of cell phones, cable television, computers and now mobile technology, they’ve boldly predicted that telemedicine is coming. Thus far, however, we’re still waiting for progress to be made on a large scale.

Internet speeds and connections are a barrier, especially in remote areas. At the same time, medical culture is slow to change, and many doctors are hesitant to treat patients without face-to-face interaction. Yet with the spread of electronic health records and a new crop of doctors that grew up with the Internet, some say we’ve reached the tipping point, according to Dr. Ted Eytan, Kaiser Permanente’s physician director.