Topics: Books, Chemistry, Editor's Picks, Mark Miodownik, Must-Do, Nonfiction, Physics, Science, Stuff Matters, What to Read, Entertainment News

There’s a famous scene in the 1967 film “The Graduate,” in which a middle-aged businessman informs the movie’s title character, Benjamin Braddock, that he has “just one word” of advice for the presumably enterprising young man: “Plastics.” The scene is meant to convey the vapidity of the adult world that Benjamin is expected to join; what could be more degraded and fake than plastic? But the joke is on Benjamin and the film’s creators, because not only are the businessman and his cohort plastic, but so is everyone else in the film, including Benjamin and the drippy young woman he runs off with in the end. All of them exist thanks to celluloid. If not for plastic, there would be no “The Graduate.”

Along with plastic, here are some of the other things Mark Miodownik’s new book, “Stuff Matters: Exploring the Marvelous Materials That Shape Our Man-made World,” celebrates: concrete, glass, porcelain, paper, graphite (aka pencil lead) and stainless steel. But if all this reminds you overmuch of another tedious shopping expedition to Staples, wait a sec. Before you click away to some story about a feckless celebrity’s Twitter gaffes, know also that “Stuff Matters” makes the seemingly banal objects of our everyday lives into an endless source of wonder, dreams and possibility. Miodownik may start out with bricks and coffee mugs, but by the time he’s done, he’s thrilled his readers with invisibility cloaks, bionic human limbs, exploding billiard balls and an elevator to outer space.

Miodownik is a materials scientist and a professor of materials and society at University College of London, which seems a rather unfair hoarding of talents, since he also writes a splendid sentence and communicates the often recondite basics of his discipline with enviable ease. “Gold is the full-fat cream of the metal world,” he tosses off at one point. Indeed it is. His description of the small delight of a brown paper bag — “it comes out first in its flat-pack condition, but then its bottom is pushed out and it makes that glorious sound of thunder as the concertinaed paper sides are deployed into their upright positions” — is positively Updikean. In the course of this wide-ranging little book, Miodownik becomes a sort of Bill Buford of molecules.

“Stuff Matters” also serves as an introduction to the fringes and furtherest reaches of the material world, including its man-made cutting edges. There are probably other books where you can learn that, thanks to the discoveries of deep-sea explorers, scientists have devised a form of living, self-healing concrete containing tiny organisms that excrete calcite, a mineral constituent of concrete, whenever they are exposed to the outside environment. (Good for maintaining inaccessible structures like bridges and the linings of nuclear reactors.) They’ve also devised a “textile version of concrete” that can be rolled out, arranged and finally dampened to make it assume a rigid form. (Good for slapping up quick shelters in the aftermath of a disaster.) Some new forms of concrete can even be taught to purify air.

Still other writers may tell you how samurai swords came to be “ten times stronger and sharper than other swords” or what a raw cocoa bean tastes like or that the pure glass at the center of a decorative scarab found on the mummy of King Tut was incredibly rare in the ancient world and produced by lightning or that the biggest diamond known to humanity is a planet in the constellation of Serpens Cauda and five times the size of Earth.

You can no doubt find other (if not more bewitching) descriptions of an outlandish substance called aerogel, invented nearly a century ago but still something not many people get the chance to see in person, let alone touch. “There is no weight to it that you can perceive,” Miodownik writes after holding a block, “and its edges fade away so imperceptibly that it is impossible to see where the material stops and the air begins. Add to this its ghostly blue color and it really is like holding a piece of sky in your hand.” However, I challenge you to find all these and many additional wonders between the covers of a single book. Scientists growing a human windpipe in a laboratory! Graphene, “the thinnest, strongest, stiffest material in the world,” and so conducive of electricity that it may in time be used to bring the touch-sensitivity of an iPhone screen to “whole objects and even buildings”!