Donald Trump speaks during a news conference at the Trump International Hotel in Washington this month. (Jim Watson/Agence France-Presse via Getty Images)

Each week, In Theory takes on a big idea in the news and explores it from a range of perspectives. This week, we’re talking about presidential policymaking. Need a primer? Catch up here.

Justin S. Vaughn is an associate professor of political science in the School of Public Service at Boise State University. He co-wrote “Czars in the White House: The Rise of Policy Czars as a Presidential Management Tool.”

Recently, elite concern over what a Donald Trump presidency would entail has expanded to include fretting over the qualifications and beliefs of those on his recently announced list of foreign policy advisers.

That nervous observers may now be as concerned about the potential consequences of Trump’s advisers as they are of Trump himself sitting behind the Resolute desk in the Oval Office reflects the central reality — and irony — of the contemporary American presidency: Although the president is arguably the highest-profile figure in national and global politics, the individuals who surround him wield immeasurable power, in some cases eclipsing the presidents they serve.

[Strong presidencies may threaten democracy. Luckily, we don’t have one.]

This is not a new trend. For decades, power has been shifting from Cabinet departments to the White House itself, ever since the creation of the Executive Office of the presidency in 1939, which exists to provide the president policy and management advice. Today, the staffers who run the White House fulfill many of the responsibilities that Cabinet secretaries once did, including developing domestic, national security and trade policy and providing legal advice to the president.

For a brief period at the start of Barack Obama’s presidency, the alleged growth in power of a subset of these staffers – colloquially known as “czars” – was a subject of controversy, resulting in congressional hearings and much hand-wringing over the potentially unconstitutional and undemocratic nature of such staff. Rep. Steve Scalise (R-La.), currently House majority whip, has arguably been the most active legislator focused on identifying and responding to the potential threat many feel czars present. Although my own research suggests much of this fear (and the corresponding rhetoric) is overblown, it underscores the reality that today’s presidency is much, much more than the president.

The president today is arguably more of a manager than ever before, overseeing thousands of staffers and millions of bureaucrats. Sure, the president generally sets the White House’s agenda, chooses many of the individuals tasked with achieving it and ultimately serves as what George W. Bush called The Decider. (Or, if you prefer, as Harry Truman suggested, the president remains where the buck stops.) But what they are not is deeply involved in the minutiae of the policy proposals they attempt to get through Congress, or even many of the unilateral policy actions such as executive orders, signing statements and memoranda that the White House routinely issues.

Instead, a great deal of what is included in these bills and actions comes not only from the president’s chosen advisers, but also from relevant government agencies, think tanks, private industry and previous versions of failed legislation. One recent example, of course, is the influence that the Massachusetts health-care system had on the development of what eventually became the Affordable Care Act. Similarly, when the Carter administration decided to work on welfare reform matters in the late 1970s, a great deal of the input about what should be pursued came from the relevant government agencies themselves, as that was where the policy experts were located.

[Imagine there’s no Congress]

In fact, research I’ve conducted with José Villalobos and Julia Azari shows that when the president stresses the influence that bureaucrats and policy experts have had on a policy the White House is pushing, the legislation is more likely to pass than if they instead emphasize that a bill is a priority of the president, that it is something popular with the public, or even that the bill is the result of bipartisan cooperation.

This, of course, raises an important question about democratic accountability. If presidents are not deeply involved in the details of the policy initiatives they push and pursue, but rather unelected staff, bureaucrats and outside interests are, does this present a problem of legitimacy? The easy and immediate answer might be yes, but another perspective is that presidential reliance on staff, bureaucrats and other constituencies provides another check on just how much a president can accomplish. An extra-constitutional check, to be sure, but one not altogether inconsistent with the separation-of-powers model that James Madison and his fellow Framers embedded within the Constitution.

This should provide some amount of solace to the population of pundits, policy wonks, Republican establishment apparatchiks and global threat analysts terrified by a potential Trump administration. The presidency as an institution is far more constrained than is popularly understood, and even as iconoclastic and unorthodox as Trump’s approach to presidential leadership could end up being, the havoc that could be wreaked would likely be quite compartmentalized.

Explore these other perspectives:

H. W. Brands: Don’t trust presidential candidates who can’t trust themselves

Mark J. Rozell and Mitchel A. Sollenberger: Policy czars already have too much power. Trump would make that worse.