IF WORDS LIKE PRIMARY, DEBATE AND ELECTION CONFUSE THE HECK OUT OF YOU, YOU’RE NOT ALONE. LEARNING HOW POLITICS WORK IS NOT AN EASY TASK. HERE AT COLLEGE TIMES, WE WANT OUR READERS TO BE IN THE KNOW. THAT’S WHY WE’VE COMPILED THE MOST IMPORTANT INFORMATION FROM THE 2016 PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN THAT YOU NEED TO KNOW. FROM CANDIDATES TO CAUCUSES, WE’VE GOT YOU COVERED.

THE CANDIDATES

THE REPUBLICANS

TED CRUZ

Who is he? Texas Senator

Age: 45

Background: He was born in Calgary, Canada, but his hometown is Houston, Texas. Since his mother was born in the United States, he is eligible for presidency. He has graduated from Princeton University and Harvard Law School. Cruz became the first Hispanic man to win a presidential caucus in February 2016. He is also known for that time he filibustered trying to defund Obamacare and caused a government shutdown in 2013.

Platform: He thinks states should have their own definitions of what marriage means, wants to restore economic growth to bring back jobs, doesn’t see climate change as a huge concern, says women have the right to choose, but wants to protect every life.

Who’s on his side? Die-hard conservatives

Memorable Quote: “If standing for liberty and standing for the Constitution make you a wacko bird, then you can count me a very proud wacko bird.”

JOHN KASICH

Who is he? Governor of Ohio

Age: 64

Background: He’s from Westerville, Ohio and graduated from Ohio State University. As an 18-yearold freshman, he wrote to President Nixon asking to meet and speak with him and the president agreed. He has served nine terms as a member of the United States House of Representatives and was also a commentator on Fox News and host of “Heartland with John Kasich.”

Platform: In favor of background checks for guns, wants to give immigrants who are already in the United States citizenship and establish a guest worker program, accepts the Supreme Court ruling on gay marriage and believes climate change is real—but doesn’t want people to lose work because of it.

Who’s on his side? White-collar Republicans

Memorable Quote: “We’ve got to unite our country again, because we’re stronger when we are united and we are weaker when we are divided.”

MARCO RUBIO

Who is he? Florida Senator

Age: 45

Background: He’s a Cuban-American American from Miami, Florida and graduated from the University or Florida and the University of Miami School of Law. His parents were both Cuban immigrants who came to the United States in 1956.

Platform: He wants to see an alternative to student loans to keep students out of debt, wants to modernize illegal immigration, believes in pro-life unless rape or incest, believes marriage should be regulated by the states.

Who’s on his side? Younger male voters

Memorable Quote: “The American Dream is a term that is often used but also often misunderstood. It isn’t really about becoming rich or famous. It is about things much simpler and more fundamental than that.”

DONALD TRUMP

Who is he? Businessman and TV Personality

Age: 70

Background: He was born in Queens, New York and graduated from the Wharton School of Finance at the University of Pennsylvania with a degree in economics. His wealth comes from becoming president of his father’s firm (now called The Trump Organization) and establishing his brand with hotels, golf courses, casinos and more. We’ve seen him on “The Apprentice,” “Home Alone 2” and many other shows and films.

Platform: He wants to build a wall between Mexico and the U.S. and ban Muslims from entering the country, expand treatment for people with mental health issues and is pro-life except in cases of rape, incest and health of the mother.

Who’s on his side? A big portion are conservatives without college degrees

Memorable Quote: “We will have so much winning if I get elected that you may get bored with winning.”

THE DEMOCRATS

HILLARY CLINTON

Who is she? Former Secretary of State

Age: 69

Background: Widely known as the former first lady during Bill Clinton’s time in office. She is from Park Ridge, Illinois and graduated from Wellesley College where she was the first student to deliver the commencement address. She was also United States Senator from New York from 2001 to 2009 and United States Secretary of State from 2009 to 2013.

Platform: She is on board with Obama when it comes to climate change, believes women have the right to choose, supports Obamacare, but she wants to do more with the cost issues.

Who’s on her side? The Democratic Party

Memorable Quote: “If a country doesn’t recognize minority rights and human rights, including women’s rights, you will not have the kind of stability and prosperity that is possible.”

BERNIE SANDERS

Who is he? Vermont Senator

Age: 75

Background: He was born in Brooklyn, New York and graduated from the University of Chicago with a degree in political science. He is running as a Democrat, but is the longest-serving Independent in United States congressional history.

Platform: Raising the minimum wage to $15/hour, voted for Obamacare, but wants everyone to have coverage, believes women have the right to control their own bodies, plans to bring free tuition to colleges and universities.

Who’s on his side? Extreme Democrats and very young voters

Memorable Quote: “If a financial institution is too big to fail, it is too big to exist.”

IMPORTANT DATES COMING UP

March 10 – Republican Debate: The 11th debate candidates that are left before the big states head to the polls.

March 15 – Florida Primary: It’s Florida’s turn to vote. This primary can decide who wins the nomination.

March 15 – Ohio Primary: Obama won during this primary in 2012. Don’t underestimate its power.

March 15 – North Carolina Primary: This swing state will have us all on edge. All eyes on North Carolina.

March 22- Arizona Primary: Although this isn’t always such a huge deal nationally, it is ‘Zonies’ chance to have their say before November.

July 18-21 – GOP National Convention: Republicans will be celebrating their top candidate in Cleveland, Ohio.

July 25-28 – DEM National Convention: The Democrats will also be nominating their candidate who’s in the run for president in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

November 8 – Election Day: It’s officially the Tuesday right after the first Monday in November, aka Election Day. Get ready for the new POTUS.

POLITICS DEFINED

Polls: The practice of voting in an election (in this case, the POTUS election).

Debate: This is where all the candidates come together to discuss specific topics and opposing arguments.

Caucus: A meeting of supporters for a specific political party.

Primary (Election): This election narrows down the candidates before an election for office.

Swing State: A state where the Republican and Democratic candidates can both win votes because the amount of support is very similar.