China’s Communist government has tightened its control over the Internet so much recently that businesses, researchers and ordinary people are finding it hard to complete basic and innocuous tasks, like placing ads on websites, sharing documents and reading technical documents. It seems the government of President Xi Jinping is so determined to crack down on dissent that it is even willing to stifle commerce and scientific research.

Government censorship has been a fact of life in China for many years. But the country has imposed even more burdensome controls on the Internet in recent months by blocking online libraries, text messaging applications and cloud computing services, including those provided by American companies like Google.

For example, the government has made it very hard to use web services that were previously available, like Google Drive, which many businesses use to share documents among employees. And virtual private networks that allow employees to log on to their corporate servers remotely have also come under attack. These restrictions follow on the Chinese government’s efforts to block Google’s search engine and some Western news sites, including The New York Times.

Groups that monitor Chinese censorship say the intensified clampdown is part of the policy unveiled in a speech Mr. Xi gave to propaganda officials in August 2013, a few months after he took charge, in which he described the Internet as a “battleground” on which the Communist Party “must not be marginalized.” Losing control over public opinion, especially among young people, has been a serious fear. Mr. Xi’s latest effort against the Internet and the media is also about consolidating his power in the party.

The tougher line will certainly make it harder for foreign companies to do business in China — one American executive told The Times the new controls were “a frustrating and annoying drain on productivity.” But multinational businesses can work around these restrictions by, for example, moving some executives outside China, as companies like General Motors have done recently.

Most Chinese people and businesses, however, cannot easily get around these controls. They will have a harder time getting access to information stored on foreign computer servers or communicating with people outside China.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

There has always been tension between pursuing economic development and maintaining the party’s control over how people communicate with one another and with outsiders. It is only getting worse.