Amid a sea of rainbows, booths and people Saturday at Denver PrideFest, a chalk-covered road pointed to family-fun activities.

A small petting zoo, which included ponies and a turtle, was on one side of 14th Avenue at Broadway, while the other side featured tables replete with markers, crayons, paper flags and ribbons meant to create decorations for Saturday’s kids’ parade — or just for fun.

The kids’ parade has been going on for at least five years, and this year, Frontier Airlines has joined as a sponsor.

The coloring supplies and decorations, donated by the airline, were for children to decorate their scooters and bikes, said Caree Lulofs of Frontier.

“If they don’t have wheels,” she said, they could make flags to wave.

Denver PrideFest is produced by the Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual & Transgender Community Center of Colorado.

Lulofs gave credit to the Frontier and festival volunteers for making the family center and kids’ parade happen. “There are lots of people helping to make sure the kids have a good time,” she said.

Sarah Deveau-Running said Saturday’s parade marked her 2½-year-old daughter’s first time in the event. Deveau-Running’s family and the church she works for have participated in the festival’s main parade — scheduled for Sunday morning — many times.

Deveau-Running said her girl knows that when parade time comes, she gets to wear a tutu.

The kids’ parade began at noon in front of the main stage at Civic Center park. Participants walked through and around the park and ended up at the event’s family-fun center.

On Saturday morning, the “Big Gay 5K” kicked off the annual two-day festival with three times as many participants as last year’s.

The rest of the day was dedicated to families.

“Today is about having fun with all families,” said Rex Fuller of the GLBT center. “But especially those in the GLBT community.”

Denver PrideFest, which has been going on for 39 years, says it is the third-largest free-admission such festival in the country. Organizers expect attendance for the weekend to reach 325,000 people.

Fuller said this year’s festival has 30 sponsors, the most ever. The festival also sold out its 250 vendor booths 10 days earlier than last year’s.

The CoorsLight PrideFest Parade — which organizers call the seventh-largest such parade in the U.S. — begins at Cheesman Park at 9:30 a.m. Sunday and ends at Civic Center.