Wright & Filippis, Binson's diversify under health care reform

Rochester Hills-based Wright & Filippis Inc. has sold several lines of business, has acquired two medical supply companies and is diversifying into other business lines as the 70-year-old family company continues to adjust to changes under the Affordable Care Act and Medicare's competitive bidding process.



Despite a loss of Medicare revenue the past several years, Wright & Filippis has maintained same-store annual revenue of about $121 million with 37 offices and 625 employees in Michigan and Ohio. It also operates six other medical supply offices with 45 employees in South Carolina and North Carolina.



The geographic diversity is due in part to the acquistion this year of North Charleston, S.C.-based Carolina Orthotics & Prosthetics. The company bolstered local operations in 2011 with the purchase of Livonia-based Michigan Orthopedic Services.



"We are looking into other areas of the U.S. to expand our line," said CEO Anthony J. (AJ) Filippis Jr. "We want to become involved in complex rehabilitation, improved accessibility for people in their homes and develop our case manager program."



With Michigan expanding its Medicaid program to more than 475,000 patients beginning April 1, Filippis said the company, which specializes in prosthetics, orthotics, respiratory care and home medical equipment, stands to grow.



In an effort to capitalize on its home medical equipment experience, Filippis said the company decided to start a new case management business line to help hospitals, physicians and accountable-care organizations improve their care of at-home patients.



"We are telling (accountable-care organizations, hospitals and physicians) to give us the patient's name and let us manage those patients at no cost to them," Filippis said. "We can reduce costs, readmissions and track outcomes."



Center Line-based Binson's Home Health Care Centers Inc. also is launching a new company, AssuraScript, to case manage patients it supplies with pharmaceutical medications, said COO Ken Fasse.



Pharmacists will follow up with patients at home to make sure they are taking the medications and to monitor possible side-effects, he said. Doctors will be notified of their patients using Binson's electronic medical tracking system.



"We are positioning the company to work with organized systems of care, ACOs and physicians we work with to be the eyes and ears of the physicians," Fasse said. "We want to expand this program statewide with our partners."