After three years and three open enrollment periods, the navigators trained to help people in West Virginia enroll in health insurance coverage through the Affordable Care Act gathered to talk about the successes and problems that they faced in 2016.

The West Virginia Primary Care Association, the WV Healthy Start Navigator Program and West Virginians for Affordable Health Care had an ACA enrollment debriefing for the third year in a row on Tuesday in Charleston. The coalition, which had a similar event in Morgantown earlier this year, invited those whose work is helping folks enroll in Medicaid or individual marketplace plans to share their experiences with regional and national partners.

Joanne Grossi, the Region III director for U.S. Health and Human Resources, as well as Rachel Linstead Goldsmith, the regional director for Enroll America, were on hand to answer questions about this year’s enrollment period, which ended on Jan. 31.

Sherri Ferrell, the chief operating and financial officer for the West Virginia Primary Care Association, said this year, many of the problems navigators were reporting were “in the weeds,” and the major problems with enrollment had been cleared up from earlier enrollment periods.

Several navigators noted that the website used to enroll in individual coverage, healthcare.gov, was much improved over previous years, but that some still encountered problems. One navigator said that account passwords for healthcare.gov tend to expire between enrollment periods, which could cause problems if too many people fail to reset their passwords on their own and have to call for assistance. Another described the problem of trying to enroll a minor who was not living their family but was not legally emancipated from them.

“We’re really in the weeds now — it’s a problem here, a problem there — it’s really shifting,” Ferrell said. “It’s things you can’t just look up and say ‘Oh, here’s the answer.’ It’s something you have to work through with partners.”

Nationally, nearly 5 million people gained new coverage during the Affordable Care Act’s third open enrollment period, and a total of 12.7 million signed up or were re-enrolled in coverage, according to HHS. More than 37,000 West Virginians enrolled or re-enrolled in coverage in 2016, including roughly 12,000 new enrollees. Those numbers, coupled with the more than 170,000 West Virginians enrolled in expanded Medicaid over the last three years, have made West Virginia one of the top states in reducing its uninsured population, with an estimated 116,000 uninsured remaining, according to Renate Pore, the health policy director for West Virginians for Affordable Health Care.

Of those remaining 116,000, roughly half are likely to qualify for Medicaid, Pore said, and the majority of the rest would be eligible for subsidies on an ACA-compliant plan.

“West Virginia has done really well; we’re one of the top states in terms of declining rates of uninsured, and that’s because of all the people here today who worked hard to enroll people in Medicaid and marketplace plans,” Pore said.

One of the biggest lingering concerns navigators have are the scams that have cropped up in the wake of the ACA’s health insurance mandate. Several websites advertising plans have URLs that reference phrases like “Obamacare” and offer coverage, but those plans are limited in their benefits and often come with hefty premiums. They also don’t qualify for the minimum level of coverage required by the law, which means plan holders would still be subject to the tax penalties for being uninsured.

One navigator said she had assisted a consumer who purchased a limited coverage plan that cost more than $460 a month, but that after a surgery that cost $20,000, the company only fronted $1,000 of the bill.

“We have to make a push about these bogus health-care sites disguised as healthcare.gov that aren’t providing anything,” said Terri Giles, executive director of WVAHC. “That’s just a complete ripoff, but they’re getting away with it, because people are confusing this as real.”

Another big challenge, Pore said, is eliminating the stigma from Medicaid, which she said many view as a “welfare program,” despite the fact that Medicaid was separated from the welfare program nearly 20 years ago. More than 80 percent of those enrolled in expanded Medicaid in West Virginia are working, Pore said.

“We have to change the face of Medicaid,” Giles said. “The face of Medicaid in West Virginia is not, as they said in the ’80s, that of ‘the welfare queen.’ It’s working people.”

Reach Lydia Nuzum at lydia.nuzum@wvgazettemail.com, 304-348-5189 or follow @lydianuzum on Twitter.