Scholars from other countries spent big in Colorado from 2008 to 2012, but the value of a foreign college student population extends far beyond graduation day, according to a report released Friday by the Brookings Institution.

Foreign students on F-1 visas spent $371.3 million to study and live in Colorado during the five-year period.

About $252.7 million went to tuition bills. Students spent another $118.6 million

on living expenses in the Boulder, Denver and Fort Collins-Loveland areas.

While the big spending was a key finding of the joint report by Brookings and JPMorgan Chase, the report also suggested regional leaders can better capitalize on the students’ connections to fast-growing foreign markets to increase local jobs and investment.

About two-thirds of foreign students major in science, technology, engineering, math or business and could be recruited to close critical employment gaps through the F-1 visa’s optional practice training program, report author Neil Ruiz said in an interview. OPT allows the students to work 12 to 29 months in the U.S. after they graduate.

“If a metro area has a shortage, or needs workers, why not hire ones that are located locally,” Ruiz said.

Foreign students also offer valuable knowledge of the business, cultural and societal norms of countries of origin and so can serve as a bridge to global economies, he said.

Foreign students in 118 markets across the U.S. spent $21.8 billion on tuition and $12.8 billion on living costs. However, just 45 percent of these students extended their visas and got jobs after graduation.

In metro Denver, where 6,360 students attended the University of Denver, University of Colorado Denver, Colorado School of Mines, Colorado Heights College and Colorado Technical University, 56.5 percent extended their visas.

Among the 2,442 international students who attended CU, Naropa University and Southwest Acupuncture College in Boulder, just 30.9 percent of the graduates stayed under OPT, compared with 34.4 percent of the 1,856 students from Colorado State University and Front Range Community College in Fort Collins.

The F-1 visa application requires students to express their intent to return to their home countries, CU-Boulder international program director Larry Bell said. “But many of them have a short-term goal of gaining work experience before they return home.”

Some, he said, stay on beyond the OPT program on temporary employment visas and later seek permanent residency.

“There is a bit of money to be made here and many of them continue on in the U.S.,” Bell said. “They are in high-skill fields, like engineering and other STEM disciplines.”

There were 1,879 international students at CU-Boulder last year. Bell expects about 2,000 this year and said the university hopes about 10 percent of its 30,000-student enrollment will be international in the next five years.

At DU, there were 1,417 international students last year and an additional 200 in the OPT program. About 40 percent were business majors, international program director David Gowdey said.

“They constitute almost 12 percent of our total enrollment,” Gowdey said. “And they tend to pay full tuition, so they have a pretty substantial economic impact.”

But beyond the hard dollars, the international students provide a global context on campus where some students haven’t experienced cultures different than their own, he said. This helps DU students emerge better prepared for work worldwide.

And there is an added bonus, when students return home and wind up in positions of great influence, Gowdey said. DU

has graduated people who now are foreign ministers of Iran and Chile, and leaders of major corporations, including Emirates Airlines.

“From the United States perspective, having an official that senior who has a fond memory of Denver can only be good for the United States,” he said.

Howard Pankratz: 303-954-1939, hpankratz@denverpost.com or twitter.com/howardpankratz