CRAWFORDSVILLE, Ind. (WLFI) – With two weeks until Election Day, candidates are making their final push for votes.

In the 4th Congressional District, Republican Todd Rokita is vying for a third term, facing off with Democratic candidate John Dale.

The two men attended a pair of candidate forums Tuesday night. First, each man gave a introductory speech of six minutes in a “Meet the Candidates” night at Danville High School.

About an hour later, they went head-to-head in a debate at Crawfordsville High School in an event sponsored by the League of Women Voters.

The debate showcased the differences between the candidates on a variety of issues before about 75 people.

The audience asked the men more than a dozen questions on topics like deficit reduction, size of government, the Affordable Care Act and the candidates’ willingness to compromise across party lines if elected.

One of the biggest contrasts that kept coming up was on topics like climate change, fossil fuels and renewable energy.

“These aren’t facts. Ninety-seven of some of the liberal scientists who were polled believe that humans are doing this,” said Rokita. “This is not settled science. Just like perhaps many of these same scientists, 97 percent perhaps, believe there is no God. But they don’t know. There’s no science on that. So scientists are like the rest of us. You can have beliefs, but that doesn’t make it science.”

Dale rebutted, “I have to go with the 97 percent of scientists, liberal and conservative scientists. If 20 percent of scientists told me some kind of soda was going to hurt my kids, I wouldn’t let my kids drink that soda. Ninety-seven percent, I have to believe in their expertise and advice.”

Another interesting contrast was when the candidates were asked to rate President Obama on a scale of one to 10.

Dale gave the president a six or seven for his support of public schools, but faulted him for being partly to blame for gridlock.

Rokita gave the president a one or two, stating the country is leaderless, citing examples like the IRS scandal and the expansion of food stamps.

The differences between incumbent and challenger were also highlighted in closing remarks.

“It’s been my humble and highest honor to be your representative. There are big issues, huge issues,” said Rokita. “There’s a fight going on for the heart and soul of this nation right now, more than I’ve ever seen it, perhaps more than you’ve ever seen it. So these decisions, which one of us you are going to have to represent the 700,000 of us are very important.”

Dale replied, “Congress’ approval rating was in the single-digits. It reached up to 16 percent now. The definition of insanity is voting the same people in and expecting different results. They’ve shown what they’re going to do in the past. If you guys are happy with that, vote for the incumbent. If you’re ready for change, vote for me.”

We’ll have a profile of both men in the District 4 race on News 18’s Weekend Report on Sunday.

Share this: Email

Print

Twitter

Facebook

Google

More

Pinterest

Like this: Like Loading...