Add Bryan Cranston, the star of TV's recent hit "Breaking Bad" and a new Broadway play about former President Lyndon B. Johnson, to Team Obamacare.

In an interview with Yahoo News “global anchor” Katie Couric, the actor called Obamacare the highlight of President Obama's legacy.

“Now’s the time to stake a claim to leave your legacy,” he encouraged Obama.

“I personally believe that his health care program is fantastic. Yes, there are problems. Anything worth while is going to go through a growing pains period. But this is his legacy and I think it’s a great one because I don’t think that basic health care should be a privilege of the rich. It should be a right to all,” said the actor.

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

What's more, Cranston said that Obama is doing the right thing in using his executive powers to push through other elements of his agenda, such as increasing the minimum wage.

Asked by Couric if Obama could learn anything from the president who followed John F. Kennedy, Cranston cheered: “I think our president is actually doing something now with the executive orders that is something Lyndon Johnson would definitely do if he ran up against a brick wall. He would just push it through, because it was something that he believed in and he knew it was the right thing for him to do.”

When talking about Obama and the president’s health insurance program, Cranston joked, “It sounds like I’m running for office.”

Couric agreed and said, “I think you may be getting a call from the White House.”

Cranston, so far not one of the Hollywood surrogates used by the White House to encourage Americans to sign up for Obamacare, quickly said, “No, no, no, I don’t want to.”

Also from the Washington Examiner Obama: protesters make me a better president President Obama told Vietnamese activists in Hanoi on Tuesday that people like them have made him a better leader. The courageous work that they do is "important everywhere, including, by the way, in the United States, where there are all sorts of activists and people who are mobilizing, [who] often times are very critical of me and don't always make my life comfortable but, ultimately, I think it's a better country and I do a better job as president because I'm subject to that accountability," Obama said. He encouraged the civil society leaders to continue pressuring their government to make reforms. "Ultimately, it's up to the Vietnamese people to determine how their society functions and the nature of the

On Broadway, he stars in “All the Way,” a play about LBJ's first year in office after the assassination of JFK and his push for passage of the Civil Rights Act.

Paul Bedard, the Washington Examiner's "Washington Secrets" columnist, can be contacted at pbedard@washingtonexaminer.com.