Maybe the Broncos are not as wimpy as advertised.

Before rallying from 11 points down to beat Miami 39-36, there was a crucial juncture Sunday when all their Super Bowl dreams could have died in a stadium where snow flurries mixed with a sprinkling of boos from a frustrated Broncos Nation.

“We didn’t panic,” Denver defensive tackle Terrance Knighton said. “One loss can ruin your NFL season if you don’t handle it the right way. But we don’t have the kind of guys in this locker room that panic.”

For the Broncos, the real foe at this game’s make-or-break moment — when Peyton Manning and his teammates walked to the line of scrimmage, facing third-and-20 at their 42-yard-line and a 21-10 deficit with only 51 seconds remaining in the second quarter — was not the Dolphins.

The real foe was all the balderdash being whispered about the Broncos that could create self-doubt: an old quarterback in slow decline, a lousy offensive line beyond repair, a team too soft to fight back when punched in the mouth.

“We’re professionals and we’re going to get criticized, no matter what we do. If we went to the store and accidentally bought brown rice rather than white rice, somebody’s going to say something about it,” said C.J. Anderson, who ran for 167 yards.

What happened when the Broncos could have folded in the face of criticism and let their season come undone was the jaw-dropping highlight of the most important drive led by Manning in 2014. Under the duress of third-and-20, receiver Emmanuel Sanders shook loose for 35-yard gain that proved to be the key play, allowing Denver to finish the first half with a touchdown drive that ignited hope a comeback would be possible.

PHOTOS: Miami Dolphins vs. Denver Broncos at Mile High

“These are the games you remember most: when you battle back, not blowing out a team, but when you battle back from a deficit and conquer,” said Sanders, who could not have gotten more open more often if the Dolphins’ secondary had stayed home in Florida.

While a much-maligned Denver offensive line rediscovered its mojo with the return of granite-hard blocker Virgil Green and the one-cut explosiveness of Anderson, everything you needed to restore faith could be seen on the final play of the third quarter: Trailing by 11 points, and needing to pick up 2 yards at the Miami 41-yard line, what did Broncos offensive coordinator Adam Gase do on fourth down?

Well, we all know what ESPN commentator and former Denver offensive lineman Mark Schlereth would have done in that same tense situation. He would have punted … on third down.

Instead, Manning approached the line of scrimmage, surveyed the Miami defense and changed the call.

“Peyton checked into a run,” insisted Anderson.

Well, truth be known, it was Gase who stayed calm as the play clock wound down and relayed a running play through the speaker inside Manning’s helmet. The quarterback took the snap and handed the football to Anderson, who ran for 20 yards.

Shortly thereafter, Manning hit Demaryius Thomas with a pass for a 5-yard touchdown play and followed up with a two-point conversion that cut Denver’s deficit to 28-25. The comeback was on. But it was the trust Gase showed in Anderson and a beleaguered offensive line on fourth down that spoke louder than any roar of approval from 76,987 fans at Sports Authority Field at Mile High.

At a juncture when the Broncos could have succumbed to a crisis of confidence, they won a tough game on heart and guts. Let us count the ways:

After never leading in a loss at St. Louis a week earlier, the Broncos came back to beat Miami, taking their first lead since Nov. 9 when Anderson scored on a 10-yard touchdown run with a tick more than five minutes remaining in the fourth quarter. Denver overcame a short field-goal attempt clanked off the upright by kicker Brandon McManus, whose job status must certainly be in doubt. In the midst of a slump by their $17.5 million quarterback, the Broncos ran to daylight, and as the sun rises Monday, they stand alone in first place of the AFC West.

“It could have been that ‘This is not our day type of mentality,’ ” said Manning, who reminded everyone in the NFL he can post a stellar 135.4 quarterback rating in a game when Denver’s offensive balance was a pure 50/50 split of 35 runs and 35 passes.

When the Broncos could have panicked, Manning said the key to the comeback was: “We had a real calm demeanor the entire game.”

Keep calm and trust No. 18.

The long, rocky road to the Super Bowl is not for wimps.

Mark Kiszla: mkiszla@denverpost.com or twitter.com/markkiszla