DCH Health System in the 2016 fiscal year will likely have a reduction of $2 million in federal funding — money meant to bolster hospitals that treat a higher percentage of low-income and non-insured patients.

Medicare continues to tighten down on supplemental disproportionate share payments by the Affordable Care Act, said Nina Dusang, DCH chief financial officer.

The DCH Health System will end the current fiscal year with $4 million less in annual disproportionate share payments to DCH, with another $2 million less expected in fiscal year 2016.

Fewer people are supposed to be uninsured because of the Affordable Care Act, which means hospitals aren't supposed to need the added payments to cover the cost of treating the underinsured or uninsured. But DCH continues to treat around the same percentage of uninsured, Dusang said. In 2014, around 7 percent of the patients at DCH were uninsured. In 2015, it was 6.5 percent.

“Though people are mandated to have insurance or face a penalty, most of the people coming through our doors without insurance are refusing assistance to explore the exchange possibilities,” Dusang said.

The increases are included in the fiscal year 2016 budget, which was approved by the DCH Health System board of directors Tuesday night.

Overall, the budget is a tight one, with no major capital projects, Dusang said.

“We are continuing to be tight this year,” she said.

The budget includes $497 million in total operating expenses, $16.4 million in routine capital expenses and $14.6 million for potential new projects for the DCH hospitals,

The major expenditures include:

- $1.6 million to replace an inpatient MRI unit at DCH Regional Medical Center

- $400,000 to replace monitors in the neonatal intensive care unit at DCH Regional and Northport Medical Center

- $350,000 to replace digital radiology equipment in the emergency department at DCH Regional.

The budget also includes a 2 percent merit pay increase for employees planned for March.

“It all depends on our financial performance at that time,” Dusang said.

All DCH full-time and part-time employees, including those at DCH Regional Medical Center, Fayette Medical Center and Northport Medical Center will be eligible. There are about 3,120 full-time and 1,600 part-time DCH employees. DCH had a similar 2 percent raise during the 2015 fiscal year.

The 2016 budget is very similar to the fiscal year 2015 budget, which had $468 million in total operating expenses, $14 million in routine capital expenses and $11.6 million for potential new projects.

The budget is larger than last year — by about $29 million. But a portion of that goes to employee raises.

Some of the cost increase also goes toward paying the increasing cost of supplies. For instance, IV saline solution has seen a 50 percent increase in pricing, Dusang said.

“This increase will cost DCH close to an additional $1 million annually just on this one product alone,” Dusang said.

There are no major construction projects planned for 2016. The budget does include some infrastructure upgrades, including new air handling units and continued face lifts to the existing medical surgery units, Dusang added.

Reach Lydia Seabol Avant at lydia.seabolavant@tuscaloosanews.com or 205-722-0222.