January 20, 2016, at 4:54 PM | By Justin Petrisek |

Felician University, a Catholic institution in Rutherford, N.J., honored pro-abortion U.S. Sen. Cory Booker of New Jersey with an award on Monday, saying Booker’s “personal mission in life … embodies the mission and values of the University's Felician/Franciscan heritage — compassion, justice and peace, and finding goodness in all God's creation.”

Booker was awarded Felician University’s 2016 Martin Luther King Jr. Legacy Award, an award “created by Felician University to honor Dr.King and to do so by recognizing individuals who strive to fulfill Dr. King's dream of equality and justice,” according to a University press release.

The University website lists “Respect for Human Dignity” as its first core value, stating that it maintains “reverence for and commitment to promoting and protecting the dignity of persons.” In honoring Booker, the former mayor of Newark, N.J., who became a U.S. Senator in 2013, the University promoted a known supporter of abortion, which the U.S. bishops have made clear, “ends the life of a child and offends God.” National Review Online went so far as to label Booker’s pro-abortion views as “Abortion Extremism.”

On his campaign website, Booker declared his support for abortion, pushed to protect the contraceptive provisions in the Affordable Care Act and condemned public defunding of Planned Parenthood. Booker also garnered a 100 percent rating by NARAL Pro-Choice America, and a zero percent rating by the National Right to Life Committee. Additionally, Booker is endorsed by the Human Rights Campaign, the nation’s largest LGBT-rights organization.

The Cardinal Newman Society reached out to Felician University President Anne Prisco’s office and University officials to explain the conflict between Booker’s views on abortion and the University’s values and Catholic identity, and how the University goes about selecting and vetting its honorees. No response was received by time of publication.

In 2004, the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops released a document requiring Catholic institutions to withhold honors and platforms from public opponents of Church teaching. The document, “Catholics in Political Life,” stipulates:

The Catholic community and Catholic institutions should not honor those who act in defiance of our fundamental moral principles. They should not be given awards, honors or platforms which would suggest support for their actions.

Yet Prisco, the first secular leader in Felician University’s history, was full of praise for the senator in the University’s statement. While she spoke about Booker using words like “life,” “opportunity” and “generations yet to come,” she failed to address the contradictory nature of honoring a pro-abortion politician at a Catholic university.

“Higher education is all about hope,” she said. “Education breeds hope for a better and healthier life—a life of opportunity, productivity, prosperity, and perhaps most important, improving the world condition for generations yet to come.”

Booker was selected for the award based upon three criteria, according to the University’s news release (emphasis added):

-An individual whose life's work reflects and promotes the University's core values—especially passion for issues related to social justice, civil rights and economic equality.

-A personal mission in life that also embodies the mission and values of the University's Felician/Franciscan heritage—compassion, justice and peace, and finding goodness in all God's creation.

-A person who compels all people to give the gift of hope.

“While it is truly humbling to be honored by Felician University today, I share this recognition with the thousands of ordinary Americans who stepped up with extraordinary courage to change the path of a nation,” Booker was quoted as saying in the University’s press release. “I applaud Felician for their tireless commitment to education, and look forward to continuing to work with great New Jersey institutions like theirs as we carry on Dr. King's legacy and strive towards the dream of a more equal and just America.”

Prisco continued to praise Booker on Twitter Monday night following the award ceremony. “@CoryBooker our @Felician community is grateful for your inspiring talk, may kindness reign! & I think u ‘rock’ too,” she tweeted.

Catholic Education Daily is an online publication of The Cardinal Newman Society. Click here for email updates and free online membership with The Cardinal Newman Society.