Brian Finch to Pillsbury Winthrop — Fogel-Bublick hired as partner at Capitol Counsel — Home care hits the Hill — NRF hosts retail execs, unveils new website

With Tarini Parti

SOURCES: BRIAN FINCH TO PILLSBURY WINTHROP: Multiple sources tell PI that Brian Finch is leaving the struggling Dickstein Shapiro. Finch is headed to Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman, where he will take his book of lobbying business with him. As of 2014, he has the American Gas Association, American Public Power Association, Edison Electric Institute, IHS, McAfee and others as clients.

Story Continued Below

Pillsbury hasn’t had a significant lobbying presence in recent years. The firm did about $360,000 in lobbying revenues in the first quarter of 2014, with 18 clients. Many reported no activity, however. The firm did not respond to a request for comment. PI also hears that Finch interviewed a few other places around town, including Manatt, Phelps & Phillips and Holland & Knight — looking around for a cybersecurity and privacy practice to head up. At least one other firm extended an offer.

FOGEL-BUBLICK HIRED AS PARTNER AT CAPITOL COUNSEL: Capitol Counsel has hired Jenn Fogel-Bublick as a partner. In her new role, Fogel-Bublick will help lead the banking and financial services practice at the firm — focusing on insurance, Dodd/Frank and housing, including government-sponsored enterprise reform. “Jenn’s addition to our team will round out our financial services practice and provide incredible value to our clients,” said Jim McCrery a partner at Capitol Counsel. “Clients will benefit from regulatory, Administrative, and bipartisan legislative expertise and advocacy as Jenn joins our team.” She comes on board from McBee Strategic, where she worked for the firm’s banking, insurance, nonprofit and trade association clients. Before joining the private sector, she spent more than seven years as counsel to the Senate Banking Committee.

GOOD TUESDAY AFTERNOON where it’s the birthday of the predecessor of the National Security Agency. On May 20, 1949, the Armed Forces Security Agency was created and given responsibility for all codebreaking activities. The NSA was later officially established — in secret — in 1952, after the AFSA was unable to fully coordinate with other intelligence services. Send lobbying news, gossip, tips and scoops to btau@politico.com. And keep up with PI on Twitter by following @ByronTau or @PoliticoPI.

HOME CARE HITS THE HILL: The Home Care Association of America and its members are in Washington this week for their annual fly-in and congressional lobbying day. In meetings with members and staff, home care industry representatives will discuss worker misclassification legislation and the impact of Affordable Care Act on home care providers.

NRF HOSTS RETAIL EXECS, UNVEILS NEW WEBSITE: The new headquarters of the National Retail Federation at 1101 New York Ave. NW is playing host to dozens of retail and business executives this week. The NRF Foundation Board of Directors and the NRF Board of Directors both will meet this week. At the NRF board meeting on Tuesday, top retail leaders are expected discuss issues like data and payment security, as well as the agenda for NRF’s legislative fly-in in July. Retail execs will also publicly unveil the newly redesigned NRF website, nrf.com. “The new site not only allows NRF to tell retail’s story to opinion leaders and legislators more effectively, but it also epitomizes the modern, innovative and constantly evolving retail landscape,” NRF President and CEO Matthew Shay said.

**A message from POWERJobs: Jobs on our radar this week: Government Affairs Analyst at Dish Network, AIEF Israel Seminars Director at AIPAC and Director of Federal Government Affairs at AFSCME. Interested? Apply to these jobs and more at www.POWERJobs.com; finally, a career site made for YOU!**

DOWNTOWNERS RAISE FOR DELAWARE RACE: A number of downtowners are hosting a fundraising reception for Sean Barney, a former Hill staffer and candidate for Delaware state treasurer. The Wednesday event will be held at Chef Geoff’s downtown and costs $50-$1,000 to attend. Listed on the host committee: Michael Breen of the Truman National Security Project, Tony Park of LMG Inc., Nathan Hake of Arnold & Porter, Josh Alloy of Proskauer Rose, Ziad Haider of White & Case, Adam Yoffie of Williams & Connolly, Giridhar Srinivasan of the World Bank, Rahul Sakhuja of the CVA Heart Institute and Arthur Plews. Barney has served as a top aide to Sen. Tom Carper and Delaware Gov. Jack Markell — both of whom served as state treasurer.

TCH HIRES DONNELLY: Michael Donnelly will join the Clearing House Association in June as a vice president of research and policy. In his new role, he will assist TCH on research and advocacy initiatives. He joins the association from the Office of Financial Research of the U.S. Department of Treasury, where he was deputy chief of staff. It’s part of an expansion push for the association, which also recently hired Sean Oblack as senior vice president of media and public affairs. The association also hired Alexey Levkov earlier this month as senior vice president, director of quantitative analytics.

INTERDIGITAL BRINGS ON STIEN: Wireless research and development company InterDigital, Inc. has hired Robert Stien as vice president of government relations and regulatory affairs. In his new role, he’ll open the company’s Washington office and work on government relations, public policy and regulatory affairs strategy for the company. Most recently, he served as vice president and general counsel for Artemis Strategies. Prior to Artemis, Stien he was director of congressional affairs for SAP America.

NONIS GOES FROM AAA TO ASCE: Via Mr. Adam Snider: Pete Nonis, AAA’s manager of congressional relations, will be leaving the group he’s been with for seven years to join the American Society of Civil Engineers. Nonis will be the senior manager of federal government relations at ASCE. “I am thankful for the opportunities given to me by AAA; my time here has been extremely gratifying. I am proud to have been associated with such a quality organization comprised of dedicated professionals who have a clear passion for serving the needs of their 53 million members,” he wrote in a note to colleagues.

ELSEWHERE IN THE INFLUENCE WORLD:

MORNING CONSULT: HEALTH, ENERGY SPENDING DOWN: The new publication Morning Consult is out with analyses of two lobbying sectors. Reporter Jon Easley notes that for the fifth consecutive year, health care lobbying is down after peaking at $554 million in 2009. And Emily Holden reports that has also slowly dwindled since 2010, falling from $3.55 billion spent in 2010 to $3.2 billion spent in 2013. Here’s their takeaways: health care: http://bit.ly/1qSg2Mp and energy: http://bit.ly/1jnmRjJ

WHITE HOUSE: NOTHING TO SEE HERE: USAT: “The White House is dismissing criticism that President Obama's weekend golf outing included a prominent Washington lobbyist. 'I think he played a game of golf,' said White House spokesman Jay Carney when asked if the Saturday foursome that included Joe O'Neill violates Obama's pledge to limit the access of lobbyists to the White House.” http://usat.ly/R4bNg3

NEW JOINT FUNDRAISING COMMITTEES (Members of the JFC):

None

NEW PAC REGISTRATIONS:

Opportunity Alliance PAC (super PAC)

NEW LOBBYING REGISTRATIONS: (Firm: Client)

Becker & Poliakoff, P.A.: MorphoTrak

Becker & Poliakoff, P.A.: Sarasota County

CSA Strategies LLC: SunConnect Corporation

NEW LOBBYING TERMINATIONS (Firm: Client (Type of Termination))

Anchor Consulting, LLC: Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital (Q1 Termination (no activity))

Anchor Consulting, LLC: KC Windustrial Company (Q2 Termination (no activity))

Hague Associates: Revision Eyewear Ltd. (Q1 Termination)

KPMG LLP: Diageo PLC (Q1 Termination)

KPMG LLP: Reed Elsevier Group PLC (Q1 Termination)

Platinum Advisors, LLC: Medivation, Inc. (Q1 Termination (no activity))

OUT TODAY — POLITICO's morning newsletter from POLITICO Pro eHealth, our forthcoming coverage area launching June 3. Electronic health records. Telemedicine. Health apps. Federal health IT. Start your day with the latest policy developments from the frontier of health care and technology. Sign up here: http://bit.ly/Qyu4lQ

**A message from POWERJobs: Tap into the power of POWERJobs for the newest job opportunities in the Washington area from the area’s top employers, including Center for Shared Services, Evolver, AIPAC, U.S. Chamber of Commerce, National Propane Gas Association and American Academy of Actuaries. Powered by names you trust — POLITICO, WTOP, WJLA/ABC-TV, NewsChannel 8 and Federal News Radio- POWERJOBS is the ultimate career site with more than 2 million job searches and nearly 17,000 applications submitted this year so far. Connect through Facebook or LinkedIn, search jobs by industry and set up job-specific email alerts using www.POWERJobs.com, the site for Washington’s top talent.**

** A message from the National Retail Federation: Retail is more than great products, or the sound of a cash register. More than a storefront, or a website. It’s working together as a community, creating the things people want, today. It’s the smile at the end of every transaction and the effort and innovation that customers don’t see. Retail businesses – 98% of which are small businesses – are at the heart of many towns and neighborhoods nationwide. That’s why when retail thrives, communities thrive. Think you know retail? Think again: http://bit.ly/this_is_retail #thisisretail **