There’s a new school in town.

Virginia College, located at 5005 50th St., is enrolling post-secondary students into its diploma and associate’s degree programs. Its first quarter of classes begins April 7.

The Lubbock location is one of a chain of 27 for-profit institutions located mostly in the southern United States. The main campus is based in Birmingham, Ala.

“When we go into a community, there has to be a need. There is a great need here,” Karina Long, president of the Lubbock location, said.

The 55,000-square-foot facility, formerly a shopping center, is open for walk-ins hoping to see the building. Eventually, the school will employ up to 125 local faculty.

The college will offer associate’s degrees and career certification in areas such as business administration, cosmetology, medical billing and coding and medical assistance. Long said more degree programs could be offered as the school grows.

According to Long, the most popular program on the other VC campuses is cosmetology, but medical coding and billing has seen a surge in popularity as insurance companies adapt to the Affordable Care Act.

“We’re not here to compete with Texas Tech,” Long said.

Unlike Tech, which targets recent high school graduates, VC’s programs are tailored toward non-traditional students who have already entered the workforce and are looking to change careers.

“We are an alternative that serves a large group of adult students who are looking for the most direct path to a new career,” reads a statement provided by VC.

The demographic varies from location to location, but Long said VC students are mostly female.

“They understand that they need the skills to qualify for a new position,” director of enrollment Dan Salehi said. “Ultimately, it’s not about what degree they want, it’s about what career they want.”

So far, only 10 students have registered for classes since enrollment began two weeks ago, but Salehi said about 140 have inquired about programs the school offers.

Salehi and Long were optimistic that more students would enroll as word spreads. VC has about 16,000 students nationwide.

The 50th Street building is equipped with its own bookstore, library, several computer labs and a mock examination room.

The Lubbock location will offer a full-service cosmetology center, open to customers, where students in the program will hone their trade. Long said other programs will feature “externships,” in which students will work at local businesses.

“We care about our students, and I seriously mean that,” Long said. “A lot of our students don’t have a good support system at home. We are that support system for them.”

The school employs financial aid specialists to help students determine a payment plan. Tuition varies according to the academic program, but Long said on average it ranges between $15,000 and $32,000 per program.

Books and uniform cost are included with tuition, Long said. Financial aid, including the FAFSA program and outside scholarships, are available to students. More options will be made available as the school grows, Long said.

Classes operates on a quarterly calendar, with academic terms lasting for a couple months during each season. The spring term lasts from early April until late June.

According to a release from the school, VC is accredited by the Accrediting Council for Independent Colleges and Schools.

blake.ursch@lubbockonline.com

• 766-8722

Follow Blake on Twitter

@BlakeUrsch_AJ