Tag-fee cuts likely — but motorists won't save much

When they return to work next spring, Florida lawmakers and Gov. Rick Scott are hoping to cut some of the motorist fees jacked up in 2009. And with the state flush with more than $840 million in surplus tax revenue, there's no lack of proposals for who else should get tax cuts — and how much.

TALLAHASSEE — Motorists may get a $12 break on their annual license tag fees and some businesses could see their taxes trimmed, depending on the outcome of a tax-cut debate in the Capitol.

Scott is campaigning for a still-undefined $500 million package. The Senate is advancing a proposal to reduce a range of vehicle registration, tag and license fees by some $240 million. That's less than one-fourth of the $1 billion increase lawmakers adopted in 2009.

Meanwhile, the House wants to cut business taxes again, and an array of lobbyists — for Realtors, utilities, cellphone companies and chains such as Publix that pay commercial-lease taxes — lined up Thursday to make their pitch for more than $4 billion in various reductions.

"We all say, 'Everyone has a cellphone,' when not everyone does have a cellphone. 'Everyone drives a car.' Not everyone drives a car," said House Finance and Tax Chairman Ritch Workman R-Melbourne, citing two consumer levies proposed for reductions.

"If I can find out a way to get a tax cut that touches everyone a little bit, that's a pretty broad stroke," he said, adding that the House package could wind up bigger or smaller than Scott's target.

The decision will also be at least partly influenced by the political calendar: House Democrats on Thursday blamed GOP lawmakers for raising motorist fees in 2009, after one speaker pointed the blame at then-Gov. Charlie Crist — who is likely to run as a Democrat in 2014 — for the hike.

"We never should have raised those fees that we did," said Rep. Jim Waldman, D-Coconut Creek.

Here's an explainer of some of the moving parts:

Q. Who will get the $500 million in proposed tax cuts?

The pot will likely be divided between regular citizens and smaller-business owners. The Senate plan right now would amount to an average $12-per-person savings from motorist fees.

Businesses could see their corporate-income-tax-rate exemption enlarged slightly — as lawmakers have done twice already for Scott. Those cuts have removed more than 90 percent of the companies paying the corporate-income tax from the rolls.

Business groups are also pressing lawmakers to cut taxes on utilities and rental-property owners, corporate-filing fees, communications services taxes and even insurance-premium breaks to help businesses pay for the phase-in of the Affordable Care Act, or "Obamacare."

Q. How would the Senate proposal affect me?

Very marginally, when you renew your vehicle registration, change vehicles or need to get replacement registration paperwork.

The Senate plan (SB 156) cuts the fee for license plates, mobile-home or validation stickers and duplicate registration certificates from $5 to $2.50.

It would also cut the service charge imposed when a vending or printer-dispenser machine is used to issue a renewal sticker for a license plate, boat or mobile home from $3 to $1.