McHenry, chief deputy House whip, disagreed and said conservative critics of Boehner forget that Republicans can't pass legislation over opposition from Democrats in Congress or President Obama.

U.S. Rep. Patrick McHenry, R-Lincoln (Photo: Special to the Citizen-Times)

REYNOLDS – An effort to remove House Speaker John Boehner is an unneeded distraction from issues like the proposed nuclear deal with Iran, 10th District U.S. Rep. Patrick McHenry said during a town hall meeting Tuesday.

"The only person who's enjoying this right now is Barack Obama," McHenry, R-Lincoln, told a crowd of about 50 people at Reynolds High School.

Eleventh District U.S. Rep. Mark Meadows, R-Jackson, last week filed a motion to remove Boehner from the speaker's job, saying he has used his position to intimidate members and has diminished Congress' power.

"Mark and I work on a number of issues together, but on this one I don't agree," McHenry said.

Asheville resident Jim MacAlpine said Republicans in Congress have let down those who sent them there, failing for instance to follow through on promises to end the Affordable Care Act.

"There was a mandate and it seems like that mandate wasn't heard," he said. "The first thing that this current Republican congress did is they kicked it down the road. … I'm tired of voting for people who say one thing and do something else."

Jane Bilello, a Henderson County resident who is a leader in the Asheville Tea Party, said the way Boehner has run the House is "corruption."

McHenry, who is chief deputy House whip, disagreed and said conservative critics of Boehner forget that Republicans can't pass legislation over opposition from Democrats in Congress or President Obama.

"In 2010 the American people gave conservatives a mandate. They gave us the House of Representatives, and who was the majority leader in the Senate? Harry Reid. … We couldn't get meaningful reform through the Senate."

And in 2012, Obama was re-elected, McHenry noted. Just blindly opposing his policies won't work, he said.

"If (congressional Republicans) get into a fight, it has to be a valiant effort where the American people" go along, he said. "You don't want the American people to say well that was dumb. It's like me getting in a bar fight with an 8-foot-tall guy."

McHenry said he had told Boehner about areas where he thinks Boehner could do better, but he sharply disagreed with Billelo's statement that Boehner is corrupt.

"There are people I disagree with on every issue but I don't think they're corrupt. I might think they're cracked in the head, but they're not corrupt," he said.

On other issues, McHenry said he:

• Opposes the Iran agreement and said continuing sanctions might lead to a better one. The importance of the American banking system would have an impact on Iran even if some allies did not go along.

"It's a bad deal and I think it should be rejected," he said.

• Favors ending federal funding for Planned Parenthood.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1SKTnzA