We've all had one.

It's that Christmas gift we want more than anything else. It's the one that we dream about at night and the thing we fervently whisper into Santa's ear after that long wait in the mall line.

For me, it was the Barbie Winnebago. As with many things, however, the Christmas dream didn't go according to plan. Santa brought the big plastic yellow doll vehicle that year but he needed a little help from my father to put it together. Tired from building a bicycle earlier in the night, the Winnebago ended up missing some of its parts and the stickers marking the bathroom and the closet were in the wrong place.

The "Barbie" logo sticker on the side was upside down. My dad said Santa was tired.

It didn't matter to me or Barbie, of course. We loved that Winnebago and played with it for years. The messed up yellow plastic doll wagon was a dream come true.

Christmas wishes are magical things, even if they don't always come work out in the way we expect. As we've learned from countless holiday movies though, it never hurts to dream.

Along those lines, we've asked elected officials, advocacy groups and non-profit organizations across Alabama to share what's on their Christmas lists. Like that Barbie Winnebago, many of these are long-desired dreams that with a little bit of work, could make things better for all.

Here are the wishes:

From Alabama Speaker of the House Mike Hubbard:

"My Christmas wish is for every single child in Alabama, regardless of their race, income, or background, to have access to a high quality education; for every parent to have the choice to obtain the best education possible for their children regardless of their zip code; and for every child who graduates from an Alabama school to have the skills and know-how necessary to fill the jobs of the future."

From Mary Ellen Judah, President of the Board of the Low Income Housing Coalition of Alabama:

"The Low Income Housing Coalition of Alabama would love to see hardworking Alabamians be able to pay rent and still be able to put food on the table. We would love for every child to have a safe place to call home. We would love for the men and women who defend our country return to safe and affordable home. We can begin to make all of these a reality by securing dedicated revenue for the Alabama Housing Trust Fund in 2015. The Alabama Housing Trust Fund has the potential to address some of our state's most pressing and persistent housing challenges and thus have a significant impact on Alabama families, Alabama communities and the state's economy. It is our hope that the people of Alabama will encourage their legislators to address the ongoing housing crisis in Alabama by securing dedicated revenue for the Alabama Housing Trust Fund in the 2015 legislative session."

From Lt. Gov Kay Ivey:

"Moving into the new year and next Legislative Session - the first of this quadrennium - it is my hope that Alabama will continue to take a strong stand against the overreach of the federal government. Now more than ever, it is up to the states to fight back unnecessary and far-reaching policies like proposed EPA regulations that are attacking the coal industry. Also, I expect we will continue to promote economic growth by empowering the individual, cultivating an environment where businesses can thrive, and getting government out of the way. I will continue my focus on strengthening our military assets by helping Alabama prepare for future BRAC efforts through the statewide coordinated strategy of the Military Stability Commission. Lastly, when it's all said and done, it is my aspiration to leave our state's affairs better than when we began."

From Tony Cooper, Executive Director of the Jimmie Hale Mission in Birmingham:

"I would like to see our country return to the foundation of Judea-Christian values and Biblical teaching that our nation was founded on."

From Frank Adams Jr., President of the A.G. Gaston Boys and Girls Club:

"Our wish as an organization is that there be a comprehensive and sustainable regional breakthrough in public transportation. Our Club could have even more impact in the lives of our community's children beyond our pick up program if there were a reliable option for them to use after school and during the summer."

From Gov. Robert Bentley:

"For my wish list this year, I would like for people to donate toys for children in Alabama's domestic violence shelters or make a donation to the Alabama Coalition Against Domestic Violence. Domestic Violence is a crisis that impacts families and neighborhoods throughout Alabama. It does not discriminate on race, wealth or status. I am honored that Dianne has chosen to help victims and their children know about the resources available to end the cycle of abuse. The donated toys we receive will be put to good use by children in domestic violence shelters here in Alabama."

From Armand DeKeyser, Executive Director of the Alabama Humanities Foundation:

"We see many of our veterans coming home from wars in Afghanistan and Iraq with special needs, where transitions back to civilian life can be particularly challenging. Our Christmas wish at Alabama Humanities Foundation is that we see support for innovative veteran programs, like our Literature and the Veteran Experience reading and discussion program, to help ease the transition. Through the use of scholars who are veterans themselves, our brave men and women are reconnecting to people with whom they can relate and making connections between their own experience and the experiences of others across time and cultures. Utilizing new knowledge and perspectives, they can renew relationships with enriched understanding and build their new lives on a stronger foundation."

From incoming Congressman Rep. Gary Palmer:

"One of the primary reasons Republicans were given the majority in the House and Senate is to repeal Obamacare. It would be a great Christmas gift for the American people, if we achieve that goal."

From the A+ Education Partnership:

"A+ would like to see continued improvement in Alabama's schools, as our state works to ensure that all students graduate college and career ready and have the opportunity to fulfill their true potential in life."

From Bill Armistead, Chairman of the Alabama Republican Party:

"What I want for Christmas is not for me but for my country. I want a return to our basic constitutional conservative values upon which our country was founded. In order for this to occur we must have principled leadership at the national level in the legislative and executive branches of government. My Christmas gift will not be delivered on Christmas Day but over a two year period of time. It will begin with the legislative branch of the federal government as members of the 114th Congress meet on January 3, 2015, to elect their leaders. The leaders they elect will take great wisdom and discernment as they will determine the direction of the country during the final two years of the Presidency of Barack Obama. The granting of the final phase of this Christmas gift will occur when Republicans nominate a constitutional conservative as our nominee for President in 2016. And, when that occurs, the gift that I want will become a reality on Nov. 8, 2016, when the nation elects a constitutional conservative Republican as the next President of the United States of America."

From the Literacy Council of Central Alabama:

"At the Literacy Council all we want for Christmas is a state where everyone reads at his or her maximum potential. That is why we are focusing on family literacy in 2015. We are hosting a series of workshops for parents and educators on dyslexia and working with partners around Central Alabama to bring the Campaign for Grade Level Reading to our area. Getting kids reading at a young age is the cure for adult illiteracy and we can do it in Alabama if we work together."

And here are some from our AL.com commenters:

"Two Southern states have passed laws that outlaws smoking in a motor vehicle with a minor present. They are Louisiana and Arkansas. Other states have too. I see it as outright neglect and worse. Smokers see it as none of my business. I say we each have a dog in the fight."

"New Revenue/Tax Increases. Collect tax from on-line sales. Everyone is buying more and more stuff on-line for cheaper and it is killing our local economy and our state."