U.S. Rep. Greg Walden coasted to victory in Oregon's sprawling 2nd District on Tuesday against political newcomer Aelea Christofferson.

In partial returns, Walden was defeating Christofferson with more than 68 percent of the vote.

Moving forward, Walden said he would spend his next term focusing on "improving access to health care," including repealing parts of the Affordable Care Act. He said he is primarily concerned with "exploding rates" for small businesses.

"They're having to cut coverage for employees and to cut their work hours because of ObamaCare," Walden said. "It's hurting the people it's intended to help."

Walden said he likes some parts of ObamaCare, such as its coverage for pre-existing conditions and an allowance that keeps dependents up to the age of 26 on their parents' policies. "But you have to repeal parts to fix it," he said.

Also, with the U.S. Senate now controlled by Republicans, Walden said he hopes to finally see passage of a bill that would open 1.4 million acres of federally owned forests in Oregon to revenue-producing harvests to fund roads and schools in struggling rural counties.

"We've passed it twice in the House but the Senate has put up a road block to its passage," he said. "That changes tonight."

He said he was ready to immediately put the campaign behind him to enact "policies that will grow jobs, root out wasteful spending, improve access to health care, and stand up for our veterans. I look forward to doing my part and deeply appreciate the strong support I've received in this election."

Walden, the only Republican in Oregon's congressional delegation, has built a reputation for playing close attention to his vast district – which is bigger than any state east of the Mississippi – while climbing the leadership ladder in the House.

Walden has been particularly attentive to his district's agriculture and timber interests while having a voting record that has caused some consternation among tea party conservatives.

The National Journal ranked Walden, 57, as the 169th most conservative House member in 2013, putting him to the left of more than two-thirds of the chamber's Republicans.

As chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee, which oversees GOP campaigns, he attracted anonymous grumbling in a Politico story last week that suggested he may be "too nice" for the job.

Yet Walden made headlines this year by calling for a federal investigation of the Cover Oregon mess -- he has termed it "the data equivalent of the Columbus Day Storm" -- and ruffled feathers last year by voting against the budget deal that ended a partial government shutdown.

"I think I work hard and effectively," Walden said in a recent interview, noting his more than 500 trips back to his district.

His district covers all of eastern Oregon and takes in a chunk of the southwest corner around Medford and Grants Pass.

Walden helped pass Bush-era legislation to thin forests and reduce fire danger, and he helped Malheur County onion growers fend off stricter federal water regulations. He also pointed to his work with Oregon Democratic Reps. Peter DeFazio and Kurt Schrader on a bill to increase western Oregon timber harvests as an example of his willingness to reach across the aisle.

Walden represented Hood River in the Oregon House and Senate before joining Congress. He and his wife have a grown son.

Christofferson, 61, is a Bend businesswoman who was seeking her first elective office. She sought to position herself as a moderate Democrat and fiscal conservative who would do more than Walden to tackle the district's economy and high unemployment.

-- Jeff Mapes and Joseph Rose