(AP Photo/Danny Johnston)

When Donald Trump makes predictions, they're not always the best. They're predictions that have lots of problems. Some, I assume, are good predictions. But the worst came four years ago, when Trump proved that just because you're good at business doesn't mean you're good at understanding the economy. Specifically, Trump warned in 2011:

The White House is predicting 9% unemployment throughout 2012 – and when Obama Care takes effect in 2014 expect it to go even higher. — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) September 2, 2011

Unemployment, as you may recall, is 5.3 percent today. The government reminded us of that today!

But let's be classy, and be fair to The Donald. It's true that unemployment has fallen in part because people have given up looking for work rather than finding it. Now, a lot of that was inevitable as the Baby Boomers hit their golden years, but a good chunk of it wasn't. The share of 25 to 54-year olds, who should be too old to be in school but too young to be retired, who are actually working is still lower than it was before the Great Recession began. Those are millions of "missing" workers who, along with the rest of the so-called shadow unemployed, make our jobs picture worse than the official number says it is. That's just the legacy of a once-in-three-generations financial crisis.

No, the bigger reason unemployment has fallen as much as it has is that the economy has, well, added as many jobs as it has. That was an average of 173,000 jobs a month in 2011, 188,000 in 2012, 199,000 in 2013, 260,000 in 2014, and 208,000 so far in 2015. Notice, too, that job creation picked up after the Affordable Care Act, a.k.a. Obamacare, came into effect at the start of last year. And that's not because we just added a lot of part-time jobs. The opposite, actually. As you can see below, part-time employment hasn't increased at all the past year and a half, or even the four years before that. Indeed, all the job growth since 2010 has been in full-time jobs.

Source: BLS

Now that doesn't mean that Obamacare won't make more people work part-time. It will. Some, as Ben Casselman points out, will have their hours cut so their companies won't have to give them health insurance. And others will choose to cut their own hours since they can now afford to get health insurance other than through their job. But that's a different question than whether Obamacare is hurting hiring overall. There's just no evidence to support that.

But we shouldn't pick on Trump. The rest of the Republicans are equally wrong about this point. Jeb Bush, Marco Rubio, Ted Cruz, Rand Paul, Mike Huckabee, and Ben Carson have all harped on Obamacare as a "job killer", or, in Carson's case, the worst thing "since slavery." They continue to insist that it's a "train wreck," reliving the glory days of October 2013 when the Web site didn't work, rather than deal with the reality that it's covering more people than we thought it would for less money than we thought it would.

The same is true of unemployment, it's true of inflation, it's true of interest rates. Republicans have spent the Obama years prophesying doom, and when it hasn't come true, they've either ignored it or insisted that the numbers are somehow fake. Trump fits right in.