If an ISIS attack occurs on American soil between now and November 2016, Donald Trump will be the next President of the United States.

WASHINGTON, Nov. 15, 2015 – Just as G-20 world leaders were set to hammer out provisions consolidating the evolving new environmental religion known as Climate Change, someone conspired to move the imaginary goblins responsible for rising air temperatures, rising seas and rising hubris over “saving the planet” from the Western world’s overactive imagination:

That someone is ISIS.

ISIS strategy shift raises global terror threat

The targets for the coordinated jihadist attacks in Paris were centered on public diversions: a soccer match, a restaurant and a concert hall where an ear-splitting American heavy metal band performed.

More than a decade after the 9/11 attacks, which brought down two New York towers of commerce, jihadists obviously believe the only way to get the attention of frolicsome Westerners is to interrupt them at play.

If we listen closely, they tell us there are two matters working in tandem to destabilize and undermine Western civilization: unfettered immigration and jihadist totalitarian Islam.

According to the Reuters news service, “Evidence emerged that at least one of the attackers had traveled through Europe alongside Syrian refugees, seeking asylum in Serbia.”

This uncomfortable reality posed no problem for European Commission head Jean-Claude Juncker, who “stressed the attacker was not a refugee but a criminal,” said Reuters.

I’m not sure that bureaucratic distinction will help soothe the grief of families now mourning the more than 120 dead.

Last September, White House spokesman Josh Earnest announced President Obama’s plan to unilaterally amend U.S. immigration law and allow at least 100,000 Syrian refugees to enter the United States.

“Refugees have to be screened by the National Counter Terrorism Center,” said Earnest, “by the FBI Terrorist Screening Center. They go through databases that are maintained by D.H.S., the Department of Defense and the intelligence community. There is biographical and biometric information that is collected about these individuals.”

These measures did not stop Boston Marathon bombers Tamerlan and Dzhokhar Tsarnaev from perpetrating terror here at home.

But biometric data compiled on incoming jihadists will at least enable the FBI to identify the remains of the “martyrs.”

Can there be peace with Islam?

After all, French authorities identified one of the seven dead Parisian attackers by running tests on his severed finger. He fragmented after detonating his suicide belt.

When New York real estate tycoon Donald Trump announced his candidacy for the Republican Party’s presidential nomination last June, he was roundly criticized for saying, “When Mexico sends its people [to America], they’re not sending their best. They’re not sending you… They’re sending people that have lots of problems, and they’re bringing those problems to us.”

Two weeks later, 32-year-old Kathryn Steinle died in her father’s arms, shot by an illegal alien allowed to walk free in a California Sanctuary City, with a handgun lost by a blundering federal agent sworn to maintain public safety.

That incident propelled the illegal immigration issue and the Trump candidacy front and center in the American mind.

During Saturday’s Democratic presidential debate in Des Moines, Iowa, CBS debate moderator John Dickerson asked Hillary Clinton if America was at war with “radical Islam.”

The West’s mutton-headed crusaders

While not blaming the Paris attacks on an American-made, anti-Muslim video, Hillary provided this convoluted offering:

“I think you can talk about Islamists who are clearly also jihadists, but I think it’s, it’s not particularly helpful – to make the case that Sen. Sanders was just making, that I agree with, that we’ve got to reach out to Muslim countries, we’ve got to have them be part of our coalition – if they hear people running for president who basically shortcut it to say we are somehow against Islam.”

Benghazi Hillary is nothing if not forward thinking. She speaks as though Obama’s 100,000 Syrian refugees are already settled in America and receiving federal assistance, taxpayer subsidized health care under Obamacare and are happy, card-carrying members of a heavily dependent and favored Democratic Party voting bloc.

Donald Trump, on the other hand, said, “I’m putting people on notice that are coming here from Syria as part of this mass migration, that if I win… they’re going back.”

If an ISIS attack occurs on American soil between now and November 2016, Donald Trump will be the next President of the United States.