Equipment donated by Boulder's SparkFun Electronics

Jacob Segil, a teaching faculty member at the University of Colorado, talks with sophomores Kaelen Woodruff, center, and Allison Updike, right, during class on Wednesday. Students in the Bio tech class are working on creating prosthetic hands using SparkFun components. ( Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer )

Engineering students at Lafayette's Centaurus High School are designing prosthetic hands using the basic circuitry and computer programming skills they learned through a recent pilot program.

The program, designed by Boulder's SparkFun Electronics, pairs a curriculum designed for high schoolers with the company's inventor kits. SparkFun donated 100 inventor kits to the school for the pilot.

About 165 students in the school's engineering program participated in the pilot, including freshmen in an introductory class and students in a bio-technology class.

"It's an affordable way to get their hands on circuitry," said Nicholas Cady, who teaches the introductory class and used the kits to teach basic circuitry and soldering. "It's a lot more fun when you can put something together."

Freshman Chantelle Humphries said she wasn't sure about engineering, but took the class because she wanted to learn more. While she wasn't a fan of the computer programming lessons, she said, she liked the more hands-on projects.

She said her favorite was using the inventor kits because they've been the most interactive.

"It was hands-on, do it yourself," she said. "It's a good way to learn."

Classmate Aubreigh Zorgdrager said the class has solidified her interest in engineering.

"I like the math, and I always look forward to this class," she said. "It's not easy, but it's fun."

In the bio-technology class, students are using what they learned from the kits to build prosthetic hands that will pick up a tennis ball using wood sticks, tape, rubber bands and other scrap materials.

Advertisement

To make the hands work, they're using what they learned from the circuit kits about controlling the different components that make up circuits — LEDs, servos, sensors, DC motors, potentiometers and relays, teachers said.

Jacob Segil, a teaching faculty member at the University of Colorado at Boulder hired by SparkFun to oversee the pilot program, recently offered encouragement to the class as they worked on their hands. The class he teaches at CU is working on a similar project.

"You fail often to succeed sooner," he said. "You learn from all these things that go wrong."

Sophomores Kaelen Woodruff and Allison Updike are on their second prosthetic hand attempt, this time trying a simple lever switch to get the hand to open and close.

Kaelen said she likes the project because "it's a good representation of what biotech can be."

Junior K.C. Sargent said the toughest part wasn't creating jointed fingers, but figuring out what to use to create the palm of the hand. He ended up using a metal piece from a soup can.

"I love this project," he said. "I'm finally doing some real, major building."

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa