Loveland-based Wild Zora Foods reaches a rapidly expanding market

Wild Zora Foods employees Barry Sucherman, left, Erin Stalgren, back right, and Tamao Norris cut and weigh snack bars Wednesday in the commercial kitchen facility in downtown Loveland. The nutrient-dense snack-food bars are made using meat and vegetables. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Plenty of health-conscious parents concoct special recipes for their children to help them eat right. Not many decide to manufacture their culinary creations and sell them in grocery stores across the country.

Meet Zora and Josh Tabin, two Fort Collins parents who launched Wild Zora Foods last year. They make their meat-and-vegetable snack bars in a commercial kitchen in downtown Loveland.

According to the company website, when Zora Tabin tried to find healthy snacks for her family that didn't contain grains or added sugar, she was stuck with jerky, which tasted good but was made with chemicals and was tough to chew. So she came up with her dehydrated bars that contain only meat, vegetables, a little fruit and some spices.

Josh and Zora Tabin, owners of Wild Zora Foods, pose for a photo Wednesday holding their meat-and-vegetable snack bars at their downtown Loveland business. (Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

What came next — founding a company — was a natural for the Tabins.

"There have been 20 businesses that Zora and I have started," Josh Tabin said. As a young entrepreneur, he rode to the dizzying heights of the dot-com bubble with his company, Tabin Technology, and kept it profitable after the bubble burst before selling. He's also made money as the franchiser for Starbucks in Eastern Europe and lost money on an Internet search startup in England that never made a profit.

'Rich in learning'

"That was a spectacular failure, and life-changing, because now we have to be very careful with our finances," Josh said. "I joke with my wife that we're rich in learning. We're just not rich in cash anymore."

Advertisement

At one point, he and Zora, a native of the Czech Republic, decided to move with their two young children to North America to a place with a business-friendly environment.

"We were looking for the best place in the entire world to raise our family and start a business," he said.

After an 18,500-mile road trip through 36 states and Canada and exhaustive research — "I'm very analytical" — they decided that Colorado's Front Range was that place and moved to Fort Collins.

Wild Zora Foods has five flavors of meat-and-vegetable bars so far. (Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Josh got involved in entrepreneurial ventures in Fort Collins and Boulder and began researching how to start their own food-manufacturing business. A consultant told them it would cost $1 million to set up a USDA-compliant operation, so they figured it wasn't going to work out.

Then they discovered that Ophilia's Kitchen, a Loveland burrito-making company, was going out of business, and they were able to buy it.

Just meat and veggies

Josh said many people say a meat-and-veggie bar sounds strange. "But that's pretty much what we eat every night, meat and veggies."

When they had developed what they thought was a viable product, they started approaching local stores.

"And we started going on the farmers market circuit, trying to get things in people's mouths to see what they liked," he said.

With positive feedback and sales from local stores, the Tabins accelerated their efforts. Last week, Wild Zora bars were in 80 stores across the country, including The Crunchy Grocer and Boar and Bull in Loveland. Last Tuesday, they hit 20 locations in the area, which a distributor requires before it will take on the product and deliver it to corporate chains such as Whole Foods and Natural Grocers.

The Tabins have five part-time employees doing all the production by hand but hope to increase hiring and automation as the business grows.

Wild Zora bars come in five flavors so far, among them Chili Beef with kale, apricot and cayenne pepper; Masala Turkey with spinach, dates and cardamom; and Mediterranean Lamb with spinach and turmeric.

All the bars are free of grains, gluten, soy, nuts and MSG and contain certified-organic vegetables and grass-fed and free-range meats with no added hormones or antibiotics, according to the website.

The bars, 1 ounce or 1.1 ounce in a package, are listed for $3.39 each on the website, although Natural Grocers in Fort Collins sells them for $2.99, Josh said.

A natural-products winner

Last month, the business got an unexpected boost when Josh and Zora won first place in the 11th annual Naturally Boulder Pitch Slam competition, which earned them a prize package worth $58,000 including a booth at Natural Products Expo West in California next March.

Although the Tabins want to grow their business and take it national, at 47, Josh said he doesn't feel the need to swing for the fences anymore.

"We're not going to take too much risk. I just want a nice, steady business, that's all," he said.

Craig Young: 970-635-3634, cyoung@reporter-herald.com, www.twitter.com/CraigYoungRH.