Last week, President Obama invited Ahmed Mohamed — a 9th grader from Irving, Texas — to the White House for a visit after school officials were concerned that a clock he built at home looked a lot like a bomb (or a hoax bomb).

At the time of the invitation, many on Twitter asked what might happen if Ahmed attempted to bring his hoax-bomb-clock with him to the White House. Would the Secret Service allow it?

Perspective: kid visits White House, w/ that clock? OVER. Why's a school's safety less imp than Obama's? Cuz he liked the story. — GregGutfeld (@greggutfeld) September 19, 2015

Well, we don’t know the answer to that question, but check out what the Secret Service did have a problem with Saturday night: kids with cancer and their parents who were holding a candlelight vigil — with permits! — a little too close to the White House:

Secret Service kicked cancer-stricken kids and their parents out of a park near the White House http://t.co/PS22q5qTe0 — Washington Post (@washingtonpost) September 20, 2015

Parents told the Washington Post that they were kicked out because the president used a different door to exit the White House earlier in the evening:

Police officers and agents on the scenes told some parents that the closure was necessary because President Obama had left the White House from an entrance near the square to address the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation’s annual gala. “At first, we were patient. I mean we’re a peaceful community; we’re fighting for kids’ lives,” said Anthony Stoddard, a New Hampshire resident who, after the death of his 5-year-old son, launched an initiative to light public buildings in gold as a show of support for children who have cancer. “But after about an hour, or hour and a half, it started getting a little angry, some of the fathers.”

How awful.

Exit question: If President Obama felt the need to offer a White House trip to a kid who caused a security scare with a badly made clock, what will he offer these kids?

***

Related:

Meet the 14-year-old kid in Texas arrested for bringing a homemade clock to school #IStandWithAhmed

Peak #IStandWithAhmed? Hillary Clinton tells 9th grader arrested for building a clock to ‘stay curious’