The Koch brothers have bagged their own version of an elephant.

Charles Koch Zuma Press

Koch Industries, the conglomerate of Charles and David Koch, will spend $7.2 billion to acquire Molex, a manufacturer of electrical and electronic components.

That would be the conglomerate’s second-biggest purchase ever, behind 2005’s $13 billion-plus purchase of Georgia Pacific Corp., the maker of Brawny paper towels and Dixie cups, according to S&P Capital IQ.

It would also give them their first big acquisition since Charles Koch told WSJ earlier this year the group is looking to buy more companies and compete with the famed elephant-hunter Warren Buffett.

Molex makes the components that put together electronics and fiber-optic cables, such as switches, antennas and other parts. A 75-year old manufacturer based in Lisle, Ill., the company had sales of $3.6 billion in the 2013 fiscal-year ended in June.

Its shares have been up just 7.3% this year, trailing the global rally, but Koch is paying $38.50 a share, a 31% premium to the common stock price and the highest it has traded since 2006. That still pales to the $60-plus the stock spiked to in 2000. It bottomed in 2009 just below $10.

The Koch brothers, well known for political positions, are looking to get into more deal-making after several years of largely making investments, Charles Koch, the chairman, told WSJ this year. Specifically they want to duplicate what Mr. Buffett has formed at Berkshire Hathaway: a buyer and long-time holder of large, steady companies.

Mr. Buffett has made no secret he’s out on “safari” for big deals himself, though electronic components aren’t typically in his wheelhouse. His biggest deal this year was a shared purchase of ketchup giant Heinz & Co. for $23 billion with private-equity firm 3G Capital.

Monday’s deal is not subject to financing, which shows off Koch’s deep pockets. The sides are hoping to close by the end of the year, a fast maneuver for an M&A deal of that size. It will face a shareholder vote.

“After 75 years this was a difficult decision, but our board of directors and our family believe that this transaction,” said Fred Krehbiel, co-chairman of the Molex board.

–Kevin Kingsbury contributed to this post.