Worldview Entertainment Sky Ferreira in “The Green Inferno.”

A lot of blood is being spilled at the Toronto International Film Festival – and not just by producers ramping up their Oscar campaigns.

The festival’s “Midnight Madness” tradition of showing horror movies like “The Green Inferno” in the wee hours is already stealing a little buzz from some of the event’s awards contenders. That’s partly because highly pedigreed Oscar fare might attract hardware for the mantel, but gorefests have proven to be a safer box office bet.

Toronto premieres like Eli Roth’s “The Green Inferno” have acquisition groups circling in hopes of recreating earlier festival successes like “Insidious” or Mr. Roth’s 2002 directorial debut, “Cabin Fever.”

Described as a “gruesome homage to the notorious Italian cannibal movies of the late seventies and early eighties,” Mr. Roth’s movie is attracting the most attention leading up to its Saturday night premiere. Like Mr. Roth’s “Hostel” series, “The Green Inferno” follows a group of wayward college students who find themselves fending for their lives (and body parts). Other Midnight Madness titles include “All Cheerleaders Die” and “Rigor Mortis.”

The Midnight Madness movies – which include everything from “ravenous biological monstrosities” to a “raging inferno of axe murders and alien abduction” – are a popular counterpoint to the festival’s daytime offerings, which include arty heavyweights like Weinstein Co.’s “August: Osage County.”

This year’s Midnight Madness movies are premiering in a promising year for scary movies, one that saw low-budget horror films consistently outperform other genres – even big-budget summer “tentpole” features made for ten times the production cost.

The January release of “Mama” from Comcast Corp.’s Universal Pictures kicked off the trend. The Jessica Chastain movie was produced for $15 million and went on to gross $71.6 million domestically. Summer hits like Universal’s “The Purge” ($3 million budget, $64.5 million gross) and Time Warner Inc.’s Warner Bros. July release “The Conjuring” ($20 million budget, $134 million gross) were a better return on investment than some big-budget releases like Walt Disney Co.’s “The Lone Ranger” or “After Earth” from Sony Corp.’s Sony Pictures Entertainment.

It’s a promising market, but past Toronto Midnight Madness titles have yielded into mixed box office results. “You’re Next” was picked up at the 2011 festival and has grossed only $15 million since being released last month by Lions Gate Entertainment Corp.

Others have made the jump more successfully. In 2010, “Insidious” was acquired by Sony Corp.’s Sony Pictures and distributed in April 2011 by FilmDistrict. The movie, which had a production budget of $1.5 million, went on to gross $54 million at the domestic box office – certainly enough to justify the “Insidious Chapter 2” sequel being released next week.