The Denver dispatcher facing disciplinary action for failing to relay important details to police officers responding to Kristine A. Kirk’s 911 call from her Observatory Park home has resigned, officials said Monday.

Following a review of her handling of the call, the dispatcher’s superiors began termination proceedings on Friday, the same day the dispatcher requested to hand in her resignation, according to Daelene Mix, a spokeswoman for the Denver Department of Public Safety. The department later withdrew the dismissal letter and accepted her resignation.

Kirk called 911 on the evening of April 14, reporting that her husband, Richard Kirk, had used marijuana and possibly taken prescription medication for back pain and was hallucinating and talking about the end of the world.

The dispatcher, who has not yet been named, did not tell the officer responding to the home that Kirk’s behavior was becoming increasingly erratic, that he was asking his wife to shoot him and trying to grab a handgun.

Kristine Kirk was on the phone for nearly 13 minutes before she was shot in the head. Investigators found Kristine’s body inside the home, after Kirk met officers at the front door, according to police records.

Kirk now faces one count of first-degree murder in his wife’s death and is scheduled to appear for a preliminary hearing in August.

The Kirk case expedited policy changes in the Department of Safety that authorities say could have changed the way the call was handled. Under the new policy, dispatchers must verbally air critical, up-to-date information to officers.

During a 911 call, operators take calls and relay notes to a dispatcher through a computer system. A dispatcher then assigns an officer to the call and shares information with those officers over the radio.

The first officer arrived about 14 minutes after being dispatched to the scene.

A Denver police investigation found the officers’ response was appropriate, according to a report released in May. The dispatcher did not broadcast information that would have caused officers to increase their urgency.

The same report also revealed that a police officer was less than a mile from the home, located at 2112 S. St. Paul St., but eight minutes passed before he left for the scene.

Details about the dispatcher’s training and history with the department have not been made public. The dispatcher, who was placed on paid leave immediately after the shooting, attended a meeting with the director of Denver 911, Carl Simpson, and a human resources representative in late May.

She was allowed to have representation present, but it was not clear on Monday if she did so.

Jordan Steffen: 303-954-1794, jsteffen@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jsteffendp