The Switchbacks FC has signed its first official player! Luke Vercollone will join the 2015 squad, pending USSF approval.

“I am excited to have Luke as the first signed player for the Switchbacks FC,” said Switchbacks FC Head Coach Steve Trittschuh. “He is a leader both on the field and off the field and his experience playing in this league will be a tremendous asset to the team. I look forward to building the team around Luke and adding more quality players in the next few weeks.”

Most recently, Vercollone played for Switchbacks FC rival Richmond Kickers in the USL Professional Division.

Vercollone started his soccer career in Pembroke, Massachusetts, where he won All-Conference and All-State honors. From there, he went to Seton Hall where he was named to the All-Big East first team in his senior year and finished his college career with 11 goals and 24 assists. Vercollone also played for the Cape Cod Crusaders, which is part of the USL Premier Development League, and helped the team win PDL Championship titles in 2002 and 2003.

In 2004, Vercollone was drafted 42nd overall into the MLS by the Columbus Crew, but joined the New England Revolution as a developmental player. In 2006, he joined the Charleston Battery for the USL First Division Season. Then in 2008, he signed on with the Richmond Kickers and was part of the team when it won the 2009 USL Second Division Championship. He continued on with the Kickers through the 2014 season.

“I am super excited about joining Colorado Springs Switchbacks FC,” said Luke Vercollone. “Since they were announced last year, it's been my goal to play for them and to continue my professional career in Colorado near family. I'm hopeful to contribute to this team's success on and off the pitch and to help establish a top-level pro soccer team in Colorado Springs.”

Vercollone currently lives in Fort Collins with his wife Andrea and their three children, Augustine, who is almost five, Gemma, who is almost three, and Estella, who is six-and-a-half months old.