Faster than a speeding bullet? Maybe not quite that quick, but Denver Comic Con officials say they spent all year working on a plan to speed the process of getting fans into the Colorado Convention Center.

Photos: Denver Comic Con 2014

On its opening day Friday, the lines were moving quickly.

On the first day of the event last year, a line of about 15,000 people wrapped around the complex. After waiting in the queue for hours, about 6,000 people were turned away by the fire marshal and convention staff.

“We knew that was the biggest thing we were dinged on last year and we spent the entire year with that as the No. 1 focus,” said Michael Newman, ticketing and registration director for the convention. “The No. 1 priority was to make sure that worked well this year.”

Newman said the plan included having separate lines for people in different categories, more signs and better organization. Doors also opened at 10 a.m. Friday, five hours earlier than on the first day the year before.

“We processed 2,600 people in 40 minutes. When doors opened at 10, the entire line of people with badges waiting at the door was cleared in 25 minutes,” he said.

Michelle Provolt, of Colorado Springs, said she and her friends were able to simply walk right into the Con without having to wait in line.

Denver Comic Con playlist: Listen to the best video game songs



On its opening day Friday, the lines were moving quickly.

“Getting in was phenomenal this year,” she said. “Last year we waited forever. This year was great.”

There were more than 60,000 people in attendance last year and officials are expecting about 75,000 fans this year.

Artist Ben Templesmith, best known for his work on “30 Days of Night,” has been a guest at the convention since its first year and said he’s not surprised by its growth.

“It seems like it’s a city hungry for the arts,” he said. “Not just pop culture, but the arts.”

Hours of Denver Comic Con are 10 a.m. to 7 p.m. Friday and Saturday, and 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Sunday.

For more information, go to www.denvercomiccon.com.

Joe Nguyen: jnguyen@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joenguyen