ELECTION 2016: Long Prairie author seeks Republican nomination for 7th District

LONG PRAIRIE—A missionary and author from central Minnesota is seeking the Republican party's nomination this year to challenge longtime U.S. Congressman Collin Peterson in the state's 7th District.

Amanda Lynn Hinson of Long Prairie filed to run for the position in January and said she's running for the district's seat because she "strongly opposes all the regulations in the country" and wants "to see the freedoms preserved for our children and grandchildren."

The decision to run for the House of Representatives was initially discussed between Hinson and her family while they were in Russia, serving as missionaries for five years.

"Before coming back from Russia, I had started to think about it," Hinson said in a phone interview with the Pioneer this week. "My husband and I looked at the situation. We saw that different families we met were having difficulties with the Obamacare mandate. We also heard about businesses feeling over regulated and some people were not enthusiastic about starting a business."

Hinson added she felt most compelled to run for office when her and her family moved back to the United States and purchased a house in Long Prairie.

"I realized that the time was now, and there's no time for me to wait to get involved," she said.

Since announcing her candidacy, Hinson said she's already been busy, traveling to 37 of the 38 county conventions that make up the 7th District. However, this isn't her first time involved with the district's Republican party, as in past years she's served as a delegate, vice chair and deputy chair.

For the nomination, Hinson is facing Karlstad resident Dave Hughes. Delegates will decide who gets the nomination next weekend during the district's convention in Alexandria this coming Friday-Saturday.

If Hinson were to capture the nomination, she would face Peterson in the general election on Nov. 8. Peterson has been a constant in Minnesota politics for more than two decades, first being elected to the seat in 1991.

"In these last 26 years, we've had the same representative going to Washington to represent us," Hinson said. "I think it's time for a new, fresh perspective."

Describing her campaign as being run full time, Hinson said her main goal in this election cycle is to make herself available.

"I'm calling people constantly, talking to voters, supporters and delegates. It's a priority for me to talk to everybody, because it's not about me it's about the district."

If she were to win in November, an immediate priority to take on in Congress would be stopping EPA regulations that are hurting small farms and manufacturing companies, Hinson said.

Hinson is the mother of four and has been married to her husband Steve since 2001. She has a degree in mass communications from North Central University and wrote the book "Wide Open Curtains: A Journal of a Pregnant American in Russia," detailing her experience of having a child out of the country.