Photo

WASHINGTON — President Obama and Speaker John A. Boehner sat across from each other for an hour on Tuesday in the leather-bound chairs of Mr. Obama’s office and quickly ticked through a remarkably long list of issues.

They chatted about economic matters like manufacturing, trade promotion authority and flood insurance, according to aides to both men. They discussed the Affordable Care Act and the president’s push for an immigration overhaul. They engaged on efforts to wind down the war in Afghanistan, the process of getting a budget, and the stalled highway funding bill. And don’t forget the California drought and Mr. Obama’s new plan for fighting fires.

All told, they spent about five and a half minutes on each of the subject areas. (Less, actually, since the above list is not a complete record of the topics covered during the conversation, Jay Carney, the White House press secretary, said.)

But while the meeting offered a rare moment for private sharing by the leaders of America’s two dominant political parties, few of their colleagues expect it to lead to any legislative breakthroughs. Aides to both men on Tuesday called it “constructive” but offered no evidence that Washington gridlock is over.

“They agreed that there is a lot of work to do the rest of the year, and it is important to work together wherever we can find common ground,” an aide to Mr. Boehner said in an email to reporters after the meeting.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Carney maintained that the White House “is looking for a partner in Congress.” But he also noted that Mr. Boehner had in the past said he would never again negotiate with Mr. Obama. Mr. Carney declined to say whether there seemed to be any softening on the no-negotiation stance.

The president and Mr. Boehner have spent most of the past five years in a series of awkward and often fruitless negotiations. Tuesday’s exchange of views was the first publicly known, in-person, one-on-one since December 2012, and the only such talk since Mr. Obama became president that was not aimed at resolving some sort of looming fiscal crisis.

(That doesn’t count phone calls or the time Mr. Obama invited Mr. Boehner for a round of golf at Andrews Air Force Base in June 2011. Aides said that social outing was constructive, too.)

It is unclear whether Mr. Obama might have had another, private message to deliver to Mr. Boehner during Tuesday’s surprise meeting, which was revealed late Monday night in the president’s daily schedule. But nothing in their dealings so far suggested a new détente is in the works.

The two political adversaries met Tuesday even as the leaders in both parties in Washington have largely resigned themselves to the fact that almost no major legislation will break through in the current election year. Republicans are trying to seize control of the Senate this fall, as Democrats scramble to try to defeat as many Republicans in the House as they can.

Mr. Obama, for his part, has spent the month since his State of the Union address vowing to circumvent Congress whenever possible — and has acknowledged publicly that he does not have high hopes for progress on economic issues or an immigration overhaul.

“We’ve got a Congress that prefers to say no rather than yes right now,” Mr. Obama told Democratic governors last week. “They don’t have an affirmative agenda. Their main strategy is to just try to do nothing and see if they can — falsely — give people a sense that somehow the policies that we’re trying to pursue aren’t working for them.”

At the same time, Mr. Boehner has done little to suggest his House would advance any of the president’s agenda in the months leading up to the midterm elections, telling his members this month that he would not pursue the immigration legislation that Mr. Obama supports, but that angered conservative Republicans.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Republicans have vowed to continue their push to roll back or change the Affordable Care Act, and in a message posted on Twitter, even as the speaker was arriving at the White House, Mr. Boehner took a political jab at the president’s top domestic policy.

“#ObamaCare may increase premiums for 11 million workers, report says,” the message from the @SpeakerBoehner Twitter account read.

After Mr. Boehner finished the meeting in the White House, he slipped out without talking with reporters and returned to the Capitol. Moments later, he took to the floor — but not to wax poetic about the “constructive” meeting he had just had.

Instead, he used a new — and disputed — report on the costs of insurance premiums to attack the president’s health care law. “Another sucker punch to our economy,” he called it. “Another broken promise to hardworking Americans.”

The next Oval Office meeting might not come for another year.