Marin residents who have recently signed up for Anthem Blue Cross health insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act may have to travel outside the county for medical specialty care.

One San Rafael woman said she recently swapped her Blue Shield coverage, which cost her $916 a month with a large deductible, for a gold plan offered by Anthem Blue Cross through California's new health insurance exchange, Covered California. She pays just $250 a month for the Blue Cross plan, but there is a problem: She needs to see a gastroenterologist, and she can't find one in Marin who is part of Blue Cross' physician network.

Rebecca Williams, practice administrator for Marin Gastroenterology in Greenbrae, the county's largest gastroenterology practice with five doctors, said Blue Cross wanted the practice to accept a big cut in its reimbursements if it wanted to remain in the insurer's network.

"It's like someone offering you a job, saying, 'Hey, would you like to come work for us at a 30 percent reduction?'" Williams said. "Anybody in their right mind is going to be thinking, 'No, I don't think I'll join that part of your program.'"

Darrel Ng, a spokesman for Blue Cross, said, "We offered them a contract, and they said, 'No, we won't do it.' Medical costs are the largest component of our costs, in order to increase the affordability of our exchange plans, we offered rates to medical providers that would allow that."

Williams said Blue Shield also initially planned to drop Marin Gastroenterology from the network for its Covered California offering, because the practice wouldn't accept a cut in reimbursement rates. But Williams said the practice reached an agreement with Blue Shield after, "We came to an understanding that there wouldn't be enough providers in the area to service their members."

Gastroenterologists aren't the only specialists under pressure to accept lower reimbursements.

Lorraine Holzapfel, administrator at Marin Specialty Care, said Anthem Blue Cross presented the oncologists and urologists there with the same ultimatum: accept less money if you want to be paid to treat Blue Cross patients in Covered California.

"The contract that they presented was unacceptable," Holzapfel said. "We wanted to negotiate, and they basically said there was no room for negotiations."

Nearly all of the county's oncologists work for Marin Specialty Care. Holzapfel said the two Marin doctors listed as oncologists in the Blue Cross network do not spend a majority of their time practicing oncology.

Marin Specialty Care's doctors remain in the Blue Shield network.

"The only carrier that requested us to sign a separate contract at different rates from the preferred provider organization contract we have in place was Blue Cross," Holzapfel said.

Preferred provider organizations (PPOs) typically offer patients a broader choice of doctors than health maintenance organizations (HMOs). Marin residents purchasing insurance through Covered California have five choices: Anthem Blue Cross, Blue Shield and Health Net, which are offering PPOs, and Kaiser Permanente and Western Health Advantage, which are offering HMOs.

Holzapfel said there is a great deal of confusion among patients about which doctors are part of Blue Cross' network for Covered California.

"They're not giving patients the right information; I can tell you that," she said. "There is a lot of frustration."

Last week Covered California removed an online physician directory that was supposed to help people purchasing insurance determine which doctors were in insurers' networks. Larry Hicks, a spokesman for Covered California, said the directory was removed because it had too much inaccurate information. Hicks said the errors resulted due to inaccurate information supplied by insurance companies. No deadline has been set for reposting the directory. In the meantime, insurance buyers are being directed to insurers' websites.

Joel Criste, chief executive of Meritage Medical Network, a network of independent doctors and health care providers in Marin and Sonoma counties, said Western Health Advantage has signed a contract with Meritage.

"So if somebody wants to sign up for Western Health Advantage on the exchange, they would have access to the entire Meritage Medical Network across three counties," Criste said.

The law allows HMOs to contract with large medical groups such as Meritage while PPOs are prohibited from doing so.

Rick Heron, chief marketing officer for Western Health, said, "Because open enrollment is still active, we've had dozens of calls from Covered California enrollees who want to switch health plans because of the limited network issues in the PPOs."

Heron said Covered California is allowing this dis-enrollment and re-enrollment process — as long as it happens before March 31 — because of the problems with provider directory functions on the website.

Contact Richard Halstead via e-mail at rhalstead@marinij.com. Follow him at twitter.com/halsteadrichard

Editor's note: This story has been edited since initial publication.