Dr. Jerry Williams Jr. will soon open his seventh 24/7 Urgent Care site in less than four years in what he says will fill a large gap left by an evolving national health care system.

For the Savannah pediatric and adult neurologist, it’s part of an effort to address needs not just for people but also for animals that face abandonment.

His philosophy: “You can judge a society on how it treats the elderly, the homeless and animals.”

But the Chatham County native takes pages from rugged conservationist President Theodore Roosevelt’s playbook and includes a large collection of mounted trophies collected on various hunting adventures.

“Hunting is very much a part of who I am,” Williams said. “But I’ve never hunted anything I’m not going to eat.”

Williams has opened five 24/7 Urgent Care sites in Chatham County with plans to open at least two more. He plans to expand his business model into the Atlanta market, starting with a Centennial Park site within the next several months.

He also owns Chatham Neurology, two veterinary hospitals — one on Tybee Island and Savannah Animal Care in downtown Savannah — and plans to open a third on Whitemarsh Island next to Wal-Mart.

He is not above stopping in the middle of the night to rescue a lost dog on the highway, then keeping it until he can locate the owner.

“I’ve been an animal person my whole life,” Williams said, adding that he has owned more than 100 dogs in his lifetime.

Williams, who sports long hair and cowboy boots, becomes emotional when recounting his friendship with a homeless man he challenged to escape that

world and gain a voice others would listen to.

“I’m not afraid to show my emotions,” Williams said just days after he delivered the eulogy for advocate for the homeless Marvin Heery, who once was homeless himself. “He was a barometer for the community and it breaks my heart.”

But Williams is a pragmatist, too.

His efforts to expand his Urgent Care sites are a reaction to “filling a niche that needs to be filled” as the result of the Affordable Care Act, commonly referred to as Obamacare.

He considers that law to be fatally flawed and poorly implemented, freezing out the people it was designed to help. He said he foresaw the problems three years in advance and reacted.

“I didn’t go into medicine because of money,” he said, adding he has had bad experiences with insurance companies and does not accept insurance payments for his services.

He prides himself on the service delivery model from his Urgent Care sites.

“People are willing to pay for good service,” he said.”We trying to convey to people we really do care.”

Nor is he concerned about how people react to his off-stereotype appearance.

He said he’s worn cowboy boots “my whole life,” since age 3.

Likewise, his hair fills a need.

He works with Locks for Love, a Florida-based non profit that provides hairpieces for financially disadvantaged children suffering from long-term medical hair loss. Williams cuts and sends his own hair for hairpieces in that effort.

“I grow my hair for sick kids,” Williams said, adding he became hooked by the plight of a 6-year-old girl who needed just that to help restore her self-esteem.