The Roselle Borough Council on Wednesday night unanimously introduced an ordinance that, once passed, will launch a communitywide identification card program. (Photo: ~Courtesy of Jaffe Communications Inc.)

ROSELLE With nearly 200 members of the borough’s Hispanic and Haitian communities in attendance, Roselle Borough Council on Wednesday night unanimously introduced an ordinance that, once passed, will launch a communitywide identification card program.

The measure represents an ongoing effort to address the needs of the borough’s immigrant community, Mayor Christine Dansereau said. The program, which is expected to be ratified on a second ordinance reading Oct. 21, would produce and issue municipal identification cards for all Roselle residents, and particularly for the borough’s fast-growing immigrant community.

“This ID program will further level the playing field because it allows for all residents to have access to municipal amenities, with an official form of identification,” said Dansereau, adding, “Roselle welcomes you.”

Members of council and the public also highlighted the accomplishments and vision of the borough’s Office of Hispanic-Latino Affairs, a key organizer in the municipal ID program.

"Today marks an important step forward for Roselle," said German Vergara, member of Make the Road New Jersey, a Union County-based community organization.



"Municipal IDs will give all Roselle residents, including immigrants, seniors and students, access to ID to open bank accounts, enter government buildings and feel comfortable approaching law enforcement,” he added.

“Municipal ID programs are a valuable resource for many disenfranchised residents,” said Kevin Brown, 32BJ vice president and NJ state director. “These programs ensure all residents, including the undocumented, have proof of residency and can get access to municipal amenities. I applaud Roselle elected officials for joining a growing number of municipalities that have embraced all of its residents by proposing a municipal ID program.”

In Union County, the Hispanic population increased by more than 12 percent between 2010 and 2014, according to the U.S. Census Bureau. The surge in the Hispanic population has offset the decline of other demographics in many areas.

For information about Roselle’s Office of Hispanic-Latino Affairs and for additional related resources, call 908-259-3038 or email his-lat@boroughofroselle.com.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1F6FvcT