Krysten Ritter, who stars in "Marvel's Jessica Jones," attends the premiere for the Netflix series Tuesday in New York. ( Andy Kropa / Invision )

Some of the best TV shows this fall aren't on television, at least not automatically.

To see all three of the major streaming shows premiering this week, you would need an Amazon Prime account — yes, the one with two-day free shipping — for "The Man in the High Castle," a Netflix subscription for "Marvel's Jessica Jones" and the willingness to sit through online commercials for "The Art of More," on subscription-free Crackle (available at Crackle.com or through a number of web-enabled devices and set-top boxes).

They're all, to some degree, worth the trouble.

The best of the three, Amazon's "The Man in the High Castle," arrives with a 10-episode season. Adapted from Philip K. Dick's Hugo Award-winning novel, it takes place in 1962, in an alternate reality in which the U.S. lost World War II to the Germans and Japanese, who now occupy the East and West coasts, respectively.

Let's just say that Don Draper might not recognize either place.

Created by Frank Spotnitz ("The X-Files") and produced by Ridley Scott, the show depicts both a nascent resistance movement — as well as the overwhelming forces arrayed against it — while imagining a world in which the Germans and Japanese, once allies, see their interests increasingly diverging.

Alexa Davalos ("Mob City") stars as Juliana Crain, a San Franciscan who's drawn into the resistance after an unexpected discovery, and who, on a secret mission to the wild West of the Rocky Mountain States, encounters another young messenger, Joe Blake (Luke Kleintank).

Left behind in San Francisco: Frank Frink (Rupert Evans), Juliana's boyfriend, whose Jewish grandfather puts him at constant risk of being turned over to the Nazis by the Japanese.

Rufus Sewell plays an American Nazi named John Smith, a commanding officer in the SS whose "Father Knows Best" home life stands in chilling contrast to his work days, which routinely involve torture.

Cary-Hiroyuki Tagawa is Pacific States trade minister Nobusuke Tagomi, a decent man who finds himself with a terrible secret.

"The Man in the High Castle" has no trouble building and maintaining tension. Honestly, it gave me nightmares. Missing, or at least muted a bit in the four episodes I've seen, though, was the sense I had from the book of how life, and even personality, could be shaped by occupation over time, rendering resistance less and less likely.

If the show's view of a past that didn't happen is more frightening than any of the dystopian futures we've visited lately, it may be because Dick and Spotnitz each extrapolate from horrors that demonstrated that we humans can be more menacing than any zombies.

"The Man in the High Castle" isn't just saying that the Holocaust could happen again. It's asking us to acknowledge that it could have continued here. And to imagine that it never stopped.