Bruce Gilbert (Photo: Provided to the RGJ)

I found it ironic that Stephen T. Parente’s recent musings on the “failed” implementation of the Affordable Care Act in Nevada (“One View: Bleak forecast for Nevada's Affordable Care Act future”) were published the same day that it was reported that a record number of Nevadans had enrolled in health insurance through Nevada Health Link.

Parente seems to have made a cottage industry of painting the implementation of the ACA a failure nationwide. A quick Internet search shows that he has submitted essentially the same “analysis” to media in multiple states, not surprisingly finding the future identically bleak in Georgia, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Virginia, Pennsylvania, New York, the Carolinas and more.

Parente first argues that Nevada’s “failure” is proven by an average premium increase of slightly over 8 percent this year. That argument would certainly be more persuasive if, prior to the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, health insurance premiums had not also increased year over year, often by double digits. It would probably also be helpful to ignore a Kaiser Family Foundation report released in October which found that the cost of a 2016 benchmark silver plan in Nevada actually decreased after accounting for available tax credits.

Parente then claims that the end is near because any premium increase invariably deters consumers from purchasing health coverage. I’m not sure how one can reconcile that statement with Nevada’s second consecutive record-setting open enrollment period, or the study recently released by the Commonwealth Fund (a nationally recognized nonpartisan foundation that sponsors independent research on health care issues) which noted that premium increases would be expected to stimulate rather than depress consumer enrollment as more consumers become eligible for subsidies.

In the course of our discussion, it might be worth mentioning that Nevada’s efforts have significantly improved access to medical care for our most vulnerable population: children. A research brief prepared by the Nevada Legislative Counsel Bureau in November 2013 showed Nevada to have the highest percentage of uninsured children in the nation (19 percent compared to 10 percent nationally). Happily, we’re doing better today. According to a recent report from the Georgetown University Center for Children and Families, the national rate of uninsured children has dropped to a historic low across the nation following implementation of the Affordable Care Act in 2014. More to the point, as the report notes in its key findings, Nevada has had a larger percentage reduction in the number of uninsured children than any other state.

Fact, not opinion, must be the standard for determining the success or failure of the implementation of the Affordable Care Act in Nevada. While there is more work to do, it is an undisputed fact that hundreds of thousands of previously uninsured Nevadans – many of them children - now have coverage and access to health care and more are signing up every day. That’s how the law is "playing out" in our state; clearly better than some with an agenda are willing to admit.

Bruce Gilbert is the executive director of the Silver State Health Insurance Exchange.

Read or Share this story: http://on.rgj.com/1RbjePD