Anthony Wright accused of murdering Fowler man in 2012

(Anthony Wright)

The two-week trial for a Cañon City man accused of murdering a Fowler man in 2012 is scheduled to begin Monday at the Otero County Courthouse.

The Daily Record will provide daily updates of Anthony Wright's trial.

Wright was arrested Aug. 15, 2013, in Cañon City on suspicion of first-degree murder, murder in the second degree and conspiracy to commit murder in the first degree.

The arrest is in connection to the Oct. 12, 2012, murder of Griffy, 77, in Fowler. Otero County Sheriff's deputies were called to a home near the intersection of CR 4.5 and U.S. 50, which is about 30 miles east of Pueblo, and discovered Griffy shot. He was pronounced dead on the scene. Griffy was a longtime funeral director in the Arkansas Valley and served on the Fowler School Board for more than 13 years.

In May 2012, Griffy pleaded guilty to one count of sexual assault on a child by a person in a position of trust. The victim, a 15-year-old boy, claimed the offenses occurred during a two-year time frame when he worked at the Griffy Funeral Home in Fowler. Griffy was sentenced to four years of probation and 150 hours of community service.

Wright was a co-owner of three Florence businesses with Giebler, 52, a former Florence mayor, who died in January 2013 of cardiomyopathy. The men owned Charles Anthony Funeral Home, Mainstreet Grille and Bakery and Smashing Good Guitars.

Testimony heard in March 2014 during a preliminary hearing revealed that Griffy was to "have lunch with his friends, Wright and the late Charles Giebler, also a suspect," for his birthday on the day he was found dead. A press release issued by the CBI states Griffy's birthday as Oct. 13.

Advertisement

The Pueblo Chieftain reported in March 2014 that "Mark Morlock, a former agent with the Colorado Bureau of Investigation, ... said that during a phone interview with Giebler later that day, Giebler told him he and Wright showed up for the lunch date, but that Griffy never arrived. The two men said they went to his farmhouse but couldn't get to it because of a locked gate."

According to the paper, "the men said they called Griffy twice and left a message both times before heading back to Florence."

The Chieftain also reported about "alleged stolen money, alleged inconsistent statements from suspects, the hiring of a hit man and lack of physical evidence at the crime scene" and that "Investigators said there were no fingerprints nor the weapon used to kill Griffy at the crime scene."

The CBI press release states that "this is a joint investigation by the CBI, Otero County Sheriff's Office and the 16th Judicial District Attorney's Office."

Wright is free on a twice-reduced $250,000 bail, posted Sept. 7, 2013, in Otero County.

Formal charges against Wright include murder 1 after deliberation, a class 1 felony; and conspiracy to commit murder 1, a class 2 felony. Each has two counts of the aggravators violent crime used weapon and violent crime caused death or serious bodily injury.

Sarah Rose: 719-276-7648, roses@canoncitydailyrecord.com or twitter.com/sarahfaithrose