Beth Walters says filing taxes online saves her money, and she gets her refund more quickly than hiring an accountant.

The 49-year-old Clermont native has been filing online for at least seven years, when she discovered online tools like TurboTax. There are more digital options than ever, including a TurboTax app released last year that imports your W-2 form when you take a picture of it on your mobile phone.

"Before, when you did your taxes, it would take six weeks to get your return," Walters said. "They make it so it's pretty easy."

Growth in digital options means a growing percentage of taxpayers filing with technology rather than a tax professional. According to the IRS, one in three tax returns last year were done digitally, which is up from one in five in 2009, the first year IRS numbers were available.

But that's no reason to worry about your local tax guy, said David Cole, who owns a firm in Orlando. He hasn't lost sleep over the statistics because his volume of work remains high, he said. In most cases, he and other professionals say, people should do their own taxes online. Exceptions include more complex financial situations, such as owning a business or getting a divorce.

Apple has released its list of the top 25 iPhone apps for 2015. For more information and to download, go to the App Store.

"If all they have is a W-2 and mortgage, they should do their taxes for free with TurboTax or programs like that," Cole said. "We have more business than we can handle."

As workers prepare for the annual ritual of turning W-2 forms into tax returns, IRS data show that 33.4 percent of tax returns were filed online by taxpayers themselves.

That number was slightly higher than the 32 percent in 2014 and has climbed steadily since 2009, when 22.3 percent of returns were e-filed by taxpayers.

As tax preparation software improves and people put more of their life online, they are more comfortable with entering personal data online in return for an expedited process.

But highly public security breaches of the last few years, including IRS estimates of about $20 billion in tax-refund fraud each year, have some such as Walters hesitating.

"We try to take precautions," she said. "We try to limit the personal information we put out there."

The tax season often starts off slowly, as W-2 forms trickle to workers, usually starting in January. But by the April 15 filing deadline, people scurry to their tax professionals or finally start up that computer and jump online.

A recent study by GoBankingRates.com revealed 43 percent of taxpayers filed their own taxes for the 2014 tax year. Of those, more than 80 percent did so using digital tools.

Tax-preparation software such as TurboTax adds new features each year as the tax code changes.

New versions seem to easily integrate filing tools that make accounting for laws like the Affordable Care Act simpler, GoBankingRates finance writer Elyssa Kirkham said.

But she said many still don't understand how easy it can be.

"If you haven't been through the process, these will be hard to figure out," she said. "A basic level of understanding is lacking where a lot of people who could file for free aren't aware that is an option. A lot think it's easier to pay someone."

But there are also self-filers who run into problems, which result in added work for licensed professionals like Charlie Marcussen, an accountant with Newman, Seland and Oppenheimer in Orlando.

Marcussen said he sees people every year who come to him to "fix the mess" of a botched return. And sometimes that is because they relied too heavily on technology to do their work.

"Sometimes they realize they were in over their head," he said. "Sometimes, their expertise is in building a home or in sales or doing what they are good at. Their business is not keeping their books."

Although Walters is not completely comfortable with online activities, she said it's the way things have headed.

"It's a lot of personal information to put out there, so it's scary," she said. "But everything is done online, from applying for jobs to tax returns. The traditional stuff you do with paper has become passe. We are just trying to keep up with society and keeping our things online."

msantana@orlandosentinel.com or (407) 420-5256.