Oklahoma rural hospitals are under financial siege.

"It's very scary right now," said hospital consultant Val Schott, 71.

About 56 percent of Oklahoma's rural hospitals operated at a financial loss between 2009 and 2013.

Seven have been involved in bankruptcy reorganizations since 2011.

"I would say probably 70 (percent to) 75 percent of the hospitals in rural Oklahoma are having some kind of financial struggle," Schott said.

He estimated a dozen or so are in serious trouble, with less than 10 days cash on hand to pay operational expenses.

Meanwhile, more than 50 hospitals have closed across the nation since 2010. That is more than closed in the past two decades, Schott said.

Another 250 or so are teetering on the brink of bankruptcy or failure, he said.

Why should I care?

Oklahomans should care whether rural hospitals are forced out of business because their lives may one day depend on a hospital's survival, Schott said.

If a person has a stroke or serious accident, the first 30 minutes of medical care they receive is often the most critical in determining the outcome, he said.

And for a rural community, the loss of a local hospital is economically devastating, he said. The hospital is often the second- or third-largest employer in a community and has some of the top paying jobs.

Pauls Valley General Hospital employed about 220 people when it filed for bankruptcy reorganization in 2013 and generated revenues of $1.5 million to $1.7 million a month.

Craig General Hospital in Vinita, which filed for bankruptcy reorganization in February, employs about 330 people and has an annual payroll of about $10 million.

Not only are those jobs important, but there are a lot of industries that don't want to locate in a community if nearby hospital care isn't available, Schott said.

What's the problem?

One problem facing many rural hospitals is aging facilities that weren't designed to accommodate the technologically advanced equipment that patients have come to expect. Hospital officials feel pressure to build new facilities and buy equipment to attract patients, but costs can seem prohibitive and finding lenders can be difficult.

HMC/CAH Consolidated Inc. of Kansas City, Mo., created a business model based on acquiring aging Critical Access Hospitals in rural areas and replacing them with state-of-the-art facilities and equipment, Dennis Davis, the company's chief legal officer, said in a bankruptcy filing.

Five rural Oklahoma hospitals were among the company's early acquisitions, bringing hope for a brighter future to Drumright, Fairfax, Stigler, Prague and Seiling.

As expected, the corporation lost money in its early transition years, including more than $4.2 million in fiscal year 2009, $9.3 million in 2010 and $2.3 million in 2011.

Davis said the company was expecting to make a profit the following year, but was forced into bankruptcy reorganization when its lender backed out of the financing agreement.

Trent Skaggs, the company's senior vice president of strategic planning and corporate compliance, said his company worked its way through bankruptcy reorganization and remains committed to its goal of replacing aging facilities and equipment. However, he said progress has been slow in a tough regulatory environment.

The Drumright hospital is the only Oklahoma hospital that has been replaced so far, and the town of Seiling took its municipal hospital back, he said.

Sequestration, electronic records

Federal government sequestration cutbacks and the requirement for hospitals to convert to electronic medical records have been major obstacles to financial recovery, Skaggs said.

"Our biggest challenge right now is that sequestration that the federal government put in place," he said.

Prior to sequestration — Congress' solution to the budget crisis — Critical Access Hospitals were reimbursed for treatment of Medicare patients at a rate of 101 percent of allowable costs. Sequestration cut that rate by 2 percent.

"While that may not sound like a lot, most of these hospitals are running to break even or maybe a percent positive, so that sequestration to us has really been hard to adjust to — that 2 percent reduction," he said.

The state's decision not to expand Medicaid rolls has added to the financial pressure, because it fails to provide relief for additional financial requirements placed on hospitals by the Affordable Care Act, he said.

Another huge problem has been the cost of complying with the federal requirement that hospitals convert to an electronic medical records system, he said.

"The ongoing expense of maintaining those is just debilitating for all rural hospitals," he said.

Roger Knak, chief executive officer of Fairview Regional Medical Center in Major County, said sequestration, the Affordable Care Act, and electronic medical records requirements also have posed major financial challenges for his hospital.

The Fairview hospital hasn't had to go through bankruptcy reorganization, but Knak recalls that a year ago the hospital was down to four days cash on hand to pay expenses — a crisis he blamed on the electronic medical records requirement.

While the federal government said it would reimburse the hospital for its costs, the hospital had to pay $923,000 up front and then wait for reimbursement, which put it in a financial bind, Knak said.

When the hospital was finally reimbursed, it only received a portion of what it was promised, which helped but didn't relieve all the financial stress, he said.

And the electronic records system reduced productivity in the clinic by 30 percent because it takes doctors longer to navigate, Knak said.

He said proponents of the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) told hospitals they could expect an increase in the percentage of insured patients to offset other increased costs that hospitals were asked to absorb.

But Major County still has 21 percent of its residents uninsured, the same level as before, he said.

"I've been struggling for almost three years to replace a physician who left us," he said. "We are facing an extreme difficulty getting physicians to choose to practice in a rural part of the state. The cost of recruiting goes up and the difficulty in maintaining physicians goes up."

Fairview Regional Medical Center has battled back financially and had 36 days cash on hand at the end of the fiscal year, but it hasn't been without pain.

"We've reduced staffing ... below what it was many years ago," Knak said. "Sometimes you reach a point that doing more with less means you're not doing it as well, and with health care you cannot afford not to be doing anything as well."

Pauls Valley hospital

Pauls Valley General Hospital also cited the general economic downturn as one of the reasons for its March 2013 bankruptcy reorganization, along with threats from the provider of its billing hardware and software. The hospital borrowed money to purchase the billing system to comply with federal mandates.

"Without such hardware and software, debtor would be severely affected in billing and collecting for services rendered, including Medicare and Medicaid, debtor's largest revenue stream," hospital officials told the court.

Like Craig General Hospital, the closure of Pauls Valley General Hospital's surgical center contributed to that hospital's financial woes.

Pauls Valley's surgical center was closed for more than a year so it could be refurbished and remodeled before reopening earlier this year.

Progress reports filed with the court show the hospital has made significant progress in improving its finances.

The city of Pauls Valley approved a half-cent sales tax to pay for improvements to the hospital's surgical center and the acquisition of computer hardware and software, the hospital said.

Hospital officials said they also were working with the city of Pauls Valley to purchase additional specialized equipment that would allow certain complex surgical procedures to be performed.

In June, the hospital reported 132 surgical procedures had been performed over a 45-day span, providing additional revenue.

A substantial subsidy payment from the city of Wynnewood helped the hospital show positive cash flow for May.

But the transition has not been without pain. In 2014, the hospital began winding down home health services that it provided. In 2015, it reported it had implemented a 10 percent reduction in the hospital workforce and reduced its use of contract nurses.

Craig Jones, president of the Oklahoma Hospital Association, said federal officials added to the problems of rural hospitals by creating a program that contracts with auditors to monitor Medicare billing statements for government overpayments. Auditors are paid a percentage of the overpayments they identify, which hospitals must reimburse to the government.

This "bounty" system led to a flood of challenged billings.

"In Oklahoma, there was a period of time when we probably had 90 percent successes in appealing and having these audits overturned," Jones said.

However, the appeals process sometimes took more than a year, which contributed to the cash flow problem for hospitals, he said.

As the crisis continues, hospital officials indicated the public can expect to see hospital requests for more financial help — both in the form of Congressional action to improve reimbursement rates and requests for financial assistance from local governmental entities.

"Always before in my career, I've always had some sort of answer to the way that we could fix this. I don't have that answer now," Schott said.

"It's one day at a time," Knak said.