Centene: A High Performer in the Health Insurance Industry PART 3 OF 13

Centene: What Key Markets Does It Serve?

Key markets

The performance of players in the health insurance industry (IYH) depends largely on the demographic mix, social mix, and regulatory framework in the key markets. Accordingly, managed care organizations—like Humana (HUM), Centene (CNC), Cigna (CI), and UnitedHealth Group (UNH)—operate in select markets to balance risk and earn sustainable profits.

The above graph shows the distribution of Centene’s risk-based membership. In risk-based Medicaid services, Centene enters into Medicaid managed care contracts with state governments. It assumes responsibility for Medicaid enrollees’ future claim obligations in exchange for payment from the state government.

Since 2014, Centene also started offering non-risk Medicaid services. The company provides administrative support—like claims administration and access to a health provider network—in exchange for fees from the state. In this case, the state government assumes the financial risk of the Medicaid claims. A few of Centene’s new contracts are mentioned below.

Louisiana

To increase its Medicaid footprint in the state, the company completed a transaction in July 2014. CHS (Community Health Solutions of America) assigned its Medicaid contract to the Louisiana Healthcare Connections, or LHC—Centene’s subsidiary. In February 2015, Centene started operating in Louisiana under the new contract.

Texas

Texas added nursing coverage for its Medicaid Star+PLUS members—also termed as “dual eligibles.” These people belong to the low-income category. They’re disabled or above 65 years old. Increased coverage will also increase Centene’s future opportunities and payments.

Mississippi

As one of the poorest states in the US, Mississippi is an attractive market for Centene. In 2014, Centene started offering services under the MississippiCAN program to TANF (Temporary Assistance for Needy Families) children. The company is expected to benefit from further enrollments in this program in 2015. In addition, effective January 2015, the company started offering services to CHIP (State Children’s Health Insurance Program) beneficiaries in the state.

Indiana

Centene was contracted by Indiana to serve ABD (Aged, Blind and Disabled) beneficiaries under Indiana’s new Hoosier Care Connect program. It’s expected to benefit 84,000 beneficiaries in 2015. Effective in 2015, the state also adopted the expansion of the Medicaid program. As a result, it will add substantially to Centene’s Medicaid enrollments.

Arizona

Centene was contracted by Arizona to provide behavioral health services through a partnership between its subsidiary Cenpatico and the University of Arizona Health Plan.