Now this is astonishing: Donald Trump’s front-runner status was only hours from receiving yet another underscore of voter love via a five-state sweep at the primary ballot boxes when establishment conservatives, undoubtedly watching polls, unleashed more attacks, this time calling on the billionaire’s key supporters to renounce their support and for key political players to find and rally behind a third-party candidate.

It’s like they’re blind and deaf, immune to reality. What part of voters’ collective “Trump’s our guy” cry don’t they get?

First this, from Weekly Standard editor Bill Kristol, who appeared on MSNBC to spout the view that fellow conservative elites ought to stand firm and fight on – that the Trump train could certainly still be stopped. He said, in part: Let’s launch a Reform Party run.

“The key is to have compelling candidates,” he said. “I think there is too much resignation and fatalism, especially among the people. If you think we deserve better than Trump and Clinton, and I certainly do … I guess I’m annoyed at other people who are activists and donors and politicians, who sort of sit back and watch the slow motion car crash happening. It is happening in slow motion. There is time to avert it.”

Then this, from ForAmerica Chairman Brent Bozell, in an open letter to Sarah Palin, Mike Huckabee, Ben Carson and Phyllis Schlafly, all Trump supporters: “Do the most courageous thing you’ve ever done, in a lifetime of bravery. Retract your endorsement.”

Cheryl Chumley’s latest book takes on the Washington behemoth head-on. Don’t miss her guidebook for turning back the disastrous effects of bipartisan Big Government: “The Devil in D.C.: Winning Back the Country from the Beast in Washington”

Huckabee, meanwhile, indicated in an email within hours after that call for retraction that he would do no such thing – especially since he’s never officially endorsed Trump.

“The irony is that I have not endorsed in the primary,” he said, in an emailed statement. “I think some assume if you don’t hate Trump and spew venom at him, you must have endorsed.” He also added, however: “For the record, I like Trump and think he is our very best hope to beat Hillary [Clinton].”

This should also be for the record: The Trump hating has got to stop. Remember the January torrent of outrage that spewed at National Review when dozens of Republican pundits, faithfuls and operatives penned separate letters that were then filed under the general headline, “Conservatives Against Trump”? Those at least came when the primary season was still in the throes of competition, with 11 candidates in the Republican camp duking it out on nationally televised debate stages. Now, the voters’ choices have been made clear; now, it’s mathematically impossible for anyone but Trump to lead in the delegate count.

Yet, diehard Trump bashers seem content to rest on the laurels that brought about the rise of Trump in the first place – which is to say, their reliance on inner-party workings and the power of said workings to overcome any will of the people that doesn’t fit their inner-party visions. Their goal? To bring about an open convention where delegates can thwart the will of the American voter and pick the establishment’s candidate of choice – which appears, at this point, to be Anyone But Trump. America saw this type of attitude already with the tea party fight for relevance on Capitol Hill, and the push-back from the likes of the Senate’s top Republican, Mitch McConnell, one of Washington’s most entrenched insiders, who bragged during the 2014 election season “we are going to crush them everywhere.”

It’s that same elitism, the one that expresses profound disbelief in an American citizenry’s ability to choose what’s best for self and country, that’s continuing to propel this anti-Trump march forward – that’s giving it breath and life it doesn’t deserve. Like Trump or hate him, the will of the American Republican seems clear. And it’s personified by this, the most recent delegate count: Trump, 954; Cruz, 562.

Those who refuse to accept the numbers and abide the fact that what voters see in Trump, at root, is that he’s everything they’re not are only revealing themselves as entrenched elitists, enemies of the very republic – the one won against all odds by farmers and shopkeepers and untrained militiamen, no less – they then impudently proclaim to support.

Cheryl Chumley’s latest book takes on the Washington behemoth head-on. Don’t miss her guidebook for turning back the disastrous effects of Big Government: “The Devil in D.C.: Winning Back the Country from the Beast in Washington”