Jana Ffitch is one of the success stories.

In just a few months, the single mother went from the threat of eviction to the promise of a bright future.

Last year, the Solebury woman enrolled in a one-year nursing program at Bucks County Community College. Hoping to improve her prospects in the long-term, she was struggling to make ends meet day-to-day.

“Basically, I felt like I was robbing Peter to pay Paul all the time, just not really sure where I was going to get money to pay for groceries this week, or maybe this week it was gas, or maybe my daughter needed new winter boots,” ffitch said. “It was always one thing after another.”

When the juggling act began to topple and ffitch faced the very real possibility that she’d have to drop out of school and uproot her 9-year-old daughter, she turned to the Bucks County Opportunity Council for help.

A financial coach taught her organizational and budgeting skills. The opportunity council provided rental assistance, money for car repairs, even helped turn her Internet back on, so she could focus on her studies.

“They helped me, gosh, in so many ways,” ffitch said.

But without Intelligencer readers’ generous donations to the annual Give A Christmas fund drive last year, there may have been a little less help to go around.

Since Give A Christmas was introduced more than a quarter of a century ago, readers have donated nearly $2.4 million to brighten the holidays for neighbors in need.

Last year, readers demonstrated record-breaking altruism, raising $146,677 for the Bucks County Opportunity Council and the Keystone Opportunity Center.

The opportunity council distributed the bulk of the money — about $130,872 — among 642 families, most of whom earn $15,000 a year or less.

The council gave out more than 500 gifts, toys and school clothes for children, needs-based gifts for adults. They provided rental assistance for 48 families, paid utility bills for 113 families and helped maintain transportation for 45 families. Depending on their needs, some families received help in more than one area.

“The needs of many of our neighbors are touching, and their gratitude for any help at all is moving,” according to Roger Collins, executive director of the opportunity council. “Give A Christmas helps the most vulnerable in our community who have the greatest needs.”

The Keystone Opportunity Center, which services parts of Montgomery and Upper Bucks County, received the remainder of 2012 Give A Christmas funds to help 33 families, in many of the same areas.

Families received rental help, money for car repairs, utility payments, or temporary hotel stays for the homeless before finding placement in a shelter, according to Allegra Cressman, Keystone’s social services manager and housing director.

Keystone also helped pay for tuberculosis testing and pre-employment health screenings to help clients seeking employment in the medical and nursing care fields, Cressman said.

Though Give A Christmas recipients received only a few hundred dollars on average, even that little boost is enough to make a difference.

It made the difference in ffitch’s life.

She graduated from nursing school in July and from the Bucks County Opportunity Council’s economic self-sufficiency program a few months later.

Now, she has a full-time job in her field, working in patient intake for a home health network in Wayne. She’s hoping to save enough money to buy a house for her and her daughter. And she’s already planning how she can help to turn around someone else’s life.

“That whole year, (I was thinking) if I can just get through this, I’m going to do the same for someone else,” she said.