Beverly taught many what it means to be present to others — to be there in the moment for each and every person. To be there in a way that reflects back that person's goodness. I believe that greatness in any person is measured by the content of that person's goodness. Beverly's goodness was unmatched.

She possessed this insatiable desire to ensure every relationship she had was loving, authentic and transparent. Those are buzz words for some, but for Beverly, it was how she lived her life. And if a relationship was out-of-sorts, she was fiercely determined to restore it. She left no stone unturned in her desire to ensure the relationships she had in her life were caring and loving.

Bevery Title (Courtesy photo)

Beverly lived a life of loving service. She spent little energy on the trifles of living. Much of her life-force was devoted to the more essential realities that seemed to have everlasting importance — her spirit, her relationships, her family and her vision for community. Her life was full of light-heartedness and joy. And by her example, she taught many that real joy was revealed in sharing her journey and life with others.

Let there be no doubt that Beverly experienced the wide ranges of human emotion from superb joy to profound sorrow. I had the opportunity to visit with her many times over the last year, and always was she at peace with her lot in life and of rare good humor. She was most interested and could hardly wait to talk about my life. I heard similar stories from many others. And her presence, even in days when she was in pain, was matchless.

Much has already been written about Beverly's accomplishments from developing alternative schools to restorative justice to no-bullying programs. But underlying all of that was this remarkable vision of seeing far into the future and a conviction that all of us together could create a world that was at peace with itself. Beverly was all about peace. She co-founded an organization named Teaching Peace. Her byline on her correspondence was a quote from President Jimmy Carter: "Peace, like war, is waged."

She was a best friend to many, many people. She knew that friendship enhances joy and glorifies the triumphs of life and tends to rob suffering of its sorrow and hardship of much of its bitterness. She was so aware that intimate associations were essential to the renewal of the zest for life and were indispensable to sustain the courage and conviction to endure the sacrifices that came with bringing about transformation which she did often.

Beauty has sometimes been defined as bringing harmony to those things that contrast. Beverly's spirit was beautiful and her capacity to bring about harmony was unsurpassed. She had this remarkable ability to gather people together from many different colors, persuasions and perspectives. She was able to do this because she could see that beyond those visible aspects of people lay a soul, a heart and an intellect that were spiritually connected to one another. Her depth of vision could see past the cosmetic and penetrated to each person's desire to be valued.

Beverly chose to see strengths in people, especially those who seemed to be struggling. Beverly chose to see the cup as half full. Beverly chose to see the world as a beautiful majestic melody.

I had the distinct honor of being able to call Beverly my friend for 20 years. I had the privilege of joining Beverly on several life-giving projects that will serve our community for years to come. Beverly's life and what she taught others will live on in her family and friends and in people who never met her. And if Beverly could speak, she would say that what she accomplished was done in the midst and with the assistance of many others. This community is so better off because she graced us with her beautiful, selfless life. Our community did not lose Beverly Title — her legacy will live on.

Mike Butler is Longmont's Public Safety chief.