Last week I turned a little bit intemperate in arguing about abortion with members of the conflicted center-left. Now I’m going to try to be a little calmer in pursuing a conversation with the not-at-all-conflicted pro-abortion left, by answering some of the questions that Katha Pollitt posed to her pro-life opponents last fall. I wanted to write a response at the time (she wrote up some of the answers she did receive here), but it slipped by the wayside; now that we’re in the throes of the ongoing Planned Parenthood controversy, it seems like an appropriate time to take her challenge up. So here are the first four of Pollitt’s (meaty) questions, in italics, with my (prolix) responses following; I’ll try to handle the remaining five by this time next week.

*

1. Illegal abortion. You often talk as if banning abortion would drastically reduce or even end it. You don’t seem very concerned about death and injury to women who have illegal procedures. (In fact, you tend to discount pro-choice claims about the danger of illegal abortion, while portraying legal abortion as vastly unsafe.) But what about the simple fact that illegal abortion is widespread in countries where abortion is virtually banned? In Brazil, for example, there are between 1 and 4 million abortions a year—at least as many as in the United States in a much smaller population—and more than 200,000 women land in the hospital with injuries or infections. Do you believe illegal abortion can be prevented, and if so, how? If not, what makes criminalization worth so much harm to women?

Abortion cannot be absolutely prevented, no. But there are good reasons to think that restrictions and bans do, in fact, reduce the abortion rate much more substantially than you suggest. The comparison you make to Brazil, like other comparisons between the developed and developing worlds, actually tells us very little about what abortion restrictions would look like in a society like the United States. (Brazil’s murder rate is more than five times as high as ours, but that doesn’t prove that laws against homicide can’t reduce murder rates.) As I’ve argued many times before, if you compare like to like — wealthy countries to wealthy countries, U.S. states to U.S. states — there’s plenty of evidence that abortion restrictions do, in fact, lead to considerably lower abortion rates overall. To take only the most obvious example: the country with the second-lowest abortion rate in Europe is Ireland, which has an outright ban, and that low rate includes the Irish women who go the United Kingdom or elsewhere in Europe for abortions; even then, the Irish abortion rate is one-fifth the rate in Sweden, and one-fourth the rate in the U.K.

Nor is there clear evidence that in developed societies abortion restrictions would necessarily do the kind of damage to women’s health that your side assumes they must. You and I have gone back and forth on this issue a bit before, but it bears stressing again: If you compare Ireland, the major Western outlier on abortion, to other countries like it, there’s simply no evidence that its laws are imposing the kind of massive, back-alley harms that you deem inevitable; its maternal mortality rate is normal for Western Europe and compares favorably to Great Britain, it has the same female-versus-male health indicators as Sweden and Denmark, etc.

Which is not actually surprising when you look at the history of maternal mortality and deaths from illegal abortion in the United States. The great modern plunge in pregnancy-associated deaths was not accomplished by Roe v. Wade, but by medical advances that substantially predated the legalization of abortion. Ramesh Ponnuru goes into this in more detail in his book on the abortion issue, but a few data points: There were an estimated 1,300 deaths from abortions in 1943 but only 159 in 1966, before any abortion laws were liberalized; by the time Roe was decided, that estimated figure was down to forty-one; today, post-Roe and Casey, it probably stands around ten or fifteen per year. (Even if these figures undercount the actual numbers — and they appear, albeit without the pre-1960s data, in pro-choice analysis as well — the trajectory simply does not support your implied contention that legal abortion was a massive tipping-point moment for female mortality and health.) Overall, the Roe decision and the change in abortion laws that followed had no discernible impact on the maternal mortality rate’s broad downward trajectory. Nor, as Ponnuru pointed out, did it have any obvious effect on female mortality rates overall: Per the CDC, there was no decline in the death rate after Roe for women age 15 to 34, the cohort who have over ninety percent of all abortions.

With that said, you’re clearly right about this much: The reality is that the pro-life side does accept, must accept, that abortion restrictions will lead to some tragic cases, some illegal abortions that accidentally kill the women who obtain them. But I think the evidence I’ve just cited offers good reasons to believe that these tragedies need not be nearly as inevitable and pervasive as the pro-choice side assumes, that they would be horrible exceptions rather than a back-alley rule. I also think that there might be further steps that a pro-life society might take to render them more exceptional still, about which I’ll say more in a later answer.

2. Compromise. You present pro-choicers as intransigent and yourselves as wanting modest restrictions: a twenty-week ban, stricter regulation of clinics, waiting periods. We both know that this is a tactic, and your goal is the end of legal abortion—yet most Americans don’t share this goal. Do you see any chance of a stable compromise? What would it look like?

I suspect abortion politics in this country could (and may yet) stabilize, at least for a time, at a slightly more European place, in which the left’s recent victory, the quasi-universal health insurance guarantee of Obamacare and the contraceptive/abortifacient mandate that’s attached to it, coexists with eventual national-level restrictions on abortion after twenty weeks and the defunding of Planned Parenthood, and then other restrictions (waiting periods, clinic regulations, parental consent) in more conservative states … and with, perhaps, the chance in some states for a ban after 10 or 12 weeks.

I’m not sure the pro-lifers can win those national-level victories (though they seem at least possible), and the scope of state-level restrictions obviously depends on Anthony Kennedy’s whims, and on the future composition of the high court. But that seems like a combination of policies that maps reasonably well onto the muddle that is American opinion on abortion, and it seems at least possible that in a decade or two, after some more thrashing around with health care reform and some more incremental pro-life advances, that’s where we’ll end up.

At which point, yes, my side of the argument wouldn’t be satisfied with that status quo; we would still pursue our more sweeping goal of “protected in law, welcomed in life.” (Though there are more possible compromise points along the path to that goal, with the rape-incest exception being the most-discussed example these days.) Which is a reason for pro-choice absolutists to resist any move in our direction … but then, being absolutists, you have every reason to resist it anyway! What it’s not, I think, is a good reason for people in the mushy middle — to whom pro-life arguments for compromise are usually addressed — to resist that move, because it’s those people, not activists on either side, who ultimately determine where the country actually ends up, and so they will always be able to say “thus far and no further” if they remain unconvinced by the broadest pro-life case.

3. Birth control. It is obvious to most Americans that birth control is the way to lower the number of abortions. Yet the fight over the Affordable Care Act’s no-co-pay birth-control provision is only the most recent demonstration that many abortion opponents want to restrict contraception too. True, a few anti-choice politicians propose putting the pill over the counter, but no major antiabortion organization supports contraception, and many opponents are redefining modern methods—the pill, the IUD and emergency contraception—as “abortifacients.” Is contraception a lesser evil than abortion or just more of the same evil? If the former, would you accept universal provision of birth control to any and all, including teens?

Follow-up: Would you support such a provision if it was limited to condoms, diaphragms and other methods that no one, not even you, can call dangerous or abortion-causing?

I’ve written about this issue from several different angles: Most recently here, and previously here and here. The distillation of those earlier pieces is as follows. 1) While it may seem obvious, to you and many others, that a liberal approach to contraception is the best way to reduce the abortion rate, in the Western/developed context there isn’t actually that much evidence to support that view; instead (as Megan McArdle stresses in this recent piece), abortion rates tend to be higher, not lower, in states and countries that take the policy/cultural approach you urge on the pro-life side. 2) That correlation is a part of why anti-abortion groups aren’t enthusiastic about the public provision of contraception (they fear that the message sent by that provision is effectively permissive in a way that ultimately encourages abortion), though there are many other factors as well: the religious scruples of conservative Catholics, the anti-spending sentiments of Republicans, and as you say, the concern that some contraceptives are actually abortifacients. 3) To speak personally, I am both convinced that the contraceptive “solution” to high abortion rates isn’t really a solution but also skeptical that contraception and abortion are as inextricably linked as some social conservatives fear, so my view has tended to be that the pro-life movement should be willing to support the public provision of non-abortifacient contraceptives (I include the pill as well as barrier methods in that category; I will betray the pundit’s code and confess to ongoing moral uncertainty about emergency contraception and IUDs) to adults as part of a bargain that also further restricts abortion; absent such a deal, not. 4) With the Obamacare mandate, it seems like my view has been somewhat overtaken by events; no matter what religious carve-outs we end up with, contraception coverage is now semi-universal and likely to remain so, so it’s less clear to me what further steps pro-lifers are being asked to support.

Over-the-counter access to birth control pills, as you yourself note, is something that many social conservatives already support, and I would support as well. I generally would not support sex education programs that distribute contraception to teenagers; for a host of reasons I favor a minimalist, just-the-facts approach (neither militantly pro-abstinence nor wildly “sex-positive”) to sex education in public schools, which might need to be vary a bit from locale to locale depending on how much in loco parentis work the schools need to do, but should be set at the local level for precisely that reason.

But I suppose I would put the question back to you: After the Obamacare mandate, what is the next pro-contraception step on your preferred agenda?

4. Poverty. Six in ten women who have abortions are already mothers. More than 40 percent are poor, and many more are on the edge. Maybe some of them would have the baby if they had more support: healthcare, daycare, housing, jobs—and protection from job discrimination for pregnant women and mothers. Charity can’t begin to supply all these needs, and the antiabortion movement is firmly allied with the Republican Party, which cuts social programs wherever it can. What do you offer to women who want to end a pregnancy because they can’t support another child?

First, a necessary caveat: As in other areas related to religion, social conservatism and charitable works, I do think the pro-choice side tends to underestimate just how much non-governmental work people with pro-life convictions really do that supports mothers and families (and promotes adoption), how much they give and volunteer, and how big a difference it actually makes.

With that said, on the policy side, I have two thoughts, one suited to the current paradigm and one more radical. The one suited the current paradigm is basically just my support for what gets termed “reform conservatism,” which is basically the view that conservatives but especially social conservatives (most “reformocons” are also pro-life or at least lean that way) should support policy shifts that tilt the design of the welfare state in a more pro-family, pro-parent and pro-work direction: A larger child tax credit, a larger earned-income tax credit or wage subsidy, and (in a world where Obamacare were repealed or transformed) a reform of Medicaid that doesn’t just gut the program and a new tax credit that makes basic health insurance more affordable for the working class.

I think many anti-poverty programs (including some of the ones you implicitly mention) don’t work particularly well and deserve reform or transformation, and as in the contraception debate I see very little evidence that big government writ large is the key to lowering abortion rates; indeed I think there’s often a bigger government/social breakdown feedback loop that encourages the kind of personal situations that make abortion seem like a necessity. But I also don’t think simply cutting anti-poverty spending (as opposed to reforming entitlements, cutting corporate welfare, etc.) should be central to the right’s domestic agenda at this point, and to the extent that it is, I think the pro-life movement’s tight (and, given where the Democrats have drifted, completely understandable) relationship to the G.O.P. can be a problem for its broadest goals.

In some ways this makes me an outlier among politically-engaged pro-lifers — but not entirely, since many abortion opponents are conservative Catholics who would have been natural Democrats fifty years ago and who, notwithstanding their rightward migration, remain somewhat ill at ease with element in the G.O.P. And then of course the Catholic church’s leadership is both pro-life and often well to my own left on these questions … and some abortion opponents, particularly in minority communities, would never consider voting Republican at all; they just don’t vote on the issue. So there is a pro-welfare state and pro-life constituency, even if it lacks a clear representation in our politics …

… which brings me to the more radical point: When I write about public policy I try work within realistic lines, but if I were arranging our politics from on high I would want the pro-life movement to have near-absolute flexibility in the kinds of policy experiments around pregnancy, motherhood and family life that might accompany real progress toward our goals. And if it were the case that something much bigger than just an abortion ban after twenty weeks were on the table, if we were actually talking seriously about enacting a real nationwide ban on abortion (or a ban with a few genuinely modest exceptions) … well, then you could probably talk me pretty easily into putting aside my skepticism about the efficacy of certain government interventions if they seemed like necessary parts of a pro-life grand bargain.

I come by that skepticism honestly, and I think an abortion ban is compatible, politically and morally, with a redesigned but still limited welfare state. But I also concede that what pro-lifers are aiming for, what we envision, is a major social experiment, one that if it ever came to fruition might well require reshuffling left-right alignments (just as Roe itself did) and examining old debates anew.

This is part of why I’ve written wistfully, on various occasions, about the decline of the pro-life Democrat. The pro-life movement can succeed, I think, in gaining ground incrementally as a mostly one-party force, especially if it can help prod the G.O.P. a little ways away from some of its recent “47 percent”/maker-taker follies, and it can succeed in changing the composition of the Supreme Court in ways that make further incremental progress possible. But to win comprehensive protection for the unborn, to work the larger revolution, it has to have a political foothold outside the Republican Party; it needs some bipartisan leadership and support.

That’s true because of the necessity of policy experimentation and flexibility I just outlined, and of course it’s true for obvious political reasons as well: An abortion ban imposed by one party would more vulnerable than the abortion regime imposed by seven justices in 1972 — and that regime, happily, has proven more vulnerable than its architects and supporters (yourself included) once expected.

Anyway, that’s word count enough for one post. More anon.