Pacemakers have been around for more than 50 years, but the technology that helps the heart beat properly isn't a perfect fit for everyone.

There's risk for infection and the wires that connect the device to the heart can break, or in some cases, cause severe complications.

One of those complications, called venous occlusive disease, occurs when scar tissue builds up in the veins, blocking blood return to the heart.

That's what happened to one Ohio man, but thanks to a new type of pacemaker, he can enjoy life again, hook, line and sinker.

58-year-old Norm Johnson loves being outdoors, but it was a different story 2 years ago.

Norm had a pacemaker to help control the rhythm of his heart but the wires were causing severe complications like extreme swelling and headaches.

"I slept in a hospital bed in my living room for a year and a half. I kept wondering, you know, am i going to get better? It was rough," Johnson described.

Several doctors and hospitals later, Norm enrolled in a clinical trial at Cleveland Clinic for a new device called a leadless pacemaker, it doesn't have wires and doesn't require any incisions.

"It's a fully self-contained unit less than 10% of a traditional pacemaker. It gets around the long standing limitations of a traditional pacemaker," Cleveland Clinic Dr. Cantillion explained.

A flexible tube, or catheter, is snaked through a vein in the leg up to the heart and the leadless pacemaker is placed inside one chamber.

It's anchored by a tiny cork-screw-like tip and controls the heart's rhythm.

The device is still experimental but new research published in the New England Journal of Medicine shows it's safe and effective, especially so for Norm.

"He could preserve the benefits of having a pacemaker while alleviating the problems that were created by the traditional pacemaker, you know it was an absolute home run," Dr. Cantillion pointed out.

Norm feels like himself again. His heart doesn't miss a beat, and neither does he.

"I couldn't ask for a better life, you know. I'm back to doing what i like to do. So, life has gotten really good," said an enthusiastic Johnson,

The leadless pacemaker is not yet FDA approved.

It's currently designed for someone who only needs one chamber of the heart stimulated, and that's about 10-percent of people who need a pacemaker.