Three health care clinics opened in the Portland area on Monday as part of an affiliation between Providence Health & Services and Walgreens.

The clinics, operated by Providence, are located in Walgreens stores in Milwaukie, Beaverton and Vancouver. Three other Providence clinics also opened in Seattle-area Walgreens stores, with up to 19 others planned in the two states.

The chain has more than 400 in-store clinics across the country, but this is the first time the company has partnered with the Catholic hospital system.

That has prompted 19 civil rights groups to write to the company expressing their concern.

They worry about the expansion of health care guided by a religious doctrine. Nearly 50 percent of the hospital beds in Washington state are now affiliated with a church, the groups said.

As a Catholic health care system, Providence abides by the Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care Services, a document issued by the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops. Those directives forbid abortions, birth control and aid in dying services.

"In our states, we have consistently seen that when secular entities join with religious health systems, the services, information or referrals provided at the secular entity become limited by religious doctrine," the letter said.

It asked Walgreens for clarification of its policy.

"There is a standard of care that everyone should be entitled to," said Janet Chung, counsel for Legal Voice, a Seattle women's rights group that joined the letter. "Is this yet another potential place where patient care would be compromised?"

Walgreens spokesman James Cohn said the affiliation with Providence won't affect its services.

"The clinics are being managed and operated by Providence," Cohn said. "They do not impact the pharmacy services that we provide nor will it affect any of the current policies that are provided at our clinics."

Like other retail clinics, the Providence Express Care at Walgreens will offer quick-stop services. Staffed by a Providence physician assistant or nurse practitioner, they will provide diagnosis and treatment of conditions from colds, cuts and rashes to stomach pain, sprains, anxiety and routine preventive care.

They're not designed to offer services that might touch on concerns expressed by the advocates, said Dr. Ben LeBlanc, chief medical officer for Providence Medical Group.

"The item that would be most likely to come up in these retail settings would be around birth control," LeBlanc said. "In all of our clinics the decisions around prescribing birth control is left to the provider and patient. They together determine what's the best course of action for that patient."

Providence physicians prescribe birth control for a variety of conditions, said Gary Walker, a Providence spokesman. But the directives don't allow the use of contraceptives to prevent pregnancy.

In a statement, the hospital system said that Providence expects its providers to follow the directives along with sound medical practice. It also said the health care system respects the confidentiality of the physician-patient relationship.

A one-time refill of a birth control prescription might be provided but the clinics aren't set up to provide ongoing gynecological care, the statement said.

The clinics aim to appeal to people who need a quick appointment. With millions more insured under the Affordable Care Act, a shortage of primary care physicians and rising health care costs, the lower cost retail clinics have wide appeal. Providence Express Care, for example, will charge those without insurance $99 for a visit, $50 for a sports or school physical and $8 and $15 for simple tests and screenings.

Open seven days a week from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m., the clinics also aim to bring more patients into the Providence system.

"Primarily we're trying to meet the needs of patients and consumers," LeBlanc said. "If we're meeting the needs of patients, they will vote with their feet and continue to come when they need care."

-- Lynne Terry

lterry@oregonian.com

@LynnePDX