Please enable Javascript to watch this video

SACRAMENTO --

Written evidence of influence bartering, vote stacking and a lot of non-city work being done on Sacramento city time - all of it documented in 6,100 messages newly - placed in the public domain.

"At the end of the day, it's for a direct benefit to Sacramento," said Ben Sosenko, spokesperson for Mayor Kevin Johnson.

That's what Sosenko had to say about the emails revealed through several legal challenges rooted in what business the mayor and his staff are carrying out online.

"If they deleted... they're gone...tomorrow..we're done," said attorney Paul Boylan.

Those words from one of the challengers helped bring the city one defeat Tuesday.

Based on a restraining order request filed by watchdog group 'Eye on Sacramento,' Judge Shellyanne Chang ordered a delay in the scheduled deletion of certain messages.

Plaintiffs in the case feared the deletion would stymie the public's right to know about city operations.

It's a delay that could cost citizens at least $50,000.

"Well, we don't fear it. It's inconsistent with law and it's significant cost to taxpayers," said Sacramento city attorney James Sanchez.

Some critics of the mayor believe he's fought city emails getting out because he does fear what they show about his alleged obliteration of the National Council of Black Mayors and strong-armed substitution with a group he created - the African American Mayors Association.

It's a move he's being sued over.

Newly-released messages document city staffers spending city work hours trying to get certain mayors to pay their NCBM dues in order to influence the group's voting quorum.

Those staffers were also booking travel for NCBM events.

"It is standard practice to use city staff," said Sosenko.

But, it's a standard not sitting well with some voters and that's not all.

Another email shows the mayor promising his wife's school organization will help with an out-of-state school board race, in exchange for support for the NCBM.

A separate message details city staff pushing the president's Affordable Care Act as part of the NCBM - suggesting tweets about enrollment.

It's all part of a national presence the mayor's spokesperson says can do nothing but help Sacramento by connecting it with Washington D.C's resources.

"He's on stage with Barack Obama and that's the mayor of Sacramento getting a front row seat with the president and it's on national news. And it's great visibility for Sacramento," said Sosenko.

Still, many fear the mayor's extension outside of his city may backfire...like the president's recall of his name just two weeks ago.

Obama called the mayor 'Dennis Johnson' at the U.S. Conference of Mayors annual meeting, held this year in San Francisco.