CINCINNATI — Nolan Arenado and Brandon Barnes collected call-and-response, dueling diving catches into the stands Monday at Great American Ballpark. If the Rockies get back on track, they had to fall off the field first.

Barnes in the second inning dove into the right-field stands to beat a red-clad Reds fan in cargo shorts to a fly ball. It was the second-best diving catch into the stands this season — Arenado’s now-legendary feet-flying dive over the tarp into the stands in left at San Francisco last month remains the standard.

But Arenado bumped Barnes to third-best in the eighth when he tumbled over the wall down the line in left. He hugged the concrete and fell into the peanut shells in the aisle as umpire Mike Everitt ran over to make a call. Arenado popped his glove up into view, ball still inside.

The Rockies threw themselves around Ohio to keep hold of their first winning streak in a month. Arenado’s sacrifice fly in the ninth, off Cincinnati closer Aroldis Chapman, scored Charlie Blackmon as the Rockies rousted the Reds 5-4 on Memorial Day for a third win in a row.

“With that defense, it’s tough to win against us,” Colorado starter Eddie Butler said.

When Arenado returned to the dugout after the winning RBI, Barnes was on the top step to greet him first.

“He can upstage me any time,” Barnes said. “That’s why he’s the best.”

Arenado went 3-for-4 at the plate with three RBIs. He jerked an 0-2 pitch off ex-Rockies, now-Reds starter Jason Marquis for a solo home run in the fourth. And he singled in Blackmon in the first.

After a 4-for-5 day Sunday against the Giants at Coors Field, Arenado is 7-for-9 in back-to-back games. It’s almost overshadowing his defense.

Almost. Arenado, though, extended his highlight reel in the sixth when he shaded into the grass against left-hitting Tony Cingrani, then made a diving play toward the bag on a hard line drive. Arenado also dove back to his position from a shift in the third to steal a Jay Bruce line drive.

“His defense is always elite — every day,” manager Walt Weiss said. “He’s gone through a tough stretch offensively. But he’s definitely beyond that now.”

Butler threw six quick innings for Colorado, using 82 pitches to keep the Reds calm. It was just the second time this season he’s gone at least six long. He struck out only one batter, Marquis in the fourth, but Butler allowed just four runs. Marquis countered by giving up 10 hits in 5 2/3 innings for four runs (two earned).

Barnes continues to be a B12 vitamin shot for the Rockies. He also doubled in the third and is 9-for-18 since his call-up from the minors last week. And Blackmon, who walked twice and scored each time, stole three bases for the first time in his career, including going from first to third on separate swipes in the sixth.

John Axford pitched a hitless ninth for his seventh save in as many opportunities. The Reds lost a ninth consecutive game, their lognest skid since 1998.

The Rockies won three games in a row for the first time since April 22-24, when they improved to 10-7. After that, they went on a 1-12 skid. But Colorado has won seven of its past 10 games.

“As long as we’re making outs and helping our pitchers out, that’s all that matters,” Arenado said.

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke