ACAExpress.com partners with AgencyBloc Through this partnership, our clients will have access to a fully integrated solution which allows for commission reconciliation after their enrollments are complete.

ACAExpress.com, a best in class ACA Enrollment Solution provider, is excited to announce their partnership with AgencyBloc, the top agency management system and commissions processing solution provider.

“ACAExpress.com is proud to announce a partnership with AgencyBloc. Through this partnership, clients will have access to a fully integrated solution which allows for commission reconciliation after enrollments are complete. Something all agents need,” says Chris Linville, Chief Marketing Officer at ACAExpress.com. “Combining the top ACA Enrollment Solution [ACAExpress.com] with the Top Agency/Commission Management Solution [AgencyBloc] is a total win for agents and is perfectly in line with company goals to keep agents relevant in the post ACA era.”

ACAExpress.com believes consumers gain significantly by keeping licensed, knowledgeable, thoughtful agents involved in the process. Simply put, they put the power of Obamacare health insurance enrollment back into the hands of health insurance agents by providing an ACA enrollment solution that is simple for agents to use. Their turn-key enrollment solution provides agents with the tools they need to not only succeed, but the ability to thrive.

AgencyBloc’s mission is to provide powerful solutions to life and health insurance agencies by making the convoluted straightforward. AgencyBloc helps agencies grow their business by organizing and automating their operations using a combination of an industry-specific CRM, commissions processing, and integrated marketing automation.

“We’re excited to be integrating such an important time-saving feature for our clients. Open enrollment season is overwhelming and if we can remove extra work to make our client’s lives easier, we’re all about it,” says Cory Schmidt, Chief Technology Officer at AgencyBloc. “ACAExpress.com was the clear leader in their space when we researched and talked to users. Their solution is a great fit for AgencyBloc.”

With a joint vision, both ACAExpress.com and AgencyBloc continue to break the mold while providing innovative solutions to insurance agents, brokers, and sales organizations. Together the companies not only provide agents with the ability to quickly enroll clients but also the back-end support needed to make sure it’s a profitable venture.

ACAExpress.com, a certified Web-Broker Entity(WBE), has to date enrolled in excess of 150,000 individuals for health insurance coverage in less than one year. While still young in its corporate life, the company has quickly risen to be the leader within the ACA agent enrollment technology space. Originally founded in early 2014 as a bootstrapped venture, ACAExpress.com has recently taken significant angel investment through a Series A round. For more information contact ACAExpress.com press relations at press(at)acaexpress(dot)com or 888-668-3909.