Bloomberg

What has been the big difference between McDonald's and Wendy's, two historic names in the American burger business, over the last year? One way to answer that is via a line of ancient poetry.

The fox knows many things, the Greek poet Archilochus once wrote, but the hedgehog knows one big thing. In other words, is it better to be a cunning player of many games, or a highly focused one-trick pony?

McDonald’s, the fox in this scenario, has been firing multiple shots in all directions to stay on top in the fast food wars. In the last year alone it launched chicken wings, fish nuggets, bacon habanero ranch burgers and a line of wraps, among many other things. Wendy’s on the other hand, went full hedgehog — but instead of curling up into a spiky protective ball, it doubled down on its core burger lineup and introduced a very successful twist: the pretzel bun.

The resulting share price action over the last year speaks for itself (McDonald’s in yellow, the S&P 500 in red, Wendy’s in blue):

via Google Finance

McDonald’s has made plenty of admissions that its much more elaborate menu isn’t working as planned: It dropped the premium-priced Angus Third Pounder burger, acknowledged its line of salads aren’t selling like literal or figurative hotcakes, and said its customer service has suffered because it introduced too many new menu items too quickly.

In discussing results yesterday, McDonald’s chairman Don Thompson said the company needs to “re-establish the trust of customers” if it wants to overcome flat sales and profits. “That means basic execution at a restaurant level, marketing engagement at a much stronger level and also to make sure that our menu is relevant.”

As the WSJ’s Julie Jargon reported, that process will include adding more employees at busy times and changing the layout of kitchens to give employees more space to prepare food. But will it be able to make a hit new product that takes off in the market like the pretzel burgers at Wendy’s, or Taco Bell’s Doritos Locos Tacos? As the WSJ reported last year, it’s been a long time since the company struck gold with a new menu item:

The fast-food company hasn’t had a new product become a bona fide blockbuster—a unique new product that stays on the menu and meaningfully affects business—since the 2003 introduction of the pancake sandwiches it calls McGriddles, according to analysts.

Its next hit might not even be food. The company has big hopes to take more share of the drink market, especially coffee, where it says it is underperforming. Here’s CEO Donald Thompson on an analyst call last November:

The way that we look at this opportunity is based upon what we view as a McDonald’s fair share based upon our overall share within the marketplace, which basically tells you that we are less than that fair share now and feel like we have some room to go to catch up relative to our opportunities within beverages. Having said that, it’s also a growing category. So as beverages continue to grow, we also want to participate in the growth. [The competition is] any place that you can buy a beverage. So when you stop off — anyone that stops off to get a cup of coffee anywhere, that’s a competitor. That’s an opportunity potentially for us. Now we’re not chasing every single competitor, we’re looking at what the larger buckets of opportunities are. So what’s coffee on the go, what — where are we strongest in that coffee arena? We’re pretty strong in drip coffee, but we can be stronger. There’s more players entering this space, but we can be stronger in terms of our coffee execution.

Whatever it’s next big hit will be, McDonald’s better hurry, because Wendy’s is about to introduce the ciabatta bun.

See also:

McDonald’s Says Its Restaurants Got Too Complicated – WSJ

At McDonald’s, Salads Just Don’t Sell – WSJ