Buy Photo Metro is studying inclusionary zoning, a policy that would require new housing developments to set aside a certain percentage of units for affordable housing. (Photo: Karen Kraft / File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

The Metro Council took its most significant action to date Tuesday to address Nashville's depleting stock of affordable housing, setting up a showdown on the issue for six months from now.

Despite past concerns raised by developers, realtors and the chamber of commerce, the council voted 31-4 late Tuesday to give final approval of legislation that could lead to a new mandatory inclusionary zoning policy for future residential development.

The bill, sponsored by council members Fabian Bedne, Brady Banks and others, directs the Metro Planning Department to draft a mandatory inclusionary zoning proposal for later consideration.

Such a policy, utilized in numerous cities, would require that a certain percentage of units in new residential development be priced as affordable or workforce housing. The ordinance advises the planning department to set a goal of 14 percent. It gives the planning department 180 days to draft a proposal — meaning it would be a newly elected council that votes on the future ordinance.

"What we're trying to do is just send this to the experts, the planning department, to come up with a comprehensive affordable housing plan," Councilman Anthony Davis said. "And yes, we are saying we want inclusionary zoning in that plan."

Conservative council members Phil Claiborne, Robert Duvall, Tony Tenpenny and Charlie Tygard were the lone no votes Tuesday.

The bill overcame an amendment Tuesday from Tygard, who had proposed establishing a task force that would work with the planning department and consider other affordable housing solutions and also further examine mandatory inclusionary zoning. The council shot down his amendment by a 25-11 vote.

Tygard told his colleagues that he wanted more input on a proposal before one gets baked by the planning department. But most agreed that public-input mechanisms are already in place.

"We have a group of citizens on the planning commission who are appointed to do this regularly and there are processes in place for people to participate," at-large Councilman Ronnie Steine said. "We also have the word from the interim planning director that there's going to be that opportunity."

Though the issue of affordable housing has gained momentum — particularly during Nashville's ongoing mayoral race — a lengthy public hearing two weeks ago showed a sharp divide on the issue of mandatory inclusionary zoning.

Affordable housing advocates, who have mobilized over the past year, said it's finally time for Nashville to take real action to keep rapidly changing neighborhoods affordable for citizens who have lived there for decades. But critics warned of spotty track records of inclusionary zoning policies in other cities and argued that the new requirement for developers would be a boon to Davidson's surrounding counties.

Opponents of the bill included the Greater Nashville Association of Realtors and the Greater Nashville Apartment Association, among other groups.

Affordable housing is priced for low-income households, which make substantially less than the county's median income — $46,000 for a family of four. There's also "workforce housing," defined in the bill as households that earn from 80 percent of median income up to 120 percent.

Even without council action, the planning department has already hired a consultant to lead a study on affordable housing options and inclusionary zoning. The department's goal had always been to create a proposal. With the council's vote Tuesday, they are now working on a six-month timeframe.

Reach Joey Garrison at 615-259-8236 and on Twitter @joeygarrison.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1RP8o2H