Rasmussen: Just one in three Americans think Obamacare will improve healthcare in U.S.

A mere 30 percent of likely American voters believe the quality of healthcare they receive under Obamacare will be better than what they now have, according to a new poll by Rasmussen Reports released Monday.

Among that 30 percent is just 50 percent of Democrats, 31 percent of Millennials and 37 percent of self-identified moderate voters. A full 50 percent of Americans believe the quality of their healthcare will get worse under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

None of this is beneficial for President Obama, as Americans can begin signing up for the healthcare exchanges that make up the core of his signature legislative policy in a week. An NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll released last week found that 44 percent of Americans consider Obamacare to be a bad idea. Moreover, a majority of Americans would rather see the federal government defunded next week than Obamacare funded, according to a Rasmussen Reports poll released Tuesday.

The viability of the healthcare exchanges is already in jeopardy because the Obama administration has largely failed to convince Millennials to sign up. Because Millennials – or “Young Invincibles” – tend to be healthy for the most part, their participation in the exchanges is necessary to offset the costs of the health care used by older Americans. A study conducted by The Morning Consult earlier this month found that just one in ten Millennials will definitely buy into the program, however.

Sensing that younger Americans are skeptical about joining the healthcare exchanges, the Obama administration — particularly the Department of Health and Human Services — has gone out of its way to recruit professional athletes and celebrities to convince Millennials to join the healthcare exchanges, but has seen little success thus far.

Rasmussen Reports conducted a telephone study of 1,000 likely voters nationwide on September 20-21, 2013. The margin of sampling error is +/- 3 percent at a 95 percent level of confidence.