Those who suggest the Republican establishment will not support Cruz don’t know the Republican establishment.

Texas Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick (Photo: Dan Patrick)

To suggest that Ted Cruz cannot win the general election demonstrates a complete disconnect with the American electorate. Conservative Republicans, independents and Reagan Democrats have waited a long time to vote for a true conservative candidate. Ted Cruz is that candidate.

Ted Cruz will bring out voters from all walks of life. As the first Hispanic presidential candidate, Ted will generate the highest turnout of Hispanic voters in our history. They will vote for him because he shares their values of life, traditional marriage, school choice and economic freedom.

He will increase the turnout of faith-based voters because believers know another true believer by their word and deeds. He will turn out Tea Party and grassroots voters because he stands for liberty and the principles this nation was founded on.

Young families will also turn out to vote in record numbers because they will identify with Ted and Heidi and their children. Ted shares their dreams for their children because he has the same for his.

Those who suggest the Republican establishment will not support Cruz don’t know the Republican establishment very well. He may not be the first choice for some, but they know we must end the attack on American business. They want lower taxes, less regulation and an end to Obamacare. They will not vote for Hillary Clinton.

Imagine a debate stage next fall with Cruz and Clinton. Which candidate will communicate a bold vision to destroy the Islamic State terrorist group, secure the border, restart our economic engine, restore the American image around the world, lower taxes for all and replace Obamacare with a sound health care plan?

Which candidate will inspire people to re-imagine an America that holds promise and hope for our children and grandchildren? Which candidate will assure the nation that it can sleep soundly again knowing we have a president whose first priority is to keep us safe?

Cruz will dismantle Clinton issue by issue, exposing her plan to continue the Obama policies for eight more years. It hardly seems like a fair fight!

The general election contest will be a mismatch of gigantic proportions, and Ted Cruz will be elected president.

Dan Patrick is the lieutenant governor of Texas.

Read or Share this story: http://www.baxterbulletin.com/story/opinion/2015/12/16/ted-cruz-true-conservative/77388742/