Contest brings together competitors in carriage horse divisions

Kathy Sassano and her pony Stonyhill's Merlot prance through the warm-up course Sunday during the Rocky Mountain Carriage Club Fall Follies event in Johnstown. ( Aaron R. Atencio / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

On the Web For details about the Rocky Mountain Carriage Club, visit http://www.rockymountaincarriageclub.org/.

From horses to ponies to VSEs or "Very Small Equines," carriage drivers from around Colorado arrived in Johnstown on Sunday to participate in the Fall Follies horse driving competition.

Around the arena at the Bey Breze Farm, women in long-sleeve dresses and flowery hats, and men in jackets and helmets, passed by in two and four-wheel carriages pulled by (mostly) single horses.

Sitting straight and tall, these carriage drivers expertly guided their horses around a dressage pattern — in which the horses are judged on rhythm, quality of trot and figure — before they moved on to a cone course, where their drivers guide the horses through an obstacle course of cones.

"It's fun, entertaining, a challenge," said Susie Haszelbart of Elizabeth after she completed both courses Sunday morning with her purebred halflinger horse, Shasta.

The Sunday event consisted of three sections to the sport; dressage patterns, a cones course and "hazards" — a type of obstacle course, according to organizer Nancy Bruckhauser.

Advertisement

"In dressage, the horse has been schooled or is in the process of being schooled to become relaxed and submissive in a pattern," Bruckhauser said.

In the cones course, each cone has a tennis ball on it and carriage and horse must drive through in an allotted period of time and not knock over the balls or cones.

After each turn, volunteers also reset cones for the carriages as various carriages had different widths to their tires.

Haszelbart wore a red skirt, yellow jacket, and wide-brimmed red hat on Sunday with a lacy flower on one side.

She competes all over the country in both combined driving and pleasure competitions — which have different events at each — and recently returned from an event at Villa Louis in Wisconsin.

"It's the 35th year and it's right there on the historic grounds of Villa Louis," she said proudly. "I probably had 10 classes (I competed in) and I had seven outfits and different hats."

She said there were 147 competitors at the event from all over the country.

And last year she went to New York to compete.

"If we don't get more people involved than (the sport) just dies away," Haszelbart said.

She added that the club does many learning clinics open to the public, and that their events always need more volunteers.

"It's just a great social activity to get involved in," she said. "It's some of the nicest people you would ever meet."

Jack Bloss has been competing for about 30 years. He had a horse new to the sport on Sunday, a Morgan horse named Sassy.

"I love the challenge," he said.

He enjoys this event over other dressage events where a judge is viewing many horses in the arena at once.

"I don't care how good the judge is. They just can't do a good job," he said. "If you have one judge judging dressage like this, that judge sees absolutely everything going on. It's fairer, plus it's more of a personal challenge."

Bloss also owns Carriage Machine Shop in Berthoud that produces horse drawn carriages.

Fall Follies was hosted by the Rocky Mountain Carriage Club, which is under the American Driving Society, based in Wisconsin.

"Carriage driving now is a sport. Back in England, it was the way you got around. A lot of this is tradition based on what people wore or did 100 years ago before cars were invented," Bruckhauser said.

The Rocky Mountain Carriage Club is a 501(c)3 that has been in existence since the 1980s to promote the sport of carriage driving. They have 80 members and around 22 of those participated on Sunday. Their club is based mainly on the north side of Denver while the Colorado Driving Society draws its members from the south side.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.