Topics: America, Christmas, CIA, Civil Liberties, Cuba, Foreign policy, North Korea, Osama Bin Laden, Sony, Torture, Politics News

The United States is in real trouble when the story about the hacking into Sony Pictures computers and their decision to pull an inane comedy totally big foots the deeply troubling Senate Intelligence Committee’s study of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program.

Talk about using the holidays to flush bad news. Between the salacious internal Sony emails, the Obama administration’s watershed reset of U.S.-Cuban relations, and Christmas the average American will not get reporting on the fine print in the Senate Committee report nor a full analysis of the ambiguous CIA response.

In this case the devil really is in the details. For years the public was told the torture techniques saved lives, prevented additional terror attacks and helped lead to the capture of Osama bin Laden. Not so, says the Senate report, which goes on to chronicle years of obfuscation, deceit and deception by a CIA that was hell-bent on covering its tracks. Now the CIA is saying it is “unknowable” if the torture techniques produced results.

Even well into the Obama administration the Agency continued to go to the extraordinary steps of hacking into the Senate Committee’s computers. The Agency’s track record already includes the covert destruction in 2005 of 92 videos of detainee interrogations, which would have been critical to congressional investigators. In 2010 a federal special prosecutor declined to prosecute.

What emerges from the Senate report is a CIA that post-9/11 quickly turned to outside contractors and used multiple “black sites” where they employed what they euphemistically called “enhanced interrogation techniques.” These practices included waterboarding, forced rectal feeding, extended sleep deprivation, keeping subjects in prolonged stress positions including standing on broken bones, closing detainees into coffin-like boxes, staging of mock executions, as well as making threats to kill or rape detainee family members.

Dozens of individuals were wrongfully detained by the CIA and two of the Agency’s informants were mistakenly tortured. One detainee died of hypothermia after 48 hours of sleep deprivation, getting doused with cold water and being chained to a concrete floor.

Certainly these are all activities that would be defined as illegal under the United Nations Convention Against Torture, which the United States ratified in 1994. Under the terms of the Convention there are no “exceptional circumstances,” like preventing a potential terrorist act, which would permit the use of these techniques that deliberately inflict “severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental.”

The Senate Committee report concludes that the EIT techniques were ineffective and that the Agency regularly misled the White House and Congress about the nature of the program and its efficacy. The outside contractors, who pocketed more than $80 million from 2001 through 2009, carried out “inherently governmental functions such as acting as liaison between the CIA and foreign intelligence services, assessing the effectiveness of the interrogation program, and participating in the interrogation of detainees held in foreign government custody.”

New Crossroads labor correspondent Gregory Heires writes in his aptly titled post “Outsourcing Torture” that “the contract workers had a conflict of interest. They were responsible for carrying out torture while also determining whether it was effective and safe.” Heires notes there was a built-in financial incentive to be brutal. The contractors who waterboarded detainees got $1,800 a day, four times the amount paid to interrogators who did not.

Some of the most compelling material appears in the attachments of the Senate report in the form of additional statements made by individual senators who served on the committee.

Colorado Sen. Mark Udall says the investigation documented that the CIA’s interrogation program was “shaped and conducted by individuals who didn’t understand what they were doing and who had a financial stake in representing the program as effective.” That inherent conflict of interest was even more problematic because the EIT program “was managed incompetently by senior CIA personnel,” writes Udall.

“The ‘enhanced interrogation techniques’ were far more brutal than anyone understood. Perhaps most importantly, these techniques did not work. Nonetheless, the program was sold to the White House, the Department of Justice, the Congress, and the media as a necessary program that provided unique information that ‘saved lives,” according to Udall.

Udall says even as late as last year the CIA was still not being straight with Congress. “As I discovered in late 2013, an internal CIA review of the program initiated under former Director Panetta corroborates some of the significant findings of the [Senate committee] Study and acknowledges significant errors made during the course of the CIA program—but this internal review conflicts with the CIA’s own official response provided to the Committee, which denies or minimizes those same errors.”

Udall reports that Committee staffers spotted those glaring contradictions between the internal Panetta review’s conclusions about the enhanced interrogation program, provided years earlier to them, and the official June 27, 2013, response submitted by the CIA to the Senate Committee.

“Committee staff grew concerned that the CIA was knowingly providing inaccurate information to the Committee in the present day—which would be a serious offense and a deeply troubling matter for the Committee, the Congress, the White House, and our country,” writes Udall. “To preserve evidence of this potential offense, Committee securely transported a printed portion of the draft Panetta review from the CIA-leased facility to the Committee’s secure offices in the Senate.”