A bid to shrink the 'digital divide'

Ryan Morgan, freshman, uses her Chromebook on Thursday in chemistry at Centaurus High School in Lafayette. ( Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer )

Susan Simonds asked her first-year Spanish students at Centaurus High School to practice using Spanish to invite someone to go somewhere by using Google chat on their Chromebooks.

After they finished, the students copied the chat and emailed it to her so she could see how they did. Students also use the devices to complete warm-ups, take competitive online quizzes and complete assignments.

"The Chromebooks have been amazing," Simonds said, adding that she walks around the classroom more to help students and monitor them, stopping one from using Google's translator as a shortcut.

Boulder Valley schools have added about 8,500 Chromebooks in the last 30 months, between Chromebooks carts used in classrooms and a pilot at Lafayette's Centaurus High that gave every freshman a device.

Andrew Moore, Boulder Valley's chief information officer, said the district's goal is providing "one-to-web" access, with Chromebooks chosen mainly for their affordable price and ease of use with the Google environment.

Because they have a keyboard, students also can use them to take the state's online tests.

"Our goal is to get a device in every student's hand so we can shrink the digital divide," Moore said. "It's not so much about, 'hey we're giving you a Chromebook.' It's about connecting every student to the web. The device is the gateway."

Every district school has at least one cart of 30 Chromebooks that can be shared among classrooms, while most have more. At the high school level, the district is slowly rolling out its "one-to-web" initiative.

Advertisement

Along with the cost of the devices, Moore said, the other challenge to getting more of them in the hands of students is providing training for teachers.

"We want to help them change their teaching," he said. "The way the curriculum is delivered needs to changed."

Louisville's Monarch High School was the first to try a one-to-one initiative in Boulder Valley and is now in its fourth year of requiring students to tote laptops or other devices. The 25 or so students who can't afford their own laptops borrow one from the school.

But requiring students at every district high school to bring their own devices would put too high a financial burden on families, district officials said.

Instead, the district this year started a pilot at Centaurus, giving every freshman a Chromebook in January. Each new class of freshman will also get Chromebooks, until all students have one. When they graduate, the district will gift the devices to them.

In the fall, the district plans to expand the pilot to Broomfield High School.

"Thee's a lot of excitement around the devices," said Centaurus one-to-web coordinator Jason Oliver. "Students are asking to do more with them. It's helped push the teachers to ask, 'What can we do?'"

He said benefits include collaborating with someone outside the school, such as an author, and streamlining activities like warm-ups and quizzes so teachers have more time to spend with students who need more help. The devices also give students more control over their learning, he said.

Last week, in a freshman combined physics and chemistry class, students accessed an in-class assignment online, solved the problems on paper in groups and then plugged in the answers to check if they were correct.

"It's real-time learning" said their teacher, Jason Crispin.

While students had a few minor quibbles, like the difficulty in printing from a Chromebook, they said they liked the small size and ease of use.

Morgan Vantassel said having assignments online makes it easier to stay organized.

"It's not really an option to lose an assignment," she said. "You can do a lot of your work on them. It's a good size and easy to manage."

She said she also prefers the Chromebooks for presentations because its so easy to add visual elements.

Zack Jorquera said the devices are handy for taking notes in class and keeping track of assignments. He also used is Chromebook in social studies to send a draft bill to his legislators.

"Chromebooks do everything you need for school," he said.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa