Country’s best a brightest gathered together Wednesday night for the 47th annual CMA Awards.

Hosts Carrie Underwood and Brad Paisley took center stage for the sixth time, and they were just as entertaining as always, poking fun at everything from Duck Dynasty to Miley Cyrus to Obamacare.

Speaking of the great bearded ones, Willie Robertson appeared with his wife, Korie, brother Jase, and Jase’s wife Missy to present the first award of the night: Single of the Year, which went to Florida Georgia Line for their hit, “Cruise.”

Other award highlights were Kacey Musgraves for New Artist of the Year, Blake Shelton for Album of the Year, Little Big Town for Vocal Group of the Year, and George Strait for Entertainer of the Year. Country darling Taylor Swift was presented with the Pinnacle Award, which goes to artists who have achieved the highest levels of record and concert sales and who have made an impact both on country music and the wider world of pop culture.

One of the sweetest moments of the night belonged to the first couple of country music: Miranda Lambert and Blake Shelton. They will have to make room in their Oklahoma home for their respective Vocalist of the Year awards. This marks Lambert’s third Female Vocalist of the Year win and Shelton’s fourth.

Lambert didn’t just rule the night, she ruled the red carpet, showing off a noticeably slimmed-down figure. When asked the secret to her weight loss, she admitted: “All through my 20s I worked a lot – I was on the road since I was 17 and the road life is a lot of fast food and a lot of late nights and a lot of drinking – I didn’t give up drinking. I refused. You have to drink to put up with my husband! Just kidding! But I just felt that I should get a little more healthy and I have a record coming out in the spring and it’s a very important album to me – it’s my fifth album – and I have this spot, I found a great spot in country music and I want to keep it.”

When pressed for more, she said, “I didn’t give up really a lot really. Just Cheetos mostly!”

The CMAs were also chock-full of great performances. Check out Swift’s dramatic rendition of “Red” with special guests Vince Gill and Alison Krauss.

Did you watch the CMAs? What was your favorite performance?