Buy Photo Rep. Gwen Graham, D-Tallahassee, sits in her Capitol Hill office while searching on her phone for information about Danfoss Turbocor Compressors Inc. She recently visited the air compressor manufacturer in Tallahassee while promoting the importance of career training programs. (Photo: (Photo: Ledyard King/Tallahassee Democrat))Buy Photo

WASHINGTON – An optimistic Rep. Gwen Graham arrived on Capitol Hill a year ago, the darling of a Democratic Party that had suffered stinging losses in mid-term elections around the nation.

It hasn’t been the easiest year.

Graham's legislative accomplishments have been modest, not surprising for a freshman member of the minority party.

Working with Republicans, she added a civics component to a broad education reauthorization bill, renewed a trust fund used to protect coastal environments, restore fisheries, and improve boating safety, and authorized research and development on an anti-tunneling defense system to protect Israel from terrorist attacks.

But over the past 12 months, the Tallahassee lawyer representing the 2nd District has angered some of her progressive supporters by siding with Republicans on several issues, including support for the Keystone XL pipeline and for increasing the weekly hours employees must work to qualify for insurance under the Affordable Care Act, and opposition to President Obama’s nuclear deal with Iran.

Graham's political future is clouded by last year's ruling by the Florida Supreme Court that Florida's congressional boundaries had to be redrawn. The court said the existing map approved by the state legislature violated a voter-approved ban on political gerrymandering. Though the ruling was not related directly to her district, her lines have been redrawn in the process.

A final court decision is expected soon on an injunction to keep the current boundaries intact.

If the new map splitting Leon County is upheld, Graham faces a difficult choice between running in the newly configured – and heavily Republican – 2nd District, and running in the newly configured 5th District -- stretching to Jacksonville -- against Democratic Rep. Corrine Brown.

Brown, who is challenging the new map in court, is considering a run in either the new 5th District or the new 10th District if her challenge fails.

Graham, the daughter of former Florida Gov. Bob Graham, who also served in the U.S. Senate, remains characteristically upbeat despite the uncertainty. She eagerly talks about her office's constituent work (more than 1,100 cases opened) and the friendships she's struck with other lawmakers, particularly Republicans.

“I’ve learned that the House of Representatives is such a natural fit for me and that surprised me,” she said about her first year. “I thought it would be a good fit but I didn’t realize how positive it was going to be.”

During an interview in her Longworth House Office Building suite Wednesday, Graham also spoke about congressional perks (she wants to curtail them), her tangles with liberals back home (she says she’s kept her word to vote based on the merits of individual issues), her hopes for this year (solving the water flow for the beleaguered Apalachicola Bay is a priority), and her political future (she's undecided on details but is sure she won’t challenge Brown in a primary).

Graham recently discussed the past year and her hopes for 2016 in an interview with the Tallahassee Democrat:

Question: What have you learned in your first year?

Answer: You’d be surprised at the friendships (in the House), the wide breadth of ideological spectrum. I can walk up to (a member) and give a hug and say, 'I have this piece of legislation, let’s talk about it.' And we can agree to disagree but you don’t have to demonize one another.

Q: Were you surprised at how partisan Congress can be?

A. I’ve been disappointed with both sides of the aisle. Watching (some) members walk on to the floor, they don’t have a clue what they’re voting on. You have people, Democrats and Republicans, handed a "whip" sheet telling you how to vote. I’m proud to say no one ever gives me one of those sheets.

Q: Has it been difficult to get things done?

A: In terms of legislation, it is a challenging process for any piece of legislation to go through the normal procedure. To be dropped in the hopper, to be voted on in the House, to make it over in the Senate to be voted on. What we’ve tried to do is find other ways to get our priorities through.

Q: What are your priorities for this year?

A: We will continue to work on Apalachicola Bay. My goal for 2016 is to work in a bipartisan fashion... to try to find a solution to this ongoing water issue.

Q: You’ve taken aim at congressional perks involving air travel and car leases. Why?

A: I am very frugal. I believe in using money wisely and I don’t think the expense involved in flying first class is justified. One of the (other) things I’m appalled about is that members can rent cars for their own personal use back in the district. And they’re not renting small Fords. They’re renting luxury vehicles that are $800 a month or something. I drive my own car. I pay for my own gas.

Q: You disappointed progressives in your first year. Do you think you’ll be disappointing them again this year?

A: During the campaign, I was very consistent that I was not going to be a vote for either party, that I was going to do what I’ve done which is listen to competing viewpoints on issues, look at the facts, think through the issues and make an informed decision. And that’s what I’ve done.

Q: How much do you consult with your father about your job?

A: I’m very blessed because I have someone in my life that I respect so greatly that I can talk to about issues. I would not be doing my job if I didn’t talk to my father. I talk to him about everything and it’s part of my commitment to do my job to the best of my abilities.

Q: Does he ever disagree ever with your conclusions?

A: Yes. He disagreed with me on (opposing) the Iran agreement.

Q: If the courts uphold the new congressional lines, will you seek re-election?

A: A lot will depend on if Corrine runs because I would not primary Corrine. If she made the decision to run in District 10 then I would have to consider District 5.

Q: Does that mean you wouldn’t run in the newly drawn 2nd District?

A: I’m not naive. I recognize how tough District 2 would be. It will (be) a very, very tough decision. If I am running for office, it is my commitment to serve in that office to the best of my ability.

Q: Some would like to see you run for governor or U.S. Senate. Would you?

A: My dad has a saying and I believe it 100 percent: ‘You gain the right to consider future options by the job you do today,’ and I’m focused on doing the best job I can as the congressional representative of Florida’s 2nd District.

Contact Ledyard King at lking@gannett.com; Twitter: @ledgeking

Read or Share this story: http://on.tdo.com/1UZcu5B