In recent years, 14 doctors in Michigan, most in the Detroit suburbs, have been indicted in fraud cases centered on home visits.

House calls (Photo: Al Goldis, USA Today) Story Highlights Average patient is 74, has 8 chronic conditions, and takes 10 prescriptions

Michigan doesn't license home health care agencies

4 million Medicare patients needed a house call in 2012

(USA TODAY) - Medicare spending on doctors who make house calls rose to $236 million in 2012 — a 40% increase since 2006. But the effort to help aging patients with limited mobility get medical care has been riddled with fraud due to lax regulations in some areas of the U.S.

Nowhere is this more pronounced than in Michigan, where nearly a fifth of all the spending on Medicare home visits nationwide take place. In 2012, physicians in Michigan received Medicare funds for home visits equal to 42 other states combined, a USA TODAY data analysis reveals. The result: more than $60 million in fraudulent billing by Michigan doctors in the past few years.

Advocates say demand for home-visit services has skyrocketed nationally as a generation of seniors ages in place, and that Michigan's payments have boomed because it is home to several major visiting-physician businesses. Recent studies suggest that home visits, where doctors examine patients and perform tests, can reduce the likelihood of repeat hospital stays and drive down overall Medicare costs.

But others say the state's lax regulations have led to a surge in providers, some of whom have exploited the system by submitting false bills or charging for more work than provided.

"It's bad," U.S. Assistant Attorney General Leslie Caldwell says of the prevalence of fraud around home care. "And it's just an easier thing to do in Michigan than in other states."

A string of high-profile indictments in Michigan have led some to question whether home visits are doing the intended good.

“It's bad...and it's just an easier thing to do in Michigan than in other states.” U.S. Assistant Attorney General Leslie Caldwell

"These tend to be some of the most vulnerable people in our state," says state Sen. Mark Jansen, who has pushed for more regulation on behalf of Michigan's seniors. "We want them to stay in their homes, but we need to figure out how to protect them from bad people. We have an obligation to do something."

In recent years, 14 doctors in Michigan, most in the Detroit suburbs, have been indicted in fraud cases centered on home visits, Caldwell says.

Among the state's current cases:

• Physician Mikhayl Soliman was Medicare's 10th-highest-paid home visit doctor in 2012, making nearly a half-million dollars before he was arrested in September 2012. Soliman, of Wayne, Mich., awaits trial on 10 counts, including claims that he billed Medicare for home visits even though records show he was out of the country at the time, according to a criminal complaint. Data show that in 2012, every time he visited an established patient, Soliman billed Medicare for the most expensive type of home visit.

• House Calls Physicians owner Hicham Elhorr was charged in a $40 million fraud case in 2012. According to charging documents, Elhorr submitted claims "when beneficiaries were hospitalized or when the beneficiary was dead." The case came to investigators' attention after Elhorr on 75 occasions billed for more than 24 hours of services within the same day. Elhorr, who awaits trial, also is accused of receiving kickbacks for referring patients to home health agencies when it wasn't medically necessary.

• Aaron Scott Goldfein and William Sokoll were indicted in late 2013 and charged with submitting $5.7 million in claims to Medicare, the majority of which were for home visits. Charging documents allege much of the treatment wasn't necessary, didn't occur or was performed by Sokoll, who had his medical license revoked. The case is slated to go to trial next year.

Caldwell says these cases are generated by Michigan's lack of state regulation of home health agencies. Although doctor home visits are considered separate from Medicare's home health care program — which sends nurses, therapists and the like into patient's homes for ongoing and regular care — the two are closely linked, Caldwell says. A doctor must certify that a patient is homebound to get into the home health care program, which has given rise to a cottage industry of mobile-based doctors who do that work and feed the home health care agencies, she says.

Michigan is one of five states that doesn't license home health care agencies, which has led to an "astronomic" increase in providers — so much so that they now outnumber legitimate patients, Caldwell says.

Because home health care companies can't operate without patients receiving doctor certification, she says, "we really focus on the doctors" in prosecuting fraud.

Sherry Bumpus, an assistant professor of nursing at Eastern Michigan University, says that outside a medical office the potential for fraud rises. Visits are billed by the complexity of the case and time spent with a patient, and USA TODAY's analysis of home visit data shows that nearly 70% of visits in Michigan were billed at the two highest-level codes, while in New York, California and Florida about 45% of home visits were billed at those levels.

"Oversight might be an issue," Bumpus says. In many cases involving Medicare fraud at home, "nobody was watching them, and who was going to say if they were there for five minutes or an hour?"

But she says painting all home visits as problematic overshadows a lot of the good that can come from the practice.

"It allows us to do things we can't do in an office," she says. "When you do a home visit your eyes are wide open to all these other things — are they likely to trip? Do they have clean water? — that can help you develop a better plan of care."

On a recent snowy Friday in suburban Cleveland, physician Sitarama Pochiraju, who has performed home visits for 15 years, walked into the ranch home of an 86-year-old patient. His medical assistant, Digna Lopez, followed him in and went to work in the woman's bathroom, testing a urine sample to check for signs of a recurring urinary tract infection.

Pochiraju prodded his patient's swollen ankle.

"Your legs are better, much better," he said. "Are you drinking fluids every day?"

"I'm drinking more," the elderly woman said, as her two home health aides shook their heads in the background. Pochiraju frowned. "Coffee alone is not it," he said. "You have to drink juice, you have to drink water."

“There are bad apples, but there are in every industry.” Kevin Murphy, COO

The aides eased her into bed for an examination and so Lopez could perform an EKG. Bars to prevent falls surrounded the bed and a chair in the shower, modifications the doctor had recommended on earlier visits.

"Every patient has a chronic problem and needs supervision, needs a doctor's help," Pochiraju said. Visiting her home means problems are identified quickly, he said, and results in fewer trips to the emergency room. "There's no way this patient can be going to the doctor's office."

Pochiraju works for the country's largest home-visit provider, Visiting Physicians Association, headquartered in Troy, Mich. VPA now operates in 10 states, with 10 offices alone in Michigan. The average patient is 74 years old, has eight chronic conditions and takes 10 prescription medications, says Chief Operating Officer Kevin Murphy. Roughly a third are bedridden.

In 2009, the company paid $9.5 million to settle government claims that it submitted bills to Medicare and Medicaid for treatments that were unnecessary or for services more complex than those actually rendered.

Today, VPA has strict internal controls, including GPS monitors that show how long its physician and medical assistants have been at a location. Quarterly reports show only a small fraction of visits are billed at the highest levels, says Murphy, who acknowledged that recent prosecutions of doctors have tarnished the whole industry's reputation.

"There are bad apples, but there are in every industry," he says.

He added that critics of home visits often don't understand that doctors who do home visits are seeing patients who are often too sick or infirm to leave their home — a clientele with far more problems than the average office doctor's.

"People don't understand the complexity of house call medicine and what's being done in the home."

Data from the American Academy of Home Care Medicine show 4 million Medicare patients had a medical necessity for house calls in 2012, but only 620,000 received even one visit, executive director Constance Row says.

Her office in Maryland fields calls every day from people seeking in-home care and frustrated by the lack of primary care outside an office setting, she says.

"We are nowhere near meeting the need of people," she says. "It's an underserved population. If a few more people in Michigan are getting service, then good for them.

Among the issues in getting doctors to perform house calls, she says, is that Medicare doesn't reimburse for travel or travel time, making the visits costly to physicians and nurses who spend much of their day getting to their patients.

To counter that, Medicare is sponsoring a three-year demonstration project as part of the Affordable Care Act, offering financial incentives to 18 medical practices and partnerships giving primary care to seniors at home. If home care saves money by reducing more expensive emergency room visits, for example, the practice gets to keep a portion of the savings. .

Although savings data on the seniors-at-home project hasn't been released, early results are promising, Murphy says. Another demonstration project has resulted in the company's home visits generating $3 million savings in Medicare each year, and he expects the new project to show similar benefits.

"If you think about people who don't have access to the health care system — they don't have a doctor they go to for a regular checkup," he says. "When they need to access the system, they're going to the emergency room or they're dialing 911. It's simple for us to go out, if we see a patient eight or nine times a year — you compare eight visits, well, one ER reduction is going to more than pay for the cost of that care."

He says other companies have seen Visiting Physicians Association's success in Michigan and have tried to emulate it, causing the number of home-visit companies there to surge.

Sen. Jansen, meanwhile, chalks up Michigan's rise in the number of mobile doctors to rulemaking in other states. In recent years, as places like Florida have tightened controls over home health providers and prosecuted numerous fraud cases, Michigan has seen its incidents rise, he says.

"They tend to come and find low-hanging fruit," he says. "It's been on my radar screen for close to four years."

For the past two, Jansen has proposed legislation aimed at tightening regulations over home health agencies, requiring them to perform federal background checks on employees and apply for state permits.

His bills, however, have gotten hung up amid disagreements between home agencies that provide companion care for elderly residents and those that provide medical treatments such as therapy. Both are covered by his proposed law. Jansen's term expires at the end of the year, but he says he believes another senator will step up to push the issue further.

"Even if I don't get it, it'll be back next session," he says. "I think if everyone is honest, they know — this is the right thing to do."

Read or Share this story: http://www.wzzm13.com/story/news/investigations/13-on-your-side/watchdog/2014/12/02/medicare-house-call-fraud-michigan/19771553/