"Not what we say about our blessings, but how we use them, is the true measure of our thanksgiving," W.T. Purkiser, Christian theologian, once said.

First Presbyterian Church volunteers spent two days prepping and cooking a Thanksgiving feast for seniors and the needy. Over 114 dinners were served.

Eleven turkeys, four gallons of cranberry sauce, 25 pounds of stuffing and 30 pounds mashed potatoes, enough bread pudding to feed an army, 114 diners and 40 volunteers. That's the "blessings" that went into the First Presbyterian Church of Rutherford's annual Thanksgiving Dinner held on Nov. 28.

Seniors and those looking for some company on Thanksgiving headed to the Parish House where they were served a turkey dinner with all the trimmings.

People of all faiths, in need of a hot meal and some company, were welcomed by the church at the Parish House to enjoy a hot turkey meal, good company and a little entertainment.

This is the second year the church has offered a refuge on Thanksgiving. Conceived by parishioner Dr. Steve Adubato last year for the many people who were displaced by Superstorm Sandy, this year committee chair Bob Joerger said the church wanted to open its doors again, but to anyone who would otherwise be alone on the holiday. As much as the diners varied - aged 22 to 92, hailing from East Rutherford, Rutherford, Lyndhurst and Carlstadt and of many faiths, from Hindu to Christian - their reasons for coming to the church did not. They were alone for the holiday and wanted to share a meal with others.

The volunteers, who spent two days prepping, chopping, setting tables, serving, cooking and cleaning, ranged from doctors to musicians, former mayors to stay-at-home moms, dancers to journalists. All had the same idea when volunteering to spend their Thanksgiving at the church, "No one should be alone and without a hot meal on Thanksgiving."

As the dining hall filled with people who had made reservations weeks in advance and others who had just walked in off the street, the volunteers served up the turkeys cooked by John Hipp and Bill Rood.

Table banter spanned from ObamaCare to holiday traditions to children among the many who entered as strangers but left as friends. All said they were thankful to the church for not only the delicious meal that took two days to prepare but the good company of others.

"If it wasn't for this dinner, I would be home alone," said Roy, who donned a suit and tie for the occasion.

The room was filled with music as diners joined others singing holiday tunes at the piano played by Helen Joerger. Decorations was provided by The Academy of Saint Therese of Lisieux in Cresskill, Corpus Christi School of Hasbrouck Heights, and the church's Sunday school students.

The meal, was rounded out by pumpkin bread pudding made by parishioner Angie Miller and by Spindler's Bake Shop in Hasbrouck Heights, who emptied their showcases of cakes and desserts at the end of the day.

While the church had wanted to give diners a chance to mingle over a good meal, volunteers did not leave out the homebound and delivered meals to residents at Rutherford Senior Manor. There, residents enjoyed the delivery of turkey, stuffing, mashed and sweet potatoes, cranberry sauce, salad, vegetables and bread pudding and cakes.

After the masses were fed and the deliveries made, the volunteers sat down to the fruits of their own labors for a Thanksgiving meal blessed by the church's Reverend Pete Wilkinson.

In all, the group produced and served 114 meals to seniors and the needy.

"I am truly impressed by the effort put forth by the volunteers. I find it amazing how a group that were mostly strangers a few days ago became a formidable team ready to feed the masses," said Adubato.

Adubato and his team of chefs and volunteers, still counting their blessings, are readying a Christmas dinner for seniors and the needy. This tradition, that began over a decade ago at the First Presbyterian Church, feeds over 40 people who would otherwise be alone on Christmas Day.

Email: winters@northjersey.com