People Moves of the Week: ACG, Houlihan, Ironwood Capital

ACG promotes Amber Landis; Houlihan adds managing director; Ironwood Capital moves up three

Association for Corporate Growth- The middle-market mergers and acquisitions organization promoted Amber Landis to vice president of public policy. She will be in charge of advocacy at ACG and will open its Washington, D.C. office by the end of the year. Landis has been with ACG since March 2013 as a director of public policy, most notable, she established the Caucus on Middle Market Growth in the U.S. House of Representatives and also created ACG’s Private Equity Regulatory Task Force. Before joining ACG, Landis worked in Whirlpool Corp.’s D.C. office. For more on Landis and ACG’s public policy, see ACG to Open Office in Washington, D.C. in Public Policy Push.

Ardian- The private investment firm has expanded in Europe by opening an office in Madrid. The office will be led by managing director Juan Angoitia, who heads the firm’s infrastructure group and managing director Gonzalo Fernandez-Albiñana. The latter focuses on mid-cap buyouts. Angoitia has been with Ardian since 2013. He previously spent five years as an investment principal for Citi Infrastructure Investors. Prior to Citi, Angoitia was with Grupo Ferrovial for 10 years. Fernandez-Albiñana joined Ardian in 2015. He previously worked for Investindustrial and 3i in Spain.

Berkery Noyes- The New York investment bank added Vineet Asthana as a managing director in the firm’s telecom, media and technology group where he will focus on mergers and acquisitions in digital media and internet. Previously, Asthana was a founding member of digital media and technology focused investment bank CyndX Advisors. He also worked at Deutsche Bank AG (NYSE: DB) and Citigroup Inc. (NYSE: C).

BDA Partners- Edmund Price has joined the New York-based investment bank as a managing director and head of financial institutions group. In his role, Pirce, who is based in Hong Kong, will work alongside BDA’s bankers to expand the firm’s M&A and capital raising efforts for financial institutions in Asia. Before coming to BDA, Price spent a decade as a managing director in the Asian Financial Institutions Groups of UBS Group AG (NYSE: UBS) and Macquarie.

Burns & Levins LLP- Joseph Quinn and Carla Reeves have joined the law firm’s intellectual property and business litigation practices, respectively. Quinn, who comes on as a partner, works with intellectual property issues in electrical and mechanical engineering, material sciences as well as computer science. Prior to joining Burns & Levinson, Joseph served as a senior counsel at Seyfarth Shaw LLP. Reeves has joined the business litigation and labor, employment and employee benefits practices as an associate. Before joining Burns & Levinson, Reeves was an associate at Manion Gaynor & Manning LLP, formerly known as Cooley Manion Jones.

CBIZ and Mayer Hoffman McCann PC- The accounting firm added Dora Dvir as a managing director for the MHM audit practice in the New York office. Dvir will work with middle-market companies in the consumer and the financial services industries. She worked for MHM from 2008 to 2013.

Getzler Henrich & Associates LLC-The New York-based middle-market restructuring firm hired Frank Mack as a managing director based in Chicago. Mack focuses on pre-acquisition and financing due diligence, integration and divestitures specifically in the transportation, aerospace and defense, energy and financial services sectors.

Gibson Dunn & Crutcher LLP- Deepak Nanda has joined Gibson Dunn’s Orange County, California, office as a partner, focusing on mergers and acquisitions. Nanda was previously a managing partner in Foley & Lardner’s Los Angeles office.

Goodwin Procter- The law firm announced that Fredrich Lim has joined Goodwin Procter’s private equity group in San Francisco as a partner. Lim was previously a partner in Kirkland & Ellis’ debt finance group.

Houlihan Lokey- The investment bank said it hired Doug Rooney as a managing director in the firm’s strategic consulting group. He is based in Chicago. Before joining Los Anges-based Houlihan Lokey Inc. (NYSE: HLI), Ronney was with Benchmark strategy group where he worked with financial sponsors, mid-market family-owned businesses and public companies across a number of sectors. Rooney also worked for Compagnie de Saint-Gobain as a director of development, being responsible for the firm’s North American strategic planning and M&A efforts.

Ironwood Capital- The middle-market private equity firm, based in Avon, Connecticut, announced three promotions: The firm promoted Marc Reich from president to chairman and CEO; Carolyn Gailette has been named president and will continue to serve as the firm’s chief investment officer and Victor Budnick has been promoted to senior managing director.

Keefe Bruyette & Woods Inc.- Neil Chawhan recently joined Keefe Bruyette as an managing director in the firm’s insurance investment banking group. He is based in New York and will work alongside with KBW’s o‐Heads of insurance investment banking Seth Bair and Joseph Beebe. Chawhan most recently worked in Bank of America Merrill Lynch’s financial institutions group.

Morrison & Foerster- Lauren Bellerjeau has joined the law firm as a partner. Bellerjeau focuses on mergers and acquisitions in the real estate, aerospace, technology, healthcare, industrial and consumer sectors. She comes over from Hogan Lovells.

Platte River Equity-The private equity firm hired Eric Crawford as a vice president, focusing on investments in all of the firm’s sector groups. Crawford previously worked as an associate for Denver-based Platte River for three years before he left to pursue his MBA. In addition, Platte River hired T J Stone as an associate. Stone was most recently an analyst for JPMorgan Chase & Co. (NYSE: JPM), where he focused on M&A and financing in the industrials, transportation and aerospace sectors.

Reed Smith- Gregory Wang has recently joined the law firm’s Hong Kong office as a partner, coming over from Morrison & Foerster, where he was worked for three years. He advises public companies and private equity firms across China on mergers and acquisition, equity offerings and convertible note offerrings. Wang was also an associate in Davis Polk’s Hong Kong office for 10 years.

Venable LLP- Friedemann Thomma has joined the law firm’s San Francisco office as a partner, concentrating mostly on tax matters related to mergers and acquisitions along with post acquisition integration in the technology sector. Thomma previously worked for DLA Piper.

Veritas Financial Partners- Antanas Liobis has joined Veritas as chief credit officer where he will oversee portfolio management and loan operations, for the Boca Raton, Florida-based lender. Liobis comes over from Ares Management LLC where he was senior vice president in the firm’s commercial finance unit.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: