Customer representatives answer phone calls Tuesday, Oct. 22, 2013, at the Colorado Springs call center for Connect for Health Colorado. (The Gazette, Christian Murdock)

DENVER - Colorado's health insurance exchange needs a fee increase to remain financially sustainable, an outlook adding to lawmakers' concerns about the embattled exchange's future.

The assessment by Gary Drews, Connect For Health Colorado's interim chief executive, comes as the exchange is forced to operate without the use of federal funds, as stipulated under the Affordable Care Act. The law, also known as Obamacare, requires the exchange to be self-sustaining beginning this year.

Drews said Connect For Health Colorado needs an increase to the carrier fee, a $1.25 monthly charge for each policy on their books, to keep the nonprofit running. The fees would apply to most policies in Colorado, including those obtained through and outside the exchange.

Meanwhile, Connect For Health Colorado continues barreling down its course, working to enroll more Coloradans and resolve some glitches in its online sign-up system, Drews said. It's a journey that he compares to riding a steam engine roaring down an unfinished track at 200 mph.

"The track is still being laid out in front of us, but hopefully we are getting near the end," Drews said.

The exchange operates as a one-stop marketplace offering myriad insurance plans, and it's the only place Coloradans can go to get federal subsidies that can cut the cost of their monthly payments.

But the future of the exchange is being questioned more than ever after a scathing audit released in December, highlighting hundreds of thousands of dollars of overspending.

Republican legislators have banded together to try to get the exchange repealed, claiming that it bleeds taxpayer money on a one-size-fits-all model that doesn't work.

Rep. Janak Joshi, R-Colorado Springs, who proposed House Bill 1066, doubts the repeal will succeed, but said it makes the Republican statement clear: Most conservatives want the exchange gone.

"We could have done better on our own, anyway, so let's get rid of it and let's just try to see what are the other options available," Joshi said.

Joshi thinks one of the exchange's greatest failings is effectively forcing people to sign up for some aspects of coverage they don't want. Insurance obtained through the exchange offers a minimum $5,000 deductible, which drives Coloradans to emergency rooms to avoid having to pay up-front for medical visits, Joshi said. He would also prefer the government intermediary between people and private insurance companies be eliminated, he said.

The bill's chances of passing are slim, as it has been assigned to the State, Veterans and Military Affairs committee - known among the Capitol set as the "kill committee" where bills are sent to die.

"It's a tall order to say we just want it to go away," Lundberg said. "Realistically we don't think it's going to happen."

All of this comes just days after the health exchange needed to spend an additional $322,000 through the end of February to help fix problems with the website.

Thursday was the first of perhaps many times that the health care exchange will be taken to task this session by the Legislature's Health and Human Services Committee.

Thursday's meeting with members of the Senate and House committees merely reviewed the nonprofit's annual report. The Senate will hear a bill next week that proposes a second, more extensive, audit of the exchange.

While the proposed added oversight was not discussed Thursday, it offered a critically needed look at the exchange, said Sen. Kevin Lundberg, R-Berthoud, chair of the committee.

Lundberg has been skeptical of the state's role in creating the nonprofit, something he thinks could be forced to shut down, leaving Colorado in a lurch while it has to comply with the Affordable Care Act.

States without their own exchange have relied on the federal exchange, Healthcare.gov. Under the Affordable Care Act, people who cannot claim an exemption must have insurance or face a tax penalty.

"I'm not satisfied that the exchange is doing the job that it was set out to do, ostensibly, as far as providing insurance options for people of Colorado (and) giving them a very limited amount of options," Lundberg said.

He urged Drews to consider a future when the federal government will not support a state health exchange.

"I suggest strongly that the board in its strategic planning have a category for things changing dramatically," Lundberg said.

"Change how? I'll give you one. Well, it (the exchange) goes away."

Colorado Republicans' dislike of Colorado's health care exchange echoes the sentiment of their counterparts in Washington, D.C., said Seth Masket, chair of the department of political science in the University of Denver. But lawmakers at both levels lack a good alternative, he added.

"You see the way the Republicans at the state level are very much tied to a national party agenda, which has been for a while now that Obamacare is wrong, it needs to be stopped," Masket said. "But they are pretty vague on exactly what the replacement looks like."

States that have opted out of creating in similar exchanges are at a disadvantage, said John Straayer, a professor of political science at Colorado State University.

Advocates of the exchange tout its latest enrollment numbers - 121,000 people for 2014, said Adela Flores-Brennan, the executive director of the Colorado Consumer Health Initiative.

"If it was totally broken we wouldn't have 121,000 (people) enrolled," Flores-Brennan said.

With split control in the Colorado legislature and a Democratic governor, Lundberg recognizes that the exchange will likely be around for a while. In the meantime, he is dedicated to fixing some of its issues.

"If we can find things that can make it work better for the people of Colorado, while we are stuck with it, sure," he said.

-

Contact Ryan Maye Handy: 636-0198

Twitter @ryanmhandy