The Cowboys’ DeMarco Murray led the NFL with 1,845 yards on the ground. The Lions boast the league’s top rushing defense. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

Arlington, Texas — Before Eddie Lacy pounded out 100 of the Green Bay Packers' 152 rushing yards last Sunday at Lambeau Field, the Detroit Lions were on their way to having one of the best seasons defending the run since the Baltimore Ravens redefined dominance in 2000.

The Lions (11-5) were statistically on par with the 2010 Pittsburgh Steelers, who gave up 3.0 yards per carry and a long run of 24 yards before making their run to Super Bowl XLV, and the '06 Minnesota Vikings, who held opponents to 2.8 yards per carry and 61.6 yards per game en route to a No. 8 finish in total defense.

In the first series of the Lions' 30-20 loss to the Packers, Green Bay rushed for 61 yards, which was more than six opponents had gained against the Lions in an entire game. By game's end, Lacy had become the first back to gain 100 yards rushing against the Lions, and the Packers had set the season-high for rushing yards against Detroit (152).

"Our guys block well and our runners run well," Packers offensive coordinator Tom Clements said of the strategy to run against the Lions. "So we thought we could continue to do it."

Since that game, the Lions have had a short time to evaluate how a defense allowing 3.0 yards per carry and 63.8 yards per game could slip up so badly in a game that decided the NFC North title.

The answers needed to come quickly because waiting to end the Lions' season are the Dallas Cowboys, the No. 2 rushing team in the NFL with the No. 1 rusher in the game. If Lacy (1,139 yards, 4.6 average) can go for 100, one has to wonder what DeMarco Murray (1,845 yards, 4.7 average) can do to the Lions at AT&T Stadium on Sunday afternoon.

"As we saw last week we didn't do a great job of stopping the run and consequently we didn't play as well as we could have," Lions defensive coordinator Teryl Austin said last week. "Credit to them, they did a heck of a job, so this week we have to play better.

"Everything starts with our front seven, starts with the guys up front, our linebackers, and, you know, whichever safety we happen to have down. We have to do a great job up front."

The Lions looked like a one-and-done playoff team when the NFL suspended all-pro defensive tackle Ndamukong Suh for a game for stepping on Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers. But Suh's appeal was successful and his suspension was reduced to a $70,000 fine, putting him right in the middle of the fray in this wild-card matchup.

The interesting thing is that the Packers chose to run at Suh in the early going and had a lot of success walling him off on zone running plays. The Lions chose not to play a safety in the box so they could devote seven players to covering the Packers' high-powered passing game and the results weren't good.

Against Dallas (12-4), the Lions probably will start out trying to stop Murray and make Cowboys quarterback Tony Romo beat them.

"Like any game we go into, we want to make them one-dimensional," Austin said. "If we can stop them from running the ball and make them one-dimensional, then we think our chances go up because it takes away the play action and all those different things.

"It would be great if we could get them one-dimensional because I think that would work in our favor."

Maybe.

Romo has been sensational in December, completing 74.8% of his passes for 987 yards and 12 touchdowns with one interception for a 133.7 passer rating. In his final home game against Indianapolis, he completed 18 of 20 passes for 218 yards with four touchdowns and no interceptions for a career-high 151.7 quarterback rating.

Murray led the league with 24.5 carries per game, a number so high that Romo finished 31st in the NFL in passing attempts per game at 29. By comparison, the Lions' Matthew Stafford averaged 37.6 and the Packers' Rodgers averaged 32.5.

"Obviously we're significantly better than we've been up front in a long time, running the ball better than we have in a long time, and I think he's benefited from that," Cowboys coach Jason Garrett said of Romo. "But there's no question in my mind he's orchestrated the whole thing."

The Lions like to pressure with just their front four because they're confident they can consistently win that matchup, but with Dallas they'll be facing one of the best offensive lines in the NFL.

Somehow, the Lions will have to get some hits on Romo because if they can't, he's going to put up some decent numbers. Romo's back has been his biggest nemesis this season, but he was sacked only five times during the Cowboys' four-game win streak to end the season.

"For me, I was just excited to get back to a level to do similar things I had learned and was excited about trying,'' Romo said recently. "It (the back) held up and really allowed me to play my best football this season."

If Romo is on his game, the Lions will have to get a better performance from Stafford than they did in the Packers game.

The Cowboys defense is markedly improved from last season. The soft spot is a propensity to give up long passes. Only two teams have given up more 40-yard-plus completions than the 14 the Cowboys have allowed. The Lions offense ranks tied for seventh with 11, so there's room for Stafford to take this game over.

It's just a matter of if can he do it.

"There will be a time when you will say that Matthew Stafford is one heck of a quarterback," Lions coach Jim Caldwell said. "He's moving in that direction and that could be come Sunday."