People Moves of the Week: Timken, PEF Services, Quarton International

Timken names Ajay Das VP of business development; PEF Services expands in Midwest; Quarton merges with Blue Corporate Finance

Franklin Square Capital Partners- The alternative investment firm, based in Philadelphia, hired Greg Bassuk as head of liquid alternative strategies. He was previously the COO of IndexIQ. Bassuck will be responsible for Franklin Square’s liquid alternatives group. Franklin Square funds are sub-advised by the Blackstone Group LP's (NYSE: BX) GSO Capital Partners.

IFM Investors- Tom King has joined IFM as a senior advisor in the firm’s infrastructure group. He comes over from National Grid USA. King, based in Houston, will be in charge of advising new investments and portfolio companies for the fund manager.

K&L Gates- Philp Vickery has joined the law firm’s Brisbane office as a partner. Vickery focuses on M&A in the agriculture and resources sector. Separately, Brian Healey has also joined the firm as a partner. Healey advises global investors who are interested in the Australian agriculture sector.

Mayer Brown- The law firm expanded its Middle East practice by adding Charles Hallab and Tahan Thraya as partners, focused on cross-border M&A and joint ventures. Hallab will serve as the chair of Mayer Brown’s Middle East practice, while Thraya will become head of the group’s corporate and commercial team. Both were previously with Baker & McKenzie.

PEF Services LLC- Thomas McNeely has joined PEF as vice president of business development. Based in Chicago, McNeely will focus on expanding PEF’s services in the Midwest. He was most recently with Redridge Finance Group. PEF is a fund administrator for private capital funds.

Quarton International- The middle-market investment bank was recently created through the merger of Quarton Partners and Blue Corporate Finance. Quarton will advise on M&A deals valued between $25 million to $500 million in the industrial, consumer, health care and media sectors across the U.S. and Europe.

Squire Patton Boggs- Georgy Borisov has joined the law firm as a partner in Moscow. He focuses on M&A in the energy and natural resources sector. Borisov was previously with K&L Gates.

Timken Co.- Ajay Das (pictured) has been named vice president of strategy and business development, including M&A, at Timken (NYSE: TKR). He replaces Ron Menning, who announced his retirement plans. Das has been with the Canton, Ohio-based bearings manufacturer since 1992 and he was most recently the vice president of quality management.

Varde Partners- The alternative asset management firm, based in Minneapolis, has opened new offices in Tokyo, New York and Sydney. In addition, George Hicks has been named sole CEO while current co-CEO Marcia Page will stay on as chairman.

Wynnchurch Capital- Scott Fitch has been hired as a managing director at the middle-market private equity firm. Based in Los Angeles, Fitch will focus on sourcing investment opportunities. Fitch was previously in charge of business development at Platinum Equity.



For more information on related topics, visit the following: