Police line

Early Sunday morning, the Jackson County Sheriff’s Office received a 911 call reporting two individuals being shot.

When deputies arrived on scene, they found Travis Marvin Locke and Patrick Register had been shot.

During the investigation it was determined that Locke and Register were meeting with other individuals that night to purchase a large quantity of pills, used to make methamphetamine.

During the meeting, on Dellwood Cypress Road, Locke and Register were ambushed by the people they were meeting in an attempted robbery.

Shots were fired during during the struggle between Locke and Register and the suspects into the passenger compartment of Locke’s vehicle. They struck both Locke and Register. Locke and Register fled the scene and traveled to a home in Grand Ridge.

Locke was transported by helicopter to Bay Medical Center in Panama City, while Register was taken by ambulance to Jackson Hospital.

Locke’s injuries are non-life threatening. He was treated and released, but Register died as a result of his injures.

During the investigation a female suspect was identified as Dayeisha Curry. Officials say Curry was the one that Locke was talking with to arrange the purchase of the pills.

While searching for Curry, her vehicle was found in Marianna and a traffic stop was conducted. Deputies say Curry was the driver. Also in the car was Jordan Davis and Chris Laster.

Evidence collected from the scene of the shooting compared with evidence located from Davis, Laster and Curry, in addition to statements from the parties involved, implicated all three suspects in the murder of Patrick Register and the attempted murder of Travis Locke.

Dayeisha Curry and Chris Laster were both placed under arrest charged with Principle in the First Degree to Homicide of Patrick Register and Principle in the First Degree to Attempted Homicide of Travis Locke. Jordan Davis was placed under arrest on an open count of murder in the death of Register and Attempted Murder in shooting of Locke.