COLLUMBIA, SC (WACH) - With a little more than 48 hours left to sign up, it's crunchtime for those looking for coverage, and if you don't sign up before the deadline, it could cost you more than just a hefty fine.

Healthcare professionals at Lourie Consulting have been busy, as the clock is ticking to enroll in healthcare coverage.

It's the third Affordable Care Act open-enrollment period, and anyone who doesn't meet the deadline will face the highest penalty yet.

"It's real important people understand that this is it for the affordable care act this year," said Joul Lourie.

The fine for not being covered is 695 dollars or 2.5 percent of your household income- whichever is greater. If you aren't insured, you'll see the penalty when you pay your 2016 taxes.

Lourie says it's too expensive not to be insured for reasons other than the penalty. "If you look at the number one reason people go into bankruptcy today in America is because they have some sort of catastrophic event, they end up in the hospital with a hundred thousand dollar bill, and it just follows them around the rest of their lives."

In South Carolina alone, the Affordable Care Act has helped more than 200 thousand people enroll as of mid-December 2015.

Lourie says 90 percent of the people who get healthcare in South Carolina have access to a subsidy, and can cost many people as low as twenty to thirty dollars a month for coverage.

"We're seeing clients that can come get enrolled, and their monthly premium is far less than what their annual penalty would be," said Lourie.

If you've had problems getting covered in the past, the rules have changed.

"Now you're not excluded for pre-existing conditions. We've been able to help clients who are breast cancer survivors or some other form of catastrophic illness who were really priced out of the market before.. now we're able to help them," said Lourie.

The deadline to enroll is Sunday, January 31st at midnight. Lourie Consulting says it only takes about 10-15 minutes to go through the entire process, and they'll be available in person and by phone all weekend.

Lourie Consulting is located at 2711 Middleburg Dr. Ste 208, Columbia, SC 29204. Their phone number is (888) 553-3323

http://consumers.lourieconsulting.com/