On Nov. 2, the Catholic Church observed All Souls Day, which gives special remembrance to those who have died. As a school centered on faith in the presence of God, Saint Paul’s celebrated this holiday but in a different way.







In a morning assembly held Oct. 31, the student body gathered in the Briggs Assembly Center for the third annual Dia de Los Muertos, or Day of the Dead, prayer service. Dia de Los Muertos is a traditional holiday, practiced mainly in Mexico but also in many cultures around the globe, remembering friends and family members who have died. During the prayer service, faculty, staff, and students are asked to come to the altar and either place a photo of a deceased loved one or a piece of paper with his or her name on it and place it on the altar. The Spanish Club along with moderator Liz Brett and the Liturgical Band prayerfully and respectfully put on this beautiful ceremony.

Warm Hearts winter clothing drive returns

The Brother Crouzet Chapter of the National Honor Society teamed up with the Lasallian Youth Leaders and put on the second annual Warm Hearts Winter Clothes Drive at Saint Paul’s Oct. 14-25. Hundreds of students donated cozy coats, gloves, shirts, and hats to help the less fortunate in our community.







This selfless act goes along with one of the Lasallian Core Principles: Concern for the poor and social justice.



After counting all the winter gear items, the total tally reached over 1,000 items.



Since the school reached its goal, Dean of Students Kenny Sears, Principal Brother Ray Bulliard, and Vice Principal Trevor Watkins awarded the student body a New Orleans Saints dress-down day for Halloween.



Our entire community would like to thank NHS moderator Kristin LaGraize, Campus Minister Jeaneen Schmitt, and LYL moderator Myrle Wiggins for their guidance and leadership in this program.





Saint Paul’s students have an opportunity to give back to a community that has provided so much. Once a month, Saint Paul’s chapter of Habitat for Humanity rises early to build houses in the Covington area that are simple, decent, and affordable for low-income families.



Motivated by the conviction that every man, woman, and child should have a nice, safe, and inexpensive place to live, math teacher and moderator Richard Pichon rallies the assiduous and energetic wolf pack to his cause on Saturday mornings throughout the year. From 8 a.m. to noon, our workers pounded nails into walls, sprayed insulation, installed windows, put up siding, and created another secure and beautiful neighborhood for our city. Saint Paul’s thanks Mr. Pichon for his dedication to this group over the many years.

Students who are reluctant to sign up for Habitat should not hesitant. Besides giving students a great community service opportunity, Habitat teaches great construction skills and improves work ethic. Senior and President Peter Yager started working Habitat for Humanity as a sophomore without any previous “handy-man” experience. Now after many hours of hard work, Peter has only good things to say about the organization: “As Lasallian students, it is our duty to help those who are less fortunate than others. Habitat for Humanity presents us with an opportunity to fulfill this obligation while making a positive impact on our community.”