"There are a few super-users who have been in the ER 40 or 50 times, but when we step back and look at the whole population, we see a different pattern," says Jessica Castner. "People aren't replacing their doctor; they are sicker, have more chronic diseases and are using everything more." (Credit: Marcin Wichary/Flickr

Smokers 4x more likely to be emergency room ‘super-users’

Smokers are four times more likely than non-smokers to frequently visit emergency rooms.

A new study, which explores how much patients replace visits to a primary care physician with a trip to a hospital emergency room, also shows Americans with chronic diseases use both services equally.

In fact, overall, medical care visits of all types have soared in recent years.

“There are a few super-users who have been in the ER 40 or 50 times, but when we step back and look at the whole population, we see a different pattern,” says Jessica Castner, assistant professor of nursing at University at Buffalo. “People aren’t replacing their doctor; they are sicker, have more chronic diseases, and are using everything more.”

Health system strain

Emergency department use could increase as more individuals gain health insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act, placing a financial strain on health insurers, patients, and the overall health care system, Castner says.

Published in the journal Nursing Research, the study analyzed US Department of Health data of 56,000 people between the ages of 18-64 who used Medicaid to cover their medical expenses in 2009.

Patients were divided into four categories: healthy; at risk for chronic disease; diagnosed with chronic disease; and diagnosed with a system failure, such as kidney or heart failure.

People with chronic diseases weren’t the only high volume users of the ER; similar to smoking’s effect, substance abuse and psychiatric illnesses tripled a patient’s likelihood of becoming a “frequent ER user,” classified as someone who visits the ER three or more times a year.

Future studies will reanalyze emergency department use with focuses on specific chronic conditions.

Source: University at Buffalo