As of today Chris Fletcher is no longer the editor of The Daily Herald. He has taken a job as the head of public relations (or some such) for Goodwill Industries of Middle Tennessee, and last Friday was his final performance. He will now join the headlong march of desperate commuters heading for Nashville early each morning as they all happily make their way up Interstate 65. You will be able to recognize him by his white-knuckle grip on the steering wheel, and the look of steely determination in his eyes. Chris will, most likely, really enjoy his new role as road warrior.

I first met Chris almost immediately after he arrived in Columbia from his home state of Texas. He was full of vim and vigor, and I proposed to him that, as the county historian, that I could supply him with a never-ending stream of local history in the form of weekly columns. To my amazement, he agreed, and even managed to appear enthusiastic. Of course, at that point he did not realize the numbers of people of whom I had put soundly to sleep with a constant round of speaking engagements. That was about 700 Sunday columns ago, and if the new, and as yet un-named, editor is as gullible as Chris was, I might be able to continue.

Fully admitting that I have played tricks on Chris, he has endured them with a smile. That is one of his strong points. As the editor, he is blamed with every mistake, misspelled name and gaff made on rare occasions by the newspaper. I have seen him at work in his office as he takes these angry calls, and he does so without personal ego. He genuinely listens to people, takes their concerns seriously and does what he can to make things right.

Some folks who have been editors in the past became jaded to it all. Walter “Hot” Hastings was the editor of the Herald long ago and was reputed to have kept a baseball bat behind his desk to help him explain his editorial policies to angry readers. Chris had a sign above his desk that said an editor should have a brother who is a pimp so that he would have somebody to look up to. You can’t say that Chris Fletcher doesn’t have a sense of humor.

There were a few occasions when Chris and I got to take a field trip. These were usually to Civil War battlefields in the area, and several were memorable. Unfortunately, I cannot divulge any details, as the statute of limitations is still in effect. Craig Duncan, the Herald’s advertising manager went with us to Chickamauga. Chris and I had to hustle Craig out of the park because he kept scratching around looking for bullets and cannon balls.

I am going to really miss Chris and his beautiful wife, Suzanne, and their girls, Abby and Carly. The girls are grown now, and gone from home, but I hope they will always call me “Uncle Bob.” We, all of us, are losing a friend.

Chris has done his best to promote the good things about our town, while still reporting on the not-so-good. I am not willing to say farewell to Chris, but only good luck, and please don’t forget us.

◆◆◆

Bob Duncan is director of the Maury County archives. Email him at bduncan@maurycounty-tn.gov.