Democrats say a change in focus is long overdue.

"I do think the energy has already shifted," said Neera Tanden, president of the Center for American Progress, a think tank often aligned with the White House. "It would be great if the health care conversation moves to where people are, not relitigating these insurance issues."

Wishful thinking, say Republicans.

"The politics of this has gotten so unpleasant that we're locked into 'repeal-and-replace' for the next year and a half," said lobbyist Tom Scully, who ran Medicare in President George W. Bush's administration. "It may not be great for America, but that's the reality."

Scully says Republicans may be able to make substantial changes but not repeal Obama's law entirely.

What would a different health care conversation sound like? Some possibilities:

Prescription Drug Prices

Nearly three-quarters of the general public see prescription drug costs as unreasonable, according to a recent Kaiser Family Foundation survey. That concern seems to be driven by new breakthrough drugs that can cost $100,000 a year and even more. Last year it was Sovaldi, a cure for liver-wasting hepatitis C infection. Next it could be skin cancer drugs in the approval pipeline.

Economist Len Nichols of George Mason University in Virginia says the cost of new medications is "unsustainable," but government price controls could stifle innovation.

Most patients are not exposed to those excruciating cost pressures because the vast majority of prescriptions are for lower-priced generic drugs. Overall, only 1 in 5 people taking prescription drugs say it is difficult to afford their own medications, the same survey found.

———

High Insurance Costs

The value of a health insurance card is being eroded as employers and insurers impose higher deductibles, copayments and other cost-sharing on top of premiums.

"When people ask me what is the No. 1 change I want to make in the Affordable Care Act, my answer is that it's not affordable enough," said John McDonough, a former Democratic Senate aide who helped steer the health law to passage. "Moving forward, one of the challenges is how we're going to address this new world of cost sharing."