Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal's launching of a conservative nonprofit is reigniting speculation that he's positioning himself for a possible run at the White House.

Jindal said the nonprofit, called "America Next," will focus on articulating a national conservative strategy, ala Margaret Thatcher, and will avoid getting involved in individual elections. Perhaps, but the announcement has restarted chatter that the Baton Rouge native might make a run for the presidency in 2016.

He has been largely mute on his national ambitions since February, when he told Fox & Friends anyone considering a run at that time should "get their head examined." But in a rare diversion from his usual talking points Wednesday, Jindal said he hadn't made a final decision on a run for the top job.

"I don't know what I'm going to be doing in 2016," Jindal said in a conference call with local media Thursday. When asked if he would be interested in running, he repeated the same statement, adding the launch of America Next wasn't about any one election.

"This is more important than any election, whether it be '14 or '16," Jindal said. He will focus over the next two years on helping fellow conservatives -- especially governors -- get elected, working on job growth in his home state and articulating a clear national strategy for conservatives fed up with current party politics.

The governor has hired former Romney campaign manager Jill Neunaber to help run the new 501(c)(4). Curt Anderson, a confidant and political consultant at On Message, Inc. -- home of Jindal campaign strategist Timmy Teepell -- will also be involved in the nonprofit.

In the call Thursday, the governor did not have further details on who else would be involved in the effort. Policymakers, academics and businesspeople from across the country would be involved, he added, but no announcements could be made at this time.

In his message on the "America Next" website, Jindal said a "rebellion is brewing outside the Washington beltway" against what he called "the Obama experiment."

He also repeated previous concerns that the Republican Party has not properly expressed its purpose or goals to the American people. He said it's not enough to be against something.

"If we believe in the principles we espouse, then we should have no fear of putting them into practice, and we should have no fear of articulating for the American people exactly what a conservative policy agenda will do," Jindal said in the website message.

The governor didn't provide any specifics on the nonprofit, however, only saying it would focus on proposals to improve health care, education and energy policy. He said he still stands behind repealing and replacement the Affordable Care Act, also called Obamacare.

"The president was right when he said there are real problems in our current health care system," Jindal said, citing inaccessibility to quality care for those with preexisting conditions.

No campaign funds were used to launch the website or bring Anderson and Neunaber on board. Fundraising for the nonprofit will happen independently of the governor's campaign efforts and would begin Thursday, Anderson said.

Jindal first announced the launch of America Next in an interview with POLITICO.