Sioux Falls, SD

What if you could take a magic potion that would give you the body you want? There are various protein powders and workout supplements on the market right now that claim to help you pack on muscle.

In Brandon Bausch's case, hard work and dedication to the gym has earned him his physique.

"Right now, I can bench press 310 lbs," Bausch said.

This did not happen overnight. The 28-year-old started lifting about five years ago. He set personal goals and continues to make gains.

"Right now, I always drink a protein shake first thing when I wake up and immediately following a workout," Bausch said.

Bausch knows which protein powders and supplements will help his body and what will hurt it. Not everyone does the research. There are countless protein powders and supplements on the shelves, but not all of them are created equal. If you look at the ingredients, it is easy to spot a long list of chemicals and additives.

"Look at the ingredients and if you can't read the ingredients you probably shouldn't be ingesting them," Becky Hanzen, Avera Health Integrative Nutrition Health Coach, said.

Hanzen said ingesting the added chemicals over long periods of time can damage the kidneys, lungs, and heart..

"We should be scared about that. We should be smart about that, because that's the whole, the whole industry right now. Making everything as quick and as easy as can be. A little bit of one thing is ok, but they just keep putting in more and more and the body can't tolerate that," Hanzen said.

Be on the lookout for pre-workout supplements that claim they will give you an energy boost to pump you up. Consumer Reports found that some on the market contain a stimulant called DMBA. According to the journal Drug Testing and Analysis, it has not been tested on humans, and is chemically similar to DMAA -- which was recently banned by the Food and Drug Administration after being linked to heart failure, strokes, and sudden cardiac death.

"The FDA is not -- doesn't have to approve these supplements or the protein powders or the nutrition industry right now as a whole, so that's probably our biggest concern. Is we can slide in a lot of chemicals and wait until the effects happen, and then they go in and say, " Oh, look, this is really toxic for us. This is actually poison," Hanzen said.

"The FDA regulates nutritional supplements as almost a third category. Not the same as prescription drugs, but closer to over-the-counter drugs, but they have regulatory authority over the supplement industry," Randy Reinartz, Wayne and Mary's Nutrition Center, said.

However, not every workout supplement is bad for you. Many stores, including Wayne and Mary's Nutrition Center, stock their shelves with wholesome, clean products. Reinartz said his store only deals with FDA-approved laboratories and manufacturing facilities. Reinartz said proteins are not dangerous by themselves. What some companies add to them is the problem.

"The FDA needs to regulate the unscrupulous companies that are putting additives in their supplements or sports nutrition products that are not the most healthy, and they have been doing that. They will close a plant down or pull a product off the market," Reinartz said.

Not only will you find clean products, the staff here works with customers to help them make the best choices for their health. Reinartz said the most important thing you can do is read up on what you are going to buy, so you know what will work best for your body.

"It's the most gratifying thing we do, is to have people come back to us after they've made the changes in their diet and lifestyle and see an improvement in their health," Reinartz said.

As for Bausch, he said he has found a simple rule that helps him gain big muscle safely. When it comes to the ingredients in powders and supplements, a small list is the best way to go.

"Seven to ten ingredients is probably all you need for a protein powder," Bausch said.