More Video...

The infant mortality rate in Kansas is higher than other states. Around 250 infants will die this year in Kansas.

The national rate of infant mortality is 6.0 deaths per 1,000 births. Kansas is at a rate of 6.36 according to the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention. The 0.36 increase accounts for an additional 14 infants that are at risk of dying in Kansas.

There are higher counties in the state; Sedgwick, Johnson, Wyandotte and Shawnee are the highest according to the Kansas Department of Health and Environment. They account for over 50 percent of infant deaths.

Breaking the numbers down to Sedgwick County, zip codes east of downtown Wichita and to the south east have a very high rate of infant mortality. According to KDHE statistics, zip code 67214 has a 14.1 rate of infant mortality, which is the second highest in the entire state.

There are multiple causes for infant morality, but the four most likely causes are congenital anomalies, prematurity, sudden unexplained infant death and maternal complications.

Dr. Barry Bloom is director of the newborn intensive care unit at Wesley, he says that there are ways to lower the rate of infant death. “We would love to see the day that we are not necessary, but we will always be here for sick babies,” Dr. Bloom said, “many of the things that we have to deal with are preventable with changes in lifestyle.”

Bloom says that a woman’s health prior to pregnancy is very important during the pregnancy. Risk factors, like smoking, drinking and obesity, increase the chances of prematurity and abnormalities, even if the woman is not pregnant yet.

There are many other factors that cause infant mortality; they are very complex issues and sometimes out of the control of the mother.

The CDC ranks Kansas at 24th in the nation for infant mortality. That is down from years past.

Dr. Cari Schmidt is a research at the University of Kansas Medical School in Wichita. She has analyzed the data of infant morality over the past three years and has found that the areas inside the state with the highest infant mortality rates move around. One piece of information is driving her efforts in certain communities - African American babies in Wichita die at a rate three times higher white babies.

Both Schimdt and Bloom believe that the rates can be lowered and will be lowered. Their goal is to get Kansas below the national average of infant mortality.

One way to get the mortality rate down that has shown impact is to educate people about living a healthy lifestyle. Smoking, drinking and being obese increase the risk factors for problems during pregnancy. They also educate parents on safe sleep and how to take care of their infant in a safe way.

Organizations across the state are holding community baby showers, where parents and expecting parents get free information on how to help their baby be healthy.

Any infant that ends up in the NICU (newborn intensive care unit) runs a very large medical bill. Bloom says that a parent can expect a minimum $50,000 bill. That is why he stresses the health of the mother during pregnancy in hopes that the infant is born healthy.

One rule to follow is the ABC rule. A – alone, always let the infant sleep along; B – back, always make sure the infant is sleeping on their back; C – crib, the infant needs to sleep in their crib. According to Schmidt, of all the infants that died of sudden unexpected infant death, all of them had unsafe items in their cribs. That is why she says to keep any loose blankets or bedding out of the crib. “They [parents] are adding those things to the crib because they want to comfort their infant and yet it becomes a hazard,” Schmidt said.

In 2007, there was a spike in the mortality rate in Kansas. Many committees were formed to try and decrease that rate. Christy Schunn of the Kansas Infant Death and SIDS Network says that the collaboration of doctors, community activists and government health care workers are what resulted.

Schunn has found that woman as young as 12-years-old benefit from education about pregnancy and healthy lifestyle habits. “There is much we can do, we have excellent services, we have people are wrapped around this and digging deep,” she said, “and I think we are successful and we will continue to see this downward trend.”

If anyone has any questions about resources available to try and prevent infant mortality, they can contact the Kansas Infant Death and SIDS Network at (316) 682-1301.