A screening test for prostate cancer, the most common form of the disease in men, which is found in African-American men in the U.S. at the highest rate in the world. Tom Williams/Getty Images

ATLANTA — Advancements in cancer research have enabled better detection and treatment of cancers and even better quality of life for cancer survivors, but is a significant portion of the U.S. public getting left behind?

Even as the Affordable Care Act (ACA) promises to close gaps in health care coverage and make it more accessible, many cancer researchers are unsure how much it can do.

“It’s not only an issue of being able to pay for care, (but) also is the care that’s delivered (provided) in a culturally appropriate way?” said Dr. Christopher I. Li, program head of the translational research program at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle. “Are the barriers with distance taken care of? Issues such as child care or getting off of work, things like that … There are all these other factors that also need to be addressed. It’s not just about paying for it.”

Li was one of the chairs of a conference sponsored by the American Association for Cancer Research, where researchers came together to discuss how to help close the gap between those who are benefiting the most from new advances and those who have not done as well.

There is plenty of evidence of gaps in how different groups of people fare after they contract various diseases.

“Health disparities are really a global problem, and so when we talk about cancer, disparities really impact every type of cancer,” Li said.

Many of the cancers discussed at these meetings, he said, are both common and have higher rates in certain minority groups — in occurrence or mortality rates. For example, prostate cancer, the most common cancer in men, is found in African-American men at the highest rate in the world. Similarly, he said, African-American women have the highest mortality rates from breast cancer, and along with Hispanic women, they tend to have more aggressive forms of the disease when they are diagnosed. Also, Li said, African-American men and women have higher mortality rates from colon cancer.

Jean McDougall, a postdoctoral researcher at Fred Hutchinson, said there are good reasons to doubt the new health care law alone will close gaps in care.

“I think it’s going to improve access to care,” she said, “but whether it makes a difference in terms of the timeliness of treatment, I’m not convinced.”