Nearly one in four Oklahomans from the ages of 18 to 64 is without health insurance, according to recent Census data. The absence of insurance is a major contributing factor to Oklahoma's poor outcomes across a whole range of health indicators, as the uninsured have less access to regular and timely medical care they need.

Our high rates of uninsurance create a drag on Oklahoma's economy. Hospitals and other health-care providers must absorb hundreds of millions of dollars annually in uncompensated care costs, which get shifted to individuals and businesses in the form of higher insurance premiums and medical charges.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

Uninsured workers are more likely to miss work and quit their jobs due to health problems. The financial strain of being uninsured can leave families just one accident or diagnosis away from crushing debt.

Over the past 15 years, we have made great strides in extending health insurance to more children, and our insured rate for kids has fallen by half. But the number of uninsured adults has only continued to rise. Oklahoma now has a golden opportunity to address this long-standing crisis and improve the health and financial stability of our families and businesses.

The Affordable Care Act encourages states to expand coverage for individuals below the federal poverty level by offering 100 percent federal funding for three years, and at least 90 percent thereafter. States can either expand Medicaid eligibility directly, or, following a model developed in Arkansas, use federal dollars to cover the cost of purchasing commercial health insurance for those who are eligible.

The latter approach is one recommended in a report created at the request of Gov. Mary Fallin and released this summer by a national consulting company headed by Michael Leavitt. The Leavitt report calls for using federal Medicaid funds to expand the innovative and successful Insure Oklahoma program to uninsured Oklahomans. Most of these people would receive assistance to purchase private insurance through their employers or on the new health insurance marketplaces. Some higher-income individuals now covered by Medicaid would be shifted to private coverage plans.

Most of those who would gain coverage work in low-wage jobs that do not provide insurance. They work hard preparing our food, building our homes, and taking care of our children and elderly relatives.

We know that having health insurance makes a real difference. A carefully controlled study in Oregon found that adults who gained Medicaid coverage had better access to care, enjoyed better health outcomes, and were more financially secure than a peer group that remained uninsured. Previous rounds of Medicaid expansion in other state have resulted in lower death rates.

Expanding coverage would not only improve Oklahomans' health but also deliver significant economic benefits to the state. The Leavitt report determined that over a 10-year period, the economic impact of expanding coverage is expected to range from $13.6 billion to $17.6 billion. Far from creating a drain on state resources, the state's cost in providing a small share of the match of health care costs in later years would be more than offset by program savings and higher tax revenues, creating savings that can be used to boost schools, public safety and other vital services, or to cut taxes.

If we reject federal dollars, the tax dollars Oklahomans send to Washington will be spent providing health care in places like Arkansas, New Mexico and New York, while our state's residents go without. Yet turning down federal funds for Oklahoma will leave us no closer to taking the meaningful steps needed to bring the federal deficit under control.

The fact that expanding health insurance coverage is a part of President Obama's health care law has led Republican leaders in many states, including Oklahoma, to say no. But some staunch conservative Republicans have weighed expanding coverage on its merits and come out in favor. In explaining his support for expanding coverage, Ohio's Republican Gov. John Kasich declared, "I will not accept the fact that the most vulnerable in our state should be ignored. We can help them."

Arizona Gov. Jan Brewer reached the same conclusion from a strictly economic standpoint. In leading a tough but successful battle to convince the Arizona Legislature to expand coverage, she said: "Weigh the evidence and do the math. With the realities facing us, taking advantage of this federal assistance is the strategic way to reduce Medicaid pressure on the state budget."

If Oklahoma fails to expand coverage, the consequences for our health care sector, a main economic pillar for our small towns and big cities alike, could be severe. For hospitals in particular, the Affordable Care Act provided a trade-off where reduced numbers of uninsured patients were expected to make up for cuts in federal payments for uncompensated care. Without expansion, hospital layoffs and even some closures may be inevitable.

Insure Oklahoma, which Fallin and many other state leaders have fought arduously to preserve, provides Oklahoma a solid foundation on which to bring more federal dollars back to Oklahoma to expand coverage. We need to put politics aside and do what's right for our economy and our people.