Tripp, SD

It's been a long week for families in Delmont after an E-F2 tornado destroyed dozens of homes.

After seven days of heartache, residents of both Delmont and Tripp had something to smile about - high school graduation.

It's a day these fourteen students will never forget. It's a day of celebration, but many of the students say it's bittersweet.

"Hard to get focusing on that today is suppose to be a good day for graduation when there's so many other things going on," graduate Nyssa Fechner said.

During the ceremony, they reminisced about growing up together. It's a small group of students, with a large amount of respect for one another.

"We're really not a class but we're really a family. We've always been like that ever since we were kindergarteners and the bonds have grown over the years," graduate Morgan Ziegler said.

That bond was tested by the destructive tornado. Nyssa Fechner found out that her grandparent's house was gone after the twister rolled through. It's been difficult of her, but the support from her peers has made it easier.

"My classmates have been more like family. They all were there for me when it happened. They were constantly calling and asking if we're ok or if they could help. I really thank them everyday for that because you don't know how close you are with your friends until something like this happens," Fechner said.

The class went together to Delmont to help clean up the debris. Now, they're helping in a new way. The community piled into the Tripp-Delmont Gym to see them get their diplomas. The tears of sadness were replaced with tears of joy.

"I think it gives people a couple hours to forget about what just happened and focus on something else," Fechner said.

"After what happened I didn't know how people were going to react to graduation on Saturday, but seeing everyone here and that they're still joyful for what's going on even after what happened it's really a good thing to see," Ziegler said.

Now the ceremony is over, but the memories these fourteen students created will last a lifetime. A bond that's stronger than any disaster.

"I think we'll always remember that we had graduation still even after a tornado had completely wiped out one of our towns," Fechner said.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.