In 1952, there may have been no better investment one could’ve made in the United States for 5 cents than buying a Topps baseball card pack and keeping it closed. Today, that unopened pack would be worth between $10,000 and $15,000.

Brooklyn native and Hoboken resident Leighton Sheldon purchased his first pack of baseball cards in 1985 at the age of 8. Almost 30 years later, Sheldon now runs the nation’s largest buyer of vintage baseball cards, “Just Collect.”

Sheldon’s company also buys and sells football, basketball and hockey memorabilia, though his passion has always revolved around the baseball diamond.

“I played sports growing up but I would’ve been fooling myself if I thought I would go on to play professionally,” Sheldon said. “I decided to do, in my estimation, what I thought was the next best thing at the time which was getting into the baseball card industry.”

Sheldon now staffs six full-time employees as well as a few part-timers who are enrolled at his alma mater, Rutgers. His company takes pride in offering all of its customers a free appraisal.

“We like to buy baseball cards at a fair price but we do enjoy the experience,” Sheldon said. “We do it a little differently than everybody else.”

Sheldon and his team name every collection based on the story behind it. They tell the story on their website, justcollect.com.

For instance, one of his collections, “The Lost and Found Collection,” involved a family from New Jersey whose patriarch passed away believing that his collection of baseball cards had been lost. As family members were cleaning his house, they came across his 1941 “Play Ball” baseball cards that were in “really nice” condition. The family eventually sold the collection to Sheldon without regret.

“That story, along with others like it, made me realize that people felt good about selling to us and that separated us from the rest of the pack,” Sheldon said.

Yesterday, Sheldon had with him approximately $100,000 worth of baseball cards he’s acquired through auctions and private sellers.

With him was a 1915 Ty Cobb from a box of Cracker Jacks worth $6,000. A 1910 Cy Young from a cigarette box worth $3,000. A Jackie Robinson rookie card worth $3,000.

And then the final two.

First, a Cap Anson card. Anson was perhaps the greatest player during the 1800s. The card, printed in 1887, is currently on sale for $24,500.

The last is a 1952 Topps Mickey Mantle Rookie card, which Sheldon used to explain his trade and how cards are graded and priced.

“The first thing that people look at and appreciate and what dictates the value is the centering,” he explained. “See how this has a defined border left to right, it looks pretty good, top to bottom is a little bit off, not too bad.”

He explained that the Mantle rookie card is known for being off center.

What dictates the grade and price more so than the centering are the corners.

“I’m looking at the corners of this Mantle,” he said. “They’re not bad, but I can see the lower left has a little bit of wear, that’s consistent with a grade of five.”

The final indicator is the condition of the card’s surface.

“If you look here, the blue is really strong,” he said. “It’s not faded. There’s also no creasing or wrinkling.

If a card has a wrinkle or a crease it will never score a grade above a four, even if every other attribute is perfect, which can be frustrating for both collectors and dealers.

The final price for this edition of Mantle’s rookie card? $25,000.

Sheldon grew up a fan of Yankees first baseman Don Mattingly. Though Mattingly never won a World Series championship, shortly after Mattingly’s retirement, Sheldon seized the opportunity to see his team play for a shot at the 1996 World Series against the Atlanta Braves.

While in college at Rutgers, Sheldon payed $200 for a nosebleed seat at Game 6.

“I wanted to be a part of history,” he said.

He certainly was as the Yankees went on to win in the sixth and deciding game.

Apparently he wanted to take a part of history with him as well.

“I dislodged my bleacher seat and took it out underneath my Windsor coat,” he said. “I still have it to this day. I put a date on it and everything. I’d never sell it.”