Health care insurance is the biggest hurdle to a new labor agreement between NJ Transit and rail unions as the clock ticks down to a March 13 deadline, when workers can strike or management can lock them out.



Both sides return to the bargaining table Wednesday to try to avert a strike that unions and management say they don't want to inflict on riders.

How you'd get to work during an NJ Transit strike





A coalition of 11 NJ Transit rail unions have worked since 2011 without a new contract. The two sides have been through negotiation, mediation and two Presidential Emergency Boards, which issued reports, recommending the union's package with some modifications.



However the PEB punted the health insurance issue back to NJ Transit and the unions to work out, suggesting they form a joint sub-committee to solve the insurance issue, after NJ Transit made a final proposal in mid to late 2015.

The main issue is NJ Transit wants employees to pay more, up to 10 to 20 percent of the premium cost, depending on the plan, while the unions want to pay the same as their peers on Metro-North and the Long Island Rail Road, which is 2.6 percent, according to the PEB report.



NJ Transit's proposal also would change how employees pay, from a flat monthly payment to a percentage of their straight time weekly salary. The union contends that would hurt employees who earn the least, in the PEB report.



For the majority of union members now covered by a Preferred Provider Organization, premiums could rise from $82 a month to as much as $640, said a source involved with the talks. The source did not want to be identified because they are not authorized to talk to the media. The PEB estimated that increase could be $459 or higher by Jan. 2019.



A sticking point for the unions is that there is no cap on how much those premiums could rise in future years, according to the source. Unions asked for a cap on how much premiums would increase, which they said other regional commuter railroads have provided in their contracts, according to the PEB report.



"There is no cap in place, so next year it could be $800 or more per month," the source said. "The PEB stated that is way too much speculation in "uncapped premium costs" because the carrier could double or triple it from year to year. We are asking for some type safeguards with a cap in place."



Dennis Martin, NJ Transit interim executive director, declined to answer specifics about the health care proposals because they're part of negotiations. He said the answers are in the final PEB report.

The PEB also said that NJ Transit proposed a "Direct Access 10 plan" between August and December.

Under Direct Access, employees covered by a PPO would pay 20 percent of their medical and prescription premiums, according to the PEB report. Employees who opt for an HMO would pay 10 percent of their premiums. New hires would be enrolled in the HMO and contribute 20 percent.

Union officials told NJ Transit's board last week those premiums could wipe out most of any wage increase, essentially making the raise a net increase of less than one percent.



The PEB found that employees of other commuter railroads, such as Metro North and the Long Island Rail Road paid 2.6 percent of their straight time pay up to 40 hours a week toward insurance premiums. That board recommended NJ Transit union workers pay 2.5 percent.

The union also proposed co-pays of $10 for in-network doctor visits, which would increase to $15 in 2017, $70 for emergency room visits and that employees would use a mandatory mail order service for maintenance drugs. The union said it would negotiate implementation of a new health care plan.

NJ Transit negotiators argued that the agency can't afford the union offer. While other regional commuter railroads have forms of dedicated funding, NJ Transit doesn't. The governor and legislature decides the level of NJ Transit's funding annually.

NJ Transit negotiators told the PEB a settlement could cost an estimated $183 million. NJ Transit officials warned that could trigger a fare increase this year. Fares rose 9 percent on Oct. 1 to cover a budget gap.

Larry Higgs may be reached at lhiggs@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @commutinglarry. Find NJ.com on Facebook.