Topics: Domestic Terrorism, Editor's Picks, LaVoy Finicum, oregon militia, Oregon standoff, Right-wing terrorism, shawna cox, News, Politics News

Even though the occupation of the would-be militiamen who took over a wildlife refuge in Oregon ended a month ago with a whimper instead of a martyr-producing bang, that doesn’t mean that the right-wing fringe isn’t still trying to turn this into the next Waco, to be lovingly obsessed over to stoke their victim complex. Now new video out shows this issue is not going away anytime soon.

Robert “LaVoy” Finicum did get shot after FBI agents ambushed the occupiers flagrantly left the protection of the wildlife refuge to drive over an hour away to a community meeting. He is a piss-poor martyr — a taxpayer leech whose supposed hatred of government didn’t stop him from housing foster kids for money and then making those kids do unpaid labor on his ranch — but he’s the only one they’ve got, so the fringe right has been riding his death as hard as they can in hopes of establishing themselves as the victims here.

The hopes for turning Finicum into a martyr rest on the possibility that a couple of bullets that were fired by FBI agents, but did not hit him, before he reached for his waistband in what was a clear “reaching for the gun” gesture that led to the police killing him*. Originally, the militia movement pushed the notion that Finicum did not reach for his gun and was shot with his hands up. (No big surprise that an unsubtly racist movement would “borrow” the imagery from the Black Lives Matter movement’s slogan “Hands Up, Don’t Shoot” to argue that they’re the “real” victims here.)

That didn’t pan out, as the FBI immediately released an aerial video showing that Finicum did reach for his waistband, where he apparently had a gun. So the narrative changed to arguing that the FBI shot before Finicum reached for his gun.

Unfortunately for the FBI, there is some evidence for this. There’s a Justice Department investigation into the possibility that not only were shots fired unnecessarily, but that FBI agents conspired to hide the evidence. Earlier this week, video from inside of Finicum’s truck, filmed by militia member Shawna Cox, bolsters the argument that FBI agents took shots before Finicum reached for his gun.

“Cox’s video showed that one shot hit the truck’s left rear passenger window as Finicum stepped out,” Les Zaitz of the Oregonian writes. “At the time, Finicum appeared to have his hands at least at shoulder height.” You can watch the video for yourself:

That said, this video does as much to damage right-wing militia cries of martyrdom as it does to bolster it. When combined with the aerial footage, it paints a picture of Finicum as someone who is violent and reckless at best, and quite possibly out to get himself (and possibly others) killed. When the video starts, Finicum is taunting law enforcement, daring them repeatedly to kill him. Inside the truck the militia members discuss whether they can get away with just taking off, and it’s clear that they are aware of the FBI’s desire not to create martyrs, and see this as evidence that they can just get away scot-free.

“We have kids in here,” you can hear a woman, likely Cox, saying as they contemplate whether to take the risk that law enforcement is too afraid of bloodshed to open fire. Finicum then throws caution to the wind and takes off, not getting far before running his car into an embankment and nearly running over an FBI agent in the process.