Gov. Matt Bevin of Kentucky is dismantling the state’s highly successful exchange on which people buy private health insurance policies or enroll in Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act. His shortsighted and pointless show of defiance against the Obama administration’s health care reforms could harm thousands of people in Kentucky, who may fall between the cracks as the state shifts their coverage from its own exchange, known as Kynect, to the federally run exchange at HealthCare.gov.

If Mr. Bevin, a Republican, wanted to take a stand against cooperation with the federal government, he picked an odd way to do it. He is shutting down an independent state program and turning instead to the federal government to run the exchange. While the federal website appears to be working well, the transition to a different system could cause problems.

Photo

The Kentucky exchange has made it extremely easy for people to enroll in a plan appropriate for them. If someone tries to sign up for private insurance but is judged by the exchange to be poor enough to qualify for Medicaid, the application is forwarded to Medicaid, which enrolls the person. If someone tries to sign up for Medicaid but is deemed ineligible by that program, the application is forwarded to the exchange for enrollment.

With the switch from Kynect to HealthCare.gov, the transfer of electronic information from the exchange to Medicaid is likely to be cumbersome, at least initially. People rejected by the exchange will need to submit a new application to Medicaid; some may not realize their information was not automatically forwarded or could get annoyed by the process and end up uninsured. Mr. Bevin needs to put a very high priority on providing a smooth exchange of information and enough enrollment assistants to help people find the right coverage.

The more vexing issue is what Mr. Bevin will do about Medicaid, which has enrolled far more people in Kentucky since its expansion in January 2014 than have the private plans sold on Kynect. The previous governor, a Democrat, had greatly expanded the Medicaid program with the help of very generous federal matching funds. Mr. Bevin, however, campaigned on a pledge to “scale back” the Medicaid expansion (by how much, he didn’t say). Now he says he will apply for a waiver from the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to administer the program using conservative approaches, like charging certain Medicaid patients premiums or co-pays.

Kentucky received $290 million in federal grants to build Kynect, of which $57 million has not yet been spent. Federal officials have suggested that the state should repay the $57 million. But surely a state that is willfully destroying an exchange that was working well should be forced to return the whole $290 million.