Town board forms special panel to study options

EDITOR'S NOTE: The Times-Call's Take Two series revisits people or situations we have written about in the past. Take Two stories run on Mondays.

The turnout was smaller, but the majority of Lyons residents participating in last week's special election — the town's second, in less than a month's time — appeared to affirm the position that most people took when they cast ballots in March.

Public parks and open space properties should not be converted to housing sites, voters said in both elections.

When the balloting ended on March 24, 55 percent of the Lyons voters taking part in the first election — 614 out of a total 1,112 filled-out ballots counted — rejected a proposal to allow between 5 and 7 acres of the town's Bohn Park to become the site of 50 to 70 units of housing to replace homes lost in the 2013 flood.

When ballots were tallied last Tuesday, 386 voters — 54 percent of the 714 Lyons voters making their opinions known in that second election — approved adopting an ordinance that will now require voter approval of any town decision to rezone parks and open space land that's one-half acre or larger.

That ordinance will also require the town to get voter approval before putting any publicly or privately owned property into a zoning category that would allow commercial or industrial uses, if that property is currently encumbered by a development-restricting conservation easement.

"That was very, very disappointing," Lyons Mayor John O'Brien said of the results in last week's election. "It's definitely going to hamstring future town boards."

Advertisement

"Now, our options are extremely limited," O'Brien said, in trying to come up with ways to provide affordable replacement housing for residents who were displaced by the 2013 flood but who have said they want to move back to Lyons.

"We know that the interest is there," O'Brien said. "We know that the demand is there."

Nearly 200 individuals, including adults and children, "did not return after the flood," said town administrator Victoria Simonsen.

But Simonsen and O'Brien said more than 70 people who lost their homes in the flood have said they would come back, if affordable housing options were available.

Seeking to accommodate needs of a diverse population

Last Monday, night, one night before the balloting concluded in the second special election, Lyons' Town Board of Trustees approved forming a housing advisory committee and charged that panel with the task of trying to find options for providing that replacement housing — notwithstanding the first election's tossing out of the board majority's preference for the Bohn Park site.

Simonsen said the Town Board named four people to that housing committee on Monday — Justin Spencer, Craig Ferguson, Nate Mohatt and Thomas Delker — and O'Brien said three other members are expected to be named soon.

The goal, O'Brien said, is "to recognize and accommodate the needs of a diverse population" by continuing to try to look for ways to provide the replacement housing needed to allow Lyons flood-impacted residents to return to the community.

Spencer, in a memo proposing creation of a new housing committee or commission, had said the panel could focus on finding sites and funding to support partnerships with Habitat for Humanity or other developers to build low-cost, owner-occupied housing.

The committee or commission could also consider removing barriers and adding incentives for people to add accessory dwelling units that could be offered to flood-displaced residents, and could look for sites and funding for development of a manufactured housing park, Spencer said in that proposal. He said the panel cold work to find sites and funding for smaller rental housing developments.

"Affordable housing is a long-term problem already present before the flood, exacerbated by the destruction of 86 housing units, including 43 mobile homes," Spencer wrote. "Real estate and land in Lyons is already expensive and likely to get more expensive in the future."

He said that "for this town to heal after a divisive vote," the special-election over the Bohn Park proposal, "we need to show real progress toward bringing people back.

"This is the number one problem for most people in town right now, and it requires significant focus and effort to solve," Spencer wrote, adding that "there's a core group of people interested in being part of the commission and working to make progress on this problem."

Voter approval on housing proposals needed before May 31

In January, Lyons' Town Board approved a resolution designating the 5- to 7-acre portion of the town's 25.66-acre Bohn Park for the flood-recovery replacement housing project site, if voters agreed with the plan.

The March 24 election ballot question asked voters whether the board could lease that site to the Boulder County Housing Authority, which would have overseen the project, for a period of 99 years, and would have changed the site's zoning in order the proceed with the housing development.

The Bohn Park housing site proposal was opposed by Save Our Parks and Open Space, a group formed last August. That group also petitioned for the second special election, the one in which a majority of Lyons voters have now imposed election requirements for any future town proposals to use park land, open space properties or properties covered by conservation easements or housing or commercial developments.

Town officials have said voter approval of a specific housing proposal is needed before May 31, when application deadlines close for federal Community Development Block Grant-Disaster Recovery funds that could provide up to $4 million in funding for a housing project.

That money, along with tax credits and other parts of a funding package that was tied to the Bohn Park site, O'Brien said, is not likely to be available any longer.

Simonsen said that with the assistance of what the new special housing committee might come up with, "we'll continue to pursue affordable housing options, on a smaller scale."

John Fryar: 303-684-5211, jfryar@times-call.com or twitter.com/jfryartc