CHICAGO, Oct. 22, 2014 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- Leading researchers in emergency medicine will present more than 400 studies during ACEP14-Scientific Assembly, the annual meeting of the American College of Emergency Physicians in Chicago, Ill. Sponsored by the American College of Emergency Physicians, the Research Forum will be held in Room W474A of McCormick Place West Convention Center from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Monday, October 27th and from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Tuesday, October 28th.

Researcher physicians will present their latest findings in emergency medicine research, focusing on topics ranging from pediatrics to geriatrics, including toxicology, pain, injury prevention and public health. To search Research Forum by topic, presenter, title and time, visit: http://bit.ly/1w2IPgz. The abstracts on which poster presentations at Research Forum are based are published in a special supplement to Annals of Emergency Medicine, available online now at http://www.annemergmed.com/issue/S0196-0644(14)X0002-8.

Each day of the Research Forum will feature a special "state-of-the-art" presentation in Room W474A of McCormick Place West Convention Center. Judd Hollander, MD, FACEP and Roger J. Lewis, MD, PhD, FACEP will moderate the presentation on Monday, October 27th at 1:00 p.m. on the topic "Pragmatic or Adaptive? The Future of Clinical Trial Design." Frank Peacock, MD, FACEP and Robert Welch, MD, FACEP will moderate the presentation on Tuesday, October 28th at 8:00 a.m. on the topic "Can We Trust Preliminary Data? Following Up on Phase II Trials."

The Research Forum will close with a panel session, Cutting Edge: Highlights of Emergency Medicine Research, highlighting some of the most significant emergency medicine research, from 4:30 p.m. to 5:30 p.m. on Tuesday, October 28th, in Room W474A of McCormick Place West Convention Center. The session will be moderated by Phillip Levy, MD, FACEP and panelists for this event will include Angela Mills, MD and David Milzman, MD, FACEP.

Obtain credentials (and the latest daily news about the conference) in the Media Relations Office located in McCormick Place West Room W181A (Media Relations). An adjoining News Media Workroom (Room W181B) is available for use by the press, and has telephones, internet connections (computers not provided) and workspace to conduct interviews. Members of the media who display ACEP14-Scientific Assembly press credentials have access to all educational sessions, the general session, the Research Forum and the Exhibit Hall.

Media Relations Office Hours:

Sunday, Oct. 26 1:30 p.m. - 6:00 p.m.

Monday, Oct. 27 7:30 a.m. - 6:00 p.m.

Tuesday, Oct. 28 7:30 a.m. - 6:00 p.m.

Wednesday, Oct. 29 7:30 a.m. - 6:00 p.m.

Thursday, Oct. 30 7:30 a.m. - 11:30 a.m.

ACEP is the national medical specialty society representing emergency medicine. ACEP is committed to advancing emergency care through continuing education, research and public education. Headquartered in Dallas, Texas, ACEP has 53 chapters representing each state, as well as Puerto Rico and the District of Columbia. A Government Services Chapter represents emergency physicians employed by military branches and other government agencies.

HIGHLIGHTS FROM 2014 RESEARCH FORUM

OCTOBER 27-28, 2014

AMERICAN COLLEGE OF EMERGENCY PHYSICIANS

McCORMICK PLACE WEST CONVENTION CENTER ROOM W474A

Monday, October 27, 2014

9:30 a.m. – 11:00 am.

National Cost Savings from Observation Unit Management of Syncope (#39)

Presenter: Baugh, C., Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Mass.

The potential cost savings for managing certain syncope patients in dedicated observation units is $169 million a year.

Age Modifies the Association Between Obesity and Mortality among Emergency Department Visits Hospitalized with Severe Sepsis (#50)

Presenter: Abbate, L., Denver Health Medical Center, Denver, Colo.

Obesity is associated with lower in-hospital mortality, particularly among older hospital adults with severe sepsis.

Comparison of Ultrasound and Plain Radiography for the Detection of Long Bone Fractures (#66)

Presenter: Bagan, M. William Beaumont Hospital, Royal Oak, Mich.

Emergency medicine residents identified bone fractures more accurately when using ultrasound than when using x-ray.

Pediatric Electronic Board: A New and Accurate Method for Determining the Weight of Critically Ill or Injured Children (#81)

Presenter: Milne, S., Goderich District Collegiate Institute, Goderich, ON, Canada

A newly developed tool, the Ped-E-Board, was more accurate than the Broselow Tape, currently the standard tool for estimating body weight of children during resuscitation.

A Descriptive Analysis of United States Prehospital Care Response to Law Enforcement Tactical Incidents (#82)

Presenter: Aberle, S., Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn.

Emergency medical services respond to 11 law enforcement tactical operations every day in the United States, with the majority of incidents occurring in homes.

United States Emergency Department Openings, Closures and Annual Visit Volumes: 2001 to 2011 (#89)

Presenter: Sullivan, A., Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Mass.

Between 2001 and 2011, the number of emergency departments grew by 2.2 percent while the volume of emergency department visits grew by 31 percent.

10:30 a.m. – 11:30 a.m.

Strength and Dose of Opioids Prescribed from U.S. Emergency Departments Compared to Office Practices: Implications for Safe-Prescribing Guidelines (#1)

Presenter: Menchine, M., University of Southern California, Los Angeles, Calif.

Emergency departments prescribe significantly lower doses and numbers of opiates in pill form than office-based practices do.

The Impact of Emergency Medicine Residents on the Operational Efficiency in a Busy Level 1 Trauma Center Emergency Department (#4)

Presenter: Trop, A., John Peter Smith Health Network, Fort Worth, Texas

Emergency medicine residents have a positive impact on patient care and satisfaction in emergency departments.

Medicaid Expansion Under the Affordable Care Act – How May It Affect Emergency Department Utilization and Access? (#5)

Presenter: Cutter, C., Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Conn.

Projected expansion of Medicaid eligibility under the Affordable Care Act will increase emergency department volume by over two million visits a year.

10:45 a.m. – 11:45 a.m.

How Accurate is "My Gut Feeling?": Comparing the Accuracy of System 1 versus System 2 Decision Making for the Acuity Prediction of Patients Presenting to an Emergency Department (#135)

Presenter: Walston, J., Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn.

Emergency physicians' gut feeling about whether patients are sick is about as accurate as diagnostic tests like the rapid influenza test.

Use of Intranasal Naloxone by Basic Life Support (#144)

Presenter: Weiner, S., Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Mass.

Most patients who received pre-hospital doses of nasal naloxone (an opioid antidote) did not require additional naloxone in the emergency department and were discharged from the hospital.

Ultrasound Guided Peripheral Intravenous Access by Emergency Department Technicians is a Safe and Effective Strategy for Avoiding Unnecessary Central Venous Catheters (#151)

Presenter: Duran-Gehring, P., University of Florida-Jacksonville, Jacksonville, Fla.

Ultrasound guided peripheral intravenous access by emergency department technicians successfully avoided central venous catheters in at least 50 percent of patients with presumed difficult intravenous access.

2:30 p.m. – 3:30 p.m.

Advancing Resident Training with the Use of Scribes (#162)

Presenter: Wegg, B,. Central Michigan University, Saginaw, Mich.

The use of scribes during an emergency department shift significantly increases the amount and quality of teaching a resident receives during that shift.

Predicted Mortality as an Additional Measure of Critical Care Delivery in a Public Hospital Emergency Department (#163)

Presenter: Grimaldo, F., Stroger Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Ill.

Some patients who are critically ill upon arrival at the emergency department may receive intensive care unit-level interventions sufficient to admit them to a lower level of care than the ICU.

The Hawthorne Effect, Metrics and Emergency Physician's Head CT Practice (#182)

Presenter: Miller, D., University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa

When emergency physicians were informed that their use of brain computed tomography (BCT) for headache would be measured, rates of BCT went down, although admission rates remained unchanged.

In Case of a Primary Care Crisis, Please Go to the Emergency Room: An Investigation of Patient Referral to the Emergency Department by Non-Health Care Providers (#190)

Presenter: Hill, R., Christus Spohn-Texas A&M College of Medicine, Corpus Christi, Texas

Several million emergency department visits every year are the result of telephone referrals by non-physician personnel within primary care physicians' offices.

Physician Perception in Predicting Good Neurological Outcomes in Patients Resuscitated from Cardiac Arrest (#197)

Presenter: McCormick, S., Wayne State University, Detroit, Mich.

Emergency physicians' predictions of which patients will have good neurological outcomes following cardiac arrest are generally quite accurate.

Tuesday, October 28, 2014

8:30 a.m. – 9:30 a.m.

The Clinical Utility of the Clock Drawing Test in Detecting Delirium in Older Emergency Department Patients (#11)

Presenter: Emerson, G., Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tenn.

The Clock Drawing Test, which is relatively inexpensive and efficient, shows promise for detecting delirium in older emergency patients but still has limitations.

9:30 a.m. – 11:30 a.m.

Adoption of Interventions to Reduce Emergency Department Crowding from 2007 to 2010 (#206)

Presenter: Honigman, L., George Washington University, Washington D.C.

Despite growth in the number of interventions aimed at reducing emergency department crowding across U.S. hospitals between 2007 and 2010, adoption of them has been relatively low because of the difficulties in involving entire hospitals.

Factors Associated with Successfully Establishing and Managing a Freestanding Emergency Department (#209)

Presenter: Newman, B., University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, N.Y.

Just over half of all freestanding emergency departments were profitable, which may be attributed to location, local demographics, community-focused marketing campaigns and strong relationships with EMS.

Prevalence and Identification of Hazardous Alcohol Use Among Older Patients Presenting to the Emergency Department (#216)

Presenter: Shenvi, C., University of North Carolina, Durham, N.C.

Hazardous alcohol use is prevalent among older adults who visit emergency departments, though very few receive counseling to reduce their alcohol consumption.

Payment Received for Low-Acuity Care (#230)

Presenter: Schneider, S., North Shore University Hospital, Manhasset, N.Y.

Diversion of non-urgent patients from the emergency department to alternative sources of care does little to reduce overall health care costs.

Impact of Decreased County Mental Health Services on the Emergency Department (#EMF-229)

Presenter: Nesper, A., University of California, Davis Medical Center, Sacramento, Calif.

The number of visits to an emergency department and the length of stay for patients undergoing psychiatric consultation in the emergency department increased significantly after a decrease in county mental health services.

The Effect of Implementing an Emergency Medicine Residency Program on RVU Generation and Mid-Level Provider Staffing (#235)

Presenter: Clinkscales, J., University of Tennessee College of Medicine, Chattanooga, Tenn.

The establishment of an emergency medicine residency program resulted in a significant increase in physician productivity and a decrease in costs for mid-level providers.

Super-Utilizers of the Emergency Department: Could Childhood Trauma Be a Culprit? (#238)

Presenter: Ku, B., Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Penn.

A high proportion of patients who visited the emergency department five or more times in the previous year reported emotional abuse, physical abuse and/or sexual abuse during their childhoods.

Emergency Department as a Usual Source of Care in a Nationally Representative Sample of American Households (#244)

Presenter: Janke, A., Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Mich.

Only 2.5 percent of non-institutionalized Americans consider the emergency department their usual source of medical care.

Prevalence of Sexually Transmitted Infection in Symptomatic Adolescents Presenting to the Emergency Department (#302)

Presenter: Retterath, L., College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, Mich.

Thirteen percent of adolescent girls visiting three emergency departments had a sexually transmitted infection.

1:30 p.m. – 2:30 p.m.

Use of a Simple Stress Testing Algorithm for Observation Unit Chest Pain Patients Reduces Radiation Exposure and Is Cost-Effective (#308)

Presenter: Babcock, C., St. John Hospital and Medical Center, Detroit, Mich.

A simple stress testing algorithm applied to chest pain patients in an observation unit reduced the use of nuclear stress testing (and therefore radiation exposure) and saved money.

Mortality and Timing of Death in Patients with Runaway Pacemakers (#313)

Presenter: Vilke, G., University of California, San Diego, Calif.

There is no consistent data to support the published theory that conducted energy weapons, otherwise known as tasers, can pace the heart into cardiac arrest.

Health Disparities and Emergency Department Utilization: The Role of the Medical Home Network and Beyond (#342)

Presenter: Glover, C., Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Ill.

Patients enrolled in the Medical Home Network, which was designed to improve disease management and reduce health care costs, visited the emergency department with lower acuity levels and more often than other patients who are not enrolled in the program.

Acute Management of Pain from the Emergency Department: Initial Report of a Patient-Reported Outcomes Registry (#370)

Presenter: Pollack, C., Pennsylvania Hospital, Philadelphia, Penn.

A prescription non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug administered nasally (SPRIX) performed as well as or better than opiates for patients who received it for pain following discharge from the emergency department.

"A Little Dab Will Do Ya:" An Emergency Department Case Series Related to a New Form of "High Potency" Marijuana Known as "Wax" (#390)

Presenter: Schneberk, T., L.A. County and U.S.C. Medical Center, Los Angeles, Calif.

Use of a new high-potency marijuana called "wax" may result in blast injury patterns and inhalation burns, due to the particular way it is ingested.

Trauma in Cinema: Novel Medical Education of Millennial Learners (TF-8)

Presenter: Stone, J., University Hospitals Case Medical Center, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio

Using cinematic depictions of traumatic injury may be an effective way to teach emergency medicine students of the millennial generation (born from 1980 to 2000) in a way that satisfies their desire for experiential, participatory, image-driven and peer-connected education.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20100616/DC22034LOGO-d

SOURCE American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP)