It’s mid-February and I still haven’t started on my taxes. Before I buckle down and get it done, can you provide some insight on what to expect from the 2016 tax season?

Of course! This a great question, because there are several new things happening this year in the tax world that will affect nearly every American taxpayer. For starters, taxes aren’t due on April 15 this year, but on April 18 instead (due to the Emancipation Day holiday in Washington, D.C.). No doubt procrastinators greatly appreciate the extra few days, but we’re hoping this information will help everyone prepare and file MUCH earlier.

The Affordable Care Act: One of the most important changes for 2016 is in the way taxpayers will need to address the requirements of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) with their 2015 filing. Many taxpayers will receive Forms 1095-A, 1095-B and/or 1095-C in order to fulfill reporting requirements related to health care coverage. You can generally file your return even if you have not received the forms since they are not required to be submitted to the IRS with Form 1040. However, if you enrolled in coverage through the marketplace or a state health care exchange, you should receive Form 1095-A with important information that you need to accurately file your tax return. Unlike the Forms 1095-B and 1095-C, you should wait to file your tax return until you receive your Form 1095-A.

Be aware that the penalties for those without qualifying health care coverage increased significantly in 2015. In 2014, the penalties started at $95 per adult or 1 percent of household income. In 2015, the penalties jumped to $325 per adult (or 2 percent of household income).

To avoid potential penalty assessments for 2015, employers must have offered coverage to at least 70 percent of their full-time employees and dependents if they had more than 100 full-time employees and equivalents in 2014. Those with fewer employees are exempt from the mandate in 2015.

Additionally, individuals who received the premium tax credit may be required to repay a portion if their 2015 income turns out to be higher than what they estimated during enrollment.

Identity theft: Identity theft is a growing issue for people. This is especially a concern in terms of tax returns. As a reaction to more than $908 million claimed in fraudulent refunds during last tax season, the IRS has been proactively strengthening their security measures this year. You can expect more stringent password requirements to access tax software, a W-2 verification code, 20 new pieces of data required by tax preparers to file for their clients, and additional security questions throughout the process, to name just a few of the changes.

Filing early reduces the chance that a thief will steal your identity and your refund. Unfortunately, taxpayers will not realize they are a victim of identity theft until they file their return. If a criminal files a fictitious return using your social security number and receives a refund and then you subsequently file your own return it can take months to sort through the red tape.

IRS delays: Budget constraints have reduced IRS staffing at a time when the organization is also working to enforce and explain the new ACA requirements. This is going to mean more self-assistance options for those seeking help, and longer wait times on the phone. Be prepared.

Refunds: With the delays and extra security measures in place, it’s more important than ever to file as early as you can. If you are expecting a refund, filing electronically, and selecting the direct deposit option remains the quickest way to get your cash. The IRS anticipates issuing more than nine out of 10 refunds in less than 21 days from when the return is filed. Once your return has been received by IRS, you can check the status using the Where’s My Refund? tool at www.IRS.gov. You can begin checking on the status of your refund within 24 hours after the IRS has received your e-filed tax return, or four weeks after mailing your paper return.

Tom Cooney and Crystal Faulkner are partners with the Hyde Park office of MCM CPAs & Advisors, a CPA and advisory firm. For additional information, call 513-768-6796 or visit www.mcmcpa.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1XyCkzf