DEATH PENALTY STILL NEEDED by Christine Rousselle

The death penalty should remain an option, as it is the unfortunate reality that some crimes are so terrible that death is the only suitable punishment.

The death penalty is never the default punishment for any offense. In order to seek the death penalty against a defendant, the crime they are accused of must meet one of several “aggravating factors.” These typically include murder that involves torture, or is committed against children or the elderly, or involves the death of more than one person. The death penalty is only used to punish the most brutal and horrific crimes.

Yes, humans are by default fallible, and there is always a chance that someone who is not guilty could be convicted of a crime and sentenced to death. Any decision made by a human may be the wrong one. With modern technology, however, guilt is often established without almost any question of doubt.

PRISON IS NO BETTER While anti-death penalty activists claim that current execution techniques may not be “humane,” the alternative system of “prison justice” may be far worse than anything officially administered by the state. Violent criminals do not cease being violent criminals simply because they now reside inside the walls of a prison. Those convicted of crimes against children, for instance, generally do not fare well in prison, and there have been numerous instances where notorious pedophiles or sex offenders have been brutally murdered by fellow inmates. An example of “prison justice” carrying out the execution duties of a state is the murder of Jeffrey Dahmer, a convicted serial killer, rapist, and cannibal. Dahmer was beaten to death with a metal bar while on prison work detail and left to die in a pool of his own blood.

Despite confessing to 17 murders, being found with four severed heads in his apartment, and possessing numerous pictures of his dismembered victims, Dahmer wasn’t eligible for the death penalty as Wisconsin had abolished the practice in 1853. Instead, he was sentenced to several consecutive life sentences and eventually was placed into Columbia Correctional Institute’s general population, where other prisoners reportedly immediately began planning Dahmer’s eventual death.

It is fairly obvious that the state of Wisconsin knew what would happen to Dahmer if he were placed in the general population of a prison. As the state was unable to do an officially sanctioned execution for a terrible criminal, a backdoor technique of prison justice was employed, resulting in a far more reprehensible manner of death. The end result was the same as what would occur under a “typical” execution: a confessed, convicted murderer is now dead. Instead of a relatively quick and painless execution, however, a man was beaten for several minutes and took more than an hour to die. Is this really preferable?

PUNISHING CRIMINALS DOESN’T DETER FUTURE CRIMES

Deterring future criminals from committing crimes is not the goal of the modern penal system. This isn’t “Pirates of the Caribbean.” The bodies of those executed are not hung under signs warning people not to commit murder or acts of treason. The bodies of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, for instance, were not paraded around New York City as a warning to any wannabe Soviet agents to please refrain from betraying the United States’ military secrets to enemy powers.