Playing through a heavy sideways snowstorm for the second consecutive time Saturday, the University of Denver men’s lacrosse team put more orange balls in the net than its opponent and walked off the frozen landscape a winner.

The defending NCAA champions got five goals from junior attack Connor Cannizzaro, three goals and two assists from senior attack Jack Bobzien and 20 faceoff wins from sophomore midfielder Trevor Baptiste to upend St. John’s 17-10 in a Big East Conference game at Peter Barton Lacrosse Stadium.

The third-ranked Pioneers (10-1, 3-0) battled through a similar snowstorm the previous Saturday to win 12-11 at Villanova. Both games featured heavy wet snow blowing sideways because of the wind. An orange ball was used both times.

DU took a 3-0 lead against the black-and-red clad St. John’s — aptly named the Red Storm — and never trailed. The Pioneers led 5-1 after the first quarter, 9-3 at halftime and 15-7 after three quarters. St. John’s fell to 1-10, 0-3.

“The game was a microcosm of our season,” DU coach Bill Tierney said. “We did some really amazing things. Trevor and Connor obviously both played great. And then we were a disaster at times. Up and down, frustrating. We scored a little too easily early, and when that happens 18-year-olds start to think it’s going to be easy.”

He added: “We came out of last week’s game in the snow just congratulating them. It was hard work. Tough game, just pure effort. It was much worse than today. Today I just thought we were a little bit up and down.”

Denver’s 15 turnovers and 10 goals allowed are both too many. But Tierney praised St. John’s attack Eric DeJohn, who had a game-high six points on five goals. He also had a game-high 10 shots on goal.

“I give the kid, DeJohn, a lot of credit. But I’m not sure we played great defense around him at times — especially in the second half,” Tierney said.

DU junior midfielder Zach Miller, who is the team’s third-leading scorer with 29 points, was held pointless for the first time in 48 games. His 47-game points streak was the third longest in the country.

“He’s going to get his points and they’ll come in bunches, Cannizzaro said of Miller. “It was a cold game. He was freezing. No one likes the cold weather, but he’s one of the best players on our team and I can’t say enough about him.”

In making up for Miller’s offensive struggles, freshman midfielder Colton Jackson had three goals, and sophomores Connor Donahue and Brendan Bomberry had a combined seven points. Donahue, who started at attack, had two goals and an assist and midfielder Bomberry had a goal and three assists.

Eleven of Denver’s 17 goals came off assists — including four by starting middie Tyler Pace. At the other end, Pioneers freshman goalie Alex Ready had 11 saves before giving way to backup Hunter Krout. Denver played most of its reserves in the fourth quarter.

The Pioneers, who played their previous three games outside Colorado, go back on the road for this Saturday’s game at Providence before hosting Marquette in the regular-season finale April 30.

DU hosts the Big East Championship May 5 and 7 before the NCAA Tournament begins May 14 at the top eight seeds.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or Twitter: @MikeChambers