The Lehigh Valley offers so much for any employer — quality of life, access to major markets, a trained local workforce, many quality colleges, universities and technical schools, and it's very affordable by comparison.

For the beverage-manufacturing industry, we also offer a plentiful local supply of spring water. That some of the largest beverage manufacturers — Nestle Waters, Pepsi, Ocean Spray, Coca-Cola, Sam Adams — have chosen to locate here speaks to the desirability of the area. Currently, the Lehigh Valley boasts 20 beverage manufacturers; 17 in Lehigh County number more than in any other county in Pennsylvania.

Nestle Waters alone employs close to 500 people in good jobs with solid salaries, and spends about $174 million annually with local and regional companies. These companies greatly bolster our middle class.

Beverage manufacturers enhance the quality of life in the Lehigh Valley in other ways, too. One of the highest profile contributions is Coca-Cola Park, home of the IronPigs. Coca-Cola Bottling Co. of the Lehigh Valley and its president and general manager, Joe Brake, stepped up to make this great ballpark a reality, demonstrating his company's commitment to the community. Coca-Cola truly quenches the thirst of our neighbors. And for those looking for a refreshing beer, the Lehigh Valley has that covered, too, from Boston Beer Co. (Sam Adams) in Breinigsville to Weyerbacher Brewing Co. in Easton.

It has been fantastic to see startups in the industry as well, with the establishment of several smaller beverage companies in recent years. The Bridgeworks Enterprise Center, the Allentown Economic Development Corp.'s business incubator, has become home of Colony Meadery and County Seat Spirits, one of the region's first distilleries, along with the Social Still, which opened within Bethlehem's City Revitalization and Improvement Zone.

I've noticed another key factor that makes the Valley such a sought-after location for businesses that is not discussed as often. That is the uniquely collaborative approach that Lehigh Valley businesses have, both within and among industries. Collaboration has certainly become a buzzword in business in the past few years, along with the growing trend of "collective impact," or helping to shape the future of a region. In a 2013 article, the Harvard Business Review called collaboration the "new competition." Our mantra at the Chamber has always been "the power of partnerships."

Our sense of collaboration comes out of changing from a regional economy that had been dominated by a few large companies to one made up of many new, varied companies, organizations and industries; or from increasing globalization changing the perception of who are competitors; or maybe from the loyalty and pride so many residents — both those whose families have been here for generations to more recent arrivals — feel for the area.

Whatever the origin, most of us believe that improving the area is at least as important as a single organization's success. Look at the revitalization of downtown Allentown — with so many individuals and groups coming together, this great success has happened. Whether it is working on a legislative issue, education, marketing, overcoming barriers to growth, or determining how to achieve economies of scale, one player cannot match the strength of many.

The Greater Lehigh Valley Chamber of Commerce facilitates collaboration through our 31 affiliated chambers, councils and committees serving our 5,000 members and their 200,000 employees. For example, with beverage manufacturers already employing 1,856 industry workers here, and more opportunities sure to come, education and training can be targeted toward the needs of the industry. Chamber groups such as the Manufacturing Council work with the Workforce Investment Board and industry representatives to identify and to provide the necessary training for beverage workers.

I'm proud of the many ways in which the Chamber fosters collaboration. Our public policy committee, with its energy and environment, health care, manufacturing, tax & regulatory, and transportation subcommittees, routinely put aside any individual competitive business relationships to advocate legislatively at the local, state and federal levels to address issues affecting the business community. The Chamber's advocacy resulted in the passage of Act 89, which funds crucial improvements to transportation and infrastructure, ensuring safe and reliable distribution and supply throughout the Valley and beyond via its corridor to the Northeast and South.

The Nonprofit and Business Partners Council has looked at the advantages of "social entrepreneurialism," emphasizing a positive return to society, along with standard business profit and loss. Our international business council forges partnerships outside the Valley to promote international trade opportunities for all our Chamber members. The Small Business, LGBT and Women's Business councils and the Hispanic Chamber support their members' interests across industries sharing innovative ideas.

It's been a great run in this Lehigh Valley and our future looks brighter than ever.