On the same day the Supreme Court announced it would take Hobby lobby’s case to dismantle the HHS mandate that forces religious companies and groups to pay for birth control and abortion-causing drugs, two pro-life organizations released a new poll showing 59 percent of Americans oppose the mandate.

Family Research Council (FRC) and Alliance Defending Freedom (ADF) released the results of a commissioned national survey showing that 59 percent of likely voters “oppose the mandate requiring the coverage of preventive care services for women which includes all FDA approved contraceptives, including drugs that can destroy a human embryo, and sterilization services without a direct cost to the patient.”

The survey found 54% of women ages 18-54 oppose the HHS/morning after pill mandate.

The poll, conducted by WPA Opinion Research from November 18-20, sought to determine how likely voters feel about Obamacare overall, and their opinion regarding the HHS mandate. WPA noted that “Obamacare has seen its public support drop as the unadvertised consequences of the law have become clear. The mandated coverage of drugs that can destroy a human embryo, are just another instance of this.”

FRC President Tony Perkins made the following comments regarding the survey and the Supreme Court’s decision today to accept the Hobby Lobby and Conestoga Wood cases and decide the fate of Obamacare’s HHS mandate:

“Americans increasingly oppose this mandate because it puts the jobs, livelihoods, and healthcare of millions of Americans at risk. It forces those who stand up for their conscience to choose between paying crippling fines that could shut down their business or dropping the healthcare of all their employees. This frankly is an unacceptable non-choice.

“Respecting freedom of conscience is a long held American tradition and the government should not impose mandates or laws that force individuals and businesses to violate these beliefs just to hold a job, own a business, or have health insurance.

“This is a flawed mandate within a flawed law. The reality is that employers may choose to drop healthcare coverage for their employees and their families altogether rather than submit to this intrusive federal mandate.

“Americans should not be forced to violate their religious beliefs to purchase health insurance, hold a job, or operate a business in their country. Freedom of religion, the American people believe, extends to the freedom to practice your religion in your healthcare plan, as outlined by the First Amendment of the Constitution and illustrated in these poll results.

CLICK LIKE IF YOU’RE PRO-LIFE!

“The American people are turning their backs not only on this oppressive health care law but also on the law’s mandate that for the first time in American history requires individuals to violate their moral beliefs and require them to pay for items and services they oppose in their health care plans.

“Although the Supreme Court has agreed to hear this case, Congress should listen to the American people and act to protect the livelihoods of Americans that are now at risk. Congress must fulfill its constitutional duty to protect employers and individuals who do not want to be punished for standing up for their rights,” concluded Perkins.

To view the results of the survey, click here: http://downloads.frc.org/EF/EF13K71.pdf