David Vitter U.S. Senator David Vitter (R-Metairie) speaks while attending a campaign rally with U.S. Senate candidate Bill Cassidy (R-La.) Monday, October 13, 2014, at the Fontana Center in Lafayette, La. (Photo: Leslie Westbrook, The Advertiser)

Louisiana Sens. David Vitter and Bill Cassidy wrote to President Barack Obama this week urging him not to pursue a plan to steer millions in oil and gas revenue away from Gulf Coast states.

The administration’s fiscal 2016 budget, released Feb. 2, proposes to “redirect” the revenue to the Treasury to use for national programs.

Under the 2006 Gulf of Mexico Energy Security Act (GOMESA), Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas and certain counties in those states receive 37.5 percent of revenue from offshore oil and gas drilling.

The states use the money for coastal restoration and hurricane protection projects.

“We not only oppose and reject your budget proposal eroding the revenue sharing provisions in GOMESA, but will actively pursue efforts to minimize the disparity by bringing equal treatment in revenue sharing among energy-producing states,” Vitter and Cassidy, both Republicans, said in their March 4 letter to Obama.

Sens. Roger Wicker of Mississippi, Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, Jeff Sessions of Alabama and John Cornyn and Ted Cruz of Texas, all Republicans, also signed the letter. Murkowski is chairwoman of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee.

Louisiana and 19 of its parishes received about $1.4 million in GOMESA funding in fiscal 2014, according to the Interior Department’s Office of Natural Resources Revenue.

“If anything, President Obama should want Louisiana to keep more of this revenue,” Vitter said in a statement Friday. “Our coasts are the first line of defense to a hurricane or tropical storm, and it’s absolutely critical that we do everything in our power to protect and restore them.”

But Autumn Hanna of Taxpayers for Common Sense said the watchdog group supports “any efforts to make that money head back to the federal coffers instead of state projects.”

The administration proposes using the money for national priorities, including federal coastal restoration programs. Officials have said that sharing oil and gas revenue with Gulf Coast states hurts national conservation efforts and other federal programs.

Fights over sharing oil revenue with states aren’t new.

Sen. Edward Markey, D-Mass., has proposed legislation to repeal the practice, calling it a giveaway.

Hanna said it would be difficult to change the law, noting Gulf Coast lawmakers have “always led efforts to even further increase the state share.”

Former Democratic Sen. Mary Landrieu, who proposed the GOMESA legislation with then-Republican Sen. Pete Domenici of New Mexico and Murkowski, unsuccessfully proposed a measure in the 113th Congress that would have started the law’s second phase in fiscal 2014 rather than fiscal 2017. Payments are expected to increase significantly during that phase.

Landrieu’s bill also would have gradually eliminated a $500 million cap on the shared revenue by 2024.

Cassidy, then a congressman, proposed a similar version that would have raised the cap to $1 billion. That measure was attached to an energy bill that passed the House but not the Senate.

“This money needs to not only to be protected, but Louisiana and other Gulf state’s share needs to be increased,” Cassidy said in a statement.

Read or Share this story: http://www.shreveporttimes.com/story/news/local/2015/03/06/vitter-cassidy-add-continuing-gomesa-complaints/24528207/