UnitedHealthcare will stop offering individual plans in Mississippi’s health insurance exchange as well as exchanges in other states. (Photo: File/Hattiesburg American)

HATTIESBURG - It’s been little more than a year, and hundreds of people have been helped with getting prescriptions, dental care and health care at no cost, thanks to new services offered at Edwards Street Fellowship Center.

“Hattiesburg is considered a hub for medical care in this area, but it was amazing people could not access the health care they needed,” said Ann McCullen, Edwards Street executive director.

It started in fall 2014, when a diverse group got together to determine the need for free medical care in Forrest and Lamar counties, McCullen said.

“We brought together business, faith, medical and education leaders in the greater Hattiesburg area to discuss if there was a need for free health care in this area,” she said.

The group determined there was a population that could be served.

“They make too much for Medicaid, but they can’t afford the premiums, co-pays and deductibles of the Affordable Care Act,” she said.

According to 2014 data from the Mississippi Department of Health, 21 percent of Hattiesburg-area residents do not have health insurance.

From the conversations of that group, the Fellowship Health Clinic was born — in stages. Its mission was to use volunteer lay and professional resources to provide high-quality medical, dental and pharmaceutical care at no cost to eligible uninsured and underinsured adults of Forrest and Lamar counties.

In February 2015, Edwards Street entered into a partnership with St. Vincent De Paul Community Pharmacy in Biloxi to provide free prescriptions to eligible patients. Since then, it’s provided more than 700 prescriptions at no cost. No medicines are kept on-site; instead, they are mailed to clients at their homes. There are no prescriptions issued for controlled substances.

“The people we’re seeing for pharmacy services are primarily the working poor,” McCullen said. “Clients include an elderly man whose retirement income is insufficient to pay for his 10 daily medications.”

Free dental referral services began in April 2015. William Carey medical students talk with adult clients and conduct health history assessments. They refer clients who need tooth extractions to one of seven general dentists or three oral surgeons who pull the teeth for free. Clients can also be referred for free dental cleanings to Pearl River Community College-Forrest County dental students.

Since the program kicked off, more than 270 people have been interviewed and assessed. Of those, 64 percent have been referred for further treatment.

The Fellowship Health Clinic finally opened Jan. 15, after a dedication service to unveil the newly remodeled space. The clinic is located in the former Grand Affairs Bakery at 1919 Edwards St., next door to the fellowship center. Edwards Street had been using the space for children’s and community programs.

Now, the small building has two exam rooms, a lab, consultation room, lobby and a nurse’s office. Local artists, including Dollye Kirk and Cindy Fortenberry, have donated their work to decorate the space.

In January, the clinic was open for two half-days. Patients could see the doctor for general wellness exams and family medical care by appointment only. In February, the clinic offered appointments on one full day and one half-day. And in March, it has offered care on one full day and two half-days. Since its opening, 78 patients have been treated.

McCullen said one issue that has kept the clinic from being open more days per month is the expense of lab tests.

“Some of these people haven’t seen a doctor in more than a decade,” she said. “There’s an average of four lab tests on every person.”

Clinic Medical Director Stephen Baum, M.D., is a volunteer. He also works as medical director of Work Well and the Veterans Affairs Clinic at Merit Health Wesley.

“We’re very blessed to have this brand-new clinic,” Baum said. “We’re able to do what any primary care clinic is doing. We see patients, we diagnose, we test, we get their medications for them.”

Baum said the clinic’s appointment book stays full.

“We see a lot of patients,” he said. “We work with our medical students to see the patients. Some of these people haven’t had medical care in years.

“Some have a need for further tests, so we call and request to get those tests donated.”

Baum said the ailments of the patients echo the ailments of the general Hattiesburg population.

“High blood pressure, diabetes, obesity, depression, arthritis,” he said.

The clinic offers integrated health care provided by Baum, nursing students and faculty from Southern Miss’ College of Nursing and School of Social Work, medical students from William Carey University, and additional medical and health professional volunteers. The only paid positions are the ones held by a part-time clinic director and a part-time social worker.

In addition to seeing a medical provider, every patient sees a social worker, who helps the patient comply with doctor’s orders. The social worker can meet with the patient in between doctor visits.

Christopher Oglesby, third-year William Carey medical student, started out doing the free dental screenings. Now, he feels a personal connection to the patients he sees at the clinic.

“I saw a lot of the same struggles faced by the clients here as my mom faced raising three boys by herself,” he said. “I felt like I can empathize with the patients and I wanted to pursue (this) wholeheartedly.”

Oglesby said his work at the clinic will help him when he gets his medical degree.

“It’s so much more than medicine,” he said. “You get to explore all the socio-economic problems the patients go through.

“It (will) make us better future physicians.”

McCullen said it’s not the goal of the clinic to take care of its patients for their lifetimes.

“We don’t want to be someone’s medical provider for decades,” she said. “We are the gateway provider. It may be they need help with us for a few months with their prescriptions so they can save up their money for more traditional care.

“We’re trying to help people become healthier for the long term because that way they can help their families, get a better job and make Hattiesburg a better place to live.”

To make an appointment:

• First: attend a screening, 9-11 a.m., first and second Tuesdays of the month

• Where: Food pantry lobby, Edwards Street Fellowship Center, 1919 Edwards St.

• Who: Uninsured and under-insured adults, 18 and over

• What to bring: Photo ID that shows proof of residency in Forrest or Lamar counties, all insurance cards, documentation of household income and expenses

• What happens next: After being screened, eligible clients will be given an appointment at a future date

Read or Share this story: http://on.thec-l.com/1MMNcmE