Princestella Brown and her daughter, Janel Jett, who will be a fourth-grader at Sanders Clyde Elementary, looks through her bag of free school supplies given out at Charleston’s First Day Festival on Sunday at Liberty Square.

Skylour Walton thought he was just going to visit the S.C. Aquarium and Fort Sumter on Sunday, but got so much more than he bargained for.

The 11-year-old was all smiles at Liberty Square as he ran around the “Kid’s Zone” at Charleston’s First Day Festival, an annual last hurrah of sorts marking the end of summer and the beginning of a new school year. It’s a celebration of education where families gather to get free school supplies and the city encourages parents to get involved in their children’s schooling.

“It’s pretty cool, the activities and all the people,” Walton said. “I can’t explain it, like I feel happy.”

He said his favorite activity was playing baseball because he won a free ticket to see the Charleston Riverdogs.

The festival, now in its 13th year, is organized by the city of Charleston through the Mayor’s Office for Children, Youth and Families. Free school supplies are a big draw, as are free admission to the aquarium, free boat rides on the harbor, games and food. Director Mindy Sturm didn’t have an official number for turnout, but said the event draws in about 10,000 people each year.

“This has stayed really crowded the whole day,” she said. “It’s been a great day.”

She added that one of her favorite parts of the festival was giving out school supplies.

“That’s just so heartening, to be able to give kids what they need to start the school year,” Sturm said.

Parents were thrilled to take advantage of the free supplies, but there was another event this year that drew a crowd. Volunteers from the Allstate Foundation and Points of Light worked with families to create free disaster-preparedness kits to have on hand in case of emergency. It was a new, one-time activity as part of a stop an educational tour the foundations are taking this year.

“That seems to be a very popular thing,” Sturm said.

Even near the end of the festival, there was still a line at the booth, located at the Maritime Center. Kits included a flashlight, first-aid kit and cleaning supplies. Other nearby activities were geared toward health and wellness. Volunteers handed out fresh apple and other fruit juices and spoke to kids about the importance of eating well.

Tia Grant brought her daughter, 5-year-old Ayanaa Grant, to the festival this year for the second time. “We came for the school supplies and to visit the aquarium,” she said. “I like it; it’s good for the community, it’s good for the kids and it relieves a financial burden.”

Ayanaa stood nearby eating some mandarin oranges, eager to move on to the next activity.

“I haven’t been to everything yet,” she said when asked about her favorite part of the festival. “But I liked the playground.”

She added that the event helped her get ready for school, where she likes to “play outside and have fun.”

Terry Taylor, 12, of Charleston, said the festival also got him thinking about school.

“It gets you prepared,” he said. “It’s good too, ’cause kids can have fun and it’s free.”

For the Dankert family, First Day Festival has become an integral part of the back-to-school process.

“We come every year,” said Jessica Dankert as her 7-year-old daughter, Makenzie, tugged on her hand to head to the aquarium. “I just think it’s awesome that the community does this and so many come together. We’re not going to miss it for a long time.”

Makenzie agreed as she warned that the two were running late.

“I get to go in the aquarium and go on the boat,” she said. “It’s fun.”