President Obama used the positive new jobs report Friday to stick it to Republican critics who predicted Obamacare would tank the U.S. economy.

A grinning Obama let loose after the Labor Department reported that employers added 223,000 jobs in April — a solid gain after a mediocre March and a strong indicator that the economy is recovering after a woeful winter.

“Sixty-two months ago is when I signed the Affordable Care Act,” Obama said on a visit to Nike headquarters in Oregon. “So, obviously, it hasn't done too bad in terms of employment in this country. I just thought I'd mention that. Since there were a lot of predictions of doom and gloom.”

House Speaker John Boehner, an Ohio Republican and strident Obamacare critic, conceded in a statement “the economy continues to show some signs of improvement.”

But Boehner also added, “too many Americans remain out of work, and too many are working harder only to lose ground to stagnant wages and rising costs.”

There was more good news for Obama and the country in the new jobs report — the unemployment rate ticked down to 5.4 percent from 5.5 percent in March, which is the lowest level since May 2008.

Even House Speaker Boehner John Boehner had to compliment the latest jobs numbers, modestly saying "the economy continues to show some signs of improvement." (Mark Wilson/Getty Images)

“Today’s report argues that the economy is in decent health,” says Scott Clemons, chief investment strategist at Brown Brothers Harriman Private Banking.

Obama has now presided over 62 straight months of job growth — a streak that appeared to be in jeopardy after a first quarter slowdown this year during which the U.S. economy is believed to have contracted from January through March.

Jason Furman, Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, noted that more than 200,000 jobs have been created “in thirteen of the past fourteen months, the first time that has happened since 1995.”

If that trend continues, the Republicans vying to succeed Obama in the 2016 president election may not be able to run on a sour economy.

“Under almost any scenario the economy will be back to full employment by election day 2016,” said Mark Zandi, economist at Moody’s Analytics. “This means wage growth, which is already picking up, will be growing solidly. Voters will feel much better about the economy when they go to the ballot box.”

Breakdown of the jobs numbers. (New York Daily News)

Wages did indeed go up, but only by a piddling 3 cents in April to $24.87. In fact, pay has risen just 2.2 percent over the past 12 months, roughly the same sluggish pace of the past six years.

That is likely to keep the Federal Reserve from raising interest rates.

A third of the 182,000 service sector jobs added in April were high-paying business service gigs. And only 27,000 of the new positions were in the lower-paid retail and leisure fields.

Construction companies added 45,000 jobs, the most in 16 months. The health care industry added 56,000 jobs. And manufacturing added 1,000 jobs, way more than had been predicted.

But there were other indicators that took the gloss off the otherwise encouraging April jobs report:

The March job numbers were revised sharply down from a disappointing 126,000 to just 85,000.

The labor-force participation rate — the share of Americans with jobs or looking for work — rose ever so slightly to 62.8 percent from 62.7 percent. But that’s still a very low level.

Experts suspect the retirement of a lot of Baby Boomers and other demographic changes figure in that.

With News Wire Services

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? WATCH THE VIDEO HERE.