H&R Block highlights the connection on its website: “The name you trust for all your tax needs now also offers friendly, unbiased help when it comes to choosing health insurance.”

“Despite all the attention to the Affordable Care Act, many people — the average Joe on the street — are still confused about the law, the tax credits, the penalties,” said Mark A. Ciaramitaro, vice president for health care enrollment services at H&R Block.

Stan Dorn, a health policy expert at the Urban Institute, said: “It makes a huge amount of sense to involve tax preparers in the process of enrolling uninsured individuals into subsidized coverage. They are in the business of filling out forms for consumers. And they already collect 90 percent of the information needed to get help paying for health coverage.”

Jackson Hewitt, H&R Block and Intuit offer their clients what amounts to a health insurance checkup. H&R Block calls it a tax and health care review. Jackson Hewitt calls it an “A.C.A. X-ray.” Intuit has a “health care subsidy calculator.”

In addition, the tax preparation services teamed up with online insurance brokers to help clients sign up for health coverage. Jackson Hewitt has been working with GetInsured, H&R Block with GoHealth and TurboTax with e-Health.

The online tax tools make clear that, for some consumers, insurance premiums are substantially higher than the penalty for going without coverage this year.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

If, for example, a husband and wife, each 33 years old, live in Florida with no children and a household income of $60,000 a year, TurboTax’s subsidy calculator tells them: “The lowest-cost health insurance will cost you $363 out-of-pocket per month. Alternatively, you’ll pay a penalty of $33 per month.”

At H&R Block, Mr. Ciaramitaro said, premiums of more than $100 a month appeared to create “a psychological barrier for many clients.”

Consumers can receive premium tax credits in advance, in monthly installments, before they file their tax returns, and they can receive the full credit even if they do not owe any federal income taxes.

Four-fifths of people buying insurance on the exchanges qualify for subsidies, expected to average $4,400 a year for each person who receives assistance in 2014.

The tax credits are paid directly from the Treasury to insurance companies on behalf of consumers. People with lower incomes generally receive larger tax credits. If their incomes go up, they may be entitled to less assistance.

Two provisions of the health care law will hit taxpayers at this time next year. Some will owe penalties for having been uninsured. And some will find that they owe money to the Internal Revenue Service because they received too much in tax credit payments.

“A substantial number of people will be surprised,” said Catherine E. Livingston, who was the health care counsel at the I.R.S. from 2010 to 2013. “If you have an increase in income this year, it could mean that you will owe money to the government when you file your tax return next April. Or you may receive a smaller refund.”

Consumers should notify the health insurance marketplace if their income or family size changes, said Ms. Livingston, a lawyer at Jones Day.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In a guide to the health care law, Jackson Hewitt tells consumers: “You don’t want to have to pay back part of your tax credit at the end of the year. This might happen if you don’t report your changes.” Higher income or a smaller family could mean lower subsidies.

Tax professionals say their expertise and experience with tax law prepare them well to help consumers through the labyrinth of the health care law and regulations.

“We’re the Affordable Care Act experts,” Intuit says in promoting TurboTax. “As with all tax laws, we know the new health care law inside and out.”

Jackson Hewitt emphasizes that it can help people apply for Medicaid at any time of year. And it will help consumers obtain subsidized private insurance after the March 31 sign-up deadline by requesting a “special enrollment period.”

Tax experts are also telling clients that the penalties for going without insurance could turn out to be larger than they realize.

“Most people have $95 in their head,” Mr. Ciaramitaro said. “But for the vast majority of people, the potential penalty will be higher.”

The penalty this year is either a fixed dollar amount — $95 per adult — or 1 percent of household income above the “filing threshold,” whichever is greater. The threshold this year is $10,150 for individuals and $20,300 for married couples filing joint returns. The penalties are scheduled to increase in future years.

The White House is celebrating the fact that 7.5 million people signed up for private coverage through the exchanges. But in tax service offices this spring, the perspective is a bit different.

“The president met his goal,” Ms. Burnell said, “but many, many people we see still need health coverage.”