A child looks out of a car as he passes Antonio Maceo Revolution Square in 2012 in Santiago de Cuba, Cuba, where a bevy of classic American cars have amassed since the U.S. trade embargo in 1961. Spencer Platt/Getty Images

Good Thursday morning, the 352nd day of 2014 and the morning after President Barack Obama unofficially ended the last battle of the Cold War by normalizing relations with Cuba - which, according to the New York Times, was a move several months in the making, and one that featured all the elements of a John Le Carre novel: spies, secret Oval Office phone calls and clandestine, trilateral diplomatic meetings brokered by the Vatican. But as one international psychic battle ends, another rages on: it’s the first day since Sony Pictures, reacting to vague threats of terrorism, canceled the Christmas Day release of a comedy lampooning North Korea, (a starving, highly-militarized country with no apparent sense of humor about the assassination of its leader), whom the U.S. now blames for hacking into Sony’s computer servers. The cyberattack destabilized a major Hollywood studio, freaked out the entertainment industry and caused Obama to tell people to go to the movies. Get ready for this morning’s Three Minute Briefing, all the News You Can Use in 180 seconds or less:

Hold the Mojitos...: Now that President Barack Obama has normalized relations with Cuba, we can all make like Hemingway and head to Havana, visions of pristine beaches, primo rum and amazing cigars dancing in our heads, right? No tan rapido, says the Washington Post, in an article laying out the dos and do-not-dos for eager tourists and cigar aficionados.

...For Now…: In an exclusive interview with ABC News, Obama said he’s not planning to visit his new bro Raul Castro any time soon – unless, of course, he’s invited. “I don’t have any current plans, but let’s see how things evolve,” he said. If so, he might want to touch base with his buddy Jay Z to get some travel tips.

[READ: Renewed Diplomacy Between U.S., Cuba Follows Enigmatic Relationship]

… But the Jumbo Popcorn’s a Rip-Off: In the same interview, the president said his administration is investigating the hacking of Sony Entertainment computers, and the vague threat of violence at theaters screening “The Interview,” a satire set in North Korea that apparently has really irritated Kim Jong Un. For Americans concerned about those threats, the president said, “my recommendation would be to go to the movies.”

Tweet This: The Twitterati was not happy with Sony Pictures giving in to the demands of the anonymous hackers to pull “The Interview” from its planned Christmas Day release. One Tweet in particular caught our attention:

Released by United Artists, March 1941. pic.twitter.com/cXuLoxdivx — mark romanek (@markromanek) December 18, 2014

Si Se Puede: Obama’s approval ratings among Latinos has jumped 10 points since he made his move on immigration reform, according to a new NBC News-Wall Street Journal report. FIfty-seven percent say they like the job Obama’s doing, compared with 47 percent who said so in September, before the immigration announcement.

Next Up, Motorcycling Across the Gobi: First it was the climate change deal with China, then it was said executive action on immigration. Now, by normalizing relations with Cuba, Obama has checked off another item on his “2008 campaign bucket list,” according to Bloomberg.

No Sympathy: Falling oil prices has ExxonMobil wringing its hands, Russia is in an economic meltdown and commodities traders are spooked like they’ve seen the ghost of Mike Wallace on the trading floor. Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen, however, says cheap gas is like a big ol’ tax cut for the American people: "It's good for families, for households. It's putting more money in their pockets," she said.

[OPINION: Sony, Aaron Sorkin Ask Media to Stop Publishing Leaked Data, Pundits React]

Photos: U.S., Cuban Relations Over the Years EXPAND GALLERY Photo Gallery x of x Full Screen Fidel Castro gained notoriety in the 1950s after taking a leading role in the Cuban Revolution, resulting in the ouster of Cuban President Fulgencio Batista. Castro would serve as Cuba's president for roughly 50 years. Andrew St. George/AP x of x Full Screen Batista's administration was supported by President Dwight Eisenhower, right, who grew concerned with the newly radicalized government led by Fidel Castro. Byron Rollins/AP x of x Full Screen President Eisenhower ordered an operation to overthrow Castro's government in 1960. President Kennedy would oversee the Bay of Pigs Invasion following his 1961 inauguration. Fidel Castro, pictured lower right, sits inside a tank near Playa Giron, during the invasion. Raul Corrales/Granma/AP x of x Full Screen Revolutionary leaders Castro, right, and Ernesto "Che" Guevara in the early 1960s. As Castro's right-hand man, Guevara served as president of the National Bank of Cuba and as the nation's world ambassador, and played an instrumental role in Cuba's alignment with the Soviet Union. Guevara was captured and executed by Bolivian soldiers in October 1967. OFF/AFP/Getty Images x of x Full Screen Castro met with Soviet leader Nikita Khruschev to sign a trade agreement with the Soviet Union in January 1964. OFF/AFP/Getty Images x of x Full Screen President John F. Kennedy announced a naval blockade of Cuba, halting all shipment of military equipment, on Oct. 22, 1962, on live television. In his address, Kennedy said he considered any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against "any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response upon the Soviet Union." Keystone/Getty Images x of x Full Screen Members of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament march down Oxford Street in London, protesting against U.S. action over the Cuban missile crisis. Ron Case/Getty Images x of x Full Screen The Cuban government allowed anyone wishing to leave the country to do so between April 15 and Oct. 31, 1980, resulting in roughly 125,000 Cubans emigrating to the U.S. in an event known as the Merial boatlift. Here, immigrants arrive at the Naval Air Station Key West in Key West, Fla., on April 30, 1980. PKS/AP x of x Full Screen Amid declining health, Fidel Castro's secretary announced he would temporarily relinquish presidential power to his brother, Vice President Raul Castro, on July 2006. Raul Castro was officially elected president on Feb. 24, 2008. Cristobal Herrera/AP x of x Full Screen On Dec. 10, 2013, President Barack Obama, left, and Raul Castro shook hands at the funeral for former South African President Nelson Mandela in Johannesburg – a rare cordial interaction between U.S. and Cuban leadership. Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images x of x Photo Gallery x of x Fidel Castro gained notoriety in the 1950s after taking a leading role in the Cuban Revolution, resulting in the ouster of Cuban President Fulgencio Batista. Castro would serve as Cuba's president for roughly 50 years. Andrew St. George/AP x of x Batista's administration was supported by President Dwight Eisenhower, right, who grew concerned with the newly radicalized government led by Fidel Castro. Byron Rollins/AP x of x President Eisenhower ordered an operation to overthrow Castro's government in 1960. President Kennedy would oversee the Bay of Pigs Invasion following his 1961 inauguration. Fidel Castro, pictured lower right, sits inside a tank near Playa Giron, during the invasion. Raul Corrales/Granma/AP x of x Revolutionary leaders Castro, right, and Ernesto "Che" Guevara in the early 1960s. As Castro's right-hand man, Guevara served as president of the National Bank of Cuba and as the nation's world ambassador, and played an instrumental role in Cuba's alignment with the Soviet Union. Guevara was captured and executed by Bolivian soldiers in October 1967. OFF/AFP/Getty Images x of x Castro met with Soviet leader Nikita Khruschev to sign a trade agreement with the Soviet Union in January 1964. OFF/AFP/Getty Images x of x President John F. Kennedy announced a naval blockade of Cuba, halting all shipment of military equipment, on Oct. 22, 1962, on live television. In his address, Kennedy said he considered any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against "any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response upon the Soviet Union." Keystone/Getty Images x of x Members of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament march down Oxford Street in London, protesting against U.S. action over the Cuban missile crisis. Ron Case/Getty Images x of x The Cuban government allowed anyone wishing to leave the country to do so between April 15 and Oct. 31, 1980, resulting in roughly 125,000 Cubans emigrating to the U.S. in an event known as the Merial boatlift. Here, immigrants arrive at the Naval Air Station Key West in Key West, Fla., on April 30, 1980. PKS/AP x of x Amid declining health, Fidel Castro's secretary announced he would temporarily relinquish presidential power to his brother, Vice President Raul Castro, on July 2006. Raul Castro was officially elected president on Feb. 24, 2008. Cristobal Herrera/AP x of x On Dec. 10, 2013, President Barack Obama, left, and Raul Castro shook hands at the funeral for former South African President Nelson Mandela in Johannesburg – a rare cordial interaction between U.S. and Cuban leadership. Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images x of x ×

Illegitimate: Two years after Missouri Senate candidate Todd Akin went down in flames for suggesting raped women can “shut that whole thing down” and not get pregnant, a Show-Me State lawmaker is in hot water for judging rape victims. Said lawmaker, Republican Rick Brattin, is pushing a bill that would force a woman to get permission from a man for an abortion, with an exception for rape – provided it was a “legitimate rape” she reported to the cops – and they documented – first.

Awk-waaard: Sen. Elizabeth Warren may have declared she’s not currently running for president, but the progressive Democracy for America, founded by Howard Dean, announced it’s joining forces with MoveOn.org to draft her. That could make for some awkward conversations around the turkey come Christmas in the Dean household: Howard Dean’s brother, Jim Dean, is the chair of DFA, and Howard Dean recently penned an op-ed heartily endorsing Hillary Clinton for president. If she, you know, actually decides to run.

Stat of the Day: Estimated number of times SWAT teams were deployed in the U.S. in 1980: 3,000. In 2013 : 60,000. Average number of SWAT raids carried out per day in Maryland since 2009 : 4.5 (courtesy Harper’s Index).