Buy Photo A coyote is seen recently exploring Dryden Way in Parsippany. (Photo: FILE PHOTO)Buy Photo

Police are eager to track down a fifth person who may have encountered a rabid coyote that terrorized several people last weekend in the Black River Wildlife Management Area.

“It has come to our attention that possibly a fifth person came into contact with the rabid coyote on Saturday while running on Patriots Path,” Lt. Thomas Williver wrote to the Daily Record on Friday. “This person has not come forward yet, and we are requesting the use of your media resources to urge this person or any other person that may have come in contact with the rabid coyote to contact the Chester Township Police at 908-879-5514.”

Wall woman believes cats were attacked by coyotes

The coyote bit one man, who was riding his bicycle on Patriots Path, and confronted two other people Saturday before attacking a 69-year-old bow hunter Sunday, biting him on the face. The hunter, identified only as a Cliffside Park resident, fought the animal off with an arrow before killing it with a knife.

The next day, state Fish & Wildlife authorities said the 34-pound male coyote had tested positive for rabies, making it the fifth confirmed rabid coyote in New Jersey since 1989.

The hunter, who was at the rear of an archery range at the management area on North Road when he was bitten around 12:55 p.m. Sunday, and the cyclist were expected to follow a regimen of treatment for exposure to rabies, and the two who were approached by the coyote were advised to have a medical consultation.

Treatment for the deadly disease is a “no brainer” for people who are bitten by a rabid animal, but people somehow come in contact or are sprayed by an infected animal’s saliva also should seek medical advice, according to Cris Cooke-Gibbs, health officer for Chester and Washington townships.

Officials: Bear that killed hiker was not rabid

State Department of Environmental Protection spokesman Larry Hajna and Morris County Park Police Chief David Doyle said it is not likely that there is another rabid coyote in the Black River Wildlife Area, but they urged all users to be cautious and immediately report any contact with any animal that behaves suspiciously.

“Coyotes are found throughout the state in all sorts of environments, but they usually are only out at night. If you observe coyotes in the daytime, immediately contact the police” or other appropriate officials, Hajna said.

Cooke-Gibbs said that coyotes are not generally known to be high risk for rabies, as raccoons are, followed by skunks, groundhogs and feral cats.

Rabid raccoon found in Ocean Township

The coyote’s aggression was first noticed Saturday at the 3,077-acre management area when police were dispatched at 3:15 p.m. to Patriots Path on Pleasant Hill Road, near the Bethlehem Hermitage. The male cyclist was bitten on the leg about 1.5 miles from the parking lot on Pleasant Hill Road, Williver said.

Two other park visitors reported they were approached by the coyote in the same general area but neither was bitten. Conservation officers went to the area Saturday with a township officer but were not able to locate the coyote. Morris County Park Police were notified and closed Patriots Path from Pleasant Hill Road to Main Street in the Ironia section of Randolph.

Less than 24 hours later, police went to the archery range to assist the hunter who was bitten. The archery range is close to where the cyclist was bit, Williver said.

Staff Writer William Westhoven: 973-428-6627; wwesthoven@dailyrecord.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1w0Z0fe