The requirement to include electronic health records is one of the pressures driven by the ACA. | Rod Lamkey Jr. for POLITICO Are hospital mergers hiking costs?

Hospital consolidation since the enactment of the Affordable Care Act is a potential threat to free markets and health care costs, and one to which the Federal Trade Commission is paying close attention, said Martin Gaynor, director of the Bureau of Economics at the FTC.

Other panelists at a POLITICO Pro Health Care breakfast briefing Tuesday said the ACA was forcing expensive changes that required consolidation.

Story Continued Below

“The ACA and all other reforms in health care system are built on top of the market-based system” and “will only work as well as those markets,” Gaynor said. More than 1,000 consolidations occurred in the 1990s, and mergers have ticked up again since the ACA was enacted. Some, though not all, of these consolidations are a threat to the market system, he said.

( PHOTOS: POLITICO Pro Health Care Breakfast Briefing)

“Layered on top of many markets that are dominated by a small number of very large systems, it can be a concern so it’s something we pay very close attention to,” Gaynor said.

Barak Richman, a Duke University law professor, said there was “very little evidence” that consolidation had “provided any efficiencies at all.”

“Barak is right,” Gaynor said. “We’ve had mergers for a very long time. There are a lot of data, and we’ve seen almost no evidence of real efficiency claims. That doesn’t mean it won’t happen, but the most recent evidence doesn’t support those claims.”

( Also on POLITICO: The propaganda war Obama is losing)

That doesn’t mean that mergers don’t lead to more efficient care in some cases, or that there will be more evidence of it in the future, but on average that hasn’t been the case so far, Gaynor said.

A health care lawyer and a hospital executive said the ACA had created pressure for hospitals to innovate. That was driving mergers and acquisitions in the sector.

( Also on POLITICO: CDC confirms respiratory illness in children in Midwest)

The requirement to include electronic health records is one of the pressures. The cost of such systems is “ungodly,” said John Colmers, vice president for health care transformation at Johns Hopkins Medicine. “These are costing millions,” said Sharis Pozen, a partner at Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom.

“Our physicians were struggling to adjust to EHR demands,” said Deborah Zastocki, the president of Chilton Medical Center in New Jersey, which recently merged with Atlantic Health System. “We felt we needed to be aligned with best clinical practice, to be able to access clinical trials. It’s not just accessing the academic information, but also the infrastructure to be able to effectively implement these quality improvements.”

Pozen said most of the consolidation poses no anti-competition concerns. “I think many — the vast majority” don’t raise anti-competitive issues, she said.

Gaynor, whose office reviews proposed mergers, said a key factor in gauging whether a new arrangement is problematic is whether or not the two merging entities would be the main source of competition in the market if they remained independent.

( Also on POLITICO: Climate change isn't for the birds)

Such deals have to be reviewed and if necessary fought before they happen because they are very hard to unwind once they’re completed, he said.

“Once competition is gone — to paraphrase Bruce Springsteen — it’s gone and it ain’t coming back,” Gaynor said.

The merger of Chilton and Atlantic in New Jersey has enabled Chilton to deliver services more efficiently in ways that were impossible when Chilton was independent, said Zastocki.

“The types of things we’re able to do really are game changing,” she said. “The goal is to reduce cost by 2 or 3 percent over next several years” and to improve quality and access.

She mentioned that Chilton was now experimenting with how to use Google Glass — something that would have been technologically impossible if Chilton remained independent.

Integrated medical records have led to a much more efficient — and not duplicative — use of medical tests, she said.