Topics: AlterNet, Grand Canyon, National Monument, tourism, U.S. Forest Service, Business News, Life News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

The U.S. Forest Service is accepting public comments for a controversial plan that would pave the way for a foreign developer to build a mega-development at the edge of the Grand Canyon.

Opponents of the sprawling development — which includes plans for a dude ranch, five-star hotels, malls, high-end boutiques, restaurants and 2,100 housing units — say it would increase automobile and airplane traffic as well as light and noise pollution, and destroy critical wildlife habitat. The development may tap critical aquifers that could deplete the groundwater and may also reduce the levels of the exclusive source of all water for Havasu Falls, the cultural foundation of the Havasupai tribe.

Even the National Park Service, the U.S. agency that manages the Grand Canyon, considers the mega-development a “significant threat to Grand Canyon because it will require vast quantities of water and could lower the aquifer that feeds seeps, springs and streams that support wildlife and recreation.”

Italian style for an American icon

The tiny town of Tusayan, located at the south entrance to the Grand Canyon, filed a permit application with the Forest Service on behalf of Gruppo Stilo USA, an Italian developer, to build roads and utilities like sewers and water infrastructure on 40 acres of land that is completely surrounded by the Kaibab National Forest. Stilo has been seeking to develop Tusayan for over 25 years and even helped the town incorporate in 2010.

If its application is approved, Stilo would be able to go ahead with its plans to build an expansive resort and housing complex at the Grand Canyon’s South Rim entrance, the most popular tourist destination at Grand Canyon National Park, where the Historic Village is located.

Stilo “hopes to bring large-scale tourist-driven commercial development and much needed residential housing.” Plans include several million square feet of retail space. “The average tourist has his Kodak moment at the Rim, buys aplastic tomahawk made in China, and then leaves,” said Stilo spokesperson Tom DePaolo.

The company is hoping that, after tourists are done absorbing the majesty of one of world’s most beautiful and awe-inspiring natural landscapes, they will want to go shopping in malls and high-end boutiques.

Coalition of the unwilling

Earthjustice, a nonprofit environmental law group, on behalf of the National Parks Conservation Association, the Grand Canyon Trust, Sierra Club and the Center for Biological Diversity, has submitted a letter protesting the Forest Service’s consideration of the rights-of-way permit. They are seeking 50,000 signatures to support their petition urging the Forest Service to deny Grupo Stilo’s application.

“A giant development bigger than the Mall of America with all its traffic, noise and pollution will have significant, damaging impacts to the Forest, to the Park, to visitor experience and to wildlife,” states Earthjustice’s petition. “It just doesn’t belong next to the Grand Canyon.”

The impact to wildlife is a major concern. The Grand Canyon is home to at least 25 sensitive, threatened or endangered species, including the bald eagle, Mexican spotted owl, bighorn sheep, Southwest river otter, Western red bat, desert tortoise, Northern leopard frog and razorback sucker.

In addition to the many animals who call the Grand Canyon home are some 1,750 species of plants. But only one of them is a federally listed endangered plant: the sentry milk-vetch. The sentry milk-vetch is not only endangered, but also endemic: It doesn’t grow anywhere else on the planet except at the Grand Canyon. According to the NPS, “The species name cremnophylax means ‘gorge watchman'; a suitable name for a little plant that grows only on the edge, watching over Grand Canyon … The sentry milk-vetch population near Maricopa Point was fenced in 1990 after scientists discovered that the plants were unable to withstand inadvertent trampling by visitors.”

“The Forest Service is paving the way for foreign investors to exploit America’s most treasured natural landmark all to turn a profit,” said Earthjustice attorney Ted Zukoski, who criticized the agency for “throwing out its responsibility to serve the public interest by endangering the water, wildlife and wilderness that make the Grand Canyon so special.”

But where will the mayor retire?

The city of Flagstaff and regional businesses have already passed resolutions opposing the permit, arguing that it would negatively impact Grand Canyon National Park and surrounding communities. The Forest Service is holdingpublic meetings this month in Tusayan, Flagstaff and Williams to provide information about the proposed roads and utility easements.

Proponents of the plan, such as Greg Bryan, the mayor of Tusayan, say the area is in desperate need of permanent housing for residents. “I’ve been here 17 years, and if I were to retire next week I have to leave,” Bryan said. “I can’t retire here.”