If you want to help the Kingman County Humane Society by donating your time or money: Send them a message on their Facebook page: https://www.facebook.com/KingmanCountyHumane/ Send them an email: kchs@kingmancountyhumanesociety.org Send them a letter: P.O. Box 103, Kingman, Kansas 67068 Call them: (620) 532-5544 More information can be found on the Kingman County Humane Society website: http://www.kingmancountyhumanesociety.org/ People wanting to volunteer need to be over 18 years old. Stay up-to-date with KAKE News: iOS app

Android app

Follow us on Twitter

Like us on Facebook

The Kingman County Humane Society says that they are always in need of help from people wanting to volunteer or donate money for abandoned pets.

Kingman Counties Humane Society is small but their need is still great. On a yearly basis, they estimate that they adopt out 50 to 60 pets.

"We are always short on funding, we are always short on volunteers, we are always short of fosters," said Kingman County Humane Society president Carolyn Jergenson.

Jergenson says that sparsely populated areas in Kansas usually have problems when it comes to funding and supporting a humane society.

"A lot of rural small populations don't have any kind of humane society," she added.

Jergenson has worked with the humane society for four years. As of Sunday, Janurary 17, 2016, the Kingman County Humane Society has three dogs that need adopted.

The use of social media has helped this small humane society function. Jergenson says that just a month ago, someone from the east coast contacted her because of an online ad, asking about a puppy up for adoption.

Another obstacle that the Kingman County Humane Society has to hurdle is limited space.

"If we get full up in what we have back there [in the shelter], we have to turn people down or ask them can you keep the dog for another two or three weeks until we can get a space available," Jergenson said.

She says that through all the problems and work, the reward of helping a pet survive and find a home makes her efforts worth while.

"Taking an animal, that is so scared and doesn't know how to act and has no other chances. We work with the dogs a little bit, get them to where they are friendly and sociable and send them off to a home that we know they now have a chance in live. That is just the reward... you cannot measure that, it is fantastic."

The Kingman County Humane Society wants to remind people to not drop off their pets in the countryside if they can no longer keep them. Many pets are not trained to survive on their own. There are also coyotes that can prey on pets.