If Interpublic Group is put on the auction block, as activist Elliott Management reportedly wants, potential bidders may be particularly interested in the holding company’s Mediabrands media buying unit.

Media buying agencies are valuable businesses for ad holding companies because they’re growing at a faster rate than other legacy holding company businesses, according to Pivotal Research’s analysis of data from consultancy RECMA.

The major global media agencies grew billings by 12% last year with a five-year compound annual growth rate of 6.9% from 2008 to 2013, according to Pivotal Research’s analysis of RECMA’s data on media agency activity in 2013. Global advertising, in contrast, grew only 4.2% last year and over the past five years grew on a compound annual growth rate by 2.3%, Pivotal said, using Magna Global data.

Much of the growth in global media agencies’ billings has come from the big firms taking share from smaller independents and full service agencies (with some exceptions such as Horizon Media), Pivotal said. International expansion—especially in Asia outside of Japan –has been particularly important, Pivotal added.

IPG’s Mediabrands unit’s growth was slightly below its peers last year, with billings growing 11% in 2013 with a five-year CAGR of 5.9% based on RECMA’s figures. Pivotal Research noted that IPG was the second weakest among the global agencies after Havas, whose billings are half of IPG’s size, over a five-year time frame.

In contrast, Pivotal Research notes, media buying growth at Dentsu– whose size is similar to IPG’s– has been near the top of the global agencies group though a key difference is that Dentsu’s Carat as a standalone agency is almost as big as Interpublic’s Initiative and UM agencies combined.

Still, IPG’s performance could be highlighted by proponents of a sale. IPG itself, the fourth largest ad holding company by revenue, has argued it has enough scale to be competitive. During an earnings call last week, IPG Chief Executive Michael Roth noted “performance at Mediabrands remains strong in the quarter” and said the unit was a strong driver of organic growth during the second quarter.

Pivotal notes that Dentsu, if it acquired IPG, would jump to second place for media buying among holding companies from fourth place. Publicis, combined with Interpublic, would be “a clear number one” in media buying, Pivotal says.

But in a cautionary note, Pivotal Research analyst Brian Wieser says that an active sales process for Interpublic could be bad for the business, producing “an even greater distraction for all of the people involved.”

“While media agencies have very favorable financial profiles and contribute meaningfully to the logic underpinning M&A in the industry, they are at the end of the day much like the other kinds of agency businesses: they are very much ‘human’ businesses, with people as the core product and people as the core customer,” Mr. Weiser wrote in a research note on Thursday.

“Unfortunately for activist investors, human considerations need to play a major part in further industry consolidation for the agency industry,” Mr. Wieser writes.