With three weeks left in the 2015 regular session, our Legislature is working as hard as ever — to clobber us.

Perhaps it was an omen when a Miami lawmaker reportedly punched a visiting college student in the face at a Tallahassee watering hole the night before the session opened. Republican state Rep. Frank Artiles said it didn't happen. But minutes after the March encounter, a former aide to a Republican congressman called out Artiles in a tweet: "Hey…nice punch u threw tonight at that 21 yr old kid. Hope ur proud. Ur a joke."

Now that it's almost closing time at the state capitol, Floridians in general and South Floridians in particular could be in for a bruising.

Things look grim for one million poor Floridians who hoped to get health coverage through Medicaid expansion because they don't make enough to qualify for insurance subsidies through Obamacare.

Things look grim for the environment and the Everglades, as legislators have been busy subverting the will of voters who overwhelmingly passed a land-preservation amendment last November.

And things look grim for sensible gambling policy, as legislators keep punting on the issue, even with part of the Seminole Tribe's revenue-sharing agreement set to expire this summer.

And just when gays thought they were getting closer to equal footing in Florida, winning the right to marry through the courts, the Legislature has moved forward with a bill that would allow private adoption agencies to ban gay parents on religious grounds.

So far, the Republicans who control the House, Senate and Governor's mansion have been busy fighting amongst themselves and waiting until the last minute to get anything done. That includes the state budget, the only thing they're required to pass during the annual 60-day session.

The rosy budget projections that everyone had to start the year are now jeopardized by a looming $2 billion federal cut to hospital funding, tied to our state's stubborn refusal to embrace Obamacare and Medicaid expansion.

In turn, that might sink Gov. Scott's big priority, a $470 million annual tax cut on cellular phone and cable/satellite TV bills.

Gov. Scott remains as inscrutable as ever. On big issues like Medicaid expansion and the hospital funding cut, he has made muddled pronouncements, and then his own press office declines to clarify or elaborate.

After saying he was for Medicaid expansion before his re-election, now he's against it. His rationale: The feds might renege on a pledge to cover nearly all the costs in the first decade. So if the governor doesn't want Florida to take free federal money now on things that might later be cut, why does Florida still accept federal transportation dollars, federal education dollars or federal grants for law enforcement?

Meanwhile, legislators have been busy making the National Rifle Association happy, as bills that would allow guns on college campuses and in emergency evacuations keep moving forward. What's next: guns on playgrounds and in nursery schools? Or a bill that would change our state motto to, "Hands up, don't shoot!"

Three cheers for Tallahassee!

Shots are on me. I'll be the one ducking behind the bar.

mmayo@sunsentinel.com, 954-356-4508.