Pharmacist sees hiring demand, evolving role

The role of the pharmacist has evolved rapidly in recent years, from that of a dispensary role to a fully integrated and essential component of the health care system involved in patient care.

"Pharmacists' primary responsibility is to ensure the use of medications is according to the best scientific evidence, safe and effective," said Nora Osemene, professor and chair of the department of pharmacy practice at Texas Southern University's College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences. "Pharmacists provide direct patient care services, or pharmacist care, such as medication therapy management services, disease state management programs, and health and wellness programs - immunizations, smoking cessation, to name a few."

Osemene said that health care laws are increasing the need for every patient to have access to pharmacists and pharmacist care because pharmacist care has been shown in studies to improve patient outcomes.

Tara Jenkins, associate dean for academic affairs at the University of Houston, said there were also two major trends occurring in the pharmacy field that have facilitated the shift in the pharmacist role and contributed to the industry demand for these individuals.

"The first large trend seen is an augmentation of the role of the pharmacist in ambulatory care (non-hospital care). Eighty-six percent of states, including Texas, now authorize pharmacists to collaborate with physicians so the pharmacist can initiate, modify or continue medications for patients. This is called collaborative drug therapy management (CDTM) and works with written guidelines established between the physician and pharmacist," Jenkins said. "A second current trend - an increase in medication use requiring more pharmacists - is associated with the aging population, the Affordable Care Act and the expansion of Medicaid in 26 states (not Texas). Seventy percent of Americans use at least one medication daily, and as the population gets older and more patients have insurance coverage for medicines, the demand for medications is expected to increase. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics projects the pharmacy field adding over 41,000 jobs by 2022."

Jenkins added that the pharmacist market is quite competitive. While almost all pharmacists are able to get a job right after graduation, she said, many are finding, that like most careers, it is beneficial to get additional qualifications to make themselves more marketable for their ideal job.

A pharmacist also requires a broad range of knowledge and skills.

Critical thinking and problem-solving are vital for a pharmacist to be able to identify, resolve and prevent drug-related problems.

"Other skills needed include communication, attention to detail, pharmacy-specific skills such as compounding or preparing IV products and computer proficiency," Jenkins said.

In Texas, a person also must graduate from an Accreditation Council for Pharmacy Education-accredited school of pharmacy and must pass the North American Pharmacist Licensure Examination (NAPLEX) and Multistate Pharmacy Jurisprudence Examination (MPJE).

"This is a good time to become a pharmacist because the demand for pharmacists' skills and knowledge in successfully managing medication use will continue to grow as the population ages and complex therapy is used for the management of diseases," Osemene said.

U.S. News & World Report recently announced its best jobs of 2014, and pharmacists earned a spot in the top five.

The media source used data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics to identify jobs with the greatest hiring demand. Jobs were then scored using seven component measures, including 10-year growth volume, employment rate and future job prospects.