Rep. Chris Corley, R-Graniteville, shows his frustration by waving a white flag of surrender during debate over a the bill that removed the Confederate flag from the Capitol grounds on July 8. Corley has since said that the vote will come at a political cost for many Republicans.

COLUMBIA — A freshman Midlands lawmaker is predicting up to 30 Republican incumbents could face challenges in next year’s primaries because of the removal of the Confederate battle flag from the pole in front of the Statehouse.

“This was way too big of an issue and it was not handled properly in the way it was fast-tracked,” said Chris Corley, R-Graniteville. “We were sold out by the governor, by (state GOP Party Chairman) Matt Moore and by the speaker.”

Demands to take the flag down permanently grew after nine churchgoers, including pastor and state Sen. Clementa Pinckney, were gunned down last month at Charleston’s historic black Emanuel AME Church by a white gunman who authorities have said posted online photos of himself holding a handgun and a Confederate flag.

During the marathon flag debate in the House, Corley was among those who sought to block passage of a Senate bill that called for taking down the banner that had flown as part of the Confederate Soldier Monument since 2000 and displaying it at the Confederate Relic Room and Military Museum.

The bill easily won the necessary two-thirds approval and was signed by Gov. Nikki Haley, but not before opponents engaged in what Minority Leader Todd Rutherford, D-Columbia, referred to as “filibuster by amendment.”

Frustrated by vote after vote defeating amendments, Corley took to the floor to propose replacing the rebel banner with a white flag representing his view that the Republicans had surrendered.

“I don’t have a picture, but it would look like this,” Corley told the chamber, waving a small white flag from the House podium.

That and his subsequent accusation to the Aiken Standard that House Speaker Jay Lucas, R-Hartsville, was “spineless,” were “mean-spirited” and “unbecoming of a state legislator,” said Moore, the state GOP chief. He added that the white flag “infuriated” him.

“It’s just embarrassing,” Moore said. “It makes the state look bad. There were good people on both sides of this debate. Almost all of them respectfully debated the very sensitive issue.”

If there is going to be a price to be paid politically for voting to take down the Confederate flag, Moore said he is unaware of it so far, and he would stand behind incumbents challenged solely for their flag vote.

“I would say it would be disgraceful to run in a primary against an incumbent on the issue of the Confederate flag,” Moore said. “Incumbents who are concerned about it, they aren’t alone. They have allies on this.”

Rep. Rick Quinn, R-Cayce, said he fully anticipates an opponent; the vote, politically, was a lose-lose situation because most districts were evenly split in their views on taking down the flag, he said.

Quinn agreed that some “hard feelings” developed among members during the flag debate. But the veteran lawmaker — Quinn was majority leader in 2000 when the General Assembly passed the bill that moved the flag from the top of the Capitol’s dome to the front lawn of the Statehouse — said wounds heal with time.

“I think where some of the relationships that have been harmed are with the people who felt deceived,” Quinn said. “But you don’t have to be friends to serve together.”

Lucas said he understood the frustrations of some of the members because the flag debate was a “very sensitive issue,” but he didn’t directly address Corley’s comments. Lucas said he approached the issue the same way he handled others during his first term as speaker of the House.

Under previous speakers, House members felt like the chamber’s leadership wasn’t open and transparent enough. And the chamber’s leadership has worked hard during the past year to ensure everyone is involved, Lucas said.

“What we tried to do with this issue was no different than what we tried to do with every issue,” Lucas said. “We tried to be open and transparent with regards to every issue that we handle.”

But Corley insisted that the process involved a lot of deception and “back-room dealing” that went against the will of the people. And a lot of Republicans are “fed up” with how they sold out on the issue, he claimed.

“We don’t know what was said back there,” Corley said. “This is a speaker who has been supposedly all about transparency. There was absolutely nothing transparent about what was done.”

Reach Cynthia Roldan at 708-5891. The Associated Press contributed to this story.