BELDING — When it comes to health care for infants, even the smallest of concerns becomes an urgency.

As children grow older, however, that urgency oftentimes wanes, which many times can lead to an oversight of major health issues.

From the age 10 to 21, a person can be battling with so many serious health issues as he or she grows into adolescence, though none may seem threatening on the surface to parents. But issues like depression, obesity and addictions to nicotine or alcohol are serious matters, serious enough that Spectrum Health has created another youth clinic specifically meeting the preventative health care needs for children and adolescents between ages 10 and 21.

The Belding Youth Clinic at 318 Bridge St., next to First Baptist Church and across from St. Joseph Catholic Church, opened June 22, complementing the hospital’s Lakeview Youth Clinic, which is in its fourth year of operation.

“Belding is a rural area and resources just aren’t available to youth and adolescents like they should be,” said Belding Youth Clinic Manager Sarah Dishong-Perez. “Young children, infants to 9 years, receive a higher rate of care, with required immunizations and well child exams and are seen more often for preventative visits. We see a higher need for children and teens ages 10 to 21. For some reason, preventative care just isn’t seen as important anymore to older adolescents, but they are the ones who need it the most. So, we are here for them when they need us.”

The clinic is made possible by the Michigan Child and Adolescent Health Center’s Alternative School-Linked Health Clinic grant, funded through the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services and Michigan Department of Education.

Dishong-Perez, a Lakeview native, helped lead the success of the Lakeview Youth Clinic, quickly transforming it from a part-time facility to a full-time operation, something she is aiming to do for Belding’s new clinic, which is now open from 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. Mondays and Wednesdays.

“We have had a great success with the current Lakeview Youth Clinic and saw a need for the Belding area students and thought it would be a great opportunity for this community to open another youth clinic,” she said. “We are designed to offer all the same services that you would receive at your primary care provider, but with a focus on the unique needs — medical, social-emotional, developmental — of adolescents ages 10 to 21. We will have a nurse practitioner, registered nurse and a counselor.”

The clinic is in the process of hiring a full-time counselor.

The Belding Youth Clinic and Spectrum Health are taking a proactive approach to campaigning its efforts in improving preventative care for local youths. The clinic has established a working relationship with both Belding Area Schools and Belding Family Medicine, where nurse practitioner Dan Pear works. He will also be working at the youth clinic Mondays and Wednesdays, along with Nicole Parrot, a registered nurse.

“We are committed to providing interdisciplinary care to young people taking into account not only their physical condition, but also their personal, social, emotional and mental development,” Pear said. “Healthy and happy youth make all the difference.”

Representatives from Belding Youth Clinic will also visit the high school to build a relationship with students and provide them with knowledge to better themselves when it comes to preventive health care.

“The clinic is made for and centered around youth,” Dishong-Perez, who has already visited Belding football team’s seven-on-seven practices.

“It’s sometimes hard for adolescents to talk to someone they have sat next to with their parents for years, about things that are going on in their lives, experiences they are having or risky behaviors. The youth clinic is just a different atmosphere. We push to build a great level of trust with the kids in the community. We are here to help and encourage kids to talk to their parents about their life choices, but on their own terms, and support them through that process.”

Dishong-Perez has plans to embed Belding Youth Clinic in area events, including health fairs, Belding Labor Day and at Greenville’s Danish Festival in August.

The clinic is also available to help parents set up health insurance enrollment through Healthy Kids and MIChild. Because the clinic is grant-funded and backed by Spectrum Health, Dishong-Perez said the clinic is able to provide affordable services and is able to accept all insurances, copays and donations.

“We make sure there is no barrier for teens and adolescents to be seen,” she said. “If you have no insurance or can’t afford it, we have alternatives. We make sure they receive the care they need.”

Belding’s youth clinic is set up much like its sister clinic in Lakeview, offering the same services, however, each clinic also offers (or will be offering) on-campus programs at the schools for specific needs in each area, thus each clinic is customized to meet the unique needs of students in the school the clinic is linked with.

According to a recent needs assessment survey performed by Dishong-Perez at the end of last year’s school year, children in the Belding area are in more need of preventative health care for risks such as depression and smoking cessation, while children in the Lakeview area need support for obesity and better nutrition.

“Every couple of years we do a school and community needs assessment survey to get a better understanding of what the students and community feel are the greatest concerns for the youth,” Dishong-Perez said. “We then use those results to target focus areas and offer extra prevention programs surrounding those identified risks and concerns.”

Although these on-campus programs will only be operated in the Belding and Lakeview schools for those students specifically, the same services will be offered at both clinics, as well, which makes it available to any and all youths.

“Our main focus and goal is to teach these kids and educate them on their own health and how to become responsible adults for that health care and how to act socially and be a part of society,” Dishong-Perez said.

Call (616) 244-1100 for an appointment or for more information. Some walk-in visits are available.