Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Bill Clinton speaks in Louisville on May 3, 2016, as he rallies support for his wife Hillary's presidential campaign.

Former President Bill Clinton speaks at UAW Local 685 during the Howard County Democratic Pre-Primary Pancake Breakfast during his visit to Kokomo, Ind., Saturday, April 30, 2016. (Kelly Lafferty Gerber/The Kokomo Tribune via AP) (Photo: Kelly Lafferty Gerber, AP)



The former president made stops in Morehead and Lexington before ending the day in Louisville on a tour for his wife Hillary Clinton's candidacy in the May 17 Kentucky Democratic presidential primary.Former President Bill Clinton took time for some retail politicking in Louisville on Tuesday, stopping to greet folks at Franco's Home Cooking in Shively and then stopping traffic downtown when he dropped in at Heine Brothers Coffee.

"The job of this election is to restore people to middle-class prosperity and to restore upward mobility," Clinton said during a 30-minute speech to supporters late Tuesday afternoon at the Kentucky Center for African American Heritage in western Louisville. "... What Hillary wants to do is to take us back to real growth, to reduce poverty by building middle-class income."

An enthusiastic but small crowd - a Hillary Clinton spokesman estimated 250 people - showed up to hear the former president as he touched on themes his wife's campaign is stressing in Kentucky - boosting wages, making college more affordable, fighting heroin and prescription drug abuse, and "finishing the work of health care reform."

He praised Kentucky for "the best implementation of health care reform, thanks to your former governor." That was a reference to Democratic Gov. Steve Beshear's embrace of the Affordable Care Act by expanding the Medicaid program and establishing the health care exchange known as kynect.

He touted his wife's plan "that we set aside $30 billion for 10 years to invest in coal country so they can come back with a different economy." But he made no mention of his wife's controversial comment in March to CNN that "we're going to put a lot of coal miners and coal companies out of business."

Hillary Clinton made that remark in the context of her plan to create clean-energy jobs in coal regions and she said she has been unfairly attacked by critics who have taken it out of context.

The former president engaged in no attacks against his wife's opponent in the Democratic presidential primary - Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, who was in town for his own rally. Instead, he touted his wife - a former U.S.secretary of state and U.S. senator - as being "the only one qualified" to address the world's problems.

And, though not by name, he chided the policies of Republican front-runner Donald Trump. He said U.S. policy must be more sophisticated than building walls because "walls can't stop social media."

And he said, "It is wrong to demonize our fellow Americans who are Muslim."

The Clintons have a strong electoral track record in Kentucky. Hillary Clinton soundly defeated Barack Obama in the 2008 Democratic presidential primary here. Bill Clinton is the last Democratic presidential candidate to win Kentucky, and he did so in both 1992 and 1996. However, he won each time with a plurality - not a majority - of votes in elections that included third-party candidate Ross Perot.

While much of Kentucky has trended Republican in the years since Bill Clinton was president, Ronald Hunter, a customer at Franco's Home Cooking, made it clear he's supporting Hillary Clinton. "She's got my vote, 100 percent," Hunter said. "It would be good to have a woman in the White House. It's about time. Plus she knows the issues."

Reporter Tom Loftus can be reached at (502) 875-5136 or tloftus@courier-journal.com

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/26OgRZ6