Please enable Javascript to watch this video

CLEVELAND -- The country music superstar who headlined the last concert a local man ever attended once again expressed his condolences.

Jason Aldean spoke with WGAR/Cleveland's Brian and LeeAnn Friday morning, one week after he performed at Progressive Field.

That was the night Cory Barron, 22, went missing. His body was found days later in a landfill.

After chatting a bit about the concert, Aldean himself mentioned Barron's name.

"While we’re talking about it, I’ve also been kind of following the Cory Barron thing, and just want to say to any of his friends and family there, that our thoughts are prayers are with him. That’s an unfortunate thing,” Aldean said.

Barron, of Fremont, left his seat to visit friends in another section and was last seen around 9:30 p.m. that night.

He was reported missing early the next morning and a massive search was launched.

Aldean said he heard about Barron's disappearance a few days later.

“To anybody listening out there, we’re thinking about you guys. I was following that pretty closely and sad to hear that, especially somebody that ended up happening at our show," Aldean continued.

My sincere condolences go out to Cory Barron's family and friends. My heart is heavy for you all and you are in my thoughts and prayers. — Jason_Aldean (@Jason_Aldean) July 23, 2014

When Barron's body was found Tuesday, Aldean tweeted his condolences.

A worker noticed it in a Lorain county landfill around 12:30 that day. Barron's ID and concert ticket were still in his pocket.

Investigators are exploring the possibility that Barron may have fallen down a garbage chute and into a dumpster at Progressive Field.

“Just wanted to let them know that, and that it wasn’t something that we just kind of brushed to the side, been following that pretty closely," Aldean said of the news coverage.

Hundreds of people attended a candlelight vigil in Barron's memory Thursday.

Friends described him as happy, caring and full of life.

The Lorain County coroner completed an autopsy, but said it will be several weeks before he will be able to reveal how he died.

Funeral arrangements have been sent. Visitation will take place from noon-8 p.m. Sunday at Herman-Kinn-Karlovetz Funeral Home & Cremation Services in Fremont.

The funeral will be at 11:30 a.m. Monday at Sacred Heart Church.

More information was expected to be released Friday.

Click here for extended coverage on this story.