I know I am not the only parent who, post-summer, vows to get their kids to bed earlier, promises to curb screen time or pledges to cut down on ice cream. As part of our reboot I am teaching my kids about mindful eating.

Nothing too “adult” that will squander their attention or too “out there” that will trigger eye-rolling, but rather simple reminders to actually taste, chew and enjoy the food they are consuming.

According to Pavel G. Somov’s “Eating the Moment,” we eat for three main reasons:

Physical hunger: a true need to sustain the body.

Psychological hunger: “the need to be entertained, comforted, or distracted.”

Habit: both the concept that we eat at certain times regardless of hunger, and the response to “certain environmental stimuli” such as TV commercials that trigger us to eat.

When people eat too quickly and do not chew, or eat when they aren’t truly hungry, their satiety markers are blocked and they overeat.

What does mindful eating look like for children? It is the simple things:

■ Take a moment before eating to say thanks for the food or to take a breath.

■ Ask your children how hungry they are before a meal so they begin to develop an awareness of true hunger vs. habitual or emotional eating.

■ Allow children to serve themselves so they learn to regulate their portions.

■ Eat without distraction, which means not in front of the TV or computer, or in the car. If the mind is distracted during eating, critical signs signaling satiety might not reach the brain.

■ Ask your children how their food tastes, reminding them to taste and enjoy it.

■ Encourage your children to thoroughly chew their food, as chewing contributes to satiety, which can prevent overeating.

■ Teach children to put their fork down between bites so they eat more slowly, allowing their bodies to feel full.

■ Allow enough time to eat so the meal is not rushed.

■ Children should eat with caring adults in a happy setting. Parents, try not to nag about vegetables, criticize your child for the amount of food they are eating or lecture about something negative during dinner.

How many times do we adults feel worse after overeating or consuming items that are not good for us? Let’s help our kids learn that food influences how we feel.

– Casey Seidenberg, The Washington Post