When it comes to freebies for grifter illegal aliens, the taxpayer’s hard-earned cash is never safe from liberal pickpocket politicians, who serve illegals first, not citizens. Remember, any tax money spent on illegals is cash taken from Americans who may need it, particularly when it’s healthcare dollars.

When Obamacare was rolled out, the Democrats swore up and down that illegals wouldn’t get it. Now we learn that many do, even though the money is strained through county governments. And just this week, candidate Hillary Clinton said that illegals should get government healthcare, suggesting that her administration would supply it,

Now liberals argue that it’s cheaper to pay for normal delivery of healthcare than to have illegals running to the emergency room for every little problem, which they are allowed to do by law. But that idea ignores what a huge magnet American medicine is, and people come from all over (but particularly Mexico) to get very expensive treatment for seriously ill relatives. It was reported in 2006 that “hundreds” of illegals had arrived in Colorado for “free medical care they say they can’t get back home.” The cost for all this unaccountable do-goodery must be a fortune, and America is unimaginably broke.

This generosity even extends to organ transplants for illegals, where the rarity of available organs means that any given to a lawbreaking foreigner takes one from a citizen on a wait list. For example, illegal Mexican Ana Puente received three liver transplants from the state of California at a cost of well over a million dollars. Another transplant receiver was Jesica Santillan whose family paid a coyote $5000 to smuggle the girl for the express purpose of getting free American treatment for her life-threatening illness.

So any news that the healthcare door is wide open again may well prompt healthcare seekers to add to the crush of illegals headed for stupid-generous America.

The current free healthcare situation was discussed on Fox News between Tucker Carlson and Stuart Varney on Friday. The Wall Street Journal article mentioned is Illegal Immigrants Get Public Health Care, Despite Federal Policy.