Letters to the editor: letters@tennessean.com (Photo: The Tennessean.com)

Gideon Bible should be official book

The Tri-Cities in Tennessee was named America's fifth-most Bible-minded city. People were considered Bible-minded if they had read the Bible in the last week and believe strongly in the accuracy of the Bible.

With Chattanooga found to be first in Bible-minded cities, we can be proud Tennessee is probably the No. 1 fan of the best-selling book in history — the Holy Bible.

I was saddened that last year efforts to make the Holy Bible the official book of Tennessee while passing the state House, failed in the state Senate. I am happy to hear Sen. Southerland has renewed his push this year to make the Bible the official book of Tennessee. I support making the Gideon Bible the official book of Tennessee to honor both the Gideons and the Bible.

The New Testament they gave me in school has changed my life. They are headquartered in Nashville and have given out over 2 billion Bibles and New Testaments over more than 100 years.

Other books inform; only the Bible transforms. Millions have given up drugs and crime after reading the Bible.

God has given us truth in every word of the Bible and the truth can't be improved on. Reading, believing and living up to the Bible commands such as "do unto others as you would have them do unto you" is the only sure way to live up to Tennessee's official slogan: "Tennessee —America at its best.”

D.D. Nave, Elizabethton 37643

An effort to make the Bible the state’s official book is back in the Tennessee General Assembly. (Photo: Thinkstock.com )

Legislature highlights contradictions

Does the Tennessee Legislature understand irony? Or are its members completely oblivious to the messages they send?

I read Wednesday’s Tennessean articles about two bills presently advancing in our legislature, one making the Bible the state book and the other permitting guns on college campuses, with great interest.

Thankfully, the promoters of the Bible as the state book have agreed that the Bible is only a historical and not a religious book. After all, the gun bill eviscerates everything of value in the Bible.

Turn the other cheek. Heck no. Pull out your .38. Put your trust in the Lord. Why bother? The Bible is only historical, just pack your 9mm. The world is a dangerous place in which God of the Bible cannot protect you. Protection comes only from being able to carry weapons.

What to teach the children in Sunday school? Everything we teach you here is just historical nonsense. If you really want to be safe you must carry a loaded handgun.

Very interesting messages from the buckle of the Bible Belt.

Don Dawson, Nashville 37212

Black gun (Photo: SKapl, Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Marijuana misinformation

Re: "Cannabis prohibition does more harm than good," by Cecily Friday Shamim, and "Patients deserve access to medical marijuana," by Allison Barker Watson, Sunday Insight, March 27.

Please be more objective and honest in your selection of guest editorial writers than your March 27 "Point/Counterpoint," which contained two letters from pot lobbyists who used emotion rather than science to encourage our society toward addiction and brain damage.

Google: "Harvard Pot Study" to learn of the long-term damage in casual pot users to "...the nucleus accumbens and the amygdala — key regions for emotion and motivation, and associated with addiction.”

Medical science has access to drugs which provide more relief with less damage than does pot. This Harvard/Northwestern/Mass General study is certainly not "...deceit and misinformation" as an op-ed claims.

Reason and honesty are crucial in our public discourse.

Bob Alley, Nashville 37215

Marijuana in a coffee shop in The Netherlands (Photo: Ingram Publishing, Getty Images/Ingram Publishing)

Minimum wage in California (Photo: Cagle Cartoons)

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1SKYmNu