Dozens of state Democratic leaders signed a Clinton endorsement letter in August.

NJ Senate President Stephen Sweeney, at an event in Trenton Monday, said his support will stay with presidential candidate Hillary Clinton even if Joe Biden enters the race (Bob Jordan/iPhone photograph) (Photo: (iPhone))

TRENTON – Even if Joe Biden enters the presidential race, leading New Jersey Democrats so far are staying Ready for Hillary.

Multiple media reports Monday said Biden is nearing a decision to take on frontrunner Hillary Clinton to compete for the party’s 2016 presidential nomination.

Stephen Sweeney, the president of the New Jersey Senate, was among dozens of state Democratic leaders who signed a Clinton endorsement letter in August. None of the signers has renounced their support. The state’s presidential primary is June 7.

Sweeney said there’s no chance he’ll stray to Vice President Biden’s camp.

“I’ve already committed. I won’t speak for anyone else but I’ve already committed for the secretary of state,’’ Sweeney said. “I’m not backing away from my commitment.”

“The vice president is a great human being. I know him personally and I think he’d make a great president, too, but I’ve already made a commitment to Clinton.’’

State Sen. Raymond Lesniak — like Sweeney, a potential 2017 gubernatorial candidate — faulted Biden for staying on the fence for so long.

“I believe Biden waited too long to decide. We can't have a president who's indecisive about being president,’’ Lesniak said. “I'll stay with Hillary. She's come a long way towards my views on vital public policy issues during the campaign. I'm good with that.’’

Still, a Biden bid would get off to a fast start, based on a Monmouth University poll released Monday showing Biden with 17 percent support nationwide for the Democratic nomination as an undeclared candidate. Clinton is the pick of 48 percent of Democrats and Democratic-leaning voters and Bernie Sanders is at 21 percent.

Biden supporters were asked who they would support if the vice president does not enter the race, and most swing toward Clinton, giving her a formidable 57 percent to 24 percent lead over Sanders.

Pollster Patrick Murray said, “The specter of a Biden candidacy still hangs over this race, but Clinton can take comfort that she has appeared to win back some support with a solid debate performance (last week).”

Clinton as a presidential candidate has a strong New Jersey track record, besting Barack Obama 54 percent to 44 in the Garden State’s 2008 primary. Obama went on to secure the nomination.

The August endorsement letter for Clinton was also signed by U.S. Sen. Cory Booker, several members of New Jersey’s congressional delegation and nearly all of the state’s Democratic legislators and county chairs.

The letter to Clinton said: “We believe that your record embodies precisely what our country needs in our next president, and that your policy agenda — one that embraces and emboldens middle class America in a safer, more secure world – offers a vision to keep our country moving forward.”

Bob Jordan 609-984-4343, bjordan@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1RSlUiu