Buy Photo Jackie Shrago, a volunteer with Get Covered Tennessee, navigates the healthcare.gov website to help Connie Austin sign up for insurance through the Affordable Care Act in the 2015 open enrollment season. (Photo: George Walker IV / File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Jackie Shrago, a special project coordinator with the Tennessee Health Care Campaign, will be honored Friday at the White House for her efforts to help people navigate the Obamacare enrollment process.

Shrago, an omnipresent figure around Nashville during enrollment season, is one of 10 people from across the U.S. in the "White House Champions of Change for the Affordable Care Act" program.

She's a volunteer with Get Covered Tennessee who often works from community centers, mobile enrollment vans or the Lentz Public Health Center fielding insurance questions and helping people figure out which plans work for their budget and health needs.

"It really is a big deal for me. I’m humbled by it and again, there are so many people who put all their talents and all their time and all their commitment to this," Shrago said. "It’s really very special."

Meet .@jshrago. She's a woman on a mission during enrollment season. I bumped into her everywhere last enrollment. pic.twitter.com/fvygtTsqND — Holly Fletcher (@hollyfletcher) November 2, 2015

The open enrollment season ended Jan. 31, yet when reached Monday by phone Shrago was at Lentz in Nashville training people to help with enrollment.

“It continues. It’s not just an open enrollment thing," Shrago said. "You have to do it all year long.”

In Tennessee, 268,867 selected plans during open enrollment season — more than 30,000 more than in 2015.

U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell will speak at the White House on Friday. The Champions of Change honorees are:

Ana Maria Garza Cortez, San Antonio

Shelbi Flynn, New Orleans

Rudy Gonzales, Denver

Brian Hujdich, Washington, D.C.

Andrea Irvin, Atlanta

Elhadji Ndiaye, Philadelphia

Olivia Riutta, Missoula, Mont.

Aakash Shah, Cliffside Park, N.J.

Jackie B. Shrago, Nashville

Judith Solomon, Washington, D.C.

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 and on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1RfsMov