Topics: Ferguson, ferguson missouri, Fox News, Media, michael brown, Riots, Shooting, Politics News

Since the Ferguson verdict was announced last night, Fox News has been a carnival of talking heads spewing commentary that veers between depressing and infuriating and exhausting. None of it was surprising, but that didn’t make it any less awful to watch. So here’s a selection of sound bites from this morning’s Ferguson coverage.

Mark Furman, retired LAPD detective:

“Well, I think it was very predictable, Bill, because even the limited amount that we knew we could actually paint a fairly good picture that Michael Brown was the suspect from the very beginning to the very end. He precipitated every action that was used against him, he precipitated every contact with officer Wilson.”

“[Wilson’s] career has been stolen from him because somebody targeted him, not the reverse.”

“The thing that people are missing here is that you have entire parts of a community that is supporting Michael Brown, absent of the fact that Michael Brown committed not only a robbery but attacked a uniformed officer on duty and tried to kill him. That for some reason escaped everybody.”

David Webb, Fox News contributor:

“It was no longer, and frankly for a lot of them, never had been about Michael Brown but the people who had been stirred up by Al Sharpton and Jesse Jackson and others who simply are there for the, as you call it, they advertise themselves, but it’s a bait and switch on the black community to think they in any way represent the best interests of solutions.”

“We seem to have given away our voice and our actions to these purported race grievance industry leaders like Al Sharpton and Jackson and the social engineering constructs being ginned up by Eric Holder and others. Those don’t solve the problems.”

Host Jon Scott:

“That’s the irony here, is some people seem to think that a terrible crime was visited upon Michael Brown and they respond to it with terrible crimes.”

Jon: “We’re in an America where in this particular place haven’t the flames been fanned by the media, you know talking about an unarmed black teen shot by a white police officer.”