REDDING, Calif. -

In 2006, Bill Townsend was at the gym on the exercise bike when he first noticed something was wrong.

"I started feeling a little bit of chest pains. It felt like minor heart burn," Townsend recalled. "It surprised me a lot."

Townsend went to his doctor to get checked out, only to find out that at 54-years-old, he had become a victim of the number one killer of Americans, heart disease.

He had to undergo cardiac catheterization to remove the blockage in his heart. It's a common procedure used for diagnosis for heart disease as well as intervention. The procedure is done using an artery in the femoral artery, or groin.

"I was in the hospital for 22 to 23 hours and the worst thing about it is that you have to lay on your back for 6 to 8 hours until where they inserted the cath finally heals up enough where you can sit up," Townsend explained.

Fast-forward nearly a decade to 2015, when Townsend said he once again noticed a pain in his heart. Townsend would have to go through a catheterization again, but this time new medical advancements allowed him to experience a less painful option.

Radial catheterization has been up and coming in the medical industry in the last decade. Unlike the traditional method, cardiologists access the heart through an artery in the wrist.

"There are three major benefits to radial catheterization," Dr. Mohamed Khan, M.D., cardiologist at Shasta Regional Medical Center, explained. "It lowers complication risk significantly, reduces cost, and patient comfort."

It's a procedure more and more cardiologists in the U.S. are adopting, including Dr. Khan. It's his go-to method when it comes to catheterizations .

"Patients can sit up right away with just a band on their wrist and within a couple of hours they can go home," Dr. Khan said.

Townsend said if given the choice between the two procedures, he hands down prefers the radial.

"Recovery time was basically nil, and I did anything I wanted to do," Townsend said.

The way doctors perform catheterizations isn't the only thing that's changed in the last decade. Smartphones have become a big part of heart health, and is shaping the future of how people monitor, control, and prevent heart problems.

"Cholesterol can be checked with smartphones, glucose monitoring can be checked with smartphones, and EKG rhythm strips," Dr. Khan explained.

There are several technological advancements that have been introduced into the medical world, including a wearable T-shirt that monitors your heart at all times. It can send information straight to you or your doctors phone.

The Eko Core is a innovative stethoscope that can beam heart sounds wirelessly.

A quick app search also pulls up several heart monitoring apps that allow you to check your heart rate using your camera.

While all this technology can help monitor heart health, there is still no substitute for keeping your heart healthy to begin with, Dr. Khan warned.

Diet and exercise can keep you out of the operating room, but with all the medical advancements happening, the longer you stay out the better off you are.

"All one has to do is stay healthy because if you stay healthy you're buying time and there's better technology out there for you when you need it," Dr. Khan said.

Heart health and technology is a topic Dr. Khan spoke about at the annual Go Redding Luncheon in February.

Watch the entire speech here:

http://www.shastaregional.com/Go-Redding.aspx