2016 Cruz 'still weighing options' on Obamacare

Sen. Ted Cruz hasn’t made a final decision on whether he will sign up for Obamacare but will make up his mind “in the coming days,” a spokesman said Wednesday.

Rick Tyler, national spokesman for the Texas Republican senator’s newly launched presidential campaign, also defended Cruz against charges of hypocrisy for suggesting that he might enroll in Affordable Care Act health exchanges.

Story Continued Below

“Senator Cruz and his wife are still weighing options for their family,” Tyler wrote in an email to POLITICO when asked about the senator’s current thinking on enrolling in an ACA health insurance exchange, adding that the senator would make a decision shortly.

Tyler said that Cruz — who has vigorously opposed and vowed to repeal Obamacare — was subject to a law with which he disagrees. “That’s like saying he’s not going to pay the taxes he voted against,” he wrote.

Cruz, meanwhile, slammed the media coverage of his family’s health care dilemma, saying the mainstream media is playing “gotcha games.”

“And so suddenly, all the media goes, ‘Ah ha ha ha, gotcha!’” he said in an interview Wednesday with The Heritage Foundation’s Daily Signal. “Because Cruz is now signing up for Obamacare. Listen, I have zero intention of taking any government subsidy or Obama subsidy. Rather, what I’m going to do is pay in the marketplace for health insurance for my family, just like millions of Americans.”

The senator and his family had been covered through the plan his wife, Heidi, receives through her job as a managing director at Goldman Sachs in Houston. But they will lose that coverage as she takes an unpaid leave to work on his presidential campaign. That means Cruz and his wife have a decision to make regarding their family health insurance.

Under an amendment to Obamacare sponsored by Republican Sen. Chuck Grassley of Iowa, lawmakers and some of their staffers can get a government subsidy for health insurance only if they enroll in the District of Columbia health exchange and if they are not on Medicare or on another family member’s plan.

Cruz insists he wouldn’t accept the federal subsidy if he were to enroll, which his spokesman reiterated Wednesday. It’s the same subsidy that lawmakers received through the federal health insurance program they were in before the Affordable Care Act passed. They aren’t eligible for the income-related subsidies middle- and lower-income Americans using the Obamacare exchanges can get.

If Cruz chose not to sign up for the ACA health exchange, he could enroll in a private insurance plan outside of Obamacare and pay the full cost. Tyler said the Cruz family is still determining whether it might be eligible through COBRA coverage via Goldman Sachs, but the firm did not respond to a request for comment. COBRA is primarily for those who have lost a job and want to keep their employer health plan, and is sometimes available in other job-change circumstances. People enrolling in COBRA must pay the whole cost of their health coverage — a considerable amount for a family of four, such as Cruz’s.

Cruz’s statement that he would “presumably” sign up for insurance through Obamacare — first reported Tuesday by the Des Moines Register — has delighted many progressives. Several liberal blogs have argued that the senator would be actively choosing to enroll in Obamacare — not being compelled under law, as he has suggested — given his ability to apply for private insurance or possibly to get COBRA coverage.

“Obamacare has driven the whole industry, though,” Tyler said when pressed on that point in a separate phone interview. “It’s not as if the new private plans have been all preserved. They haven’t. Everything was affected by Obamacare.”

Cruz, who on Monday became the first Republican to launch an official 2016 presidential campaign, has been among the most outspoken opponents of the Affordable Care Act since arriving in the Senate. He has been criticized by many in both parties for his hard-line push against the ACA in 2013 — which included a 21-hour-plus filibuster on the Senate floor — that helped lead to the federal government shutdown. During that speech, he compared those who would relent on defunding Obamacare to people who gave up the fight against the Nazis. “Look, we saw in Britain, Neville Chamberlain, who told the British people, ‘Accept the Nazis. Yes, they’ll dominate the continent of Europe, but that’s not our problem. Let’s appease them,’” he said.

The ACA continues to be a focus of his attention — including at the launch of his presidential campaign Monday at Virginia’s Liberty University.

“Imagine in 2017 a new president signing legislation repealing every word of Obamacare,” he said then.

Nick Gass contributed to this report.