Health News

Despite concerns to the contrary, the new members who have joined Medicaid through the expansion under the Affordable Care Act use less emergency care than members who were already enrolled in Medicaid, according to a report from the Oregon Health Authority.

The report, which is part of the state's regular updates on Gov. John Kitzhaber's health care transformation initiative, measures the health and spending outcomes of regional coordinated care organizations that manage the care of Oregon Health Plan patients with a set budget.

For the first time, the report shares a glimpse of the 380,000 Oregonians who gained Medicaid coverage in 2014 and the first six months' worth of their health care utilization.

Results show they use the emergency department less, have fewer avoidable emergency department visits, and use outpatient care more often than existing or returning members.

There are several factors that could explain the results, said Lori Coyner, director of health care analytics for Oregon Health Authority.

For one, the age group that saw the biggest growth was 18- to 35-year-olds, so the new enrollees are younger and healthier than expected. The results also show that there hasn't been pent-up demand that could cause new members to flood the emergency departments as soon as they were covered. Also, CCOs have been effective in corralling new members into primary care quickly so they establish care with a community provider as soon as possible.

"We were very pleasantly surprised," Coyner said.

That pattern is exactly what state health officials want to see to improve outcomes while slowing the cost curve. Emergency care is the most expensive setting of health care, and often not the best setting for optimum outcomes. CCOs are focusing on better preventive care and more effective management of chronic conditions in outpatient settings to avoid the need for emergency care and hospitalization.

About a year ago, a study published in Science showed that new OHP enrollees who were chosen in the old lottery system used the emergency room 40 percent more frequently than others, and for conditions that could have been better treated in outpatient settings.

OHA's early results are telling a different story — newly enrolled Oregon Health Plan members actually use emergency rooms 33 percent less frequently than others — but Coyner said it's too early to rest easy.

OHA will continue to monitor health care access, and the first full year's worth of data will be available in June, she said.

In addition, CCOs have yielded improvements despite the influx of new OHP patients this year, Coyner said. Spending in emergency care continued to decline as spending in primary care was still going up, she said. Hospitalizations have also continued to decrease, indicating effective management of chronic diseases.

CCOs have decreased emergency department use by its members by 21 percent since 2011.

These are all promising indications that the CCOs have the capacity to continue holding down costs while improving outcomes and managing a larger pool of patients, Coyner said.

syoo@StatesmanJournal.com, (503) 399-6673 or follow at Twitter.com/syoo.

Read or Share this story: http://stjr.nl/1C9cNUb