Conservative commentator Katie Pavlich has a message for the left: “God made man and God made woman, but Sam Colt made them equal.”

Echoing a chapter in her new book ”Assault and Flattery: The Truth About the Left and Their War on Women,” in an interview with TheBlaze Books, Katie argued that the NRA is a real pro-women’s rights group because of their support for the right to bear arms essential to ensuring that women can protect themselves.

Katie said:

“There is nothing more powerful in equalizing men and women than giving women a chance to defend themselves with a firearm…Democrats are the ones who are constantly pushing these ridiculous pieces of gun control that are dangerous to women… [After citing stories of women unable to defend themselves due to restrictive gun control rules] There’s four victims right there…and it’s all because of their [the left's] asinine gun control agenda which has a detrimental effect on women…if they [the left] really want women to be equal then they need to give women the firepower to defend themselves against violent men.”

In the book, Katie argues that the left is actually engaging in a “War on Women,” hypocritically casting Republicans as villains despite the left’s own actions (think Ted Kennedy and Bill Clinton) and policies (think Obamacare), in the process undermining the very people the left purports to be helping.

During our interview, (the full audio of which you can find below) we also had the chance to discuss Hillary Clinton and how she has turned the women’s rights movement into a “joke,” why Katie believes that Ms. Clinton’s true legacy will be about “defending rapists and sexual predators,” why Barack Obama is the “most anti-woman president in history,” and much more including:

Why it is the left that is fighting the “War on Women”

The true history of GOP leadership in women’s rights and how it parallels that of civil rights

The hijacking of the feminist movement by socialists and Marxists

Katie’s take on the Hobby Lobby case

Why the Obama administration created the “ Life of Julia ,” ad, but not the “Life of John”

How Republicans can fight the war on women narrative

Whether conservatives are speaking in an echo chamber or can expand their reach with women

Note: The link to the book in this post will give you an option to elect to donate a percentage of the proceeds from the sale to a charity of your choice. Mercury One, the charity founded by TheBlaze’s Glenn Beck, is one of the options. Any donations to Mercury One are fully tax-deductible and go towards efforts such as tornado relief, preparedness training, and veterans support.

_

Follow Ben Weingarten (@bhweingarten) and TheBlaze Books on Twitter and Facebook.