By Sharon Day - June 24, 2014

Recent polling from Republican pollsters confirms what Republicans have said for years: women’s top priorities are the economy, government spending, education, and healthcare. Women are not single issue voters, and women are not happy with the status quo. We're looking for something better and something substantive.

Democrats have long tried to reduce women to single issue voters, and Republican have consistently called them out for failing to respect the fact that women vote on a wide range of issues. By relying on cynical political attacks like the “war on women” that lack substance, Democrats have failed to provide women with solutions to our top concerns.

For example, earlier this year when the White House was pushing equal pay legislation, and falsely accused Republicans of opposing equal pay. Republicans called them out, affirming our belief in equal pay for equal work and exposing them for peddling inaccurate statistics.

Not only did this expose the fact that they were misleading the American people, but it also showed that President Obama himself did not meet his own standard. On average, women in the White House made 88 cents for every dollar a man made. In other words, Democrats’ argument was not only misleading, it was hypocritical.

Similarly, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid’s refusal to introduce the dozens of jobs bills passed by the Republican-led House shows that job creation is not Democrats’ first priority. They only talk about job creation if they think it’s politically advantageous, but in reality the Democrat-led Senate is the biggest roadblock to job creation in Washington. Women list jobs as a top priority, and Democrats aren’t delivering. Republicans are offering real legislation that could get real results, but Democrats are dropping the ball.

However, it gets worse. Democrats are not just ignoring the bills passed by the Republican-led House. They also refuse to consider bills sponsored by Senate Republicans to help working families.

Senator Tim Scott is sponsoring the Supporting Knowledge and Investing in Lifelong Skills Act, or the SKILLS Act, which would transform our broken workforce development and training system into a more responsive and efficient program to enable workers to compete in the 21st century economy. This bill already passed the House in a 215-202 vote.

Senator Susan Collins has a bill to restore the 40-hour work week with her Forty Hours Is Full Time Act. The act would repeal ObamaCare’s 30-hour workweek rule, which has cut American workers’ hours and wages. It, too, has passed the House.

Senator Deb Fischer of Nebraska is working to prevent workplace discrimination with the Workplace Advancement Amendment. It would equip women with tools to fight discrimination in the workplace.

Senator Marco Rubio’s Rewarding Achievement and Incentivizing Successful Employees Act, or the RAISE Act, would amend the National Labor Relations Act to allow employers to give merit-based compensation increases to individual employees, even if those increases are not part of a collective bargaining agreement.

Senator Mike Lee’s Working Families Flexibility Act would help workers handle the constant challenge of work-life balance. It would allow private-sector employers to give employees who work overtime a choice between extra pay or extra comp time. This passed House in a 223-204 vote.

Senator Mitch McConnell’s Working Parents Home Office Act would fix a flaw in the tax code that penalizes parents who work from home. Right now, women and men can’t claim a tax deduction for a home office if that office includes a baby crib. This ridiculous provision punishes parents who work from home and care for their kids at the same time; the act would change that.

Sadly, it’s not surprising that Democrats only talk about helping working families but won’t work with Republicans to pass commonsense legislation. If Harry Reid let Republican solutions see the light of day in the Senate, voters would also see that Republicans are working on their behalf. Because Democrats have nothing to offer but false attacks, they won’t dare let Republicans get a vote on their solutions-oriented legislations. They only talk about women and working families when it’s politically convenient for them.

If Democrats were serious, they would work with Republicans in the House and Senate, not ignore them. This behavior is sad, but it’s what we have come to expect from Harry Reid and Barack Obama’s hyper-partisan leadership. They are so focused on winning elections that they will do anything to score a political point, including letting women and working families lose opportunities to better their lives.