FINANCE

PORTLAND -- D.A. Davidson & Co., an employee-owned full-service investment firm, has hired four new team members in their Portland and Salem offices.

More People on the move

With a combined $350 million in assets under management, the team joins D.A. Davidson & Co. from Merrill Lynch, each with strong backgrounds in the securities industry.

They are:

Kraig Kerr is senior vice president, financial advisor. A 25-year industry veteran, he previously served as the manager of the Merrill Lynch office in Salem. Kerr is a certified financial planner and also holds a bachelor's degree from the University of Oregon.

is senior vice president, financial advisor. A 25-year industry veteran, he previously served as the manager of the Merrill Lynch office in Salem. Kerr is a certified financial planner and also holds a bachelor's degree from the University of Oregon. Michael Larlee is vice president, financial advisor. Larlee, who has 12 years of experience in the industry, is a certified financial planner and holds the Chartered Retirement Planning Counselor designation. He earned a bachelor's degree in economics and business from Westmont College in Santa Barbara.

is vice president, financial advisor. Larlee, who has 12 years of experience in the industry, is a certified financial planner and holds the Chartered Retirement Planning Counselor designation. He earned a bachelor's degree in economics and business from Westmont College in Santa Barbara. Leslie Kerr is a client associate. Kerr is a former certified public accountant who holds a bachelor's degree in accounting from the University of Oregon.

is a client associate. Kerr is a former certified public accountant who holds a bachelor's degree in accounting from the University of Oregon. Christine Fordyce, is a client associate. She worked for Merrill Lynch for 13 years and at US Bank prior to that. Fordyce holds a bachelor's degree from the University of Oregon.

PORTLAND -- Matthew King has joined The Standard 's retirement services group as director of third party administrator relationships (TPA).

He will support the group's TPA partners across the country, focusing on both current and prospective relationships.

He has 20 years of experience in the employer-sponsored retirement plan marketplace. Most recently he served as the director of TPA and specialist advisor sales support at Transamerica Retirement Solutions. He's also served in retirement plans operational leadership roles with Voya Financial.

King graduated from Saint Michael's College in Colchester, Vermont, with degrees in political science and business administration. He holds both FINRA Series 6 and 26 licenses.

LAW

PORTLAND -- Jeanette C. Schuster has been named chair of the environmental and natural resources practice group at Tonkon Torp.

Schuster's practice focuses on advising clients on compliance with complex regulatory requirements under federal, state, and local environmental statutes and regulations; buying and selling contaminated property; regulatory agency enforcement defense and contaminated site investigation and cleanup (including the Portland Harbor Superfund Site). She also conducts environmental due diligence on complex corporate transactions and advises clients on issues related to the siting and permitting of renewable energy projects.

A 2002 graduate, magna cum laude, of Lewis & Clark Law School, Schuster joined Tonkon Torp in 2008.

She has authored papers and articles on environmental law matters and was named to the 2014 and 2015 Chambers USA, America's Leading Lawyers for Business for environmental law.

NONPROFIT

PORTLAND -- Amy Geoffroy will join L'Arche Portland on May 11 as director of development and communications.

She will focus on building relationships with current and future donors and communicating the mission, identity, and goals of L'Arche, "where people with and without intellectual disabilities share life together."

One of her tasks is to coordinate the organization's annual benefit concert with Julianne Johnson and Michael Allen Harrison, scheduled for Oct. 17 at the University of Portland.

Most recently she held the role of development/asset director at the Northwest Down Syndrome Association/All Born (In), which serves families and professionals in the Portland, Oregon/SW Washington region.

PUBLIC RELATIONS

PORTLAND -- The Main Street Alliance of Oregon has named Onofre Contreras Jr. as partnerships and initiatives manager.

Onofre will support the alliance's mission to represent small businesses to advance reforms in health care, corporate taxation, education, jobs and the Oregon economy among other pressing small business issues issues.

He has spent the past eight years building enduring relationships with Oregon government leaders, community based organizations and the business community while working on health care reform efforts and the implementation of the Affordable Care Act.

Onofre has served as an assistant county administrator as well as other local government roles in a 20-year career. In capacities as a city administrator and planning/public works director he has facilitated many contentious public issues as a bridge-builder to bring about consensus on matters of concern to elected officials, grassroots community members and business leaders.

In his work with the Oregon Primary Care Association representing community health clinics and the Oregon Health Action Campaign advocating for health reform, Onofre established relationships with government, business and community stakeholders to fund community health centers and support passage and implementation of the Affordable Care Act.

Most recently with Cover Oregon he helped navigate the work of the 23-member community advisory committee composed of insurance agents, small business, community advocates and consumers of Oregon health insurance services.

-- Compiled by Vickie Kavanagh



vkavanagh@oregonian.com

503-294-5913; okavkid