A rendering of the Marquette University Athletic Performance Research Center shows an aerial view looking west. The planned center will be built on 12 acres, bordered by N. 6th St., N. 10th St., W. Michigan St. and the Marquette Interchange. Credit: Marquette University

By of the

Aurora Health Care will partner with Marquette University and the Milwaukee Bucks to build a $120 million Athletic Performance Research Center, transforming a largely vacant area on downtown's west side.

The state's largest health care system, Aurora will invest $40 million toward the 250,000- to 300,000-square-foot research facility, Marquette University President Michael R. Lovell announced Wednesday. It's the single largest partnership investment by Aurora in Milwaukee, and the Jesuit university's most ambitious building project ever.

The facility will span four city blocks bordered by N. 6th St, 10th St., W. Michigan St. and the Marquette Interchange. It will be about the same size as the downtown Wisconsin District convention center, and a third the size of the new Bucks arena. It will include an indoor track, a lacrosse field and indoor golf practice area.

Lovell announced his vision for the research center a year ago, stating that it would support elite intercollegiate and professional athletes, academic research, and campus health and wellness initiatives. He also said the Bucks would play a key role, though that role hasn't been specified. Lovell said Wednesday the Bucks "will be contributing in some way to the overall cost and scope."

Beyond Aurora's $40 million, the rest of the money will come from private fundraising, Lovell said. Toward that end, Lovell granted the university's chief fundraiser and retired president Father Robert A. Wild the honorary title of chancellor.

Groundbreaking is planned for 2017, with the goal of opening the facility around the same time the Milwaukee Bucks open their $500 million, 700,000-square-foot arena just north of the BMO Harris Bradley Center, in time for the 2018-'19 season.

The Bucks arena is envisioned as a springboard for an additional $500 million, 1 million square feet of development — much of it in the largely vacant Park East corridor across downtown from Marquette's new Athletic Performance Research Center.

The Bucks also plan to build a practice facility on Park East land just east of The Brewery development.

Lovell said the Athletic Performance Research Center would transform the region, spur innovative research, and significantly advance the missions of both Marquette and Aurora.

The center originally was to occupy 7 acres, but when the 155-room Ramada Milwaukee Downtown property and former home of Herzing University became available last year, the site grew to 12 acres.

Center for emerging field

They envision it as a national destination for scholars and researchers in emerging fields of "human performance," including exercise physiology, athletic training, biomedical engineering, and fields involving nutrition and rehabilitation.

"This partnership is a true differentiator, bringing experts from health care, higher education and the highest level of sports together to take health science, innovation, and research to the next level," Nick Turkal, CEO of Aurora Health Care, said in a statement.

Turkal said the facility would help serve as "a catalyst in further revitalizing Milwaukee's downtown region and be a driver for long-term positive change."

The new facility solidifies Aurora's commitment to the near west side, said Mike Lappin, Aurora's chief administrative officer.

Lappin said he's spent most of his life in Milwaukee and remembers milestones that changed the city's landscape — buildings like the Marcus Amphitheater on the Summerfest grounds, Miller Park and the Calatrava addition to the Milwaukee Art Museum.

"These aren't just buildings. These are destinations. Destinations that transformed Milwaukee, that changed the way Milwaukee looked and the way people see Milwaukee," Lappin said. The new facility will be a "game changing" asset for the city and state, he said. "A new destination."

Marquette has had a long relationship with Aurora Health Care — specifically with its longtime neighbor, Aurora Sinai Medical Center. Aurora has provided student training and volunteer opportunities for decades.

The two also are anchor institutions of the Near West Side Partners initiative, aimed at helping to revitalize and sustain that part of Milwaukee's business and residential corridor.

A year before announcing its $40 million for the Athletic Performance Research Center, Aurora announced it would give $10 million in one-time grants to community health centers and other organizations to improve access to primary and behavioral health care, as well as treatment and prevention programs for sexual assault and domestic violence.

The grants were in addition to Aurora's ongoing support of other community programs, such as Aurora Walker's Point Community Clinic and the Sexual Assault Treatment Center at Aurora Sinai Medical Center.

Lappin said Aurora's mission is to "help people live well." He said the research performed in the new sports performance research building could be translated into better care for the community in areas such as behavioral health, wellness and injury rehabilitation.

Aurora employs about 30,000 people and has 15 hospitals and about 153 clinics stretching from Kenosha to Marinette in eastern Wisconsin.

The health system has had back-to-back years of strong profits, with operating income totaling almost $1 billion. In 2014, the health system reported operating income of $503 million, more than triple the $156.8 million reported for 2013.

The sharp income gain stems partly from an increase in patients, a reduction in patients without health insurance because of the expansion of coverage through the Affordable Care Act and cost cutting, according to a presentation to bond investors in September.

MU's growing footprint

The Athletic Performance Research Center is the largest building project in Marquette's history.

In 2010, Marquette dedicated an $85 million law school named Eckstein Hall in honor of a $51 million gift from alumni Ray and Kay Eckstein. That building is across the Marquette Interchange from the new athletic performance research center.

Marquette has been acquiring real estate on downtown Milwaukee's west side over the past year.

In July, a university affiliate purchased the 155-room Ramada Milwaukee Downtown, 633 W. Michigan St., for $3.8 million, according to real estate records.

That was Marquette's fourth real estate purchase in the area west of N. 6th St. and south of W. Michigan St. since late 2014.

Seven acres of the site for the athletic performance research facility in the 700 and 800 blocks of W. Michigan St. include vacant land and an empty office building that Marquette bought in 2014.

Marquette last April bought the nearby former Butch's Old Casino Steak House, 555 N. Lovell St., with plans to raze the building and use its 5,000-square-foot lot as part of the research facility site. The former restaurant is at the southwest corner of W. Michigan and N. Lovell streets.

Also, the university last April bought a former Herzing University location just south of the Ramada. Marquette bought the vacant 19,800-square-foot office building, with a 29,700-square-foot lot, at 525 N. 6th St., from S&R Property LLC, for $1.5 million.

The hotel and office building properties together appear to cover the entire block between W. Michigan, W. Clybourn, N. 6th and N. Lovell streets.

New development on downtown's west side has traditionally lagged behind development activity east of the Milwaukee River.

But investment on the west side has increased lately, with plans proceeding for the new Bucks arena.

Also, three new apartment buildings have opened on downtown's west side within the past year. Those include 700 Lofts, which is just across the street from the Marquette development, at 700 W. Michigan St.

Tom Daykin and Guy Boulton of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.