Denver Mayor Michael Hancock says an in-the-works financing plan for the ambitious National Western Complex project could include seeking voter approval for borrowing or a lodging tax hike. But he says a sales tax increase “would be the absolute last resort.”

“The idea would be to leverage our visitors to help us pay for some of these things,” Hancock told editors and reporters at The Denver Post an hour after unveiling new plans for the National Western project.

The Post reported details of the plan for the 109-year-old site Thursday.

The 128-page National Western Center Master Plan is long on details about the envisioned transformation of the 95-acre stock show site over the next decade. But it provides no overall cost estimates or a plan to pay for the projects.

City officials say some financial details and cost estimates will come out in mid-February, when they plan to submit an application for state Regional Tourism Act funding. That program awards money to projects that draw more visitors from outside Colorado.

Federal grant applications and philanthropic campaigns also likely will play a part in financing plans.

Hancock’s strategy is to attract more players into a budding public-private partnership that would direct the overall project and line up multiple sources of money — similar to the approach that has paid for the $500 million Union Station transit hub project. Studies suggest the stock show site components easily will exceed that sum.

“I’m confident with that stacking (of funding sources) because that’s how we’ve done some of these really big projects,” Hancock said. “The city cannot do it by itself.”

The other partners on board are the nonprofit National Western Stock Show organization, Colorado State University, the Denver Museum of Nature & Science and the History Colorado Center.

Hancock said voters could be asked, probably in 2016 at the earliest, to help by approving a tax increase or issuing new bonds or both.

Beyond ensuring the site can continue hosting the National Western Stock Show and Rodeo each January, the master plan proposes new buildings and improvements. They include a 10,000-seat arena, new stockyards doubling as a “festival park” outside the stock show’s run, restoration of a mile of the South Platte Riverfront and a big exposition center.

The changes are aimed at drawing 1 million more visitors a year to what could become a massive entertainment, education and agricultural center.

Jon Murray: 303-954-1405, jmurray@denverpost.com or twitter.com/JonMurray