Merry Christmas, mystery fans.

Here's what Patricia Cornwell is stuffing into your bloodstained stocking this holiday season with her 21st Kay Scarpetta mystery, Dust.

There's a diabolical killer, high-end corporate espionage, deep psychological trauma, tummy-turning forensics, unbearable suspense and a complex emotional resolution set on — when else? — Christmas Day.

As if that's not enough, the central story of the 500-page novel takes place in one densely packed 24-hour period, an act of narrative virtuosity even for this author of world-class page-turners.

"I wanted out to knock out my own glass ceiling," says the crisply spoken Cornwell, 57, on the phone from her Massachusetts estate. "It's the 21st book in the series and I was determined to give my readers something different. Because if I don't continue to evolve, then what's the point of writing?"

One could argue that having sold more than 100 million books to date and amassed a fortune that would be the envy of most other authors, Cornwell has set her own standards and they're blazingly intense ones.

In conversation, Cornwell seemed strangely familiar. Maybe it's because she is like her fictional heroine Scarpetta in many details. Cornwell laughs when presented with that theory.

"It's true that Scarpetta fully inhabits the world that I do. She grapples with the same enemies, she faces the same demons, she's even flawed in some of the same ways I am.

"Her relationships are so important to her that she can't let them go. I'm like that, too. And beneath an impeccable exterior, there's a lot of extremely messy feelings going on. But I don't think of myself as Kay."

The multi-faceted Scarpetta is currently the chief medical examiner for the state of Massachusetts, and while Cornwell did spend six years working for the chief medical examiner of the state of Virginia, it was in the technical and computer end.

She began her career as a crime reporter and, when you ask her today how she classifies herself, she says, "I come from a non-fiction journalist's point of view."

You can see that in the density of detail, the accumulation of minute information that makes her people and places live. Her portraits of the cities of Charleston and Boston, for instance, are photographic.

But other writers do that as well. What creates the compelling texture of a Cornwell novel is the emotional complexity of the characters. From the hyper-edgy Kay herself to her wounded detective partner, Marino, through her mercurial lesbian niece, Lucy, all the way down to her impassively stoic husband, Benton, these are not your cardboard mystery stick figures, but a collection of psyches who all would benefit from some time on a therapist's couch.

Cornwell had publicly documented struggles with depression, alcohol abuse and her own late-burgeoning sexuality. She was married to Charles Cornwell from 1979 to 1989, came out in a scandalous affair with a female FBI agent in the '90s and finally married Staci Ann Gruber in 2005.

"I certainly understand what it is to have powerful moods," says Cornwell, when asked about her past mental issues. "I've got a lot of colours on my palette. It creates the poetry of what I do, the variety of rhythms. But you wouldn't know that about me if you met me. I don't wear it on my sleeve."

Dust is set just a year ago and Scarpetta begins the book in bed recovering both from the flu and from having attended the aftermath of the Sandy Hook Elementary School massacre in Newtown, Conn.

It's the first time real-life violence has intruded into Cornwell's fictional world, and she allows that it hurls a veritable hand grenade into the chilly airtight atmosphere Scarpetta usually inhabits.

"I intended for that to happen," Cornwell says stolidly. "I had my reasons. One of them was I wanted us to start in a very dark place."

She pauses. "The other reason is that last Dec. 14, I was in Washington, meeting with Senator Orrin Hatch." Cornwell is known as a generous contributor to the Republican Party.

"I walked outside and Sandy Hook had just happened. It made me ask myself the question I often do when something like this occurs: how does this happen? What makes a human being do something like this?

"I've been immersed in cases like this all my life and yet even I can still be shocked by something like that. The average psychopath is driven by things that he can't control, but the spectacle killer is something else. What makes someone want to commit murder on such a large scale? Columbine, Virginia Tech, Sandy Hook. I guess you realize you can't be good at anything so you might as well be so terrible that you'll be remembered."

The passion Cornwell felt over the Newtown tragedy is just one of the personal concerns that makes Dust such an intense book. Corporate malfeasance is another theme and one that Cornwell is all too well acquainted with.

After five years with the firm Anchin, Block & Anchin handling her financial affairs, Cornwell sued them for $100 million in negligence. This past February, a jury awarded her close to $51 million.

"I'm not the only one who's outraged at what I found in the financial industries," she says. "A lot of people in America are outraged with the irresponsibility throughout the mortgage and housing industry.

"I've always had a special contempt for greed. It's not people having money. It's their attitude. I get paid well for what I do, but I'm not greedy. I have outrage for anything that's an abuse of power. Someone that takes a person's trust and then violates it."

Cornwell is now getting close to the bone, to the themes that have fuelled her whole creative life, issues she tries to resolve in Dust.

"Yes, I think it all might have something to do with healing," she admits. "I'm from the very part of the world Scarpetta visits at the end of the book, Miami. At Christmas. I think of my father every time I come to Miami."

And especially at Christmas, she might have added, because it was on Christmas Day, 1961, in Miami, that her father abandoned Cornwell, her mother and her two brothers. Her mother later plunged into depression, her brothers placed in foster care. Only she survived seemingly unscathed.

"As artists, our own emotions get channelled into our work," she explains. "It's a good constructive thing. At the end of Dust, Scarpetta is watching the elephants cross the street in Miami, the elephants from the circus her father used to take her to as a little girl.

"She's crying about things she can't allow herself to cry about."

The question occurs: Is Cornwell talking about Kay Scarpetta or about herself? But the moment and the question both pass, and she takes the last word.

"The best thing I can get out of anything in life is that I get a thicker skin. That's all."