Bayonne resident Ruth Burke, 76, found herself back in high school.

This time she walked down the long winding hallways of the Bayonne High School into the cosmetology classroom and sat down among a group of post-secondary students, ready for a hairdo to show off to her friends later that evening.

“I’m looking to get a haircut, a new style,” said Burke.

The free new look was courtesy of a partnership between the Bayonne Board of Education, Hudson County Schools of Technology and the Bayonne Economic Opportunity Foundation (BEOF).

Liana Petrie, 18, of Bayonne, who chatted with Burke while working on her new hairstyle, said this wasn’t her first time cutting a senior’s hair.

“Most of the seniors ask me what style I think is right,” said Petrie.

The program launched on Dec. 6 and offers the opportunity for senior citizens to get shuttled to Bayonne High School for free beauty services.

“The Bayonne Economic Opportunity Foundation (BEOF) is happy to work with the public school systems of Bayonne and Hudson County to bring this great new service to Bayonne’s seniors,” said Ana Quintela, executive director of the BEOF.

Chickie Panaccione, the cosmetology teacher, said more than 30 seniors have participated in the program with some receiving standard haircuts and other getting perms.

“This is a fun experience and it helps the students learn,” she said.

Panaccione kept an eye on Burke, making sure each clip of the scissor yielded the right cut and a happy customer.

On the other side of the room, Norman Bernstein, 86, ran his hand through his tightly buzzed haircut, feeling for any imperfections and finding none.

“He used everything to cultivate my hair,” Bernstein said of student barber Thomas “Mista Bigz” Washington. “I told him in the beginning I wanted a general trim and he was very professional. I knew from the start that he was going to be good, by the way he moved his hands.”

“I enjoy giving back,” said Washington, 25, of Jersey City. “I love it because I love what I do.”

Cousins Jessica and Claudia Bau, of Newark, were anxious to begin working on their subjects.

“I think it’s a great idea, but I’m a bit nervous,” said Claudia.

Mayor Mark Smith is impressed with the program.

“This program is a win-win for our community,” Smith said. “The students get the real-world experience that will help them in the job market, and the seniors get beauty services, free of charge.”

Seniors interested can make reservations for Thursdays at 3 p.m. when school is in session. Seniors can obtain tickets at any of the three locations, 555 Kennedy Blvd., 535 Avenue A, and the Nutrition Program at 16 West 4th St. For additional information seniors can contact Lori at the BEOF at (201) 437-7222, ext. 13.