History favors those who push for progress

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Social progress occurs because liberal-minded reformers defeat conservative resistance.

That's how slavery ended; it's how women gained the right to vote; how couples won a right to use birth control; how Social Security pensions were afforded to retirees; how labor was allowed to organize; how Prohibition was reversed; how blacks overcame Jim Crow segregation; how gay sex was decriminalized; how Medicare and Medicaid were established; how Sabbath “blue laws” were abolished; how censorship of movies and books ended; how health coverage was expanded under the Affordable Care Act; how pollution controls were enforced; how gays gained a right to marry; and various other humane advances occurred.

Improvements in Western civilization repeatedly have stemmed from progressive victories over conservatives. The tide seems unstoppable.

In 2004, former Labor Secretary Robert Reich wrote a book subtitled “Why Liberals Will Win the Battle for America.” He argued that the populace is more compassionate than the tone set by conservatives who dominate government. He said most Americans have “a bedrock sense of public, or common, morality” which sympathizes with ordinary folks, not the privileged elite favored by conservatives.

“Republicans have posed the deepest moral question of any society: whether we're in it together,” Reich wrote. “Their answer is we're not.” But Reich said conscientious people “should proclaim, loudly and clearly, we are.”

This month, Boston University religion professor Stephen Prothero will release a book titled “Why Liberals Win the Culture Wars (Even When They Lose Elections).” He says conservatives often feel society around them shifting away from their cherished privileges and prejudices. For example, they feel “anxiety about the demise of the patriarchal family or Anglo-American dominance or ‘Christian America.'” Too late, they raise an outcry and fight a furious resistance, but the trend can't be stopped.

“In almost every case since the founding of the republic,” he wrote, “conservatives have fired the first shots in our culture wars. Equally often, liberals have won. A liberal win becomes part of the new status quo and eventually fades from our collective memory. No conservative today wants to disenfranchise Mormons or outlaw five o'clock cocktails. So these victories no longer even appear to be ‘liberal.' They are simply part of what it means to be an American.”

The current culture war rose as a backlash against the tumultuous 1960s, when young Americans loosed the sexual revolution and war-denouncing counterculture. Racial desegregation, women's right to choose abortion, and banning of government-led school prayer further outraged right-wingers. Conservatives “saw American society drifting away from them, erasing forms of culture they held dear,” Prothero says.

As a counterattack, the “religious right” Moral Majority rose, and white evangelicals put conservative Ronald Reagan in the White House. White-only “segregation academies” were started so conservative families could avoid mixed-race schools. “Family values” became a slogan for hating gays. Pro-life murder occurred when a few zealots killed doctors and nurses at abortion clinics. Claims flared that America is an exceptional “Christian nation.”

But slowly, step by step, liberals carried the day. Gays won a nationwide right to marry. President Barack Obama's health care expansion made medicine available to millions of families.

“Conservatives lost the contemporary culture wars and they lost them badly,” professor Prothero says. “As the counterculture mainstreamed, American society continued to drift left.”

Most Americans have accepted liberal victories, but tea party hard-liners still sound right-wing trumpets. Will culture wars continue forever? Will progressives keep pushing for more personal freedoms? Prothero concludes:

“Liberals can take comfort in the fact that they almost always win our cultural battles -- that the arc of American cultural politics bends toward more liberty, not less.”

James A. Haught is editor emeritus of The Charleston Gazette-Mail.