Washington Post: Sen. Mark Warner discussed possible jobs for Sen. Phillip Puckett's daughter

Warner was part of a string of high-powered Virginia Democrats who in early June pressed then-state Sen. Phillip Puckett not to go through with plans to give up his seat in the middle of a bitterly partisan battle over health care.

RICHMOND — The son of a former state senator has told federal investigators that U.S. Sen. Mark Warner discussed the possibility of several jobs, including a federal judgeship, for the senator's daughter in an effort to dissuade him from quitting the evenly divided state Senate.

A Warner spokesman acknowledged Friday that the conversation occurred, but he emphasized that the senator had made no explicit job offer.

Puckett eventually resigned, throwing control of the chamber to the Republican Party and dooming Gov. Terry McAuliffe's top legislative priority — expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act. The incident also triggered a federal investigation into Puckett's surprise exit, which came at a time when Republicans were planning to give Puckett a job on the state tobacco commission and confirm his daughter to assume a judgeship.

On June 6, three days before the state senator's resignation became official, Warner called Puckett's son, Joseph, and discussed an appointment to the federal bench as well as a potential corporate position for Martha Puckett Ketron, according to Joseph Puckett's attorney, Charles "Chuck" James Jr. of Williams Mullen.

James said that Warner suggested a post for Ketron at CGI, at high-tech firm Warner helped lure to Southwest Virginia when he was governor a decade ago.

"My client, Joseph Puckett, received a phone call from Senator Warner, in which there was discussion of a CGI [ job] or a federal judgeship for the sister," James said Friday.

Warner spokesman Kevin Hall said that the U.S. senator "brainstormed" with Joseph Puckett about potential private-sector jobs for Ketron. Hall also acknowledged that Warner discussed a judgeship, but he added: "He did not offer any job nor would he nor could he, frankly."

Neither James nor Hall offered details about the conversation between Warner and Joseph Puckett.

"Senator Warner has been a close friend of Phil Puckett and his family for nearly 20 years," Hall said. "Senator Warner called his son, Joseph Puckett, to find out what the situation was and brainstormed [about] whether Martha Ketron had considered other opportunities.

Senator Warner was not in a position to offer, and never did offer, any job to Mrs. Ketron. When he spoke to Senator Puckett the following day, it was clear that he had made up his mind and had already drafted his letter of resignation."

The day after the conversation, Joseph Puckett recounted it in a text message to someone else.

"Talked to Warner for an hour last night," Joseph Puckett wrote in the message, read to The Washington Post by two people close to the matter. He went on to report, "He had no answer for how Democrats could deliver for Martha except for a potential corporate gig of some kind, which is not what she wants."

James would not confirm that his client had relayed the details of the conversation to federal investigators.

But two other people with knowledge of the investigation said that federal officials interviewed Joseph Puckett two weeks ago and that he told them about the conversation with Warner.