We at POPVOX took a look at the 241 bills and resolutions that were introduced on the first day of the 114th Congress. New message bills, leadership priorities and some old standards are now on the docket.

Leaders were elected, Members took their oaths and in short order, they got to work introducing bills on the first day of the 114th Congress.

In total, 241 bills and resolutions were introduced on Day 1: 187 bills, 11 Constitutional Amendments and 65 Resolutions.

By far the most prolific Member was Rep. Sheila Jackson-Lee, who was responsible for 18 percent of new bills introduced (43 in total.) Other names that made it onto the list include the new Dean of the House; Rep. John Conyers, who introduced 12 bills; Rep. Walter B. Jones, who introduced 10 bills; and Rep. Scott Garrett, who introduced nine.

Themes Emerging:

Some themes have already emerged among the first-day bills:

Seven would alter or repeal the individual mandate for the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare).

for the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare). Three pertain to comprehensive immigration reform ; five limit funding for the Administration’s deferred action (DACA) program.

; five limit funding for the Administration’s (DACA) program. Ten provide some kind of limitation or reduction in Congressional pay, benefits, or terms.

Already two concern the naming of post offices.

Returning from the 113th:

A few bills that have previously commanded considerable interest on POPVOX have made a reappearance (some even with the same bill numbers as before)

Rep. Marsha Blackburn introduces bills to cut federal spending across the board at 1 percent (HR 39), 2 percent (HR 49) and 5 percent (HR 58).

introduces bills to cut federal spending across the board at 1 percent (HR 39), 2 percent (HR 49) and 5 percent (HR 58). Rep Lou Barletta revived his bill to abolish the IRS (HR 33).

revived his bill to abolish the IRS (HR 33). Rep John Conyers re-introduced his bill to acknowledge the fundamental injustice of slavery between 1619 and 1865 and to establish a commission to to examine its effects and make recommendations on appropriate remedies. (HR 40)

re-introduced his bill to acknowledge the fundamental injustice of slavery between 1619 and 1865 and to establish a commission to to examine its effects and make recommendations on appropriate remedies. (HR 40) Rep. Scott Garrett’ s HR 114 would recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and re-locate the US embassy there.

s HR 114 would recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and re-locate the US embassy there. Rep. Thomas Massie re-inroduced his " Audit the Fed " bill (HR 24).

re-inroduced his " " bill (HR 24). The "Fair Tax Act" from Rep. Rob Woodall is back with bill number HR 25.

Other Highlights:

Sen. Rand Paul ’s S. 34 would “prohibit assistance to the Palestinian Authority until it withdraws its request to join the International Criminal Court”

’s S. 34 would “prohibit assistance to the Palestinian Authority until it withdraws its request to join the International Criminal Court” Rep. Erik Paulen ’s HR160 would repeal the ACA’s Medical Device Tax .

’s HR160 would repeal the ACA’s . Sen. Roy Blunt ’s S. 11 is described as “protect[ing] the separation of powers in the Constitution of the United States by ensuring that the President takes care that the laws be faithfully executed..”

’s S. 11 is described as “protect[ing] the separation of powers in the Constitution of the United States by ensuring that the President takes care that the laws be faithfully executed..” Sen. Diane Feinstein’s S. 29 would repeal the Defense of Marriage Act.

Myriad Paths Await the New Bills

Some of the First Day bills have already come to a vote or will be up soon (see the The POPVOX Week Ahead: Jan. 6 - 9.) Some may be considered later in the Congressional session. Many will languish. Some may become part of larger legislative packages, others will be the focus of discussion and debate throughout the 114th Congress.

The Complete List

The Complete List of new bills from the first day of the 114th Congress: