A 30-year-old man was extradited from Utah and brought to Plaquemines Parish to face child sex abuse charges in which authorities said the suspect’s family destroyed evidence in the case and a bishop “absolved him of his sins.”

Watch report

According to a news release from the Plaquemines Parish Sheriff’s Office, 30-year-old Matthew Todd Wallis is accused of aggravated incest and oral sexual battery. The alleged crimes happened in 1999-2000 and involved at least one young girl when he lived in Belle Chasse, according to investigators.

The Plaquemines Parish Sheriff’s Office believes more victims are possible and are urging them to come forward.

The investigation began in May 2014 when a victim came forward, telling investigators that Wallis abused her at his home in the 100 block of Brentwood Drive when she was between 4 and 5 years old.

“The victim reported that Wallis forced her to perform oral sex on him and that he performed oral sex on her,” the Sheriff’s Office said in a news release. “The victim also related that on several occasions, Wallis touched her inappropriately on her genital area and that he made her touch his genital area.”

Several witness were interviews about the allegations and later discovered that Wallis had video-recorded at least one of the sexual acts.

However, that piece of evidence will never be seen.

“When the video was allegedly brought to the attention of Wallis’ mother, she reprimanded those who found it and questioned them on why were they in his room and using the camcorder,” the Sheriff’s Office said. “Wallis’ mother allegedly informed a family member that she burned this particular videotape in order to destroy the evidence and to ‘make this all just go away.’”

Wallis’ parents admitted that they destroyed the videotape, authorities said.

According to Commander Eric Becnel, Wallis' parents won't face any charges because "the statute of limitations is six years, so unfortunately, we're unable to charge them with the crimes they are responsible for."

The sexual abuse wasn’t all a silent matter, according to investigators.

Investigators learned that about the same time of the tape’s destruction, a second victim allegedly came forward and spoke with the bishop of Wallis’ church about the matter.

The church was identified by the Sheriff’s Office as the Church of Jesus Christ Latter Day Saints based in Harvey.

“It is believed that Wallis subsequently met and spoke with the bishop of the church about the alleged crimes and possibly ‘confessed his sins’ to the religious leader at the time,” the news release said.

Witnesses told investigators that Wallis allegedly went through a “repentance program” with the church.

When investigators interviewed a bishop of the Harvey-based church who was assigned there during the time period, the leader confirmed his assignment and acknowledged remembering the suspect’s family.

However, the bishop said he did not recall being told of the alleged sexual abuse committed by Wallis on either victim.

That’s when investigators learned that there was another bishop assigned to the church during the time in question. That bishop is now deceased and is believed to be the one who “absolved Wallis of his sins.”

In early-August, investigators obtained a warrant for Wallis’ arrest and discovered he was living in Ogden, Utah.

Wallis was arrested by U.S. marshals and extradited back to Plaquemines Parish.

Wallis did not provide a statement to investigators.

On Wednesday, Wallis appeared in Magistrate Court in the 25th Judicial District Court. His bond was set at $100,000.

Wallis posted bond and was released from custody after the hearing.

Other victims or people with information in this matter are asked to contact PPSO Detective Aaron Verrette at 504-564-2525 or 504-297-5277 or Crimestopppers at 504-822-1111 or toll free at 877-903-STOP.

Sexual abuse victims under the age of 17 have up to 30 years to report a crime once they reach the age of 18.

Sign up for our email newsletters to get breaking news right in your inbox. Click here to sign up!

When you see breaking news happen, email your photos to ulocal@wdsu.com -- or post them (and your videos) to http://ulocal.wdsu.com.