Annual event shows off the fun side of technology

Christopher Jager pieces together a high tech Lego style toy called the Zome Tool at the NoCo Mini Maker Faire on Sunday in Loveland. ( Aaron R. Atencio / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

"So is this like a room of scientists or something?" someone could be heard asking at the NoCo Mini Maker Faire on Sunday.

Well, participants and visitors might argue that the fair consisted of creators and designers and inquisitive minds and children that just like to push buttons and pull on things and watch stuff light up and move. But not just scientists.

James Miller brought his Riverside Park — a Lego amusement park — to the event where children could push round arcade buttons to control the movement and light up features of a Ferris wheel, "Spaceships of Doom," "Wheel of Calamity," as well as a rather whimsical train that had an octopus and a dinosaur sitting on its cars.

"This is basically my model train," Miller said. He spent about 2 ½ years completing the many details of the colorful exhibit. And children and adults appreciated his work this weekend, judging from the children fighting over the push buttons and the adults exclaiming, "This is amazing."

SparkFun of Niwot allowed youngsters to solder and program digital name tags as its staff members helped program digital readouts with names and graphics.

Erico Cardelli and his daughter Jadis from Firestone were excited to create their LED boards because Erico is learning about programming and robotics.

"I want to just learn and immerse myself as much as possible so I can teach her," he said, holding up his name tag that ended with a "death star" exploding into pixels.

Advertisement

"I'm taking a class on 'Raspberry Pie' which is another type of computer. I invent a little on the side so it's cool just to have extra stuff in the house to play with," he said.

He purchased a couple of kits from SparkFun to create things with his daughter at home.

"We went to the first faire but missed last year. I might volunteer next year," Cardelli said.

Joe Pawelski demonstrated his Tesla technology where he used a dryer duct — because of its spherical and conductive nature — to power the high voltage charge that lit up the light bulb tubes nearby.

Children got to play with homemade pinball machines and live arcade games and human foosball tables and robots that spit Frisbees out of their mouths. They got to build tool boxes and little cars they could race on a race track that would record their times.

In the interactive arcade room, visitors could join a starship as captain, engineer, helm, weapons, science or communications and go on missions as teams, calling out directions to each other.

Across the way, guests whistled and hummed to illuminate a Lumenexus sculpture that lit up according to sound.

Out by the food trucks Brian Dickman with Rover Rally displayed his Arduino based cars with accelerometer and gyroscopes that run autonomously.

Joe Pawelski of the Tesla Research Society has been building Tesla coils since he was a teen. Here he demonstrates the 1 million volt power of the coil at the NoCo Mini Maker Faire on Sunday in Loveland. (Aaron R. Atencio / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

The Rover Rally that Dickman manages in Parker invites visitors to make their own robotics-based vehicles either from a kit or on their own, and test their skills in a day of challenges.

"There's no limit to what you can do," he said as his vehicle, programmed to run a figure 8 pattern, took out a metal trash can as it completed a turn. "You might say that turn needs to be a sharper one," he said, pointing to the first loop.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.