The state Insurance Commissioner’s disappointed, but not surprised over a reduction in health care options in central Washington.

Two companies are discontinuing coverage in 12 counties, including Chelan, Douglas and Kittitas in the north central region.

Steve Valandra with the Insurance Commissioner’s office says less populated areas present difficult challenges.

“Out in the rural communities, it is harder for insurance companies to make deals with provider networks because there’s just fewer providers.”

Premera Blue Cross and LifeWise Health Plan of Washington announced they’re dropping service to the counties this week.

Valandra notes the companies are also reacting to a big increase in the use of health care under the Affordable Care Act.

“You did have that pent up demand for years before the Affordable Care Act took place. And then some insurers did not price their plans accordingly. And now they’re finding out that more people are using services than they bargained for.”

People receiving health care from Premera Blue Cross or LifeWise through Medicaid will not be affected by the companies leaving Chelan, Douglas and Kittitas counties.

In Washington overall, insurance providers are seeking to boost premiums an average 13.5 percent because of rising costs. The state hasn’t decided whether to grant the requests.

The issue has been addressed on the political front by Republicans. Four Washington GOP Congress members – Representatives Dan Newhouse, Cathy McMorris Rodgers, Dave Reichert and Janie Herrera Beutler – sent a letter to Insurance Commissioner Mike Kreidler expressing concern over the loss of Premera Blue Cross and LifeWise.

The lawmakers also linked the Affordable Care Act to rising costs and reduced insurance options. Kreidler, a Democrat, responded that more companies are doing business in the state under the act, also known as Obamacare, than before. He also said health care costs were increasing by double digits every year before Washington implemented its exchange under the act.