Even as the costs of not expanding Medicaid in Florida increasingly worry businesses, health care providers and patients, the issue remains on the back burner of state politics and is a longshot for approval in the coming legislative session.

Top Republican lawmakers are either hostile toward or seemingly indifferent to the idea of accepting more than $50 billion in federal money to cover an additional 1 million Floridians — including 35,000 people in Sarasota and Manatee counties — through the federal-state health insurance program for the poor.

The issue was not on the list of priorities Florida House Speaker Will Weatherford and Senate President Don Gaetz highlighted last week when they unveiled a joint legislative agenda for 2014.

Gov. Rick Scott said during the same event that he is focused on tax cuts and other policy concerns. And he made no mention of Medicaid.

Weatherford has been especially critical of expanding the health insurance program, arguing that the federal government cannot be trusted to maintain funding for the long term.

“Under the current circumstances, we don’t think Medicaid expansion is good for Florida,” he said last week.

Gaetz and Senate Republicans were willing to accept the federal money during the 2013 legislative session, but they wanted to create on alternative to Medicaid that would help low-income individuals buy private health insurance.

The bill cleared the Republican-controlled Senate last year but not the more conservative House.

Similar legislation has been filed in the Senate in advance of the two-month legislative session that begins March 4, but the flawed rollout of the Affordable Care Act website may have soured some in his chamber on the idea, Gaetz said.

“I would think it would be even more difficult for the Senate to take up this issue now in the face of the federal government’s lack of decent behavior on the issue,” Gaetz said, equating the website rollout to a car rolling “into a ditch.”

Scott’s silence on Medicaid has been especially frustrating for supporters of a program expansion.

The governor backed a trial Medicaid expansion period last year, describing his position as a matter of “conscience.”

But Scott did almost nothing to promote the issue among lawmakers or the public, and does not appear likely to campaign for expansion in 2014.

League of Women Voters of Florida President Deirdre Macnab noted that Republican governors in Arizona and elsewhere have been more forceful in cajoling fellow lawmakers to expand the federal health insurance program.

“Governor Scott is missing in action,” Macnab said.

Despite the low probability of Medicaid legislation passing in Tallahassee this year, supporters of expansion say they will continue to lobby and try to increase public awareness.

Health care providers, business owners and chamber of commerce leaders joined last year to form A Healthy Florida Works, an organization that aims to highlight the financial costs of not expanding Medicaid.

Hospitals and other health care organizations could reap upward of $1.2 billion in new Medicaid payments annually, which would help pay for an estimated $2.8 billion in charity care provide statewide each year.

Sarasota Memorial Hospital would collect an additional $55 million over 10 years, money that would partially offset cuts to Medicare reimbursements, said SMH Chief Financial Officer William Woeltjen.

“It’s real money,” Woeltjen said.

And it’s not just health care companies that would benefit.

A recent study by Jackson Hewitt Tax Services found that businesses in Florida could face up to $253 million in fines annually if Medicaid is not expanded.

Any business with 50 or more employees will incur tax penalties if their workers seek private, subsidized health coverage through the insurance exchanges set up under the health care law.

But many lower-income workers would qualify for Medicaid if the program is expanded, thus allowing the companies to avoid the fines.

Kerry Kirschner, who runs the pro-business Argus Foundation in Sarasota, said he is philosophically opposed to the Affordable Care Act and Medicaid expansion.

But the former Sarasota mayor suspects business owners worried about their bottom lines will be more pragmatic.

“I think for the most part most of them will say rather than pay the fines and penalties, take the Medicaid,” he said.

Supporters of Medicaid expansion have emphasized these economic arguments when lobbying business-friendly Republicans in the Florida Legislature, but the human cost of allowing so many state residents to go without health insurance should not be overlooked, Macnab said.

The League of Women Voters is launching a new campaign that will highlight the stories of the uninsured.

“Our focus at this time is bringing to light the stories of real people who because of the inaction by the Legislature will continue not to have access to healthcare, which basically puts their life in danger,” Macnab said.

Sarasota orthopedic surgeon Dr. Adam Bright hears those stories every month when he volunteers at Sarasota Memorial’s charity clinic.

Bright recently performed surgery on a man who had injured his knees and could barely walk. The patient waited nine months to get help because he did not have insurance, complicating the surgery and forcing Bright to use an “exotic” procedure that would not have been necessary if the surgery had been performed right after the injury.

“For us to turn our nose up at the money, I think, is a mistake when all the other states are basically taking our taxes and using it to treat their patients in their communities,” Bright said.

Sarasota Memorial’s charity clinic had already treated 23 patients before lunch on a recent morning. Monica Gerner waited to have a volunteer orthopaedic specialist look at her shoulder. The injury has made it difficult for Gerner, 51, to perform her job cleaning houses, but she waited four months for an exam because she does not have insurance.

Gerner has been working less because of her shoulder pain and now earns about $150 per week, down from $500. She likely would qualify for Medicaid under the expanded guidelines.

“I think too many people are falling between the cracks,” she said.

Yet political observers see little opportunity in the short term to overcome opposition to Medicaid expansion among conservatives in the House.

Florida Hospital Association President Bruce Rueben said individual Republican lawmakers express support in private but are afraid to go against House leaders publicly.

It took five years for Florida to join the Medicaid program after it was first created in 1965. Some states waited more than a decade. States can expand Medicaid anytime in the future, but only the first three years are they 100 percent federally funded. After that, the rate drops to 90 percent and states must pick up the difference.

With future House speakers echoing many of Weatherford’s concerns about Medicaid, the political dynamic in the House is not likely to change anytime soon unless there is more outside pressure. That will happen, eventually, Rueben believes. But it could take time.

“We’ll work on this until it’s done,” he said.

Information from The Associated Press was used in this report.