As I have repeatedly said, too many of our hard-working families and small businesses continue to be hurt by the negative impacts of ObamaCare. Maine taxpayers deserve a government that works for them, not against them.

Last week, I became an original cosponsor of a bill that will help repeal ObamaCare’s overreaching Independent Payment Advisory Board (IPAB).

This unaccountable board is made up of fifteen unelected bureaucrats, appointed by the President and is tasked with cutting Medicare spending. Without a three-fifths vote from the Senate, IPAB’s proposals will be “fast-tracked” and Congress will only be able to modify the type of cuts proposed instead of the amount.

The power to adjust Medicare spending, which will affect our senior’s health care, should go through the appropriate channels in Congress, not from fifteen unelected bureaucrats. Mainers need and deserve a government that works for them, not against them.

Additionally, I joined my House colleagues in sending a letter to Speaker Boehner urging him to fast-track a bill, of which I am an original cosponsor, which will repeal the penalizing medical device tax.

As a result of ObamaCare, this 2.3% excise tax on medical devices has eliminated thousands of good paying jobs across the county and reduced research and development budgets for several companies. In an industry with more than 400,000 workers nationwide and generating roughly $25 billion in payroll, this medical device tax has had an extremely negative impact on jobs and our economy.

Most importantly, this penalizing excise tax has stifled medical innovation and creativity which, in turn, threatens patient’s access to revolutionary life-saving and life-improving products.

For example, Hardwood Products Company, located in Guilford, creates medical single-use disposable swabs and other vital medical devices. These Maine made products are extremely helpful and important for doctors all across the country to help diagnose their patients.

Unfortunately, ObamaCare’s medical device tax is making it very difficult for Hardwood Products Co. to hire more employees in order to create new innovative technology. Washington should be working to help our companies expand, create new jobs and become global leaders in their industry.

I will continue to repeal the parts of ObamaCare that are hurting our seniors, families and small businesses.