This is the time of year for all of us to assist those in need and, hopefully, in ways that are impactful enough to last much longer than the one-day event. Our goal is to find a longer term solution by providing additional resources to these families.

Medical Center of Marin (MCoM) proudly announces their second year sponsoring project UNIFY. Last year was an unbelievable success, and the plans are to make this year even more comprehensive and accomplish their original Mission Statement objective of helping as many families in as many ways as possible. Whistlestop Active Aging Center in San Rafael donates their entire building for this one-day event and on Saturday, January 17th 2015, from 10:00 am to 3:00 pm, Whistlestop (normally a place for the elderly residents of Marin) is transformed into a service center for needy families. For more information on services provided by Whistlestop, please visit: http://www.whistlestop.org or call (415) 456-9062.

This large-scale outreach has already begun at MCoM in Corte Madera and Whole Foods Markets in Mill Valley, San Rafael and Novato stores with a One Warm Coat drive. The coats collected will be given out the day of the UNIFY event along with donated books and 100 free bags of groceries, also donated by Whole Foods markets.

Affordable Care Act Certified Counselors are there to assist families make their health coverage choices in the last 30 days of the Covered California Open Enrollment period. Attendees can receive complimentary flu shots provided by MCoM, help themselves to books, coats and groceries in the donation room, as they peruse an a la carte offering of social services throughout the Whistlestop building. The entire Jackson Café of Whistlestop will be designated for Affordable Care Act sign up and counseling run by SEIU-UHW and supported by the Marin County Department of Health and Human Services (MCDHHS) and Marin Community Clinics. Some of the other agencies running tables and offering demonstrations at the event include: Parent Services Project, Marin Flagship Literacy Bus, Marin Housing, Marin Transit, Centers for Domestic Peace, Home for All Marin, Trips for Kids, Kids Cooking for Life, Marin Community Clinics Dental, Lift-Levántate, Environmental Health Network and more!

MCDHHS is supporting this outreach with multiple departments including: Covered Marin, Public Health Nutrition/CalFresh, Alcohol and Substance Use, Mental Health and depression screening, Diabetes prevention, Rx Safe Marin and disaster preparedness. For more information about MCDHHS please visit: https://www.marinhhs.org.

Individuals who would like to volunteer for this event should contact Loral Wright, Marketing Specialist for MCoM. Many volunteers are needed to make this event a success. “This is the time of year for all of us to assist those in need and, hopefully, in ways that are impactful enough to last much longer than the one-day event. Our goal is to find a longer term solution by providing additional resources to these families,” stated the managing partner of MCoM, Dr. Warren Cipa. For more information on last year’s UNIFY event visit: http://www.mcomarin.com/press_area#press.

About MCOM

Medical Center of Marin is an urgent care clinic located in Corte Madera just off Highway 101. They offer minimal wait time and personalized walk-in-service at a cost that is far less than an emergency room visit. They provide a wide-range of services including physician visits, full-lab and pharmacy onsite, digital x-ray facilities, chiropractic care, physical therapy and acupuncture. Their hours of operation are Monday through Friday from 9 am to 6 pm and Saturday from 10 am to 2 pm. All but life threatening injuries can be treated at this locally owned and managed clinic. MCoM has been serving the community of Marin County for over 25 years.

For more information contact:

Loral Wright, Marketing Specialist

Medical Center of Marin

101 Casa Buena Drive

Corte Madera, CA 94925

loral(at)mcomarin(dot)com

415.924.4525 x24/415.328.8930 Mobile ###