School Choice Weekly #88

Despite a flood of parent opposition, the Fairfax County, Virginia school board recently voted unanimously to allow transgender teachers and children to use the bathrooms, locker rooms, and sports teams of their non-biological sex.

“People are very disturbed by what just happened,” former school board member Mychele Brickner told The Washington Times. “They didn’t take parents into account. The fact that they passed a motion like this and created an additional protected class in the policy, and then they are going to let people see later what this means, that’s ridiculous. That’s exactly what happened with Obamacare.”

Board members said they had no choice in the matter: The feds were threatening to yank $47 million, or 1.7 percent of the district’s annual budget, if they did not comply with the Obama administration’s reinterpretation of Title IX. Title IX says nothing about transgender students, and Congress has rejected efforts to incorporate the issue into it, so the Obama administration just rewrote the law and is using it to smack around districts like Fairfax.

The consequences of federal involvement in classrooms have now become extremely clear. If the federal government did not subsidize classrooms with a dime of every dollar schools spend, it would have no power to march into classrooms and bully local school boards and teachers to submit to whatever whims seize the current president. That one man can have so much power, especially power outside the law, is plain tyranny. It is not rule by consent of the governed. It is not the rule of law. It’s rule by brute force.

This incident and the growing number like it are not necessarily about, as here, transgender students and teachers. Americans believe in the dignity and intrinsic value of every human person. The root issue is who gets to tell local schools what to do, and whether they can fairly be called “local” schools given increasing federal power over them.

To put it another way, at issue is whether individuals, families, and communities are free to address their concerns in a variety of ways, through diverse solutions they achieve on their own through self-government. Transgenderism is an entirely new frontier, and we don’t know enough about its causes, effects, and solutions to demand that everyone address it in the same way. Central planning, besides destroying individual freedom, also is likely to harm the most vulnerable by restraining their ability to experiment with ways to meet their needs. In the process, it harms everyone else as well by preventing us from being part of a genuine solution.

It’s time to roll back the federal role in education. Clearly, it’s not using its power well.

SOURCES: LifeSiteNews.com, Washington Times, Washington Post

IN THIS ISSUE:

School Choice Roundup

TENNESSEE: Gov. Bill Haslam has signed into law the state’s first school choice program, an education savings account law providing for disabled children. Approximately 2 percent of K–12 students in Tennessee are eligible. More.

MONTANA: A small tax credit scholarship program, the state’s first, has become law without the governor’s signature.

TROJAN HORSE: The grassroots that typically would support school choice is growing leery of the idea given that it often comes with regulations that destroy private school autonomy and parent choice, several leaders say in reaction to a speech from Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker.

FLORIDA: A foster child thrives in his new school, thanks to school choice. And a judge’s decision to throw out a lawsuit against the state’s popular school choice program means that little boy and other children can continue to enjoy the program’s benefits.

NEW YORK: Gov. Andrew Cuomo is stumping for an education tax credit program that would benefit both public and private schools.

CHARTERS: Charter school “authorizers could shorten the average [charter school] application by at least one-third without sacrificing their ability to ensure quality--a change that could save applicants more than 700 hours of work,” finds a new study on charter school overregulation from the American Enterprise Institute.

Common Core and Curriculum Watch

OHIO: A bill to drop national Common Core tests and limit state tests’ length to three hours per year passed the state House 92–1 this week.

WISCONSIN: A massive increase in test opt-outs this year has accompanied opposition to Common Core, reports the Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel. Opt-out rates were as high as 80 percent at some elementary schools, and they tracked in tandem with the strength of local opposition to Common Core. In response, state lawmakers have introduced legislation to require districts to inform parents they may excuse their children from the tests, and require districts to publish which tests they administer and how long they take.

MAINE: State lawmakers are considering bills to repeal Common Core and codify parents’ testing opt-out rights. Meanwhile, this state is also seeing the biggest testing opt-out movement ever, with refusals by up to half the kids in some schools.

DELAWARE: The state House has passed a bill, 36–3, to give parents explicit rights to opt their children out of tests. Parent opposition to testing has risen in conjunction with opposition to Common Core, The News Journal reports.

CALIFORNIA: The governor’s new budget dedicates an additional $3.5 billion for Common Core this year, which would bring the total of extra dollars taxpayers have paid for the initiative to $5.2 billion so far.

TECH TROUBLES: Sixty-three percent of school districts don’t have the technological capacity to administer Common Core tests online without disruptions, reports USA Today. That’s a major reason the tests, rolling out just this spring, have been plagued with troubles.

NEW HAMPSHIRE: A teacher and self-described liberal explains why she’s against Common Core--and it’s largely all about the Soviet-style coercion. She would know, since she taught in the former USSR nearly 30 years ago.

LOUISIANA: A compromise bill to review Common Core but not necessarily replace it made its way out of the House Education Committee this week.

Education Today

DATA PRIVACY: National lawmakers are considering three new bills to restrict, to varying degrees, the data schools and education companies can collect on children, and under what circumstances. The strongest proposal is a Senate bill from Sen. David Vitter that limits schools and government agencies as well as companies.

BULLYING: The latest data shows 22 percent of children reported being bullied at school in 2013, the lowest bullying rate since the national government began collecting such data eight years ago.

GRIT: Here’s what’s wrong with the new obsession with teaching and testing children for “grit” (or perseverance) in an effort to help them succeed.

COLLEGE ENROLLMENT: Nationwide, college enrollment has decreased by 2 percent over past year. This is the fourth year in a row that college enrollment has declined.

Thank you for reading! If you need a quicker fix of news about school choice, you can find daily updates online at http://news.heartland.org/education.