The Agenda How small-business issues are shaping politics and policy.

Photo

This week marks the somewhat limited debut of the health insurance exchanges established by the Affordable Care Act to help small businesses buy insurance for their employees. The Small Business Health Options exchanges, as they are known, went live on Tuesday, and businesses that go browsing – they won’t be able to buy online until November — are discovering a new concept for comparing the offerings: metal levels.

Metal levels are how health plans for small businesses must now distinguish themselves according to their actuarial values, which is the share of expected medical expenses that a health plan will cover. For small businesses and individuals, the Affordable Care Act defines four levels of actuarial value: a bronze plan covers 60 percent of expected costs, a silver plan covers 70 percent, a gold plan covers 80 percent, and a platinum plan covers 90 percent. The enrollee pays the rest, through deductibles, co-payments, coinsurance, or other cost-sharing mechanisms.

Sounds relatively simple, right? Not to Alan Cohen, co-founder and chief strategy officer of Liazon, a company that operates a private benefits exchange for employers. On Liazon’s private exchange, client companies can give each employee a certain amount of money to spend on benefits, and the employee can pick among several types of benefit plans. The Times has just published an interview with Mr. Cohen about his company and how the Affordable Care Act will affect small businesses.

In a related conversation, Mr. Cohen decried the metal levels as a “bad unintended consequence” of the new law. For one thing he said, the metal tiers imply increasing quality. “Except that they chose to make the dimension of the metal only one thing, which is cost-sharing,” he said. “There are lots of dimensions of what makes a plan good or bad beyond cost-sharing, like network size. A company offers really rich benefits but denies every claim, they’ll be platinum.”

The metal level scheme “dramatically reduces the number of plans a company can offer.” Insurers now have to hew to the thresholds set by the law — they cannot offer, say, a 65-percent actuarial value plan. But if metal levels are meant to simplify matters, he said, they don’t:

Metal levels don’t standardize; in fact, they confuse. A silver plan is 70 percent of actuarial value, but for all intents and purposes, there are an infinite number of ways to get to 70 percent. One plan could have a $2,000 deductible, and everything else covered at 100 percent. Another plan could have a $500 deductible and cover 70 percent to a $3,000 maximum. Another plan could have no deductible at all but have a $1,000 deductible for prescription drugs. Personally I think it infantilizes people. People don’t need metal levels to know if something is good or bad.

What do you think? If you have thoughts about the metal system, we’d like to hear from you in the space below. And if you have further thoughts about what the Affordable Care Act will mean for your business, please fill out our questionnaire.