By Jonathan Fink

The decision by The Oregonian's editorial board to downplay local efforts to address climate change in 2015 reflects a disconnect from the opportunities and challenges facing our city, our state, our nation and the world. As leaders of institutions who have created, invested in and benefited from locally based climate-friendly policies, programs, products and services, the cosigners below are disheartened that our local newspaper would take such a position.

The Oregonian believes that climate change is best addressed at the national and international levels. We agree, but we also believe that there are steps that can be taken at the state and community levels that should be supported, particularly as partisanship has largely prevented our federal government from acting.

In contrast, cities, regions, states and companies have become the primary innovators driving climate problem-solving. Oregon's anti-sprawl land-use regulations in the 1970s reflected and contributed to our state's distinctive identity, as have the city of Portland's and Multnomah County's pioneering climate action plans over the past 20 years.

This cultural awareness offers opportunities for economic growth and improved quality of life that continue to attract and retain innovative companies and individuals. The green aspects of life in Portland draw many of the best applicants to Portland State University and Oregon Health & Science University and encourage them to stay here after graduation.

Local companies such as Gerding Edlen, Glumac, and Wieden+Kennedy offer services like sustainable construction, engineering and marketing needed to move us beyond our current carbon-based economy. These firms also rely on our region's green values to attract and keep top talent.

Portland's utilities and agencies like the Port of Portland and TriMet are taking the lead on moving us away from coal generation and promoting money-saving energy conservation and alternative, low-carbon transportation options.

Reducing carbon emissions to reverse climate change is arguably the largest technological test facing our generation and that of our children. The new, cleaner economy that is emerging will reap major financial benefits for those climate-friendly cities and regions that anticipate the coming shift. Oregon's treasury is one of many investors who understand this dynamic, using its clout and nearly $90 billion under management to accelerate the development of profitable renewable energy projects.

American news organizations, including The Oregonian, have a proud history of helping to lead our society through some of its most difficult transformations. We hope The Oregonian will reconsider its position and continue to provide editorial leadership that has helped make our state a national model of environmental policy and sustainability.

•

Jonathan Fink, vice president for research and strategic partnerships at Portland State University, wrote this response on behalf of the following: U.S. Rep. Earl Blumenauer, D-Ore.; Mark Edlen, CEO of Gerding Edlen; Charlie Hales, mayor of Portland; Gregg Kantor, president and CEO of NW Natural; Neil McFarlane, general manager of TriMet; Skip Newberry, president of the Technology Association of Oregon; Nancy Stueber, president of the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry; Steve Strauss, president of Glumac; Ted Wheeler, Oregon state treasurer; Wim Wiewel, president of Portland State University; state Rep. Jennifer Williamson, D-Portland; Bill Wyatt, executive director of the Port of Portland.