Last week, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) announced its intention to block a proposed merger between Advocate Health Care and NorthShore University HealthSystem.

This has been a busy few weeks for the FTC: The Advocate-North Shore merger is the third such deal it has blocked since early November. (Yesterday, Illinois Attorney General Lisa Madigan joined federal regulators in seeking to prevent the deal from happening.)

Yet this transaction is distinct from the others, and it's important to spell out why.

First, let's compare Chicago to other markets where the FTC has been active. Harrisburg, Pa., and Huntington, W.Va., look nothing like Chicago. These are small towns with few hospitals, while metro Chicago has nearly 100.

In Chicago, the top three systems—Advocate, Presence and Northwestern—have just 36 percent market share metrowide. The Chicago market is fragmented and excess capacity abounds. In other Midwestern cities, the hospital market is significantly more concentrated. In Milwaukee, the top three systems have 80 percent inpatient share.

The other issue: The FTC evaluates hospital mergers based solely on inpatient services—services that require an overnight hospital stay—and argues that inpatient and outpatient services are not interchangeable. A more nuanced view is necessary. The market for inpatient hospitalizations in Illinois has declined more than 10 percent in since 2009 while the outpatient market is booming. We even have a surgeon in Chicago who specializes in outpatient joint replacement. We don't know what an outpatient analysis would show in terms of anti-competitive effects.

Also important: Advocate is a leader in value-based care, which means it gets paid for improving patients' health and decreasing use of high-cost services. When I left Advocate in 2012, value-based care had been a primary organizational focus for many years, and this continues today. In fact, this is the primary reason NorthShore wants to join Advocate. It's hard to transition your business model when you have to start from scratch.

The lure for Advocate: NorthShore's patients. More patients means more people among whom a combined system can spread out the costs. Indeed, value-based care models work best at scale, which is why the Affordable Care Act's value-based reforms have unleashed a wave of consolidation. Yet Deborah Feinstein of the FTC said in the New York Times last week, “We don't think the ACA and the antitrust laws are in tension with each other at all.”

The FTC must modernize its view of health system mergers. It should be looking at a range of services, from outpatient surgery to physician visits, along with inpatient care. The agency also needs to recognize the end of fee-for-service medicine—a system that everyone recognizes is broken and one that requires health systems to build different business structures.

So what now? Clearly, no one can wait around for the FTC to change its ways. Advocate and NorthShore next must consider how to preserve the competitive environment for inpatient services should they merge. Are they willing to divest assets in the northern suburbs to reach a settlement with the FTC?

Numerous competitors would be interested in expanding their north suburban footprints. Either way, what's certainly true is that protracted litigation would be a disservice to everyone.

Elyse Forkosh Cutler is president and founder of Sage Health Strategy in Chicago. From 2002 to 2012, Cutler was an executive with Advocate Health Care.