Advertisement - story continues below

Donald Trump, when asked to define a conservative, responded first by saying it is someone who is risk averse, then adding it is someone who wants to conserve.

While a guest on CBS’ Face the Nation on Sunday, the candidate went on to liken his evolution to being more conservative politically on many issues to the journey former President Ronald Reagan took.

Face the Nation host John Dickerson asked Trump how he responds to the charge GOP rival Sen. Ted Cruz and others level that the businessman has not been a consistent conservative. “Usually, I just invoke the name Ronald Reagan,” Trump replied.

Advertisement – story continues below

“I mean, Ronald Reagan was a fairly liberal Democrat, and he evolved over years and he became more and more conservative. And he was not a very conservative person, but he was pretty conservative. And he ended up being a great president,” the candidate added.

Cruz does not believe Trump’s comparison to Reagan is accurate. “I would note that Ronald Reagan spent decades as a principled conservative, spent decades traveling the country sharing his conservative, free-market views [and] defending the Constitution,” Cruz said.

“Ronald Reagan did not spend the first 60 years of his life supporting Democratic politicians, advocating for big government politics, supporting things like the big bank bailouts, supporting things like expanding Obamacare to turn it into socialized medicine,” the Texas senator added.

Advertisement – story continues below

Reagan was a Democrat who supported Franklin Roosevelt in the 1930s and Harry Truman in the 1940s. In the 1950s, he joined the “Democrats for Eisenhower,” backing the popular World War II general who successfully ran and won under the Republican banner.

Reagan changed his party affiliation in 1962 (when he was 51), and threw his full support behind conservative Sen. Barry Goldwater in the 1964 presidential campaign. The Hollywood actor then ran for office himself later in the decade as a Republican, being elected twice as governor of California.

Reagan would say when explaining his switch to the GOP, “I didn’t leave the Democrat Party, the party left me.”

The three legs of Reagan conservatism are: limited government/pro-growth fiscal policies, a strong national defense, and support for traditional values.

Advertisement – story continues below

When asked to define what a conservative is during his Face the Nation interview on Sunday, Trump responded, “Well, I think it’s a person that doesn’t want to take overly risks. I think that’s a good thing,” Trump responded.

“I think it’s a person that wants to — in terms of government I’m talking about — a person that wants to conserve, a person that wants to, in a financial sense, balance budgets, a person that feels strongly about the military. And I feel very strongly about the military,” he added.

What the candidate failed to discuss was traditional values. Trump’s bona fides in this area are already suspect with many social conservatives because the billionaire candidate described himself as very pro-choice in 1999 and has voiced support for certain homosexual rights, though he has not backed same-sex marriage.

National Review dedicated an issue last week to arguing why Trump is not a conservative, hitting on his changing views on social issues, past support for Democrat candidates, and support of certain “big government” programs and bailouts.

Trump responded:

National Review is a failing publication that has lost it’s way. It’s circulation is way down w its influence being at an all time low. Sad! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) January 22, 2016

h/t: CNS News