The Anna Kendrick-helmed episode of "Saturday Night Live" saw another installment of "Fox & Friends," and this time the upbeat and clueless hosts hammered the horrors of Obamacare.

Kendrick made an appearance as one of the regular Americans who have been sidelined by the new healthcare laws; apparently, keeping your doctor isn't an option if that doctor has a restraining order against you.

In addition to the horrors of the Affordable Care Act, the Friends also tackled climate change with a visit from Neil deGrasse Tyson (Kenan Thompson), who made a valiant attempt to explain science to them.

And, of course, there were a whole lot of corrections. See the full list below:

Ukraine was not Frasier’s brother on the show “Frasier.”

”Game of Thrones” is not an adult version of musical chairs.

There is no such restaurant as “Ruth’s Chris Christie’s.”

Jackson Browne is only one person.

Malaysia is not the female version of Asia.

Neal deGrasse Tyson does not own a sandwich shop named “Quizmos.”

You can not abbreviate the Supreme Court to spell SCROTUM.

Michelle Obama has never done porn.

Hong Kong is a region in China. Not a video game from Nintendo.

”Vaping” is not having sex with a vacuum cleaner.

Michael Strahan isn’t leaving to go be in “Good Morning Vietnam”

Crimea is not related to Queen Latifah.

Pop Tarts do not cause “splosions.”

Boeing is a company. Not a sound effect.

Pharrell is not a “stylish hand sanitizer.”

Chicklets do not grow up to be roosters.

Chris Christie was never in the show “Three’s Company.”

Infinity pools have a limited amount of water.

Garfunkle is not Garfield’s black cousin.

The Chile Earthquake is not a bold new product from Dairy Queen.

Don Cheadle does not appear if you say “Cheadlejuice” three times.

Joe Biden’s office is only sometimes a’-rockin’.

Lifesavers aren’t medicine.

Captain Phillips is not a brand of rum.

Marvin Gaye liked women.

Nancy Pelosi is a human woman.

God loves figs.

Noah is not “found footage.”

Captain America was never a U.S. President.

The periodic table is not about “lady stuff.”

Also on HuffPost: SNL GIFs SNL GIFs

1 of 50 Spartan Cheerleaders Share this slide:

Tumblr: Crentist Archive