Barbara Minch, director of human resources for The Heldrich Hotel in New Brunswick, is the recipient of the Chairman's Award of Excellence

Barbara Minch, a resident of South Amboy, was nationally recognized in her role as director of human resources at The Heldrich Hotel in New Brunswick. (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF RYAN LYNCH) Story Highlights Minch was nominated by the hotel's general manager.

The Heldrich Hotel is located in New Brunswick.

Barbara Minch, director of human resources for The Heldrich Hotel in New Brunswick, is the recipient of the Chairman's Award of Excellence, an annual award, which was created in 2005 by Burt Cabanas, founder and chairman of Benchmark Hospitality International. The honor recognizes an employee of the U.S.-based hospitality management company who has exhibited extraordinary service throughout the previous year. Minch, who resides in South Amboy, was presented with the award recently in a special ceremony at Benchmark's Home Office in The Woodlands, Texas, just north of Houston.

Minch was recommended for the Award of Excellence by Stacy Thaler Martin, Benchmark Hospitality's general manager for The Heldrich. "It was an honor to nominate Barbara and see her win; as well as see her receive all the well-earned recognition from within our company and from all Barbara's peers and friends," said Martin. "We truly are so fortunate to have Barbara as our director of human resources here at The Heldrich as in my entire career; I have not had the previous good fortune to have such a knowledgeable and caring Human Resources professional on my team. In addition to her expertise, she is a uniquely caring, dedicated and compassionate professional, committed to providing the best service possible to her fellow employees."

Minch said she enjoys the variety of responsibilities her position at the Heldrich offers. "I feel very satisfied each day," she said. "I think I like the diverse duties but most of all being an integral part of providing people with a great environment and a great place to work is probably the most satisfying component." Working in New Brunswick is also enjoyable, she said. "The cultural diversity that comes with working in a city is probably what I like the best," she added.

Beyond her professional role, Minch lends her time and talent to organizations including the Center for Vocational Rehabilitation, Montclair University, Elijah's Promise and Johnson & Johnson Blood Services.

When asked what winning the award means, she said she feels both humbled and honored. "The Chairman's Award isn't something one can compete to wins," said Minch. "I've always been a hard worker and its natural for me to give as much as I can to my company, my peers and coworkers so to be recognized by those you work for is very special — it means a lot — more than words can describe."

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1DCdW9L