As part of the Vermont Health Care Innovation Project, the Green Mountain State has tapped Boston-based PatientPing for data exchange among its hospitals.

Vermont officials and healthcare professionals will announce the adoption of PatientPing across the state's healthcare providers today at Vermont Blueprint for Health 2016 in Burlington.

The technology is expected to boost medical information transparency among previously disconnected healthcare providers.

"Our state has come together in this partnership to launch a progressive initiative dedicated to improving the way Vermonters receive care," said Lawrence Miller, senior advisor and chief of healthcare reform at the Office of the Governor, in a news release.

[Also: Survey shows care coordination lacking]

PatientPing's nationwide community includes more than 12,000 providers in Massachusetts, Connecticut, Michigan, Pennsylvania and now Vermont. The startup recently received $9.6M in funding from Google Venture, with participation from First Round Capital and SV Angel.

Company officials say its technology is designed to provide a critical missing link for providers operating in this new healthcare environment created by the Affordable Care Act: the ability to be notified instantly when a patient is receiving care anywhere – whether inside or outside of their facility or health system – and the ability to collaborate with providers across the full continuum of care.

"The average elderly patient sees seven different care providers per year, and those with chronic conditions can see more than 25," said PatientPing Founder & CEO Jay Desai. "We've all dealt with how frustrating it can be when information is not passing between those providers and they aren't working well together to serve us and our loved ones.

"When providers ping each other as their patients travel through the healthcare continuum – emergency room to hospital to rehab to home care – it's a radically simple way to stitch together disparate providers onto one team," he added.

The Vermont program is supported by Vermont Information Technology Leaders, or VITL, which manages the state's health information exchange.