WASHINGTON, December 17, 2014 – America is a nation of millions of legal immigrants that arrived at the country’s shores with hopes, aspirations and for many like my ancestors in bondage future freedom. They were not given a gift, they were given a opportunity. Many, like my ancestors that came in bondage, had to fight for that opportunity.

America is a land of opportunity. America is a land of great riches. America is a land filled with people from around the world. America is not an entitlement.

“Give me your tired, your poor,

Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,

The wretched refuse of your teeming shore.

Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me,

I lift my lamp beside the golden door!”

The Statue of Liberty promises a door, but to walk through any door requires asking for entrance. Not demanding as these protestors did at the lighting of the Capitol Christmas tree, interrupting Speaker John Boehner’s address:

This Christmas season, the president has handed five million plus illegal aliens a twelve days of Christmas present that is gift wrapped in expensive entitlements that he creates by an unconstitutional order. In giving that gift, stealing from the Americans, from first to generational immigrants, already here.

Robert Rector of the Heritage Foundation insists that the president’s amnesty order will plunge the nation into an even larger deficit hole. He suggests, “The net cost — which is total benefits minus total benefits paid in — of the amnesty recipients I estimate will be around $2 trillion over the course of their lifetime.”

For the president who had insisted nearly two dozen times he did not have the authority to do so, his Christmas gift for illegal aliens bypasses the law. Even when President Lincoln granted freedom to slaves in the Confederate slave states, there were no entitlements attached for them.

Read More: The Lincoln Catechism and President Barack Obama

Obama’s political intentions to grant illegals a Christmas entitlement wish is a legal check that he does not have the authority to write or for them to cash while claiming that his amnesty order will not break the nation’s budgetary bank. Well Obama’s lies have a way of catching up with him. America remembers his, “If you like your doctor, you can keep your doctor.” Or if you like your health plan you can keep it.”

In the end, Christmas should be a celebration of truths and not lies. All Americans should support the hope of millions around the world who want to cherish and eventually legally possess what citizens possess in this great nation.

When a president grants special favors, creates a nation where laws do not matter, and legalization of illegal entry is rewarded citizenship itself is devalued. In the end what type of nation is an America like that?

The “12 Days of Illegal Immigrants’ Christmas” is a way to explain what Obama’s executive order has done and how a broken system allows entitlements while ignoring the nation’s legal immigration laws

“Illegal Immigrants’ Twelve Days of Christmas”

On the First Day of Christmas My Obama Executive Order gave to me a Social Security card given at a Walmart parking lot. On the Second Day of Christmas My Obama Executive Order gave to me, two Obamacare enrollments, and a Social Security card given in a Walmart parking lot. On the Third Day of Christmas My Obama Executive Order gave to me, three get-out-of-jail-free passes, two Obamacare enrollments, and a Social Security card given at a Walmart parking lot. On the fourth Day of Christmas My Obama Executive Order gave to me four Greyhound tickets, three get get-out-of-jail-free passes, two Obamacare enrollments, and a Social Security card given at a Walmart parking lot. On the Fifth Day of Christmas My Obama Executive Order gave to me five Spanish-only street signs, four Greyhound tickets, three get-out-of-jail-free passes, two Obamacare enrollments, and a Social Security card given at a Walmart parking lot. On the Sixth Day of Christmas My Obama Executive Order gave to me six ACLU attorneys defending, five Spanish-only street signs, four Greyhound tickets, three get-out-of-jail-free passes, two Obamacare enrollments, and a Social Security card given at a Walmart parking lot. On the Seventh Day of Christmas My Obama Executive Order gave to me seven state treasuries access passes, six ACLU attorneys defending, five Spanish-only street signs, four Greyhound tickets, three get-out-of-jail-free passes, two Obamacare enrollments, and a Social Security card given at a Walmart parking lot. On the Eighth Day of Christmas My Obama Executive Order gave to me eight full college scholarships, seven state treasuries access passes, six ACLU attorneys defending, five Spanish-only street signs, four Greyhound tickets, three get-out-of-jail-free passes, two Obamacare enrollments, and a Social Security card given at a Walmart parking lot. On the Ninth Day of Christmas My Obama Executive Order gave to me nine legislators leaping to get illegals’ votes, eight full college scholarships, seven state treasuries access passes, six ACLU attorneys defending, five Spanish-only street signs, four Greyhound tickets, three get-out-of-jail-free passes, two Obamacare enrollments, and a Social Security card given at a Walmart parking lot. On the Tenth Day of Christmas My Obama Executive Order gave to me ten of your jobs and lifetime of security, nine legislators leaping to get illegals’ votes, eight full college scholarships, seven state treasuries access passes, six ACLU attorneys defending, five Spanish-only street signs, four Greyhound tickets, three get-out-of-jail-free passes, two Obamacare enrollments, and a Social Security card given at a Walmart parking lot. On the Eleventh Day of Christmas My Obama Executive Order gave to me gave to me eleven Sanctuary Cities where they hide, ten of your jobs and lifetime of security, nine legislators leaping to get illegals’ votes, eight full college scholarships, seven state treasuries access passes, six ACLU attorneys defending, five Spanish-only street signs, four Greyhound tickets, three get-out-of-jail-free passes, two Obamacare enrollments, and a Social Security card given at a Walmart parking lot. On the Twelfth Day of Christmas My Obama Executive Order gave to me 12 million illegal aliens getting into America scot free, eleven Sanctuary Cities where they hide, ten of your jobs and lifetime of security, nine legislators leaping to get illegals’ votes, eight full college scholarships, seven state treasuries access passes, six ACLU attorneys defending, five Spanish-only street signs, four Greyhound tickets, three get-out-of-jail-free passes, two Obamacare enrollments, and a Social Security card given at a Walmart parking lot.

&