State Rep. Jenny Horne briefly steps away from the House chambers during debates before a vote to remove the Confederate battle flag from the grounds of the South Carolina State House the night of July 8, 2015.

After her impassioned speech about removing the Confederate flag went viral, Summerville Rep. Jenny Horne’s claim that she was a descendent of Confederate President Jefferson Davis has come under scrutiny by blogs and genealogists.

Online wags were quick to note that Horne’s purported genealogy (they admitted they weren’t 100 percent sure of it), didn’t mesh with Davis’ genealogy as reflected in his papers at Rice University.

Her tearful address, shown widely on national television the day that the House joined the Senate in voting to remove the Confederate flag from the Statehouse grounds, was featured on news reports across the country and mentioned her familial link to Davis.

Asked about the discrepancy, Horne said she simply was repeating what her grandfather had told the family for years.

And since her whole point was that the Confederate flag issue was not about her, she said she is not inclined to do any genealogical research to fact-check his claim.

The empire strikes back

Speaking of Horne, R-Summerville, she also said recently she is considering running for the 1st Congressional District seat held by former Gov. Mark Sanford.

Just a few days later, though, Sanford’s campaign released numbers that show it would be no easy fight.

On Thursday, the Sanford for Congress campaign released a fundraising report showing he had raised more than $121,000 between April and June and has more cash on hand, about $640,000, than any other GOP incumbent in South Carolina.

Sanford released a statement saying he was “humbled and encouraged” by the support.

He said the fundraising reflects his record, which has been praised by the national groups FreedomWorks, Americans for Prosperity and Heritage Action. Filing for the seat doesn’t open until March 2016, but potential opponents are expected to start raising money — and their name recognition — well before then.

Forum topics up to voters

South Carolina voters can have a say in the topics addressed at an Aug. 3 presidential forum co-sponsored by The Post and Courier and news organizations in Iowa and New Hampshire.

The Voters First Presidential Forum will be held at the New Hampshire Institute of Politics at St. Anselm College in Manchester, N.H. It will be broadcast nationally by C-SPAN. “New Hampshire Today” radio host Jack Heath will moderate the forum, which will be aired by WLTX-TV in Columbia and by KCRG-TV in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, in addition to C-SPAN. The time for the forum has not been set.

The debate also is sponsored by The New Hampshire Union Leader and the Cedar Rapids Gazette.

South Carolina voters can share their preferences for forum topics by visiting a special website set up for the event at surveymonkey.com/r/RZJMGJN.

Invitations have been extended to all of the candidates in the Republican field.

The event will take place three days ahead of the first Republican presidential debate scheduled for Aug. 6 in Cleveland. Only candidates in the top 10 of an average of national polling as of Aug. 4 can participate in the Fox News debate.

Have cash, will debate

South Carolina Sen. and GOP presidential hopeful Lindsey Graham filed his financial disclosure report Friday night, and while Graham still is nowhere near the top of the Republicans in terms of cash, his campaign also has plenty to keep going.

Graham is reporting total receipts of $3.7 million and expenses to date of $1.1 million, meaning he has almost $2.6 million on hand — with zero debt.

Graham, who is scheduled to make appearances in seven Iowa communities over the weekend, has been trying to crack Fox News’ Aug. 6 debate.

Currently, Graham’s polling numbers put him on the outside looking in, but he has been making a full-court press to change that — partly by appealing to party faithful in early states.

“Not only is Fox News changing the debate process,” one of his statements says, “they are threatening to forever change history by diminishing the significance of Iowa, New Hampshire and South Carolina.”

Compiled by Robert Behre