Connect for Health Colorado has extended its deadline to enroll in health insurance coverage effective Jan. 1. Coloradans can still get health insurance through the state marketplace for all of 2016 if they apply by Saturday at midnight.

The original deadline for enrollment was Dec. 15, but a large storm on the Front Range, as well as an onslaught of people trying to enroll at the last minute, caused Connect for Health to extend the deadline a few extra days. Now the exchange has extended it again.

“That snowstorm hit Denver harder than it hit us and it caused problems there. The call volumes have been outrageous over the last week, so it’s been hard for people to get help,” said Brett Borup, a Telluride-based independent insurance broker who helps people navigate the Connect for Health marketplace. “That’s why they’re extending the deadline.”

Both Borup and Stacey Wright, programs manager for the Telluride Foundation-backed nonprofit Tri-County Health Network, which also helps people in the Telluride area sign up for insurance through the state marketplace, said they’ve been inundated with people looking for help in the last month.

Wright said she personally enrolled more than 40 people on Dec. 14 and 15 as the original deadline approached.

“I’ve been working basically from 6 in the morning to 11 at night for the last month. I thought things would drop off after [Dec. 15], but I’ve continued to be booked with meetings,” Borup said Thursday, adding that the requests had dropped off as Christmas approached, with no meetings scheduled Thursday, Friday or Saturday.

To enroll through the marketplace, Colorado residents can go through a broker like Borup (708-7895) or health navigators at TCHN (708-7096). Or, they can do it themselves at connectforhealthco.com, but both Wright and Borup cautioned insurance shoppers to know what they’re buying.

“It’s really important that people do not let auto renewal happen without knowing what their premium is,” Wright said. A report from the Colorado Health Institute last month found that health insurance rates on the private market on the Western Slope were up 26 percent for 2016.

“Don’t be fooled just by seeing the price,” Wright added.

The plans offered on the marketplace will be accompanied by detailed information on the costs and benefits, but Borup said it can be hard for individuals to figure out what all that means.

“We do this all the time. You can sit there and read all the information thrown at you, but there are a million little rules with the Affordable Care Act that many people don’t understand. I don’t blame them,” Borup said. “You don’t have to deal with it all the time, so that’s where brokers and health navigators can help.”

Penalties under the ACA for not having health insurance are variable depending on personal income, but Wright said the penalty can be $695 or more for an individual. The deadline for enrollment for coverage effective Jan. 1 is Dec. 26 at midnight, but it’s possible to get coverage by the first of the year if you have problems with the enrollment process that cause delays.