Music

No 1 again: The Veronicas. Photo: Michael Rayner

For the first time in seven years, the Veronicas have No.1 single on the charts, after going through "never-ending hell" trying to get new music released.

Identical twins Jess and Lisa Origliasso burst onto the Australian pop scene in 2005 when their first single, 4ever, went to number two on the ARIA charts. Two years later, Hook Me Up soared to number one.

This achievement has just been matched by their new hit, You Ruin Me, the first single of their third album, which is expected to be released in November.

The 14-song album features a collaboration with Silverchair's Daniel Johns, and the Brisbane-born duo have flagged the idea of touring Australia and potentially Europe and America early next year.

Advertisement

It has been a difficult road back to the top for the Veronicas, who say they "fell off the planet" due to difficulties with getting their record label, Warner Music, to release new material.

"At the time it feels like a never-ending hell," they said, but they are glad "the lost years" are now behind them.

Warner Music declined to comment.

When they first came on the scene with their pop ballads Everything I'm Not and When It All Falls Apart, the Veronicas had a reputation for a rock-star lifestyle.

Asked if this contributed at all to their musical hibernation, the pair say the reality is far less exciting.

"I hope that's what they think [that we were partying too hard]," Jess said. "That's good for our rock star cred, so let them believe that. The truth is I've been sleeping in a lot more and drinking a lot more tea.

"The one good thing about having time off is catching up on the jet lag and early mornings. It was our entire life for a period there.

"Our fans have been so dedicated and patient over the years, so it's wonderful to get the music back out to them."

Jess and Lisa have signed a new record deal with Sony and last week released a new film clip for You Ruin Me that is inspired by Darren Aronofsky's dark 2010 feature film, Black Swan.

The song's slow pace differs from their earlier work, but Lisa says their album features a range of musical styles.

"It's eclectic and I don't think it's predictable in any way," Lisa said.

"The song and the video is the end to what has happened the last four years. We've tried to catch everyone up thematically where we've been.

"We don't get too jaded or too bitter about the business stuff, we really just pour ourselves into the music."