We often hear of rabies affecting animals like raccoons, cats, or dogs, but horses? Jackson County can add that one to the list after a horse recently tested positive for the disease. This the first case in Jackson County of a rabid horse, and officials say one simple step can prevent you or your animal from contracting the disease.

Since 1994, there have only been 25 reported cases of rabid horses statewide, compared to more than 2,000 reports of rabid raccoons. But Tuesday, that number of horses climbed to 26, with a confirmed case in Jackson County.

"Rabies typically takes two forms," T.G. Harkrider, the environmental health director for the Florida Department of Health, Jackson County, said. "They have an excited form or a vicious form, like the foaming at the mouth and the aggressiveness. It also takes a, what they call a dumb form, which is just staggering, can't get up."

The Jackson County Health Department, the USDA, and the Florida Department of Agriculture teamed up to investigate the case.

The most recent incident was back in 2012.

"I've never seen a horse with rabies," John Rosi, owner of John Rosi Reining Horses, said. "I have heard of horses with rabies. It is prevalent in certain areas. Kentucky has a pretty good amount of it. Colorado, Wisconsin."

Managing horses for more than 40 years and spending thousands of dollars on his 14 horses, Rosi says having a rabid horse can be a financial loss.

"Well, it's a total loss," he said. "I mean, you know, depending on the total price of the horse, it's lost. The thing about it is, when a horse has rabies, there's no cure. He's gonna have to be put to sleep."

Officials say the disease can be transmitted through saliva and is

spread through the eyes and nose or a break in the skin, even to humans. Vaccination is the only way to prevent transmission.

"These particular animals were not vaccinated. It will provide them some semblance of immunity against the disease should they contract or should they encounter a rabid animal," said Harkrider.

No word yet on how the horse contracted the disease. Other animals on the property have been quarantined and we're told the risk of more animals getting rabies from the horse is low.

Officials say the most reported cases of rabid horses ever statewide was in 1995 with four confirmed cases.