The Broncos’ coaching staff told Wesley Woodyard he was not a middle linebacker.

The coaches felt early last season second-year player Danny Trevathan was better at the weakside, then late in the season that 36-year-old Paris Lenon was better in the middle.

Woodyard and the Tennessee Titans beg to differ.

Woodyard signed a four-year, $16 million deal Friday with the Titans, who will start him at middle linebacker.

“I’m always trying to prove myself,” Woodyard said. “The way it ended was a big surprise to me. Having the coaches tell you they want to rest you for the playoffs and then when the playoff time comes that didn’t happen — I’ve never been the type of guy to let anybody tell me I can’t play. I’m excited for the new opportunity I have.”

Woodyard, who will turn 28 in July, signed with Tennessee after also visiting New England.

“It’s a new era with this franchise and I wanted to be a part of it,” Woodyard said. “They want me to call the plays and run the defense so I was down for that.”

During his six seasons with the Broncos, Woodyard became one of the team’s most popular players inside the locker room and with the fan base. He was selected co-captain in each of the five seasons since his rookie year. Off the field, Woodyard’s charitable work made him three-time nominee as the Broncos’ Walter Payton Man of Year.

“My foundation, we’re not going to up and leave Denver,” he said. “We’re still going to have the football camp, we still have the Toy Drive in place. I made some great friends in the community, people like the mayor (Michael Hancock) so I’m still connected in Denver.

“I wish my teammates the best. I’m sure Danny is going to step up and be the leader of that defense. I’d like to personally thank (owner) Pat Bowlen for the opportunity he’s given me for the last six years and the amazing fans of Denver.

“I’m going to miss that place, but even though I’m gone I won’t forget and I’ll always be there working in the community.”

Mike Klis: mklis@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikeklis