The basic accounting problem for hospitalists is that they are not a profit center. That is, when they treat patients, the amount a hospital can bill Medicare and insurance companies is typically less than what the hospital must pay them. The opposite is true for other specialists, like surgeons.

So it was no surprise when, in the spring of 2014, one of Mr. Hill’s colleagues came before the hospitalists and confirmed that the company would request bids for outsourcing their group. Still, the room erupted in anger and despair. The doctors were convinced that working for a management company would mean seeing many more patients per shift, and they worried about losing their jobs if they resisted.

Amid the groaning, a relatively new member of the group named Dr. David Schwartz observed, “They can’t fire all of us — there are unions.” This was a bit of a stretch: While there are hospitals around the country whose doctors are unionized, there did not appear to be a union anywhere composed of a single group of specialists. But Dr. Schwartz, a barrel-chested man with close-cropped hair and a bushy beard who would not look out of place at a graduate English seminar, thought unionizing might be worth a try.

At the time, it was only one of several options the doctors considered. They talked of forming an independent hospitalists group, of forming an alliance with an outsourcing firm of their choosing. But the alternatives gradually fell away for a variety of practical reasons, and the doctors were growing increasingly bitter.

Dr. Littell developed a riff, which the other hospitalists appropriated, about how the situation was like having your spouse of several decades announce he or she was going to play the field. “You’ve been great, you’ve always been there,” he would joke. “I just heard there could be better spouses out there.” The kicker: “The good news is, you’re in the running, too!”

Several doctors could not find it within themselves to be amused and gave notice. Eventually, about a third of the 36 in the group left. The hospital replaced many of them with contractor doctors, called locums.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

By the time the doctors decided to hold their union election, almost all of them had become, if not pro-union, then convinced they had no better options. In early October they voted overwhelmingly to form a union that they chose to affiliate with the American Federation of Teachers, which already represented nurses at Sacred Heart.

By March 2015, the PeaceHealth leadership, whatever its interest in efficiency gains, was apparently not pleased that one of its hospitals had a white-collar labor insurrection on its hands. The company announced that it would not outsource the hospitalists, a move it later said was always a possibility. Mr. Hill, who declined to comment, left in May.

But backing down on outsourcing did not mean the hospital had given up on getting more out of its doctors.

‘Skin in the Game’

To work in a hospital today is to be constantly preoccupied with money, and one of the more grating features as far as the Sacred Heart hospitalists are concerned has been the administration’s celebration of “skin in the game.” That means creating financial incentives for doctors to hit performance targets — like lowering patient’s length of stay and doing well on patient satisfaction surveys. The phrase entered the Sacred Heart lexicon in 2014, but the underlying concept has spread throughout the profession in recent years.

Dr. Robert M. Wachter, chief of the division of hospital medicine at the University of California, San Francisco, says many hospitals now give doctors financial incentives to perform well according to the criteria on which the hospitals themselves are judged under the Affordable Care Act — for example, reducing hospital-acquired infections. But there is an active debate in the profession over their utility. “If at the end of the year, 10 percent of your salary is at risk based on whether you have consistently clean hands, what patients say about you, readmission rates, that can be O.K.,” he said. The counterargument is that “you could screw things up by tying everything to financial incentives,” he said. “You stomp on their intrinsic motivation.”

The hospitalists also chafe at the way the administration has tried to centralize decisions they used to make for themselves. This might include hiring fellow doctors or the order in which they see patients on any day. They also complain of being loaded down with administrative tasks.

Photo

“We’re trained to be leaders, but they treat us like assembly line workers,” said Dr. Brittany Ellison, a hospitalist in the group. “You need that time with the patient, where his wife is ratting on him.”

For the most part, Dr. Alexander has accepted this state of affairs stoically, albeit with his trademark sardonic humor. At one point he told me that a patient with dissociative disorder was on her way to a psychiatric hospital, before observing: “Often people with dissociative disorder become managers. You have to treat people like things. A different way of saying it is sociopath.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

His personal rebellion is to linger over patients as long as he thinks it’s necessary, the hell with the performance metrics that nudge him to see more.

But just beneath his fatalism, an anger occasionally flares up. “What’s the widget the hospital produces?” he asked at one point. “It’s the doctor-patient relationship. You don’t improve it with extra little tasks.”

A few weeks after I got back from Oregon, I spoke by phone with Rand O’Leary, who was promoted to oversee PeaceHealth’s hospital services in the state last summer. He was genial and disarmingly sympathetic to the hospitalists’ concerns. He said his negotiators and the union had been “dialoguing around” a compensation model that would award doctors a bonus for hitting certain performance targets — the dreaded “skin in the game.” The targets would include how many patients they see, but would also include measures of patient health and satisfaction.

“It can’t be all based on production,” he told me. “It has to be quality — safety, a good experience. If you’re the patient in the bed, it’s important to you that you’re treated as an individual, that your needs are being met.”

Mr. O’Leary was especially proud of a ritual known as REAL rounds, which stands for “rounding embraced by all leaders,” in which administrators circulate through a different unit of the hospital each week and talk to doctors, nurses and other caregivers about their needs.

Disconnect at the Table

If Dr. Alexander’s medical experience has instilled a kind of fatalism, Dr. Schwartz’s has made him skeptical about human nature. During a morning of rounds, I couldn’t help noticing he was constantly on alert for ways that a patient’s version of events might not track.

“You have to take what people say with a grain of salt,” he later explained. “Especially if the story changes, or is inconsistent, I get a little suspicious and assume the worst.”

This is not just true of patients. Noting that the negotiations with the hospital administration have dragged on for roughly a year, Dr. Schwartz said, “It’s pretty obvious that they don’t want to get a contract done.” He says the administration worries that if it essentially rewards the hospitalists with a contract, it encourages other hospital workers to unionize too.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Dr. Schwartz said he and his colleagues have always wanted to talk about staffing — ideally, they wanted to agree on a minimum proportion of doctors to patients — and how this affected patient safety. But when they raised these issues in the past, he said, the administration frequently shut down or retreated to marginal details.

Debra Miller, the system vice president for labor and caregiver relations, told me that PeaceHealth had never resisted the right of its employees to organize and bargain through a third party, and that there were many who did, like nurses and dietary workers. She said that it was standard for the first contract with newly unionized workers to take more than a year to negotiate and that this case presented special challenges. “There aren’t a lot of hospital-based physicians unionized,” she said. “I think the union themselves are trying to find their way over how to deal with it.”