Ed Holliday announces bid for #MS01





Tupelo dentist announces Congressional Candidacy



Vows to bring a common sense, citizen-friendly approach to government



TUPELO –Tupelo dentist and community leader Ed “Doc” Holliday announced his candidacy for Congressman of Mississippi’s First Congressional district yesterday at the Lee county courthouse in Tupelo.



In his remarks before a crowd of supporters and family members Holliday said “I am running because I can best articulate with passion and communicate in a North Mississippi fashion the conservative values that we hold dear”.



Holliday, a native of Tippah County, is the son of well-known Tippah County educators Troy and Mildred Holliday. Ed’s father, Troy is a former Tippah County Schools Superintendent.



Prior to entering the dental profession Holliday was active in community service. He was a high school 4-H Club leader and, in 1979, was one of only two students selected from Mississippi to the William Randolph Hearst U.S. Senate Youth Program.



“In Washington, I will represent North Mississippi’s values of sanctity of life, traditional marriage, and the 2nd Amendment right to keep and bear arms” Holliday said “I will also work to repeal and replace Obamacare, balance the budget and reduce our out-of-control debt and work to keep America safe and secure.” He said.



He has been a volunteer dentist for Lee County’s Good Samaritan Free Clinic since 1992, serving as the volunteer dental director for the free clinic for the past several years.



Dr. Holliday is a graduate of the University of Mississippi and the University of Mississippi School of dentistry.



Holliday and his wife, Leslie, have four children: Peyton (17), Edison (14), Graham (12), and Perrin (10). They are members of Harrisburg Baptist Church in Tupelo.



More information on Ed “Doc” Holliday can be found at





3/18/15



Posted March 19, 2015 - 7:21 am

RELEASE:Tupelo dentist announces Congressional CandidacyVows to bring a common sense, citizen-friendly approach to governmentTUPELO –Tupelo dentist and community leader Ed “Doc” Holliday announced his candidacy for Congressman of Mississippi’s First Congressional district yesterday at the Lee county courthouse in Tupelo.In his remarks before a crowd of supporters and family members Holliday said “I am running because I can best articulate with passion and communicate in a North Mississippi fashion the conservative values that we hold dear”.Holliday, a native of Tippah County, is the son of well-known Tippah County educators Troy and Mildred Holliday. Ed’s father, Troy is a former Tippah County Schools Superintendent.Prior to entering the dental profession Holliday was active in community service. He was a high school 4-H Club leader and, in 1979, was one of only two students selected from Mississippi to the William Randolph Hearst U.S. Senate Youth Program.“In Washington, I will represent North Mississippi’s values of sanctity of life, traditional marriage, and the 2nd Amendment right to keep and bear arms” Holliday said “I will also work to repeal and replace Obamacare, balance the budget and reduce our out-of-control debt and work to keep America safe and secure.” He said.He has been a volunteer dentist for Lee County’s Good Samaritan Free Clinic since 1992, serving as the volunteer dental director for the free clinic for the past several years.Dr. Holliday is a graduate of the University of Mississippi and the University of Mississippi School of dentistry.Holliday and his wife, Leslie, have four children: Peyton (17), Edison (14), Graham (12), and Perrin (10). They are members of Harrisburg Baptist Church in Tupelo.More information on Ed “Doc” Holliday can be found at http://www.DocHollidayforCongress.com 3/18/15 YallPolitics.Com now uses Facebook for comments. Log into Facebook to comment here.