It sure wouldn’t be Christmas in Obama’s America without Santa Claus and the “ye ole uninsured” saying thanks to Obamacare this holiday season, as shown in a new batch of ads crowned ‘ho, ho, hosurance.’

The groups that brought America ‘brosurance’ and the publicly shamed ‘hosurance‘ are taking advantage of the holiday season with some spirited ads designed to encourage Coloradans to purchase insurance through Obamacare’s exchanges. Dubbed ‘ho, ho, hosurance,’ the ads feature a clumsy Santa Claus, “three wise Millennials” who’ve had a bit too much eggnog, and frisky Nate and Susie who are looking to get a little naughty this Christmas.

“OMG, she’s hot!” one promotion states. “Let’s hope she wants to opt into this relationship as much as I do. Now that the website is working, buying health insurance is easy — which means all I have to worry about is getting her to make us Facebook official.”

A product of ProgressNow Colorado and the Colorado Consumer Health Initiative, past promotions have been both cringe-worthy and the source of many laughs. Connect for Health Colorado, a partner organization of the Colorado Consumer Health Initiative, received more than $21 million in federal grants to promote the Affordable Care Act and its state-based exchange.

According to data released by the Department of Health and Human Services on Wednesday, 69,961 Coloradans have applied for coverage through Connect for Health Colorado between Oct. 1 and Nov. 30. However, only 9,980 selected a marketplace plan.

Colorado isn’t the only state capitalizing on the holiday season to encourage young adults to sign up for Obamacare. Covered California, the Golden State’s exchange, announced a new initiative Thursday “encouraging family members to give the gift of health care.”

Called the “Give the Gift of Health” campaign, Covered California is asking family members to take a pledge to get young Americans covered. The promotion features an e-card that is sent to friends and family detailing their options for insurance and a pledge certificate to present to loved ones.

Check out the rest of the Colorado ‘ho, ho, hosurance’ ads below.