Claudia Hammond, Jem Macpherson, Director of Boarding at Pymble Ladies' College, Deanne Elliott, Pam Langan and Alex Gemmell. Boarding is not longer a case if drop off and fend for yourself.

THE desperately homesick boarding student at one of Sydney’s most prestigious private schools picks up the phone and rings her mum, sobbing uncontrollably down the line.

But mum is hundreds of kilometres away and the only material comfort she can offer her daughter is a soothing word or two of reassurance.

Those running the boarding house at Pymble Ladies’ College have finely tuned antennae for the slightest signs of unhappiness in their young residents.

The new generation school leaders take no chances with the 125 young people from around the state who are entrusted into their care. No blip in a girl’s behaviour or demeanour is taken lightly.

Alex Gemmell, Olivia O’Conner, Claudia Hammond, Jem Macpherson, Pam Langan and front Molly Garling. Pymble Ladies’ College Boarding students.

At Pymble in Sydney’s northern suburbs they have teams of psychologists, medical specialists and experts in adolescent behaviour on call.

Medicos provide boarders’ parents with strategies to help their daughters cope with problems — the girls’ mental health and wellbeing is at the top of the priority list.

“We have a clinical psychologist on site full-time, an educational psychologist on site at all times and a fantastic team of counsellors and two chaplains who play a significant role,” Director of Boarding Deanne Elliott said.

“As a team those people might say this child needs an external support system and I have been involved in those conversations.

“For the next six months the student will have an appointment up the road with an external clinical psychologist who is talking to our clinical psychologist.”

TIME TO BREAK THE SAD TEEN SUICIDE TABOO

EDITORIAL: FACING UP TO A TOUGH REALITY WITH YOUTH SUICIDE

READ JAYDEN’S TRAGIC STORY

ARE YOU OK, MATE? THESE ARE THE WORDS WHICH SAVED MY LIFE

Ms Elliott was appointed by Pymble six years ago to bring about “culture change” in the boarding community.

Out went any Draconian rule that could leave girls mentally isolated and vulnerable, out went the language of rules of punishment. In came a new philosophy of inclusion in which all issues are open for discussion — mental health, self harm, and cyber safety high on the list. Meditation lessons are taken and personal wellbeing has become a buzzword.

“We work through it if there is any hint of mental health or self harm,” Ms Elliott said.

“Homesickness is always a problem and we are living in a fast technological world and have a lot of social and emotional issues that impact on students.”

The isolation of the bedroom where boarding girls spent hours after school doing preparation and homework has been fixed.

Claudia Hammond, Jem Macpherson, Director of Boarding at Pymble Ladies' College, Deanne Elliott, Pam Langan and Alex Gemmell.

No one knew what they were doing in their rooms. Now the students spend the time together in the library working with teachers from 6.30pm and 9pm.

“We are building a community and a stronger culture of personalised education. So each student is treated as a unique individual rather than a set of 40 girls living in a house,” Ms Elliott said.

The school also counters homesickness and loneliness issues by allowing boarders to adopt a “city family”.

Ms Elliott said: “The family comes to pick the boarder up after school one day for a milkshake or they may come to sport or to a music performance. Sometimes the city friend has a sleepover in the boarding house.”

It is a far cry from the days when parents were forced to sit in the car park and wait for their child to finish boarding at the end of term.

Parents are now “in and out of the boarding houses all the time” and sometimes stay the night.

In the case of the sobbing student, Ms Elliott said a parent so far away can easily go into panic mode.

“But her daughter may get off the phone, have a friend come past and ask her to go for swim and the issue is all over,” she said.

“Boarding underpins everything at Pymble. Our aim is that every girl flourishes, not just survives.”