COLUMBUS, Ohio -- The cost of Ohio's Medicaid program is expected to be about $470 million less than what was originally estimated in the current two-year budget, and the bulk of that savings goes directly to the state.

The anticipated savings is a result of multiple factors, said Greg Moody, director of the governor's Office of Health Transformation. A big one is that fewer people than expected are signing up for traditional Medicaid coverage, which costs the state more than the expanded Medicaid coverage that began this year.

That likely is due, in part, to Ohio's improving economy, Moody said. Slightly higher household incomes may leave a family still qualifying for Medicaid, but under the expanded program.

It may also be that the state's estimates of the impact of expanded Medicaid, which is still in its first year, simply were high, he said.

While traditional enrollment is down, the number of enrollees covered by expanded Medicaid is exceeding what was projected. The state had anticipated having 377,000 enrolled under expanded Medicaid by next June when the fiscal year ends. It now expects nearly 100,000 more than that.

The state pays about 37 cents on the dollar for traditional Medicaid. Coverage through expanded Medicaid is funded through the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, commonly called Obamacare.

That is why the state will reap most of the benefits of the projected lower costs.

About $350 million of the $470 million in anticipated lower costs is expected to be savings to the state's share. The total Medicaid budget appropriated for two years, including federal support, was nearly $44 billion.

The savings is significant because it provides a fiscal argument for Gov. John Kasich as he lobbies the General Assembly to continue expanded Medicaid when he presents his budget proposals early next year.

Stats from the Ohio Department of Medicaid show that as of September, there were about 2.83 million Ohioans enrolled in the state program. That figure is about 145,000 below what was anticipated.

The state had expected total enrollment would top 3 million people by next June, but now expects that figure will be smaller by about 64,000.

Medicaid expansion made coverage available to households with incomes of up to 135 percent of the poverty rate.

But in addition to those new enrollees, the state expected numbers for those covered by traditional Medicaid would also increase. That increase, dubbed the woodwork effect, was anticipated as people who already qualified for Medicaid but never sought health care coverage would enroll.

Those signup numbers, though, have lagged estimates.

As the economy has improved, Moody said, household incomes for some new enrollees who would have qualified under traditional Medicaid likely increased enough to push them into the expanded coverage.

Another factor, Moody said, is a result of the new law's efforts to streamline enrollment. The Ohio Benefits online eligibility system setup for enrollees looks first at income levels to determine eligibility.

If a person qualifies by income, other factors that previously would have been considered, such as a disability, are not considered. As a result, many people who might have been enrolled under other criteria, such as having a disability, are landing in expanded Medicaid as a result of income.