AUSTIN — Gov. Rick Perry has nine months left in office but he is not acting like a lame duck.

On the contrary, his Wednesday visit to Lubbock — to honor departing Texas Tech Chancellor Kent Hance and to receive the National Association of Drug Court Professionals’ governor of the year award — exemplify his busy schedule, even though the Legislature is not in session.

And nothing figures more prominently in his busy schedule than his out-of-the-state travels.

In recent months he has traveled to Arizona, California, Florida, Iowa, Louisiana, Oklahoma, Nevada, New York, Tennessee and Virginia as well as to Cancun, Mexico; Davos, Switzerland; and London.

There is a good reason for it, according to those who are watching the longest serving governor in Texas history.

Though Perry won’t say it publicly, except that he is keeping his options open — as he told Fox News last week — the way he talks everywhere he goes leaves no doubt he is getting ready for another presidential run.

“Texas’ conservative fiscal principles continue to be a national example for stimulating job growth at all wage levels and creating opportunity for families,” Perry said Tuesday after the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas reported that from 2000 to 2013 Texas experienced more job growth at all pay levels than any other state.

“Employers know Texas gives them the best chance at success because our limited government approach leaves more money in their pockets, allowing them to risk their capital, create jobs and see a return on their investment,” Perry said.

This was one of his main selling points in 2012 before his presidential run collapsed — largely because of his “oops” moment in a nationally-televised debate among Republican hopefuls. Perry could not remember the name of the third federal agency he wanted to abolish if elected president.

To West Texas Republicans such as Carl Tepper, there is no doubt Perry intends to run for president in 2016.

“He’s trying to redefine himself and its working,” said Tepper, chairman of the Lubbock County Republican Party. “I am not a Perry cheerleader, but his demeanor and style are different.”

Political observers across the nation also expect Perry to run.

“Any politician who has ambitions wants the big prize, and the big prize is the presidency,” said Daniel Franklin, a University of Texas at Austin graduate, now associate professor of political science at Georgia State University in Atlanta.

Texas Democratic Party chairman Gilberto Hinojosa said his party also expects Perry to run for president, and plans to be ready for him.

“We intend to constantly point out that this man has been a terrible governor,” Hinojosa said.

For instance, Texas ranks 49th in public education funding, Hinojosa said. He also said Perry’s refusal to allow the state to participate in the Medicaid expansion offered under the federal Affordable Care Act — better known as Obamacare — has hurt many Texans.

“He leads a Texas government for wealthy corporations and for the right wing of his party, and the hell with everybody else,” Hinojosa said.