Topics: Books, Christmas, neil Strauss, Life News

The holidays are here. And that means nearly one-third of all Americans will be traveling, most of them either with family or to visit family.

It also means that there’s going to be a lot of baggage. Not the kind of baggage with physical zippers, but the kind with psychological buttons. Because if you have any buttons, you can be sure that they will be pressed if you spend any time with the parent who put it there.

It is unbelievable to watch friends in their thirties, forties, even fifties—some respected leaders in their profession or community—return from time with a parent shaken as if they’ve just returned from combat.

In fact, some therapists would describe holidays with a parent as a return to a familiar battlefield to get psychologically wounded again.

If that seems dramatic, consider this: According to neuroscientist David Eagleman’s new book and PBS series “The Brain,” we are born with “disparate and unconnected” neurons in our brain. In our first years of life, the circuits and architecture of the brain are rapidly built. As an infant, we form as many as two million new neural connections a second.

By the age of three, we have twice as many neural connections as an adult. Afterward, a process called pruning takes place, in which connections that aren’t needed are removed from the brain’s architecture. In other words, “use it or lose it.”

So although we have inherent predispositions and resiliencies, the architecture of our brain is largely shaped by our childhood environment and experiences. They even determine whether certain genes are expressed or turned on. As the saying goes: “Cells that fire together wire together.”

So if you’re spending time with family during the holidays, try to think of your brain as a computer running on an operating system. This system was programmed by your childhood caregivers. Like all human beings, they were imperfect (though some like to claim otherwise). And those imperfections, whether large or small, created bugs and viruses in your operating system. Even parents who think of themselves as loving or well-meaning make mistakes, cross boundaries, or simply do their best with the limited internal resources they have.

“Most people think of trauma as something that comes from a major assault or catastrophe,” one of the therapists in my book “The Truth” explained. “But a small trauma, like a parent criticizing you day in and day out, can be just as damaging because it’s happening on a regular basis. Think of it this way: If one big-T trauma is a ten on the scale and a little-t trauma is a one, then ten little traumas can be just as powerful as one big trauma.”

However, because we are too close to ourselves to see ourselves with any clarity, it’s not easy to see the bugs in our operating system. Often, the things that we think are our problems aren’t actually our problems. The issue is the fact that we see a problem inherent in our being where there isn’t one. It’s all in our heads.

And how did it get there?

You guessed it. Perhaps we feel unworthy because a parent emotionally or physically abandoned us; or we feel like a bad person because that’s what mom or dad said if they couldn’t control our natural spontaneity and independence; or we feel that others look down on us because a parent did the same.

The list goes on and on: Are you out of touch with your emotions because a parent always told you to toughen up when you cried? Do you feel deep down like you don’t matter because you were constantly ignored growing up? Are you always trying to save others because you were never able to save a parent from depression or addiction? Are you in complete denial that anything was wrong with your family because a parent acted infallible and demanded obedience, so criticizing that parent would be like blaspheming God?

Note that this is not about blaming anyone. It’s about understanding yourself, because no matter what deck of cards you were dealt, there is fortunately something called neuroplasticity.

As the behavioral geneticist Hasse Walum explained when I interviwed him for my book The Truth, “A messed-up childhood makes it hard [to change], and it gets even more complicated as you get older, but it’s not set in stone. We haven’t found anything that’s completely genetic. Not even these really hurtful diseases like autism and schizophrenia, or things like intelligence. There’s still some sort of environmental factor involved. So you get to change things.”