Buy Photo Bob Larson (Photo: File/USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin)Buy Photo

I am retired from Kraft Foods Inc. as category manager. I am an independent and do not belong to any political party. I will be challenging Mike Phillips, current Stevens Point City Council member for District 10.

I believe if a citizen has concerns, he or she should get involved. Since I have many concerns I believe it is important to get involved rather than just complain. Below is a list of the concerns that I have in regards to our city of Stevens Point:

1. Debt. Stevens Point owes $35.5 million in general obligation debt — 71 percent of its ordinance limit — with $14.3 million remaining as a buffer. The city has some large projects slated to be implemented in the next few years. If the city does not start to pay down its debt and watch spending it could have some major financial problems. I favor getting this debt under control.

2. Delist Business 51. In 2005, the mayor of Stevens Point and all members of the council, including Phillips, agreed to take $6.1 million dollars from the state Department of Transportation as part of a jurisdictional transfer of Business 51. That decision will now cost the taxpayers of Stevens Point $20-30 million dollars. However, this project was kicked down the road. The decision will come back to the mayor and council in 2024. Estimates are that it will cost the taxpayers between $60 million and $90 million by then. The damage is done; we cannot reverse the poor decision that was made in 2005. However, if I am elected, I will urge the mayor and council to contact the federal government and get Business 51 delisted as a highway, so we are not locked into the federal mandates for federal highways.

3. Keep Edgewater Manor. I believe the city of Stevens Point should not sell Edgewater Manor. We need affordable housing for our senior citizens. Phillips was in favor of selling Edgewater Manor. Currently the city is not selling Edgewater Manor, and if I’m elected I will fight to keep this establishment for our senior citizens.

4. New stoplights. Stevens Point needs stop lights at the intersection of Minnesota Avenue and Post Road. I will push for stoplights at this intersection, as I believe it is just a matter of time before someone gets killed there.

I would appreciate your support and votes.

Robert Larson is a candidate for Stevens Point City Council in District 10.

Read or Share this story: http://spjour.nl/1p2hQng