Children use their phones instead of playing outside. (Photo: SerrNovik, Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Not wishing to be thought of as old fashioned, I must confess that all the time children spend with electronic devices in “solitary confinement” seems to be stealing their imaginations.

Fewer young people are spending their time outdoors in free play. The lack of sunshine and activity has certainly not helped their health. With childhood obesity at its highest level, one must connect the dots to see that the less active you are, the more chance of being overweight. Not to mention the pallid look of their skin.

The lack of conversation with others is detrimental. Connecting socially teaches many invaluable lessons. Sharing ideas and opinions opens up the world to higher order thinking skills.

Interacting with others is an important tool for learning how to navigate the world. And being creative is a must for a joy filled life.

I was fortunate to have a Dad who filled my sister’s and my life with opportunities to use our imaginations. He read to us from Shakespeare and Dickens at an early age. He was a fabulous storyteller who told us about unicorns, borrowing his story from James Thurber. We could picture the unicorn, the gruel served from tales from Dickens and Shakespeare was brought to life with the visual images of my Dad’s vivid verbal telling.

From those precious memories, I was given a gift. I can picture characters from books, I can imagine being in the cave with Ali Baba and The Forty Thieves, I see these characters in full color thanks to the gift of an imagination.

When reading a book, the ideas, the characters and the stories seem to leap off the pages. They invade my mind and stay with me throughout the day and often enter into my dreams. Because I was given this gift, I have ideas jumping into my head and find the printed word so powerful.

Children need to be given the opportunity to develop their imaginations by parents, teachers and society. Constant stimulation with electronics, television and social media can rob them of that gift. It is not enough to say that they are stimulated by the interactions of media. That engagement is too passive. They must be given the time to develop their imaginations with the wild abandon that children crave.

I have been blessed in so many ways. My Dad sharing his love for books, the outdoors and storytelling has served me well. He was truly a gifted teacher, and my sister and I are the recipients of his valuable life lessons. As Auntie Mame says in the movie, “Life is a banquet and most poor suckers are starving to death!”

So, with a toast to encouraging imagination among us all, live with abandon, go to the public library and just browse through all the indelible delights waiting to be opened, spend time outdoors enjoying the sounds and silence and pretend. Pretend you are a little pixie living among the gardens in your yard. Or maybe a cloud awaiting your next assignment or even a bird flying high looking for its next great adventure.

The world awaits just outside your door in the greatest invention for imagination ever, your mind. Dr. Seuss said it best, "I like nonsense, it wakes up the brain cells. Fantasy is a necessary ingredient in living. It’s a way of looking at life through the wrong end of a telescope. Which is what I do, and that enables you to laugh at life’s realities.”

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Deb McMahon is a retired educator and political activist living in Des Moines. Click here to read more of her work.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1FHSTAk