Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Reps. Marlin Stutzman and Todd Young, two Republicans running for the U.S. Senate, rarely crossed party lines since first being elected to Congress in 2010. Here are a few times when one or the other sided with Democrats. (Dwight Adams/IndyStar) Wochit

Rep. Todd Young, one of two Republicans running to succeed retiring Sen. Dan Coats, greeted voters at Concannon's Bakery Cafe on April 7, 2016. (Photo: Maureen Groppe / USA TODAY)

SHELBYVILLE — Rep. Todd Young ran for the House in 2010 as a fiscal conservative who would help rein in spending.

After defeating Democratic incumbent Baron Hill — one of the wins that contributed to the Republican takeover of the House — Young eagerly took a seat on the House Budget Committee.

"This will be ground zero in making decisions about what our priorities are at the federal level of government,” Young said at the time. "We're going to shake things up."

Today, as Young seeks the Republican nomination to run against Hill for the Senate seat held by retiring GOP Sen. Dan Coats, he is facing an electorate complaining that Washington hasn’t been shaken up enough.

In a year in which anti-establishment candidates are collecting the most GOP presidential delegates, Young is the Senate Republican candidate who best represents party leaders. He is backed by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, which is running $1 million in ads touting Young’s candidacy. He has a long list of endorsements from Indiana GOP officials and is supported by outside groups with ties to Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky.

“The D.C. establishment thinks that they can buy your vote,” Rep. Marlin Stutzman, Young’s May 3 primary opponent, charged in a recent fundraising missive. “They have chosen Todd Young to play as their puppet in this upcoming election.”

Young argues that Stutzman may talk like a tough conservative but doesn’t have much to show for it.

“We need people in Washington who do more than give speeches and cast votes,” Young said at the Shelby County Lincoln Day Dinner this month. “I’m not running on some vague platitudes. I’m running based on my record.”

That’s a record that includes having beaten Hill once, secured an influential committee assignment and scored some legislative success. His record also includes something he doesn’t highlight on the campaign trail: being one of the few House Republicans willing to end the partial government shutdown in 2013, which earned him the ire of tea party groups.

But Jonna Reece, vice chairwoman of the Delaware County Republican Party, likes a record that she says shows Young makes his own decisions.

“His stance is not always the popular stance,” Reece said. “I think that’s important.”

Raised primarily in Indianapolis and Carmel, Young said he did not grow up in a political home. His parents — a small businessman and a registered nurse — had never attended a political rally or a Lincoln Day Dinner before Young ran for office.

Young, 43, did marry into a politically connected family. His wife, Jenny, a fellow attorney, is the niece of former Vice President Dan Quayle.

The couple and their four young children live in Bloomington, one of the state’s most liberal communities.

“I’m a Bloomington conservative,” Young says in his stump speech. “My wife and I call it missionary work.”

Young’s political experience before running for Congress included stints with the conservative Heritage Foundation and then-Sen. Richard Lugar, who was defeated in the 2012 primary after being accused of becoming too moderate.

Buy Photo U.S. Rep. Todd Young celebrated in Franklin after defeating two other candidates in the Republican primary on May 6, 2014. (Photo: Jennifer Cecil / For IndyStar 2014 file photo)

The parts of his biography that Young emphasizes frequently on the campaign trail are his service in the Marines and his degree from the U.S. Naval Academy. It’s a background that comes through in Young’s demeanor, including the intensity and discipline with which he often speaks.

“The fact that he trained as a leader resonated with me,” said Charlie Hocker, a retiree from Greensburg who heard Young at a candidate forum in February and again at the Shelby County Lincoln Day Dinner this month. Although Hocker is volunteering for presidential candidate Ted Cruz, the senator who encouraged the 2013 government shutdown that Young voted to end, Hocker said Young’s attitude convinced him that he’ll stand up for what he believes.

“We’ve got a bunch of wishy-washy people in Washington that promise the world and don’t do what they say,” Hocker said.

Young said some Republicans overpromised on what could be accomplished without controlling both the legislative and executive branches.

“They tended to be rhetorical conservatives who would talk a big game about what was possible,” he said. “But in the end, they never became known for their hard work of actually advancing conservative principles.”

In 2012, when retiring Rep. Geoff Davis, R-Ky., gave Young lead sponsorship of a bill to require congressional approval of certain regulations written by the executive branch, Davis called Young “one of the hardest-working and most diligent new members of Congress.”

That bill, along with another measure Young often touts that would increase the number of hours someone must work before an employer has to offer health insurance under the Affordable Care Act, has passed the House but not the Senate.

Young also worked on less high-profile measures that were included in bills that have become law.

And, after serving on the House Budget Committee for two terms, Young won a coveted seat on the Ways and Means Committee. The panel’s expansive jurisdiction includes taxes, trade and aspects of extensive social service programs such as welfare, Medicare and Social Security.

Among Young’s competitors for a seat on that committee was fellow Hoosier Rep. Todd Rokita, who had raised more money for the party. But Young developed relationships with House leaders and touted his graduate studies in economics at the University of Chicago and his willingness to work hard and cast tough votes.

Few votes were likely tougher than when he was among a minority of House Republicans who voted in 2013 to end the government shutdown and avoid a default on the nation’s debt.

“We must commit ourselves to avoiding the constant cycle of brinkmanship by working across party lines to address issues like job creation, stagnant personal incomes, our unsustainable national debt and rising health-care costs,” Young said at the time.

Young also has voted regularly against the alternative to House Republicans' annual budget blueprint that’s offered by conservatives pushing a greater reduction in federal spending. Stutzman has supported those alternatives and has sometimes sponsored them.

Young said he has opposed the more conservative budgets because they would impose changes to Social Security and Medicare too quickly. Although changes are needed to the increasingly expensive programs, Young said, they have to be phased in more gradually to give people time to prepare.

But Young has sided with more conservative House Republicans on several other budget votes taken since he began running for the Senate. He voted last fall with tea party members against a temporary funding measure, against a budget and debt-limit deal and against the overall spending bill for this year.

The Indiana Democratic Party accused Young of trying to appear as conservative as Stutzman before the primary. Young said he considers each bill on its own terms, and he opposed the overall spending bill because it didn’t include new restrictions on Iraqi and Syrian refugees, which Young considered a security concern.

Young also cites that vote as an example of how — contrary to what Stutzman says — he’s not a puppet of party leaders, who are a target of voters’ anger this year.

“I know so many of you are frustrated,” Young said at the Shelby County Lincoln Day Dinner. “You may feel like, 'I’ve had enough of Washington, D.C. I want to send in the Marines.’”

You can’t send them all in, the former Marine likes to tell voters, “but you can send in one.”

Email Maureen Groppe at mgroppe@gannett.com. Follow her on Twitter: @mgroppe.

Debate

A debate between Marlin Stutzman and Todd Young, candidates for the Republican nomination for U.S. Senate, will be televised live at 7 p.m. Monday on WFYI-20 and possibly other local television stations.

Rep. Todd Young

Age: 43.

Home: Bloomington.

Family: Wife, Jennifer; four children.

Education: Bachelor’s degree from the U.S. Naval Academy, 1995; master's degree from the University of London, 2001; Master of Business Administration from the University of Chicago, 2002; law degree from Indiana University, 2006.

Military service: Marine Corps, 1995-2000.

Congressional experience: January 2011 to present.

Previous career experience: Lawyer, aide to former Sen. Richard Lugar, aide at the Heritage Foundation, management consultant.

Campaign ads: Young’s ads emphasize his Marine service, portraying him as a strong, conservative leader. He says he’s pro-life and will work to defend the nation’s borders, reform welfare, get rid of Obamacare, end reckless spending and overhaul the tax code. “I’ve had it,” he says in one ad. “I’m ready to go to the Senate, and I’m ready to fight.”

Campaign funds: Young raised $2.9 million through December, the most recent date figures are available for both candidates. He has received more funding from the finance, health and most other business-related sectors than Stutzman, who has collected more from groups that are primarily ideologically driven, according to the nonpartisan Center for Responsive Politics.

Support from outside groups: The U.S. Chamber of Commerce is spending $1 million on ads promoting Young. Two groups led by a former chief of staff to Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., are spending $450,000 on pro-Young ads.

Ratings from interest groups: National Right to Life Committee (100 percent); National Rifle Association (A+); U.S. Chamber of Commerce (91 percent); American Civil Liberties Union (0 percent); League of Conservation Voters (3 percent); Human Rights Campaign (30 percent); Americans for Prosperity (80 percent); Family Research Council (91 percent); National Education Association (F); Heritage Action for America (61 percent).

Bipartisan Index rating: Young ranked 138th in the House in 2015 for how often he introduced bills that attracted support from members of the other party, and how often he co-sponsored a bill introduced by someone from across the aisle. The Bipartisan Index was created by the Lugar Center and Georgetown University’s McCourt School of Public Policy.

Quote: “Most Hoosiers aren’t very political people. They’re not impressed by strident speeches and political pageantry. What they want are conservative results. And they deserve a U.S. senator who can deliver conservative results. I can. Marlin Stutzman cannot.”

Sources: USA TODAY research, Congressional Quarterly, the Center for Responsive Politics, the Lugar Center.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1NgccZj