Luverne, MN

Minnesota is the Land of 10,000 Lakes, and the heavy rain added a few more bodies of water across the western part of the state.

Interstate 90 was closed this morning from Luverne to the South Dakota border when all four lanes of traffic were covered in water. There was a report of water up to four feet high covering the intersection near the Beaver Creek exit.

It wasn't just the interstate affected by the heavy rainfall, as numerous county and dirt roads around Beaver Creek were also covered in water.

In Luverne, residents estimate they were hit with more than 6 inches of rain last night causing Rock River to overflow inside city limits. The water took over some city streets, and the basement of Richard May's home.

"My son he brought a farm pump here and we put it down the sewage drain. It's running the water out now but the damage has already been done," Richard May said.

May says around six inches of water covered his basement. He is frustrated with the damage to his home but the army veteran is trying to keep a positive attitude.

"You got to take everything like this with a grain of salt and just do what you can to save your property. That's what we did," May said.

People took pictures of Rock River as it turned this baseball field into a swimming pool. Some residents of the town say they've never expected flooding like this in Luverne.

"I've never seen it this high before, I mean I saw it when it flooded the park but not this high throughout the town," Nathan Meyer said.

Near Beaver Creek, the water rushed through farmer's field. One farmer said he had to move his cattle, and they now have less than half an acre to graze. Travel was difficult through the area as drivers had to navigate the flooded roads.

Whether it's a farmer's field becoming an ocean, or Father's Day turning to a nightmare for a Luverne homeowner, today's flood has made an impact in Minnesota that many won't forget anytime soon.

Blue Mounds State Park confirmed that the rainfall washed out the spillway. The dam holds back water for a swimming pond in the park.