Taylor Hanna, owner of local handmade tie company The Clad Stache creates handmade bow ties and decided to create one especially for his friend Brenda to help raise money for her cancer treatments.

At just 37, Brenda Capps was diagnosed with an aggressive form of breast cancer.

The Cancer Sucks Bow Tie pink silk tweed on one side and a 100 percent cotton floral on the other side.

An Oklahoma City woman battling breast cancer finds support through a man's accessory, bow ties.

Taylor Hanna, owner of local handmade tie company The Clad Stache creates bow ties and decided to create one especially for his friend Brenda Capps to help raise money for her cancer treatments.

"When I heard her story, it just kind of broke my heart," said Hanna.

So, Hanna decided to help her in the only way he knew how, by creating a bow tie.

"I try to use different stuff," he said. "I try to do some fun kind of crazy stuff with florals and stuff like that."

Like the one he designed for Brenda. It's pink silk tweed on one side and a 100 percent cotton floral on the other side.

"It's phenomenal what he's doing," said Brenda.

At just 37, Brenda was diagnosed with an aggressive form of breast cancer. She had a right side mastectomy and will have to follow up with months of chemotherapy followed by radiation. Being unemployed and uninsured briefly, she racked up around $7,000 in medical bills.

"I can't think of any other way that I would be able to help her except for cash right out of my pocket," said Hanna. "So, to try and do this and get other people involved with it and get something out of it at the same time for them just seems like the perfect thing to do."

It's an act of friendship that hasn't gone unnoticed.

"It's a humbling experience for everybody to support me," Brenda said. "You don't realize how many people are important to you in your life until something like this happens."

The Clad Stache's Cancer Sucks Bow Tie is on sale now for $59 dollars each, with $50 of that going straight into a fund for Brenda.

Hanna said the bow tie will be available until the end of February and his goal is to raise $2,500 to go towards Capps' medical bills.