Gov. Bill Haslam speaking during a press conference at the state Capitol in Nashville, Tenn., on Tuesday, June 3, 2014. (Photo: (AP Photo/Erik Schelzig))

A few weeks ago, Gov. Bill Haslam sent a letter to Tennessee teachers lecturing them on the importance of new standards and laying the state of our workforce at their feet.

Out of 66,000 teachers, 1,800 public schools and 137 districts, Gov. Haslam met with just 12 small, tightly controlled groups of educators. From this very small sample, Gov. Haslam had a major epiphany. He now believes that teachers aren't really upset about new evaluations and other reforms — they simply don't understand why they are necessary. Now, he seems to think it's his job to explain it to them in a condescending, paternalistic letter.

Let me explain something very clearly to Gov. Haslam: Tennessee's teachers understand your reforms, they understand the what, how and why, but they don't like what they see.

Fitzhugh (Photo: Submitted)

Tennessee teachers don't need the governor to explain to them that they are on the front lines dealing with poverty, broken homes, domestic violence and other social ills — they live it every day. Instead of explaining this to teachers, Gov. Haslam should put forward a new evaluation system that takes these issues into account and evaluates educators fairly.

Tennessee teachers don't need the governor to explain to them that too many students are unprepared for a postsecondary education — they see it firsthand every morning. Instead of lecturing on the issue, the governor should give our teachers the tools they need to succeed, starting with the raise they were promised in 2014 and working to increase per pupil spending beyond our woeful $8,600 a child.

Tennessee teachers don't need the governor to explain to them that we need a better-prepared workforce to compete for the jobs of tomorrow. These teachers don't live in a vacuum; they see what's happening in their communities as factories close and move overseas. They know better than most how important a quality education, both K-12 and postsecondary, is if our children are going to compete in a global market. Instead of blaming teachers, Gov. Haslam should work with them to expand prekindergarten and other early learning opportunities.

Tennessee's teachers are some of the brightest, best trained and most dedicated in the nation. They have managed to do more with less and perform remarkably in the face of unprecedented, mismanaged and misguided reforms. These men and women deserve better than a condescending letter from Gov. Haslam explaining to them what they already know.

Instead of talking down to our teachers, instead of blaming them for the state of our workforce, we need a new conversation.

We need to talk about a new evaluation system that grades teachers on students they actually teach and rates their performance in a fair, objective manner. We need to talk about per-pupil spending, teacher salaries and where our priorities are as a state. We need to talk about prekindergarten and the real effects of early learning.

And we need to talk to our teachers like the real, adult professionals they have proven themselves to be. They need more than a letter from the governor; they need action now.

Craig Fitzhugh represents Crockett, Lauderdale and Haywood counties in the Tennessee House of Representatives. He is the House minority leader.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1s0s3Qy