by John Gibson

Follow us on Twitter, Like us on Facebook, and listen LIVE on the FoxNewsTalk App

Dr. Ezekiel Emanuel, one of the primary medical professionals who shaped Obamacare, writes in the current Atlantic Magazine that he wants to die at 75. The implication of his argument is you should too.

He admits right off the bat that his friends and close relatives, including his famous brothers (Rahm and Ari, one the mayor of Chicago, the other arguably the mayor of Hollywood entertainment industry) and his parents, think either the idea is crazy or he is crazy.

But Zeke is serious. This is how he argues living older than 75 is bad:

“Living too long is also a loss. It renders many of us, if not disabled, then faltering and declining, a state that may not be worse than death but is nonetheless deprived. It robs us of our creativity and ability to contribute to work, society, the world. It transforms how people experience us, relate to us, and, most important, remember us. We are no longer remembered as vibrant and engaged but as feeble, ineffectual, even pathetic.”

This is reminiscent of the former Governor of Colorado, Richard Lamm, who thirty years ago shocked the nation by telling a medical conference that the old have a duty to die. ”You’ve got a duty to die and get out of the way,” Lamm said in 1984. ”Let the other society, our kids, build a reasonable life.” It should be noted Dick Lamm is still among us at age 79, and that he never gave a specific age at which a person’s “duty to die” should occur.

But Zeke Emanuel’s neo-duty-to-die declaration is much more dangerous than Lamm’s three decades ago. Lamm was not in charge in fundamentally transforming the American health care system. Emanuel was, and he did. We now have a system of health care that reflects his fundamental beliefs about how much health care resources should go to the young and how much to the old.

If you think Emanuel’s design of Obamacare is going to apportion health care resources to the sick at whatever age the patient may be, I’ve got a bridge to sell you.

Zeke Emanuel’s beliefs about how long a person should live, and what should or shouldn’t be done to extend life beyond a certain number of years–75!–will be reflected in the way Obamacare takes care of those who are on the good side of seventy five years and those who are on the other side of seventy five.

Frankly, I don’t care if Emanuel wants to go at three quarters of a century, more or less.

What I worry about is that this kind of thinking permeates the medical system in this country that is largely of his design. It’s none of his business how long you live, or I live. It’s none of his business how long either you or I want to live. As a medical professional it’s his job to keep us alive (“First, do no harm”–Hippocrates).

Obviously, there are end-stages of life in which heroic efforts to prolong life a few days or weeks or even months are futile. I am not arguing that huge dollars of medical resources should be spent pushing life a short distance farther.

Emanuel concludes his argument with this:

“I am talking about how long I want to live and the kind and amount of health care I will consent to after 75. Americans seem to be obsessed with exercising, doing mental puzzles, consuming various juice and protein concoctions, sticking to strict diets, and popping vitamins and supplements, all in a valiant effort to cheat death and prolong life as long as possible. This has become so pervasive that it now defines a cultural type: what I call the American immortal.

I reject this aspiration. I think this manic desperation to endlessly extend life is misguided and potentially destructive. For many reasons, 75 is a pretty good age to aim to stop.”

What is troubling about this is not Emanuel’s personal decision, foolish though it may be. After all, in this article he talks about his parents well past his cut off age who are physically fine (though slowing down) and have all their marbles.

The disquieting aspect of Emanuel’s argument is who he is. As one of the primary designers of the basics of Obamacare one has to take his argument seriously as one of the basic tenets of the nation’s fundamentally transformed healthcare system. It is already showing up in news reports.

Death Panels anyone?

Ahhhh… Sarah Palin. Condemned and mocked when she said it five years ago, now some are noting those two words could be her greatest legacy.

And in a weird and certainly unintended way, Zeke Emanuel, Mr. Obamacare, just confirmed it.