A trio of high-flying teens from Colorado represent the country’s best hope for an Olympic medal-harvest in the halfpipe.

Boulder’s Lyman Currier, 19, Aspen’s Torin Yater-Wallace, 18, and Crested Butte’s Aaron Blunck, 17, are Colorado’s teenage triple threat for Olympic glory. The three amigos have been giddily prodding each other to boost bigger since grade school, competing in first amateur, then junior, and, most recently, professional halfpipe contests.

The game turned serious in 2011 when Yater-Wallace exploded, throwing progressive double-flipping tricks in the pipe and becoming the youngest athlete at age 15 to medal at the Winter X Games.

“That really pushed Lyman and I to really get to where he was. Both Lyman and I, at that time, were setting our hopes higher when we saw our good friend doing well,” said Blunck, whose baby-face masks an aggressive, predatory athleticism in the pipe.

Those hopes are anchored in the most progressive tricks ever seen in the halfpipe. All three spin the gymnastic double-cork 1260; two backflips while rotating three-and-a-half times above a 22-foot wall of ice. Their creative fire fuels a technical, style-soaked trickery that elevated them to not just the country’s first-ever Olympic ski halfpipe team, but as medal contenders for the sport’s Olympic debut.

“When we started competing it wasn’t even talked about that this would be an Olympic sport,” said Currier, whose dad, David Currier, skied in the 1972 Olympics as a 19-year-old. “As soon as it got admitted as an Olympic sport in 2011, it was on all our minds. It’s amazing to be here with two Colorado boys, representing Colorado the best we can.”

The fellas are silly, as teenage pals usually are. Currier’s Twitter handle is an unabashed “@urmotherlovesme.” Yater-Wallace likes to either wag his tongue or strike gangster poses when photographed. His first Tweet upon arriving in Sochi? Urging Emma Watson to respond because “it’s the only way I will medal at the Olympics.”

The three goof with each other, chase girls and generally act their age.

Elevating good times over gold medals is a lesson Yater-Wallace has imparted to his pals; something learned after two years as a teenage pioneer navigating under freeskiing’s brightest spotlight.

“The biggest thing I’ve learned from Torin is to just have fun at every competition and just be happy if you can put down a run that you are happy with,” said Currier, whose first hit in the pipe is a double-cork switch 1080, one of the discipline’s most difficult tricks. “It’s kind of crazy to have one of my idols be younger than me.”

But don’t be fooled by the trio’s it’s-all-a-party facade. These guys are fierce competitors. Stone-faced atop the pipe, bobbing to their tunes, all three are more than capable of capturing the world’s first Olympic gold medal in the ski halfpipe.

But first they have to get past David Wise, the experienced and often golden veteran, who at 23 plays the role of big brother to his ever-goofing underlings.

“We definitely have some fun times on the road,” said Wise, a husband and father who first qualified for the team two months ago after a red-hot streak of wins he hopes to carry into the pipe at the Rosa Khutor Extreme Park. “Being a teenager on the road is a pretty interesting experience but sometimes I have to be like ‘Guys it’s time to stop throwing bread at people, tone it down a little bit.’”

Wise feels the heat from his teammates, who, aside from heavy-hitting Canadians Justin Dorey and Mike Riddle, and Frenchman Kevin Rolland, represent his biggest obstacles to Olympic gold.

“Having these guys around basically just ensures that I can never take a breather. No matter what I learn or how much I progress, they are right there behind me,” Wise said. “That makes the sport more exciting.”

The men compete in both qualifiers and finals for ski halfpipe on Tuesday Feb. 18.