The $7.4 million that Texas surgeon Stephen Burkhart received from a medical device maker earlier this year seems like the kind of eye-popping sum that a new doctor-payment website was created to reveal.

But his explanation for the remuneration suggests the importance of carefully examining the sums reported by the federal government’s Open Payments database.

Burkhart is a pioneer of minimally-invasive shoulder surgery. The way he describes it, his work is a reason why repairing your torn rotator cuff no longer requires opening up your shoulder.

“It really has created a paradigm shift in shoulder surgery,” Burkhart says, and cut infection rates to less than .01% from 2%. “That alone is saving a huge amount of misery and cost to the health-care system.”

He doesn’t dispute the reported payments, which he says are royalties on the more than 25 patents he’s received for developing the implants, instruments and techniques used in the shoulder arthroscopy surgeries.

The royalties are paid by a company called Arthrex, which confirms it has the rights to Burkhart’s inventions and used them in hundreds of its products.

Neither “Dr. Burkhart, nor any surgeon Arthrex pays, receives any payment or royalty for their use, or their associated facility’s use, of Arthrex products,” the company tells us in a statement. Arthrex pays him royalties when other doctors use products made from his inventions, but not when he uses Arthrex products on his patients.

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services posted the payments this week in a database that was created as part of the Affordable Care Act, which is designed to shed light on the financial relationships between companies and doctors.

Those relationships have been murky, and studies have shown the undue influence that industry perks as minor as a free lunch can have on patient care decisions.

Burkhart says he received an undergraduate degree in medical engineering, and upon entering medical practice in 1981, thought the minimally-invasive approach to reconstructing knees could be applied to shoulder surgeries.

He says he spent 25 years developing the new approach, even employing an aircraft machinist to make the initial instruments. Today, doctors can repair rotator cuffs through three or four punctures in the shoulder.

Burkhart asks that those going to the website avoid jumping to conclusions. “My focus has been on making” shoulder surgery better for patients, he says.