Obamacare isn’t just winning in the courts. It’s already making a real difference for patients and providers.

Last month, when the Supreme Court again upheld the Affordable Care Act, the debate focused on the tax credits that subsidize monthly premiums. But the case also provided a glimpse into the progress of health reform itself, and some gains are promising.

Patients who bought coverage on the health exchange were much more likely to avoid emergency rooms and use outpatient facilities.

Women, who often need additional services, took advantage of new treatment options: Those with coverage were over three times as likely to get an ultrasound for a breast lump, for instance.

Patients with coverage usually shared in their medical costs, paying $390 on average for each visit to a large hospital chain. That compares with 9 in 10 uninsured patients who paid nothing for their care.

These were among the examples cited in a legal brief filed by HCA Inc., also known as Hospital Corp. of America. It’s the nation’s largest private provider and a major player here, with over $2 billion in patient revenue in Dallas-Fort Worth.

HCA’s early experience shows that the health law is achieving some of its core objectives: encouraging people to get care in the most appropriate setting; promoting personal responsibility and cost-sharing; and enabling better access for many at risk.

All are important goals for improving health care and trying to bend the cost curve.

Cost-sharing, for example, is a common feature of most private health insurance today. Congress wanted patients in the new system to have skin in the game, too.

“Doing so was a way to promote personal responsibility, smarter health care choices, and the use of less expensive modes of care,” HCA wrote in its filing in King vs. Burwell.

HCA urged the Supreme Court to retain the tax credits offered in federally run exchanges, which include the marketplace in Texas. In a 6-3 decision, the court upheld the subsidies, with Chief Justice John Roberts writing: “Congress passed the Affordable Care Act to improve health insurance markets, not to destroy them.”

Access in Texas

Since Obamacare passed in 2010, an estimated 16.4 million people who were uninsured now have coverage. That’s affected their behaviors and boosted results for providers, especially in states that expanded Medicaid coverage.

Texas leaders have refused to expand Medicaid, leaving billions of federal dollars on the table. But nearly 1 million Texans have enrolled through the exchange, and that’s had a positive effect.

“We could do even more in Texas, but I hear the same anecdotes about improvements in care here,” said Steve Love, CEO of the Dallas-Fort Worth Hospital Council. “The intent of the law is to expand coverage and access in a cost-effective manner, and thus far, that’s been pretty much achieved.”

Critics often said the health law would kill jobs and drive costs higher. That hasn’t happened so far. The region and the nation have been adding jobs at a rapid clip and health costs have grown more slowly than projected.

In 2013, the increase in health care costs was less than half the rate of a decade earlier. And in the exchanges, this year’s average monthly premium rose 2.9 percent for the lowest-cost silver plan, according to a report by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.

The average premium for the same coverage in Dallas rose 5.7 percent, the group said.

Good start

This year, the Congressional Budget Office also lowered projections of total federal spending on health because of lower premiums and fewer enrollees than originally anticipated.

Over a decade, the government is now expected to spend $600 billion less than projected before health reform, according to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.

At HCA, the uninsured were three times more likely to go to the emergency room for care, the company said. And patients with insurance from the exchange were almost twice as likely to go to an outpatient facility.

That’s a good start, Love said, because the uninsured usually face a learning curve in health care. They have to grasp rules about deductibles, co-pays and primary care doctors, and react accordingly.

HCA’s results mirror the experience of other providers. Ascension Health, a major not-for-profit health system, has hospitals in 16 states, including Texas. The Kaiser Family Foundation compared its results in states that expanded Medicaid and those that did not.

In expansion states, Medicaid outpatient revenue grew over twice as fast as inpatient revenue, Kaiser reported. The costs of charity care also fell 40 percent in Ascension’s expansion states, compared with a decline of 6 percent in the others.

Tenet Healthcare, a national chain based in Dallas, reported a 50 percent decline in uninsured and charity admissions for the first quarter. In two years, its quarterly costs for charity and uncompensated care have fallen by $174 million.

Politicians may still be fighting over Obamacare. But in many ways, it’s already working.

Follow Mitchell Schnurman on Twitter at @mitchschnurman.