Production problems that delayed delivery of the seasonal flu vaccine to a number of providers have been resolved, according to Craig Parrish, director of pharmacy services for the Virginia Department of Health.

"The situation we're dealing with now is demand-driven," he said, conceding that there may be "spot outages" from higher than usual demand.

On the Peninsula, the Health District and private suppliers all report plenty of the injectable flu vaccine. However, MedImmune's FluMist, a nasal spray that was first approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 2012 to protect against four strains — two A and two B — is hard to come by.

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control recommends the flu vaccine for everyone six months of age and older. Under provisions of the Affordable Care Act, the flu shot falls under preventive measures that all insurance policies must cover at no cost to the consumer — no co-pay or co-insurance can be charged.

Influenza spreads mainly from person to person by droplets from the nose or throat that are released when an infected person coughs or sneezes, according to the Virginia Department of Health. "Sometimes, people may become infected by touching something with influenza virus on it and then touching their mouth or nose before washing their hands," the website warns.

Complications of flu can include bacterial pneumonia, ear infections, sinus infections, dehydration and worsening of chronic medical conditions, such as congestive heart failure, asthma or diabetes.

The department, which tracks weekly flu activity throughout the season, is showing this year's season running a couple of weeks ahead of last year, with its current level noted as "sporadic." Most cases reported have been in Northern Virginia with the youngest children hardest-hit.

"Incidence is fairly low. We haven't had an early peak," said Parrish. While the total doses are still adequate, he added that some necessary resupply may take until the end of November.

The Peninsula Health District has announced a flu vaccine clinic by appointment for children and adults on Wednesday, Nov.4, from 8:15 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. at the Peninsula Health Center, 416 J. Clyde Morris Blvd., Newport News. It does not have the nasal spray. To schedule an appointment, call (757) 594-7069 from 8 a.m. to noon through Tuesday; without insurance, the shots cost $30.

Riverside Health System is offering a series of flu shot clinics on the Peninsula. The clinics will provide free flu shots on a first-come, first-serve basis while supplies last. Both the high-dose vaccine (for adults 65 and older) and the intradermal vaccine (for adults between 18 and 65) are offered. The clinics:

•Thursday, Nov. 6, 8 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. at Riverside Williamsburg Family Medicine, 120 Kings Way, Suite 1400, Williamsburg; 757-345-2555.

•Friday, Nov. 7, 8 a.m. to 6:30 p.m. at Riverside Wellness and Fitness Center, 12650 Jefferson Avenue, Newport News; 757-875-7525.

Salasky can be reached by phone at 757-247-4784.