By Tim Nesbitt

Storefront health care used to conjure images of drab clinics, long waiting lines and harried medical teams. But the storefronts that Zoom+ is opening throughout Portland and neighboring cities are more like health boutiques, designed to appeal to a clientele that values prompt, high quality and personalized care.

This is not the health care model I grew up with, but it's one I've been watching with interest over the past decade. Zoom's urgent care clinics have attracted a growing number of young adults and 30-something families, who found its culture of accessibility and efficiency exactly what the patient ordered for episodic care. Midway through Zoom's start-up phase, the Affordable Care Act's (ACA) individual mandate brought more of these "young invincibles" into our health insurance system, where Zoom was well positioned to meet their expectations for a more consumer-oriented approach to health care. As a result, Zoom recently became an insurer, created plans for individual coverage through the Oregon insurance exchange and began adding storefronts that offer wellness regimens, access to specialists, and chronic disease management – a total of 26 such facilities now in the Portland area, Vancouver and Salem.

Zoom remains a relatively small player in the health care market, but its approach has forced larger insurers to take notice and more established providers to open look-alike facilities in Portland neighborhoods. A few months ago, I dropped into a Zoom+ Performance storefront in Portland's Pearl District and, out of curiosity more than need, ended up scheduling a health assessment at the staff's invitation. The assessment included a short session in what looks like a space capsule and a workout before a giant TV that tested my "neuromuscular coordination." They call it "Zoom+ Performance" for good reason. Decidedly high tech, it was also highly motivating. In reaction to the space capsule's reading of my body mass index, I have since lost 12 pounds. This is health care as health promotion.

Zoom has not been welcomed by traditional health insurers, who criticize the company for refusing to take Medicaid and Medicare clients and focusing on a younger, urban, easier-to-serve population. But Zoom CEO Dave Sanders challenges those insurers by asking what they have done to improve health care affordability and efficiency since the ACA expanded their customer base. Besides, "young invincibles" are people too. They were forced to sign up for coverage in a health care system with antiquated access and pricing mechanisms, so they deserve to be heard as consumers.

As the smartphone generation confronts take-a-number health care, they will demand new technologies and practices as well. True to form, Zoom responded to this dynamic by securing state legislation last year to require insurers to pay for telemedical services. And, Zoom's appearance on the insurance exchange may be fortuitously timed, as one consumer-oriented plan, Health Republic, is now closing its doors.

In terms of market dynamics, the Zoom+ approach to health care reform looks like a classic example of disruptive innovation that begins in a small market segment, wins broader consumer acceptance and expands outward from there. But there is another driver of innovation in the health care market that looks a lot more formidable – the network of coordinated care organizations (CCOs) that now deliver care for more than a million Oregonians in the Oregon Health Plan. The contrasts between the two models are revealing. Zoom is pitching its innovations to consumers, while the CCOs are bringing their reforms to captive populations. Zoom is competing in a dynamic market, while the CCOs are managing near monopolies in a price-controlled environment. Zoom is pitching a model based on consumer choice and individual responsibility, while the CCOs are broadening their scope to address the social determinants of health and spearheading community health practices in their regions.

Still, both Zoom and the CCOs are talking about the same goals. When Oregon launched its CCOs, policymakers articulated a "triple aim" – to improve lifelong health, increase the quality, reliability and availability of care, and lower or contain the cost of care. Zoom's Sanders, ever more quotable, captured the same vision when he set a goal of "twice the health at half the cost and ten times the delight."

The ACA has been criticized for failing to control costs and reform the health care delivery system. But we have two promising innovators in our midst that can learn from each other's approaches as they set about doing exactly that.

Tim Nesbitt writes on public affairs, has served as an adviser to Governors Ted Kulongoski and John Kitzhaber, and is past president of the Oregon AFL-CIO. He writes every other week for oregonlive.com and The Oregonian. He can be reached at nesbitt.columns@gmail.com.