Democrats are daring the Republican majority in Congress to act on the budget they just passed.

They are challenging their colleagues across the aisle to draft bills to put policies into effect that would cut Pell Grant scholarships, cut off health insurance to as many as 27 million people covered by either the Affordable Care Act or Medicaid, and cut $600 billion from "income security" programs such as school lunches, food stamps, tax credits for the working poor and nutritional assistance to poor mothers. After all, in a straight party line vote of 51 to 48, the combined budget--a "nonbinding blueprint" at this point--that passed the Senate (as it had in the House) would require those steps to be taken.

Do we expect those cuts to happen? No. When push comes to shove, the Republicans will not draft the legislation that would impose the prescribed cuts, for, their 'calls for new negotiations on a more bipartisan approach' are a signal that it's just not going to happen.

But, still, think about it. This is the plan for the future that Congress envisions for America? The plan its members are comfortable being identified with? I guess so. They approved it. The Republicans did, that is. But they won't act on it. They pass a budget plan to satisfy the far right wing of the Republican Party—but even Cruz and Paul didn't think it went far enough—and then they don't have the guts to take it to the people--in the bills it would require to get the work done. Or, ahem, expose their members, unfavorably, during election time.



Some leadership!



It's reprehensible, the games these people play.

Fortunately, there is something of a silver lining when you look at the vote.



New Jersey's Republican Representative, Frank LoBiondo (2nd District) deserves a shout-out for his vote against this budget plan. He was one of only 14, yes, only 14 Republicans, to vote against the deep cuts in essential social programs, a vote to increase military spending and reduce support for food stamps and health care, you know, as noted, programs that aid the poor.

He voted against the original House measure as well, citing "proposed reductions in the food stamp program, freezing student loan aid, and financial restraints on those nearing retirement" as those programs are "vital to the families I represent."

Now, Plato said that 'one shouldn't congratulate a man for having done his duty,' but, these days, what with polarizing politics, and federal budget priorities set by lobbyists beholden to those who pay big bucks, one must notice and applaud this New Jersey Republican. The Star Ledger editors did so earlier this week.

Leonard Lance (R-7th District), his colleague, can say his 'yes' vote represents "an important step in addressing the chronic overspending that has plagued Washington far too long," but it's hardly convincing. After all, he and fellow House Republicans, not LoBiondo though, are content to support Big Agriculture while avoiding the moral--and economic--imperative to help the poor get to eat. Ironic, isn't it? The poor are cut off from eating the food produced with public subsidies. Ironic, and, lacking in fundamental decency as I noted in this blog, "Food stamps and politics: Nothing for the hungry and the poor in the House."

All of New Jersey's Republican representatives regularly vote against the hungry and the poor these days—except for LoBiondo. And, yes, they vote for Big Farm subsidies: Leonard Lance, Jon Runyan, Chris Smith, Scott Garrett, and, of course, Rodney Frelinghuysen. No help for the poor or hungry people in their districts or, for that matter, for those anywhere else in the nation. What a dismal, disappointing, and ultimately, sad performance. I noted in the blog that we need to remember their votes when we, the citizens, vote.

We have more than enough cause. Our courageous cohort of House Republicans from New Jersey--again, excepting Frank LoBiondo who was also joined by Christopher Smith—voted to cut the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), last time they had a chance, by nearly $4 billion annually over 10 years. Democrats, with LoBiondo and Smith standing with them, voted to oppose!

Keeping their priorities straight, that's our Republic cohort in the House. Representatives? Think about it and be thankful for Frank LoBiondo, a genuine representative of the people, in and beyond his district.