For the past several years it has been my privilege to serve on the advisory board of a wonderful organization – Constituting America – whose mission is to promote the U.S. Constitution to, as the ringmaster says, “children of all ages.”

What began as an effort to make the nation’s fundamental document “cool” for kids has evolved into a broad-spectrum effort to inform, to educate, to make plain the meaning and relevance of this essential text to every American through contemporary channels of communication.

Each year this group – which was founded by actress, author, and radio talk show host Janine Turner and Cathy Gillespie, a Virginia-based political activist and former congressional chief of staff – sponsors a “We the Future” contest, open to the public, that seeks to put creative minds to work showing just how the Constitution continues to be important today. Contestants from elementary school age to seniors are invited to use whatever creative media best suits them to craft entries in categories from songs to short films. In addition to having their materials posted on the group's website, some entrants are also eligible to win scholarships or, new for 2014 what the group is calling “mentoring trips” to Hollywood, Nashville or Washington, D.C.

[See a collection of political cartoons on Congress.]

There are some among us who regard such activities as these as “old fashioned” and out of step with the times. They tend to believe the Constitution is a “living, breathing document” that must be interpreted in line with the mores of our times. In my judgment, they are wrong. The Constitution is and will remain an enduring guarantor of our sacred liberties for only as long as the majority of people understand for themselves that it speaks to eternal truths, especially those that hold that “We the People” occupy are the highest level of authority in the American political system.

Lawmakers and judges nowadays accede far too often to the idea that we are a nation of men rather than a nation of laws and that it is permissible to twist the Constitution’s words to allow for outcomes that are politically popular. Without the basic guarantees of liberty and freedom of choice accorded to us by its words, life in this nation becomes perilous. There is no certainty, there can be no personal security, and, in point of fact, justice becomes a transient concept based on the parties and issues involved rather than an enduring objective, standard.

This is not to say the drafters of this magnificent document were always correct. They themselves, were they here to do it, would likely acknowledge there were places in which they erred, and badly. At least one war has been fought to correct the one that is generally held to have been its most glaring, at the cost of hundreds of thousands of American lives. Fortunately the founders provided other avenues allowing for changes to be made through the democratic process.

[Check out our editorial cartoons on President Obama.]

Opinions vary as to the ways in which the Constitution’s meaning can be interpreted. The Constituting America contest provides a welcome opportunity, especially for young people just embarked on what will hopefully be a lifetime of learning to express their views and, through the worldwide web, to share them with the largely public.

Information about the contest, including the kinds of submissions the group is seeking, the different age categories for entrants and the deadlines can be found here. For my part I will make this promise: Editors permitting, I’ll be happy to publish the winning high school and college essays here in my space on Thomas Jefferson Street. If you know a young person interested in the Constitution, or who should be interested in it, encourage them to enter.