Many animals sold online and in pet shops start life in ghastly conditions in illegal animal farms.

ANYONE who has picked up a newspaper or caught the TV headlines in the past week is, by now, aware of the stomach-turning scandal engulfing the greyhound industry.

But if you sat in front of your television screen railing against the widespread, illegal practice of live baiting in greyhound “blooding”, while patting the soft fur of your family dog, I’m afraid you are a hypocrite.

Sure, no one with a shred of decency could abide an industry that turns a blind eye to helpless animals, some of them mere babies, being strung up to a lure and torn to pieces – alive – for sport.

And it is indeed welcome news that, in the wake of the ABC’s Four Corners’ explosive revelations, meaningful action has been taken: 29 trainers, including 13 in Queensland, had been stood down as of Friday, with dozens facing criminal prosecution and potential lifetime bans.

In NSW, the entire Greyhound Racing state board has been dismissed due to the irreparable damage to its integrity.

Queensland’s new Racing Minister, Bill Byrne, derided live baiting as an act “of barbarism” and vowed to draw out the undesirables from the sport.

“Now I’m not about shutting out the sport of greyhound racing, I am about shutting down what appears to be sociopathic behaviour with some elements of the industry,” he said.

But for those armchair animal lovers clucking their tongues at the sheer hide of these sadistic trainers, I have news for you – you’re probably not much better.

If you’ve bought an animal from a pet store, or on Gumtree, or from any number of breeders, you are likely just as guilty – even if unwittingly – of contributing to an industry which profits from the torture and misery of animals.

Most of these animals come from the deceivingly adorable-sounding puppy farms, where bitches are treated as nothing more than breeding machines, pumping out litter after litter in the most filthy, appalling conditions imaginable.

According to RSPCA Australia, the mothers are often confined permanently to tiny cages, deprived of company, affection and veterinary care and are barred from leaving their prisons to exercise or go to the toilet.

If you found yourself repulsed by the wounded piglets, possums and rabbits kept captive by the rogue greyhound trainers, the situation is just as dire – and even more widespread – in the pet industry.

The irony is that so many of the fashionable, upmarket breeds – from the purebreds to the “oodle” designer dogs – endure such savage beginnings.

Of course, this only results in longterm health and behavioural problems in the animals, meaning either a costly vet bill for their future owners and, all too often, the abandonment of a pet a family is incapable of caring for.

These puppy factories are where most commercial pet stores source their stock and can encompass both largescale and small, backyard operations. Footage of animals rescued from these factory farms show creatures with matted fur, festering sores and covered in their own urine and faeces.

And authorities say the problem is worsening, as internet sales of pets become increasingly popular.

It remains to be seen if Queensland’s new Premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, will make good on her pre-election promise to crack down on such operations by introducing a registration plan for breeders with more than 20 dogs.

“What we have seen over the last few years is a heightened trade in illegal puppy farms,” Palaszczuk said in December. “Labor will end this cruel practice.”

New laws have already gone before the ACT Legislative Assembly on Thursday to ban puppy farms and require breeders to be inspected and licensed, with hopes other states and territories will follow suit.

A few months ago, I adopted my own dog Alfie from – weirdly enough – a cat shelter and couldn’t be happier with the decision.

Everyone who meets him falls in love with his friendly, cheeky personality and I’m constantly fielding questions about his breed and where I got him from; many are surprised he is a rescued dog and to learn that shelters not only have older “mutts”, but puppies and dumped purebreds.

Each day across Australia, a perfectly healthy dog is put down at a council pound at taxpayer expense simply because it has failed to be rehomed. I’d urge every person ready and willing to care for an animal to go to these shelters first and shun pet stores and commercial breeding operations.

Even better, after the horrors brought to light this week, why not check out greyhound adoption programs and give a retired racing dog a loving alternative to the needle.

Caroline Marcus is a journalist with A Current Affair.

Twitter: @carolinemarcus