Fred Upton, chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, has been in Congress since 1987. (Photo: Charles Dharapak/AP ) Story Highlights Mayday PAC is calling for reform to get big money out of politics

Upton is targeted for vote against Affordable Care Act

Mayday PAC — a Super Pac which says it's devoted to getting big money out of politics — is planning to spend $1.5 million against U.S. Rep. Fred Upton in southwest Michigan between now and Election Day on Nov. 4.

The political action committee founded by Harvard Law Professor Lawrence Lessig is funded by tens of thousands of small-dollar donors. It is coming out with a TV ad targeting Upton, R-St. Joseph, for accepting special interest contributions and voting against a 2007 bill allowing the government to negotiate prescription drug prices for Medicare and the Affordable Care Act — which included a provision prohibiting insurers from denying coverage to people with pre-existing conditions.

Both were party-line votes. Upton has said that while he objects to the ACA he supports legislation prohibiting insurers from denying coverage to people with pre-existing conditions.

Upton's campaign noted that he voted in favor of the legislation that created the Medicare prescription drug plan in the first place, saying Mayday is distorting his record. His campaign also noted that corporations are prohibited from giving directly to candidates -- though industry and corporate committees contribute heavily to political candidates, including Upton.

Upton, chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, has been in Congress since 1987. He faces Paul Clements, a political science professor at Western Michigan University who has been endorsed by Mayday PAC. Clements also supports Mayday-backed legislation to offset the influence of large-dollar donations in congressional politics.

In a news release, Mayday PAC drew attention to the fact that President Barack Obama won in the district Upton represents in 2008 and lost by just a percentage point, 50%-49%, two years ago. Upton's margin of victory that year was reported to be the smallest of his career, but it was still 12 percentage points, as he defeated Democrat Mike O'Brien 55%-43%.

Contact TODD SPANGLER at 703-854-8947 or at tspangler@freepress.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1vU8ZTH