A passenger inside a car that Cape Coral police said was racing before it crashed, killing the driver, said Sunday they weren't racing — they were being chased.

Cinthia Astacio lost her best friend, Marcus Solloway, 30, in the crash.

Astacio said they were being chased along County Club Boulevard early Saturday by another driver who fled the scene.

"It came out nowhere. Kinda started taunting Marcus," Astacio said, recounting the scary moments.

"He was weaving back in and out of lanes. He would get in front of Marcus and brake hard where Marcus would also have to brake hard to not hit him."

She said a 2004 white Monte Carlo started chasing her and her friends in their car, at one point even hitting them.

"I felt it, and of course, it scared me."

Astacio admits Solloway started following the car to get the driver's information, but soon, they changed their minds.

"This wasn't a situation we needed to be in, so he tried to go around the car, which is when we hit that curve and he lost control of the car. He wasn't racing anybody."

A neighbor said she heard a person in the other car shouting frantically after the crash.

"He was yelling 'get back in the car, get back in the car,' and he jumped in and sped off," Stephanie Furmato said.

Astacio disputes the police report that they were racing. "I do remember going over the media. I remember waking up in the car. My brother Pat was in the back and he was screaming."

She said she doesn't remember much from the crash and she is grateful for that.

"I was able to move a little bit and I was talking to Pat. I was trying to talk to Marcus and I looked over and I saw him, and you could just tell there was nothing happening," Astacio said.

Solloway died at the scene.

"He didn't deserve this," Astacio said, and she wants the other driver to know about it.

"He is going to get what's coming to him."

Solloway's half-sister said via phone she is shocked and she doesn't believe her brother was street racing.

Police are asking anyone with information on the identity of the driver that left the scene to contact the Cape Coral Police Department at (239) 574-3223. You can also submit an anonymous tip. Go to www.capecops.com/tips or text a tip- text CCPD+"Your Message" to CRIMES (274637). Finally, you can call Crimestoppers at 1-800-780-TIPS.