Caroline Gomez (rear) of Covering Kids & Families helps Maria Aguilar Sanchez of Milwaukee sign up for the Affordable Care Act last month at Centro Hispano High School on S. 36th and W. Mitchell streets in Milwaukee. Credit: Calvin Mattheis for the Journal Sentinel

By of the

Latinos, who account for more than one out of six residents in the city of Milwaukee, signed up for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act at a lower rate than hoped in the first open enrollment period a year ago.

The Milwaukee Enrollment Network, a coalition of groups working to help people sign up for coverage, aims to do better in the current enrollment period, which ends Feb. 15.

"This year has been going pretty smoothly," said Caroline Gomez, a health care outreach specialist for Covering Kids & Families, a nonprofit group that is part of the coalition. "It's just getting enough people to the events."

Latinos historically have had the highest uninsured rate of any racial or ethnic group nationally, with almost one in three under 65 not having coverage.

Many of them work in low-wage jobs that don't provide health benefits and would be eligible for coverage under the Affordable Care Act. But increasing awareness of the options available under the law has been a challenge.

At the end of the first open enrollment period, roughly half of the Latino adults eligible for subsidized coverage knew of the online marketplaces where health insurance is available, compared with almost three out of four whites, according to the Commonwealth Fund.

Covering Kids & Families and the Milwaukee Enrollment Network have been drawing on Spanish radio, a community newsletter and word-of-mouth to reach people this year.

"Word-of-mouth is huge in the Latino community," Gomez said.

Covering Kids & Families, which has a federal grant to help people sign up for coverage, has been working with Centro Hispano, a nonprofit that provides social services for Latinos, as part of the push to increase enrollment.

The initiative has included sessions each Saturday where people can meet with application counselors as well as insurance agents and brokers. The sessions, held at 1645 S. 36th St., will start up again on Jan. 10, after a break for the holidays, and run through Feb. 14, the day before the enrollment period ends.

An estimated 6.3% of the state's population is Latino, compared with 17.1% nationally, according to the U.S. Census Bureau. But Latinos account for 17.3% of the city of Milwaukee's population of 599,000 and 14% of Milwaukee County's population of 956,000.

Dane, Racine, Kenosha and Brown counties also have large concentrations of Latinos.

Nationally, about three out of four Latinos — and more than nine out of 10 Latino children — are U.S. citizens, according to a brief by the Kaiser Family Foundation. About one in four is a legal or illegal immigrant.

Immigrants, legal and illegal, account for an estimated 46% of uninsured Latinos.

Illegal immigrants are not eligible for coverage under the Affordable Care Act — either for Medicaid programs, such as BadgerCare Plus in Wisconsin, or for the federal subsidies available to buy health plans sold on the federal marketplace.

Legal immigrants have a five-year waiting period to be eligible for Medicaid, though children are eligible in some states, including Wisconsin. But they can buy health plans on the marketplaces and receive federal subsidies without the waiting period.

The subsidies, in the form of tax credits, are available for families with incomes below 400% of the federal poverty threshold — $95,400 for a family of four — who are not eligible for affordable health insurance through an employer.

In Wisconsin, the uninsured rate for Latinos is well below the national average: 24% of Latinos under the age of 65 were uninsured in the state, compared with 32% nationally before the Affordable Care Act.

Exactly how many Latinos have gained coverage nationally in the past year isn't known.

But a survey by the Commonwealth Fund found that the uninsured rate among Latino adults fell to 23% from 36%. The margin of error was plus or minus 4 percentage points. Other studies also have found a decline in the percentage of uninsured Latinos during the first open enrollment period.

The gains included Latinos who primarily or solely speak Spanish — historically one of the groups within Latino communities with the highest uninsured rates, according to the Commonwealth Fund survey. At the end of the first enrollment period, three out of 10 were uninsured, down from almost five out of 10 in 2013.

Still, language remains a barrier: Latinos who predominantly speak Spanish were significantly less aware of the marketplaces than those who primarily speak English.

The health systems in Milwaukee and Sixteenth Street Community Health Centers have application counselors who speak Spanish but primarily are helping their own patients. And few insurance agents certified to sell health plans sold the marketplaces speak Spanish.

Heather Dummer Combs, project manager for the Milwaukee Enrollment Network, said there is a shortage of application counselors who speak Spanish.

But three of the nine application counselors at the City of Milwaukee Health Department speak Spanish, and its outreach efforts have included staffing the Southside Health Center.

Immigration issues, such as when a spouse is an illegal immigrant, present another challenge.

"There is always some concern about how much information is shared and with whom," Gomez said.

The federal government has said that information will not be shared with the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service.

Overall, though, enrollment is going more smoothly this year, with fewer glitches with the website and better response time from call centers, Combs said.

"This is all new," Combs said. "It is only the second year, and we all are learning as we go."