Political junkies like to talk about “wave” elections, in which one party makes massive gains and overturns the existing power dynamic. National Journal reports that the odds of such a wave election, in favor of Republicans, are increasing for the upcoming 2014 elections. The chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee, which funds House races, is even more confident. Is this just a case of political operatives engaging in trash talk? By looking at polling trends in the upcoming House and Senate elections, we can start to gauge how big the Republican gains might be.

THE HOUSE

In 2010, in the wake of a bitter legislative battle over the Affordable Care Act, Republicans gained sixty-three seats in the House and took control of the chamber. That year, public opinion looked like this:

This chart shows an average across many polls of House ballot preference, which is defined using the “generic Congressional ballot” question: Will you vote for a Democrat or a Republican this November? The vertical axis shows how many more respondents preferred Democrats (D) over Republicans (R), or vice versa. In the closing weeks of a campaign, the generic ballot question does a good job of predicting how national elections will turn out. Along the way, it can give a glimpse into how public opinion shifts. The yellow zone runs from January 1st until mid-August. There are two lessons here: First, a preference for ousting the Democratic majority was apparent throughout nearly all of 2010. Second, opinion shifted further toward Republicans in August—right about where we are now in the current campaign cycle. The vertical range of the yellow zone shows a confidence interval, where the poll average was for ninety-five per cent of the time—in this case, between D+0.4% and R+6.0%. In mid-August, voter opinion moved out of the yellow zone and headed toward the actual election outcome, a Republican popular-vote win by 6.8 per cent. These results show that a wave can indeed be discerned in advance. If 2010 and other past elections are any indication, we should be nearly at the point where we can see a hint of the November outcome. But, as it turns out, this year’s polls look a little different:

The biggest difference from 2010 is that, for much of the past twelve months, voters have preferred Democrats by a slim margin. Two exceptions occurred: During the government shutdown, Democrats were favored by up to eight per cent; and with the rollout of the Affordable Care Act, Republicans were favored by up to four per cent. But for most of 2014, voter sentiment has stayed in a narrow range, favoring the Democrats by a median of 1.1 per cent. Last week, the data crept outside the yellow band of statistical variation, just as it did in the 2010 graph. The change seems to be real and not a random fluctuation in the data. A separate measure of the national mood, President Obama’s job approval minus his job disapproval, has also turned downward:

There is still uncertainty about what will happen on Election Day, and public opinion can still move in either direction. However, even if Democrats win the popular vote, partisan gerrymandering gave Republicans a built-in advantage of about fourteen seats starting in 2012, and Republicans are nearly certain to keep control of the House. If today’s conditions held, likely outcomes for Republicans range from a loss of a seat to a gain of eight seats. Starting from their current two hundred and thirty-four, Republicans have an outside chance of matching the two hundred and forty-two seats they won in 2010. But holding an existing majority does not constitute a wave—it is a maintenance of the status quo. Considering that it is usual for the President’s opposition party to gain seats in midterm elections, the potential movement in the House shouldn’t be much more than a small ripple.

THE SENATE

The real action will be in the Senate. Thanks to the fact that Senate terms are six years long, many Senators are defending seats they won in 2008, a banner year for Democrats, who gained eight Senate seats to end up with a fifty-nine to forty-one majority. Typically, after six years, any two-term President encounters the likelihood of losing seats. As such, the Democrats’ majority is very much at risk. To estimate where the battle for Senate control is on any given day, I calculated the average outcome based on public-opinion polls. For each Senate race, I took all available polls and calculated a median and an estimated uncertainty. This allows me to calculate a win probability for each race. In many individual races, such as Louisiana and North Carolina, it is not possible to call a front-runner with certainty. For this reason, I calculated the average outcome for all possible combinations. This leads to a highly accurate snapshot of the race.

According to these calculations, if the election were held today, Democrats (and the two Independents who caucus with them) would end up with forty-nine or fifty seats, for a loss of five or six seats. In a fifty-fifty split, Vice-President Biden would break ties in favor of the Democrats. Therefore control of the Senate is on the razor’s edge, and Republicans are at almost exactly even odds for taking over. To date, this 2014 Senate estimate has not moved much, staying within a narrow range:

The last time any national question was this close was the Kerry v. Bush Presidential race, in 2004. In such a tight scenario, public opinion would have to shift across the board by only two percentage points to create a clear advantage for either side. But based on what’s happened so far in 2014, it’s doubtful that we will see that much of a swing—we may be in for a suspenseful fall campaign. With margins this tight, what matters is not a wave but individual Senate campaigns. At the moment, polls indicate that six Senate races are within two percentage points or less: Arkansas, Colorado, Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana, and North Carolina. To win control, Republicans must win four of these races. As a result, state-specific details such as Iowan Joni Ernst’s views on impeachment and the United Nations’ Agenda 21, a third-party candidacy in North Carolina, and Mitch McConnell’s job-approval ratings in Kentucky may determine whether President Obama gets any judicial nominees approved in his last two years of office. Those local splashes, not a big wave, will shape who controls next year’s Senate.