MWV's new offices have gained the highest award from a national environmental ranking group, a recognition that the company hopes will set the tone for its major development projects, such as Summers Corner at East Edisto (a model of which sits on the table).

The fourth floor of the boxy glass and brick building at 201 Sigma Drive is more than just another Class A office space.

It's home to the community development and land management arm of MWV (also known as Mead Westvaco), a company that could build more new homes across the Lowcountry than anyone else in the coming decades.

East Edisto, an emerging mixed-use community that stretches across 72,000 acres from the outskirts of Charleston to Summerville, is just one of its major initiatives. Nexton, a 4,500-acre mixed-use development where this new office sits at the northwest corner of U.S. Highway 17 and Interstate 26, is another.

Anyone who knows anything about the Lowcountry's growth is well aware of the mixed feelings that such big developments can stir up.

So that's just one major reason why MWV felt compelled to get this office building - and its interior -right.

The office is designed as more than a comfortable, functional work space - it's designed to show the promise of new development, if proper attention is paid to the environment and if the details are done right.

That's why MWV is proud to note that the space recently received four Green Globes from the Portland, Oregon-based Green Building Initiative, the first South Carolina building to earn that award.

Ken Seeger, president of MWV's community development and land management, says the company long has led in the area of sustainability, appearing for 11 years on the Dow Jones Sustainability World Index, at least four years before it got into the development business. The company felt its new office had to "walk the talk."

So what does an office space on the cutting edge of sustainability look like?

There's a lot of natural light, for one. During a recent visit on an overcast afternoon, there was no need for any artificial light, though they still clicked on via motion sensors as people entered a room. Even interior walls are glass to let the sunlight as far into the space as possible. And one can't see it, but the glass has special coatings to insulate the interior.

Many of its sustainable features wouldn't be noticed by a visitor, such as a heating and cooling system timed to power down at night, special recycling bins for compostable food and dead batteries, and a white noise generator designed to provide acoustic comfort.

The most memorable space is the employee canteen, which resembles more of a lobby in a swanky contemporary hotel.

The building was designed by LS3P architects Rich Gowe and Brian Wurst, while the MWV upfit was done by Cameron Wilson, Whitney Grove and Brian Leounis with the same firm. Sarah Corbitt with LS3P oversaw its Green Globes nomination.

Its exterior is not a new Lowcountry landmark: Its mix of brick segments separating large vertical runs of glass is handsome but not memorable. It does reflect Nexton's architectural style of being new but not foreign - something that doesn't necessarily mimic or clash with the Lowcountry's familiar architectural traditions.

And the Green Globe recognition didn't even factor in the sustainable steps taken outside the building, says Bill Mallery, MWV's director of real estate development.

Those include stormwater ponds used for irrigation, efficient LED street lights, designated parking spaces for high occupancy and high efficiency vehicles, small oak trees, plug-in spots for electric cars, and even an asphalt additive that allowed the parking lot to be paved at a temperature cooler by about 100 degrees.

The office is only part of what is taking shape at Nexton, which also is selling itself as the area's first gigabit community - one with fiber optic cables that allow far faster Internet access. A hotel and an ale house have opened next door, and the South Carolina Research Authority dedicated its new office recently. More than a dozen apartment buildings are framed out in some stage of completion, and a new park is being built nearby.

But MWV's offices, which cover the fourth floor of the 100,000-square-foot building, were designed to lead the way.

"We wanted to demonstrate what we thought the potential of Nexton was going forward," Seeger says. "This first building needed to put a stake in the ground and demonstrate that. It will encourage others to follow suit and do something similar."

Getting development right involves hundreds of small decisions ranging from financing to engineering to architecture to government relations to urbanism to environmentalism to fill-in-the-blank.

Few developers ever get to work with the jumbo-sized canvasses that MWV has,canvasses that also will make it harder to make excuses for not getting it all right.

"I think we all share a desire to leave the planet a better place than we found it," Seeger says. "I know that's open to interpretation, but we are trying to raise the bar."

EDITOR'S NOTE: An earlier version of this story contained an incomplete listing of the building’s design team.

Reach Robert Behre at 937-5771.