Our View: Financial woes, competition and accreditation issues are making it difficult to address Arizona's most pressing health-care issues.

Voters approved a major facelift in 2014 for Maricopa Medical Center. Construction plans are now sitting on a shelf. (Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic) Story Highlights The rapid growth of cancer-patient options have created a highly fractured cancer-treatment market

MIHS’s future is so uncertain that the $935 million bond issue passed by voters last November is basically assigned to a shelf

Between accreditation issues and financial woes, one of Arizona’s most serious health-care challenges has been rendered even more critical: addressing the state’s serious lack of well-trained doctors

The perils facing Arizona's health-care industry in the new, post-Obamacare era are equal-opportunity scary:

Hospitals that choose to merge into bigger, more dynamic health-care providers face the uncertainty of whether their massive financial investments will match market expectations.

The ambitious, new $100 million University of Arizona Cancer Center opened in partnership between U of A and Dignity Health. It anticipates treating 60,000 patients each year within a decade, twice the patient total of Scottsdale’s Mayo Clinic.

Unfortunately, there are plenty of cancer patients to go around. But the rapid growth of cancer-patient options, including community-based cancer centers, have created a highly fractured cancer-treatment market in Arizona, as medical writer Ken Alltucker recently reported in The Republic. With almost every major health-care player investing tens of millions of dollars in cancer treatment, the prospects for someone guessing wrong could be high.

Meanwhile, standing pat isn’t such a pleasant place to be, either.

With no big partnership opportunities on the horizon and an uncertain patient base, the Maricopa Integrated Health System – the county’s safety-net hospital – is struggling with real mission uncertainty.

The system’s historic core patient group, the county’s poor and mostly uninsured residents, increasingly is gaining coverage through the state’s expanded indigent health-care program, AHCCCS. Coverage has given those patients options. Many of them are exercising those options at other hospitals.

MIHS lost $24.8 million in fiscal 2014, losses that the system’s chief executive officer Stephen Purves attributed to the phasing out of the state's safety net care pool as part of Medicaid expansion. Critics have savaged the MIHS board for poor management, but it is hard to balance the books when $50 million evaporates.

Purves and other hospital executives have increased efficiency to close the deficit, but they're looking to the Legislature for help.

Since the 1990s, the federal government has sent Arizona and other states something called "disproportionate share" money earmarked to help hospitals that treat large numbers of the poor and uninsured. The state has always kept most of the money for itself, sending $4.2 million to MIHS.

It has become a disproportionate share. In fiscal 2015 and 2016, MIHS expects to certify $219 million in uncompensated costs; for which the feds will reimburse almost $151 million. Under the current formula, the Legislature would siphon off $142 million, leaving $8.4 million for the safety-net hospital.

Hospital executives make a good case for a better share, but the Legislature faces its own challenges. It's hard to give up money it has come to count on.

The moral of this hospital-industry lesson? For other hospital systems, market consolidation and creative partnerships appear to be the way forward. The new cancer centers are examples of the latter. The year’s most dramatic example of the former was the University of Arizona Health Network’s $1 billion merger in February with Banner Health.

That expands Banner's footprint and shores up what had become a creaky hospital-affiliated network in Tucson. But it also raised other concerns back in Phoenix.

UA's College of Medicine-Phoenix hit a bump on its journey to full accreditation.

The Banner Health merger left insufficient decision-making power in the hands of the Phoenix med school’s dean, and too much in Banner’s board room, the accrediting agency warned UA President Ann Weaver Hart.

UA-Phoenix Medical School Dean Stuart Flynn expresses confidence that they will get the line-of-authority bugs worked out. But between the UA’s accreditation issues and MIHS’s financial woes, one of Arizona’s most serious health-care challenges has been rendered even more critical: addressing the state’s serious lack of well-trained doctors. The hospital systems are two of the state’s most important training grounds for new doctors.

MIHS’s future is so uncertain that the $935 million bond issue passed by voters last November is basically assigned to a shelf. It's covering past purchases of phone and tech equipment, but no new construction is on the drawing board.

What, exactly, can the hospital spend all that money on if it doesn’t know what it needs to be? When a public institution cannot spend voter-approved bond money as intended, that spells serious uncertainty.

But that is the nature of the health-care industry today. It is mostly true everywhere. But the future is undeniably murky here.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1EImwEY