The people of Erie are facing a serious problem. Despite having a democratically elected board of trustees, behind the curtain is a man who seems to be pulling the strings for big oil and gas. He is neither elected nor an Erie resident. Therefore, he does not have to experience the consequences of his recommendations and decisions firsthand. Erie Town Administrator A.J. Krieger is the man of whom I speak. He has a somewhat checkered past. For instance, he was suspended as city manager by the town of Ferguson, MO. The mayor stated, "The direction the council wanted to follow was often questioned and not followed by Krieger. He was not a good fit for the community." As we will see, "not following" the town's direction is a reoccurring pattern for Mr. Krieger. When he later relocated to Northglenn, CO, he was fired after only 16 months on the job.

In 2013, Mr Krieger was asked by the industry to sit on a panel for what are called the Oil and Gas Awards, an annual event where the industry tells itself of its environmental achievements. Yet, as we know, the oil industry, using powerful insider lobbying, has exempted itself from the major environmental laws of this country, chief among them, the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act, and the Safe Drinking Water Act. As a result, people in communities threatened by the invasion of the oil and gas industry find themselves unable to protect their health, safety, and well-being. Erie is one of those communities.

Advertisement

Recently, the Erie Board of Trustees voted to hire an attorney to help the town negotiate a new agreement, MOU, between itself and the oil and gas industry. Mr Krieger's top choice was Dave Neslin. Previously, Neslin had headed the COGCC, the state's oil and gas regulatory agency. He left his position at the COGCC to advocate and represent the oil and gas industry as an attorney with the corporate law firm of Davis Graham and Stubbs. So the question is why Krieger picked an oil industry attorney to represent the city in negotiations with other oil industry attorneys sitting on the other side of the table. Is this not a perfect example of the fox guarding the hen house? Thankfully, the board narrowly voted in favor of a different firm to negotiate the town's MOU, one that didn't show a conflict of interest by concurrently representing oil and gas companies and mineral right owners within our town.

In 2005 and 2012, solidification proposals were brought before the town, but never materialized due to lack of town support. According to the impact study included in the application, the solidification plant would add another 60 heavy-truck trips to the existing 858 trips to the Front Range Landfill. Add to this that Encana's "HUB" directly northeast of the landfill will add another 200 truck trips per day, and we start to see a trucking hell created before our very eyes. Then, too, Dan Grudgel, manager of Waste Connections at FRLF told residents at a community meeting back in October that if this solidification proposal were denied, they would move the plant to another one of their seven locations in the state. Despite this nightmare scenario, at the strong urging of Mr. Krieger, the solidification plant will be presented before the planning commission and ultimately voted on by the board of trustees.

Erie residents have long complained that there are not enough grocery stores, retail spots, or restaurants within town limits. With 10,000 approved homes ready to be built, one would think these items would become a top priority for this "family community." However, when we dissect what the town administrator is actively pushing for, we find that the commercial interests he thinks best suit Erie are more pollution and truck traffic from heavy industrial activities. Surely Mr. Krieger coudn't be acting to make Erie more of a dumping ground for toxic corporate waste than it already is, could he?

The residents of Erie need to stand up and be heard. Our health, safety, and property values are at stake. The industry counts on the fact that most people pay little attention to local politics. It's time we showed them that we are on to their plans and that we will not allow this or anything like it to destroy our town and it's reputation any further. Please let the planning commission hear your voice loud and clear on April 15 at 6:30pm.

Kyle Roth lives in Erie.