Bonnie Finley

Bonnie Finley

Website: bonniefinley.com

Age: 60

Family: Married to Kurt Finley, 38 years; two married sons, three grandsons.

How long have you lived in Longmont? 60 years

Professional background: CACI manager, member involvement, 15 years

Political/community experience: Serving on National League of Cities' Community and Economic Development Steering Committee, Longmont Area Economic Council, Longmont Planning & Zoning Commission, Museum Advisory Board, Longmont Cable Trust Board, Longmont Sister Cities Board.

Education: BA Political Science, University of Colorado

Name a person you admire and explain why?: Theodore Roosevelt, who said, "Nobody cares how much you know until they know how much you care."

Marijuana dispensaries are currently banned within Longmont city limits, yet legal in Colorado. If elected, would you want to keep or repeal the ban? Why or why not?

We have three stores in the city, located on county property. Yet we aren't receiving any of the tax revenue and are experiencing all of the side effects of its use. I think we would be foolish not to look at the revenue and cost of having dispensaries in Longmont. Let's look at the data and then decide. I would regulate it heavily and only allow stores in areas away from homes and schools.

Advertisement

In May, City Council directed staff to research funding options for an affordable housing goal of an additional 50 and 100 dwelling units in Longmont annually. Funding options discussed included a sales tax, density bonuses for developers and increasing building fees on some construction. If elected, would you keep the council's current direction on affordable housing or would you propose a different course? Why?

There are three types of affordable housing. The first is home ownership for first-time homebuyers. There is a lack of this type of housing and one reason is the Colorado Construction Defects Law. This law has made it prohibitive to build condos and townhouses — the most affordable type of housing. Under this law, trial attorneys file frivolous lawsuits against builders before development is finished, claiming defects. Several cities passed ordinances giving builders the right to repair defects before litigation is pursued, requiring the majority of homeowners in a homeowner's association to approve of any lawsuits, and builders be allowed to offer monetary settlements to homeowners in lieu of repairs. I am proposing we do this as well. The second type of affordable housing is rental stock for our workforce. Rents have skyrocketed due to lack of inventory. We are making progress and have around 1,600 new rental units that will be built by the end of 2016. The last type of affordable housing is for those in our community who, because of some type of disability, will never be able to afford to live here without some type of assistance. I would like to explore a way these Longmont residents can be first in line. We cannot afford to house the entire county's low income residents.

Question 3: What is the most important thing you want to accomplish during your term if elected?

I want to see a Longmont where everyone who wants a job can find one. This will only happen if we continue to have a stable, pro-business environment that encourages companies to grow or locate here to utilize all our amazing assets like the fastest Internet service with NextLight, cheap energy, great water and an educated workforce.