Sioux Falls, SD

Sioux Falls has become very diverse over the past few years, but what is it about the area that attracts so many from all over the world?

Freedom is something Bhutan-native Deo Rai cherishes. He fled to Sioux Falls in 2012 after he and his family were evicted from Bhutan, and lived as refugees in Nepal for 20 years.

Today, he works as an employment specialists at Lutheran Social Services, helping people who have left the same situation.

"The thing that I love working here is I know the sufferings, that I can say very honestly how the refugees spend their life in the refugee camp," Rai said.

Settling in a foreign country is something he knows all too well. It comes with struggles and challenges of learning the native language, and adapting to the culture.

"I can just like know their feelings and sufferings and I know how to reach them," Rai said.

Lutheran Social Services has a resettlement program that helps refugees get on their feet. Program officials say the goal is to make newcomers feel more at home in the state.

"We help to greet them at the airport and then get them settled into their apartment or housing immediately upon arrival," Rebecca Kiesow-Knudsen said.

LSS officials provide people with employment, English language training, occasional transportation, and other basic essentials. People come from everywhere to use the services, migrating from countries all over the world.

"We've reset a lot of Bhutanese and Burmese. We've also seen populations of Iraqis, Sudanese, and Congolese,” Kiesow-Knudsen.

About 500 refugees moved to South Dakota this year. More than 300 are living right here in Sioux Falls.

But what is it about Sioux Falls that keeps people coming?

Rai said he googled the city before moving. He found the state had great employment opportunities, a cheap cost of living, and an overall better quality of life. But what was most important to him was how safe the city is.

"I had my terrible life in the refugee camp. My first priority is safety," Rai said.

Some refugee parents come to Hawthorne's Elementary School's Parent University class to learn more about American culture. They learn how to say hello in different languages and they practice art therapy.

Sudan native Celina Laguba left her country to escape the dangers of war 7 years ago. She resettled in Sioux Falls and couldn't be happier.

"It's safe, and I feel like I'm home and people are so friendly," Laguba said.

Laguba didn't speak English when she first came to the city. She became fluent thanks to Lutheran Social Services' English Language Program.

Her favorite thing about the town is the quality school systems for her children. But she still says there's no place like Sudan.

"Sudan is always going to be my country. And I love, love to be home, if there's peace of course. I miss my parents, my siblings, all my friends," Laguba said.

But she said it's too dangerous to go back home now. Her children's' safety is her number one priority.

"Being here, it means more. Not just me, but to my kids, I don't want them to go through what I went through. I thank God that living here is more peaceful than being back home,” Laguba said.

Laguba said one day she hopes to return to her birth country when the war subsides. But for now Sioux Falls is the safest place to live for her and many others refugees.

Lutheran Social Services officials said there is an estimated 15 million refugees in the US. 40 percent of those are children.

Eye on KELOLAND {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.