Some 1,100 Marin residents could be forced to travel outside the county to receive medical care beginning Jan. 1 unless a contract dispute between an insurance company and a business organization of independent physicians is resolved.

The disagreement involves insurer Anthem Blue Cross and Meritage Medical Network, which represents 381 physicians in Marin — 88 primary care doctors and 293 specialists. Anthem contracts with Meritage for treatment of its health maintenance organization customers.

When contacted, Anthem and Meritage provided dueling versions of which organization is responsible for the impasse.

“During regular contract negotiations, we were not able to come to an agreement with Anthem,” said Marcy Norenius, Meritage’s director of accountable care. “Anthem is asking for a rather large cut in reimbursements.”

Dr. Mark Wexman, a Larkspur cardiologist serving as the interim chief executive of Meritage, said, “While Anthem’s premiums for patients are still increasing, they are trying to pay physicians less.”

Norenius added, “We are still in discussions with them so there is still a chance we will come to an agreement for next year and potentially beyond. But per state requirements, Anthem sent out their 60-day notice of termination to all the patients that we share.”

Notices have been sent to the affected customers, as required by the state’s Department of Managed Health Care whenever an agreement has not been reached within 60 days of a contract expiring.

Anthem spokesman Darrel Ng told a different story.

“Meritage took the affirmative step to terminate the contract,” Ng said. “With no action by Meritage, they would have still accepted and seen Anthem members on Jan. 2.”

Ng declined to comment on whether Anthem had asked Meritage to accept reimbursement cuts.

“We have contractual language that prohibits us from discussing the terms of a contract while it is still in force, which it is until the end of the year,” Ng said.

Wexman responded, “Contract termination is how contract negotiations begin for all health plan contracts. We terminated our old Anthem agreement with the expectation that we could come to a reasonable new agreement with them. The last proposal from Anthem was an unreasonable, double-digit, physician payment reduction and our physician network cannot absorb that large of a cut.”

One Marin resident who received a notice of cancellation told the Independent Journal that she was pregnant, and had not been able to find a Marin pediatrician willing to take her insurance due to her Meritage coverage ending.

Advertisement

She said Anthem told her to file a “continuity of care” application to request to continue seeing her medical providers until giving birth. Health plans provide limited continuity of care for a variety of reasons including pregnancy, acute or serious chronic medical conditions, pre-scheduled surgery and care of children under the age of 3. The woman said that after she gives birth, she would likely have to travel outside the county for health care due to the contract problem.

Anthem’s health maintenance organization plan is not among the five plans offered by Covered California under the Affordable Care Act. Kaiser Permanente and Western Health Advantage are the only two plans offering HMO coverage via Covered California.