City has advertised positions for a month, but no one has applied

The city of Longmont began advertising at the beginning of October that it has eight openings for citizens to serve on its Police Professional Standards Review Panel.

The panel reviews internal investigations of police officers by the department for thoroughness, fairness, objectivity and completeness and makes recommendations to the public safety chief.

So far no one has applied.

Cmdr. Jeff Satur said the recruitment process was further hampered by the 2013 flood that struck the area and the resulting clean-up and damaged infrastructure. The department chose not to recruit members last year. The panel has a full complement right now, but their terms have already been extended, so an entirely new crop is being sought.

"The flooding really threw a monkey wrench into the rotation," he said. "We would have done a process that year but as you can imagine we had tons of other stuff going on."

Satur said the terms are staggered so the panel keeps a mix of experienced members and newcomers. The interruption in the process last year most likely means that a new rotation will need to be started, with some new members only serving one year terms.

How to apply Drop off applications at the Safety and Justice Center, 225 Kimbark Street or call Sgt. Tim Miller 303-651-8513 for more information. Applicants can also drop applications off at the Longmont City Manager's Office at 350 Kimbark Street or call 303-651-8601. Applications are available online at http://bit.ly/1xLcxGE and must be received by Nov. 21.

He said potential members fill out an application and are later invited to appear before the city manager, police officers and current panel members to discuss why they want to serve on the panel.

Department policy dictates that five citizens sit on the board along with one police supervisor, two police officers and one civilian employee of the police department. The city manager selects and can remove citizen members of the panel, who serve two year terms beginning in January that can be extended if there is a vacancy yet to be filled.

Satur said the number of citizens actually sitting on the panel for any given case can vary because of conflicting schedules or other unforeseen circumstances but the department strives to have at least five civilian members.

""We are always aware that the idea behind this is to have community involvement so we err on the side of having enough community members to weigh in on the process," he said. "We wouldn't do it with just one community member, because having several is important to giving it credibility."

He said potential citizen members of the panel should be at least 21-years-old and have some "life experience" because of the complexity of some of the cases. They can't have a felony records or any misdemeanor convictions in the last five years. City officials or those with family members on the force are likewise ineligible to serve.

Citizen members train to have a working knowledge of department policies and procedures, professional standards and disciplinary processes and self-defense techniques and use of force policies. Members are also required to accompany two separate police officers on two separate shifts.

Diane Groff served two terms on the review panel and estimates she worked on about 50 cases, including officer-related shootings.

She said when an investigation occurs, information is compiled and members are notified of when it is ready to be reviewed, adding that volunteers need a flexible schedule because investigations can either not happen at all or come in bursts of several at a time.

"I remember sitting in various investigation rooms and sitting for several hours at a time and going through everything, keeping my own notes and coming to my own decisions," she said. "You could then collectively have a conversation on your observations."

Although she wouldn't discuss how the panel ruled or the nature of any cases, she said serving on the board was a rewarding experience.

"A lot of respect is giving to the citizen's perspective," she said, adding that she has a great deal of respect for the police.

Current member Elaine Fowler has served on the panel for several years and has worked on about 12 cases. She said cases range from officer-involved shootings and citizen complaints of mistreatment to an officer not filling out paperwork properly or running personal errands while on the clock.

Fowler said she has both sustained investigations against officers and exonerated them, adding that officers are less likely to "goof off" on the job because they know they will be held accountable for their actions. She declined to the ruling on a specific case.

"We don't always clear them," she said. "It varies. It serves its purpose."

Satur said a formal investigation into an officer tends to first go through the Professional Standards Unit — essentially internal affairs — then to a sergeant and commander, all of whom can make recommendations, sustain allegations against officers or ask for a more thorough investigation before the investigation moves along to the review panel.

"Their job at that point is to review the investigation for thoroughness and fairness," he said. "You hear about the police policing themselves. In this case we have citizens who have the opportunity to say 'Wait, this isn't right or you need to look at this.'"

Satur said the department averages 12-14 formal investigations into officers in any given year. They range from off-duty misbehavior such as DUIs or domestic violence to allegations of excessive force and officer-involved shootings. They can also be something as minor as an officer backing into a pole.

"We've had officers who've had DUIs. Not a lot of officers, I'd like to point that out," Satur said. "Relationship issues, domestic violence. It's been a long time since we've had one of those. It's very infrequent."

Criminal allegations against an officer warrant a separate investigation which are completed before any PSU investigation takes place. More informal complaints, like a person who says an officer was rude during a traffic stop, usually fall under the purview of an officer's immediate supervisor, Satur said.

"Those are usually handled by a sergeant," Satur said. "Many officers carry recorders — and we're looking at video cameras — a lot of times when we say there is a recording of an event, that ends it."

Satur said officer-involved shootings result in a mandatory investigation, as do excessive force allegations or any other serious misconduct. The Boulder County Critical Investigation Team, made up of a county-wide mix of law enforcement officials, investigates all officer-caused deaths.

Longmont police conducted two professional standards investigations in 2013 and one so far in 2014. All three resulted in exoneration of the officer or were otherwise not sustained. One of the investigations included a May, 2013 officer-involved shooting. The officer was exonerated in that case.

A 43-year-old Longmont woman filed a lawsuit earlier this year alleging excessive force by four Longmont police officers during an arrest in 2013. That case is still pending. Satur said there was no excessive force complaint made against the officers in that case.

Although the department declined to release the exact nature of the investigations, the professional standards unit conducted five investigations in 2012, all of them initiated internally rather than from outside complaints. All five were eventually sustained.

Twenty investigations took place in 2013. Eight of the investigations arose from members of the public. Overall, the PSU closed four (because of resignations, withdrawal of the complaint or a lack of information), determined two unfounded, cancelled one and exonerated one officer in another. One investigation remains open and the remainder were all sustained, which means that investigators determined there had been a policy violation.

So far this year, the PSU has sustained two investigations initiated internally and exonerated an officer from a complaint that originated from a member of the public.

How other local agencies handle citizen complaints Louisville: The process is fairly informal and usually dealt with by a supervisor. The department receives about five-10 complaints a year. It is looking to adopt a more formal, transparent process. Serious complaints are rare. Firestone: Formal complaints are investigated and reviewed by senior command staff. All such complaints receive a written disposition signed off on by chief. Department receives about two complaints a year. Frederick: Complaints usually handled by a sergeant who speaks with the complainant. All complaints are documented and followed through. If it is determined something was mishandled, the chief will issue and apology.

Other local agencies handle complaints differently.

Boulder County Sheriff Joe Pelle said his office publishes information every year in an effort to be transparent about complaints and problems within the office.

Sheriff's office records show that in 2013, internal affairs conducted 42 investigations into the operations, jail and support services divisions. Investigators concluded that 18 were unfounded, 15 were substantiated, three were exonerated and two were inconclusive. One was substantiated in part and another was substantiated in part and exonerated in part. One remained ongoing and another was considered confidential.

Pelle said the sheriff's office doesn't utilize a civilian disciplinary board or review panel as many police departments do.

"The major difference between a police department and a sheriff's office is that the sheriff is elected by and accountable to the people directly," Pelle said. "I want ultimate control over our disciplinary process and will not delegate it to someone else."

Pelle said his office contracts with professional mediation services for some cases and the satisfaction rate has been high with the process.

Satur said he believes the process Longmont uses is fair because members of the community are involved in how complaints against officers are dealt with.

"The chief gives great value to the things citizens say in these meetings," Satur said. "We want our officers to do a good job and if they mess up, they mess up. At our agency, we hold them accountable for that."

The review panel started about 18 years ago, a product of community input and a police desire to be more transparent and accessible to the public, according to Public Safety Chief Mike Butler.

Butler said the program allows citizens access to internal personnel matters regarding official misconduct, an area largely off limits to public scrutiny.

He said the program is one of several that the Longmont Police Department have in place in order to improve transparency and accessibility and facilitate a "robust and vibrant" relationship between the community and the police department.

"Democracy doesn't work unless people truly want to stand up and ask questions, but also follow through and be part of the solution," he said.

John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@times-call.com or twitter.com/jonbearwithme.