Topics: Circumcision, New York City, Life News

One is a decision with wide community implications; the other concerns just one little boy. But in two different cases this week in two different states, the complicated and contentious legal and ethical issues around circumcision were once again raised – and the decisions once again sided with those in favor of the practice.

In New York City on Tuesday, Mayor Bill de Blasio’s administration revealed plans to ease restrictions on a controversial circumcision ritual practiced by some Orthodox communities known as metzitzah b’peh, or oral suction. The ritual, in which the mohel sucks the blood from a circumcised infant’s penis, came under tougher regulation during de Blasio’s predecessor Mike Bloomberg’s administration. As New York magazine reports, between 2000 and 2012, eleven babies reportedly contracted herpes – and two died – after undergoing the ritual. Since 2012, parents who wish to have the ritual performed have be required to sign consent forms, a policy that has been difficult to enforce. The Observer says that under the old rule, the city received exactly one consent form. And in the meantime, it provoked outrage, and a lawsuit, from religious leaders in the community.

Under the new policy, the consent forms will be done away with, but leaders will agree to contact health officials if a baby contracts herpes, and to ban any mohel found to have the same herpes strain as the baby from performing the rite ever again. In a statement, the mayor’s office said that “While the de Blasio Administration continues to believe that MBP carries with it health risks, given the sacred nature of this ritual to the community, the administration is pursuing a policy centered around education of health risks by the health care community and respect for traditional practices by the religious community.” On Tuesday, Rabbi David Zweibel said, “It is to Mayor de Blasio’s eternal credit that he recognized how profoundly offensive the regulation was to our community.”

Meanwhile, a case out of Florida that’s been brewing for almost four years took another turn this week. After parents Heather Hironimus and Dennis Nebus ended their relationship in 2011, they agreed in writing that Nebus “would be responsible for scheduling and paying for” the circumcision of their baby son Chase. But by the time Nebus was ready to carry out the procedure, Hironimus had experienced a strong change of heart, stating in court last year papers that it was “not medically necessary and she did not want to have the parties’ son undergo requisite general anesthesia for fear of death.” A Palm Beach County Circuit Judge ruled in 2014 to allow for the procedure, but the family continued to fight over it after a higher court ordered a stay. In court filings, Nebus said that the procedure was “just the normal thing to do.”