The new Congress has a lot on its plate.

In addition to policy considerations and laws that might be passed or repealed, the new congressional leadership should be looking at ways to reform the way the institution does its business – and the first place for it to start is the Congressional Budget Office.

Most Americans don’t know what the CBO is, how it was created or what it does. They also don’t know how vitally important it is to the legislative process, especially where taxes, spending and entitlement reform are concerned. As Dan Mitchell, a well-respected economist with the libertarian Cato Institute, puts it in an email, the CBO “has a number-crunching role that gives the bureaucracy a lot of power to aid or hinder legislation, so it is very important for Republicans to select a director who understands the economic consequences of excessive spending and punitive tax rates.”



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Economy]

Indeed, as Mitchell alludes, the change in the control of Congress suggests the CBO will shortly have a new director. Who it should be and what the new director will be asked to do is quietly being discussed on Capitol Hill and in the lobbying shops, law firms, trade associations and other groups inside the Beltway whose legislative initiatives may live or die based upon a single CBO number.

"First and foremost, the CBO director must be respected by both sides of the aisle. While he or she might have a bias one way or the other, the work must be credible enough to stand for itself, removed from partisanship as much as possible,” says Chad Moutray, the chief economist at the National Association of Manufacturers, one on the city’s most influent trade groups, in an email.

“There are a lot of major decisions that will be forthcoming in the next few years, including possible reforms to the tax code, entitlements and health care spending programs. We need a CBO director who can be an honest broker for each of these reforms for scoring purposes," Moutray says.

“CBO provides extensive evidence of a basic truth: Washington spends too much money. It should be led by an honest broker, because CBO's analysis should be rooted in reality, independent of political games. Our spending problems don’t lie with the number crunchers at CBO, but Washington politicians addicted to wasting taxpayers’ hard-earned paychecks,” adds Brian Baker, the president of the non-profit group Ending Spending, in an email.

As established by Congress in the post-Watergate era, the CBO director – backed by a staff of close to 200 hundred employees – is responsible for determining how much proposed legislation will cost the government. That may not be a fair measure or even a necessary one, but that’s currently its job. As such, the kind of economic models used to make such determinations are important.



[READ: Paul Ryan's Dynamic Scoring Would Reveal Real Benefits of Tax Reform]

As one illustration, there is an oft-told tale among budget and tax policy wonks of a time at which CBO was asked to estimate the total amount of revenue that would flow into federal coffers if the income tax were increased to 100 percent. The point of the story is that any answer other than zero would be incorrect – at 100 percent the tax rate would be so high that no one would work, hence no revenue would be produced – but that the CBO instead came up with some number (it varies depending on who is telling the story) because the model it used to make its prediction didn’t take into account the impact of the new rate on economic activity.

There are several names being bandied about for the job of CBO director, among them Bill Beach, who is currently the chief economist for the Senate Budget Committee, the Tax Foundation’s Steve Entin, and J.D. Foster, an economist with the U.S. Chamber of Commerce who once was a top aide to former House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Bill Archer, R-Texas. All understand well the difference between static and dynamic analysis – one method takes into account how changes in tax policy affect economic activity while the other does not – and have the economic chops to lead an effort to reform the CBO from within.