DESTIN, Fla., Sept. 3, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Watertree Health, a leading provider of free prescription discount cards, today announced the appointment of Shane Power as President. Power assumes his new role after successfully leading the sales division at the Company. He will now be responsible for overseeing all day-to-day operations and implementing Watertree Health's long-term strategic plan.

As Vice President of Sales, Power, 33, was instrumental in achieving significant growth for Watertree Health. Under his guidance, the Company has built a network of more than 200 local representatives in almost all 50 states. His efforts have resulted each month in a year-over-year double-digit percentage increase of men, women and children benefitting from Watertree Health prescription discount cards, thus ensuring more individuals have access to affordable prescription drugs.

"Each day I am amazed by the great work our team of local representatives does to ensure that everyone in our country has help paying for their prescription drugs. With tens of millions of people not adequately covered for prescriptions, our job is critical," said Watertree Health President Shane Power. "Our success could not be possible without the steadfast dedication and passion of our team. I am honored to have the opportunity to lead such a great organization and look forward to building on our stellar record of success."

"I can't think of a better person for this job," said Watertree Health Founder Matthew Herfield. "Shane's dedication to growing our Company and, more importantly, making sure more people have access to affordable medicine makes him the ideal choice to lead Watertree Health into the future."

Power joined Watertree Health in May 2012 because the core mission of the Company matched his own. He felt that the rising costs of prescriptions was a problem for too many individuals and saw Watertree Health as a solution. In addition to increasing the number of people helped and the team of Watertree Health representatives, Power has taken an active role in expanding Watertree Health's philanthropic efforts as well.

Power has worked closely with the Watertree Health Senior Management team to build partnerships with organizations such as the Phoenix Suns and Phoenix Mercury to distribute cards to underinsured fans, the United Phoenix Firefighters Association Fund – a fund benefitting the families of the 19 firefighters killed last year in the Arizona wildfires, and Make-A-Wish Chapters in Arizona, Nebraska and North Central Florida. Power plans on expanding the Company's philanthropic footprint in the months ahead.

Health has long been a passion for Power. He was a member of the All-SEC Men's Basketball team while at Mississippi State University, where he was selected as the Inaugural SEC Scholar Athlete of the Year. After college, he subsequently played professional basketball in Italy. Combining his experience as an athlete, as well as his extensive careers in marketing and sales, Power brings a unique perspective to the Company that has already resulted in a track record of proven success.

Prior to joining Watertree Health, Power spent over 10 years as a Marketing and Sales executive, working with a diverse array of businesses. Born and raised in Crown Point, Indiana, he currently resides in the Phoenix area with his wife and two-year old daughter.

About Watertree Health:

Watertree Health was founded in 2010 to address the growing need for accessible health care products and services in America. The Company's mission is to help people improve their lives by improving their health. Watertree Health's founders believe everyone should be able to afford their medicines. The Company launched the free prescription discount card in 2011 to help the tens of millions of people in America who didn't have adequate prescription coverage. Even after the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, this number is not expected to change significantly.

Contact: Michael Loughran, 212-981-5258, michael_loughran@dkcnews.com

SOURCE Watertree Health