Vice President Joe Biden speaks in Chattanooga, Tenn., on Aug. 15. (Photo: Jason Davis, Getty Images)

This is one way to spend your summer vacation: Vice President Joe Biden, ensconced at a South Carolina resort, was calling old friends and potential allies to discuss the possibilities and problems of jumping into the Democratic presidential race after most pols assumed the field was complete.

If he did, what would it mean for him, for Hillary Clinton, for the Democratic Party — and for the Republican opposition?

History says he’s likely to run. “Since 1940, only three of those elected as vice president did not either run for president or become president: Alben Barkley, Spiro Agnew and Dick Cheney,” Democratic strategist Peter Fenn notes.

But Fenn adds that today’s politics are cautionary: “It will be a hard slog for Biden on many fronts — money, organization, articulating a compelling reason for getting in late.”

The 2016 political landscape for Democrats has been shaped by the assumption that Clinton is the all-but-certain nominee, even in the face of a rising challenge by Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders. If Biden ran, that landscape would shift.

“Joe Biden's entrance would completely alter the Democratic primary fight,” says Democratic strategist Joe Trippi, campaign manager of Howard Dean’s presidential campaign in 2004. “Sanders needs someone else to split the establishment party vote with Hillary Clinton. Right now he is on the losing end of a 60-40 or 65-35 split in the party. Even if Biden got in and only took 15 or 20 points, most of that would come from Clinton. Suddenly a 45-40-15 or 40-35-20 race would be a problem for Clinton and a boost for Sanders.”

It would be, as the vice president famously whispered to Obama after the Affordable Care Act was signed, “a big (bleeping) deal.”

Here are four reasons why.

Rep. Trey Gowdy (R-S.C.) on USA TODAY's Capital Download (Photo: Jeff Franko, USAT)

1. For Democrats: Establishment voters and donors who are uneasy about Hillary Clinton would have a place to go, or an excuse to wait.

“Biden offers political antacid for the Clinton indigestion,” says veteran Republican strategist Ken Khachigian.

The former secretary of State remains in a commanding position, despite controversies about Clinton Foundation fundraising and her use of a private email server while at the State Department. A record number of Democratic elected officials already have endorsed her, and national polls show a majority of likely Democratic voters continue to support her.

That said, questions about and investigations into her emails are fueling concerns even among some allies about whether these and other controversies down the road could undermine her ability to win the White House.

"We are going to follow the facts wherever they go," South Carolina Rep. Trey Gowdy, chairman of the House Benghazi Committee, said on Fox News Sunday. "If that impacts people's perception of her fitness to be commander in chief, so be it." Clinton is scheduled to testify before the committee on Oct. 22.

A bid by Biden — call it the Democrats’ Plan B — could offer a credible alternative, albeit at the risk of a more divisive campaign.

“In case of party emergency, here’s Joe,” political scientist Dante Scala of the University of New Hampshire puts it, though he’s not convinced the modern political process makes that a feasible scenario. “That worked 50 years ago for Hubert Humphrey, but of course party elites controlled the process (then) in a way they don’t now.”

A Gallup Poll released last week found Democrats split down the middle on whether Biden should run: 45% in favor, 47% against.

“You can take that as a glass half-full or half-empty for Biden,” Democratic pollster Margie Omero says. Still, “Biden would need to find a non-Clinton/non-Sanders base. I’m not sure there’s a sizable group of low-hanging fruit waiting for him.”

Sanders promised "an issue-oriented campaign" if Biden does run. Asked on NBC's Meet the Press whether the vice president's entry would help or hurt his own campaign, the senator demurred. "We'll let the political pundits determine that," he said.

President Obama golfs on Aug. 15 on Martha's Vineyard (Photo: Steven Senne, AP)

2. For President Obama: It would put him in a political pickle.

A Biden campaign would pit Obama’s vice president against his former secretary of State. Where would Obama’s loyalties lie?

When Clinton announced her campaign last spring, Obama praised her as “talented, tenacious” and “a friend of mine” who “would be an excellent president.” But White House spokesman Josh Earnest said he wouldn’t endorse her because Biden and others were still considering running.

Joshua Alcorn, a senior adviser to Draft Biden 2016, said on CNN’s State of the Union Sunday that one of the group’s main goals is to “remind people” about “his close relationship with the president.”

Obama isn’t on the ballot in 2016, but the coalition he forged — African-Americans, young people, women and Hispanics — will be crucial for any Democratic candidate to hold.

“No one currently in the race can mount much of a challenge to Hillary Clinton among African-American voters” once the primaries move past the opening contests in Iowa and New Hampshire, Trippi says. “Joe Biden, as vice president to Barack Obama, would present a viable challenge to her in the African-American community, and the winner of that fight would probably emerge as the nominee.”

The outcome of the 2016 election is crucial for Obama’s own legacy. If a Democrat wins the White House, Obama wouldn’t have to worry about a Republican successor trying to repeal the Affordable Care Act or reverse the Iran nuclear deal.

It’s not easy to do. Only once since World War II has a party managed to hold the White House for a third consecutive term. But the election of George H.W. Bush in 1988 was one factor in solidifying Ronald Reagan’s record as a conservative icon who changed the nation’s political direction.

Hillary Clinton at the Iowa State Fair Saturday. (Photo: Charlie Neibergall, AP)

3. For Hillary Clinton: Bad news at first, but perhaps good news over time.

A primary contest between Clinton and Biden would be a contrast in persona, not policy. The two espouse similar positions on most issues, but they offer very different strengths and weaknesses on the campaign trail: A disciplined candidate with the baggage of controversies (Clinton) vs. a happier warrior prone to gaffes (Biden).

Alcorn, a former campaign aide to Biden’s son, Beau, calls the vice president “the original authentic candidate.” Biden’s off-color comment to the president as Obamacare was signed in 2010 captures the strengths and risks that entails.

“The very things that make Biden likable as vice president — his penchant for off-the-cuff, ill-conceived remarks — make him difficult to see as presidential,” Scala says.

For Clinton, beating Biden in the primaries could demonstrate her ability to dispatch a formidable opponent.

"She benefits from a perception that she withstood tough challenges,” Omero says.

"In the first few weeks, Biden would be a drag on her,” Khachigian predicts. “But if he can’t get funding, is unwilling to throw some punches and doesn’t have organization, then HRC outlasts him with staying power, and — perversely — beating back his challenge could strengthen her.”

Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) on Aug. 14 after a speech in New York. (Photo: Bryan Thomas, Getty Images)

4. For Republicans: A generational contrast.

Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker and others in the Republican field have been arguing they represent a new generation in American politics — a jibe directed in part at former Florida governor Jeb Bush but also at Clinton.

The 2016 election “is a generational choice,” Rubio said when he announced his campaign in April.

Biden, who is 72, would reinforce the image of the Democratic field as reflecting an older generation. Clinton is 67; Sanders is 73. If he runs, the average age of the six Democratic candidates would be 66. The only one under 60 — indeed, the only one younger than Obama — is former Maryland governor Martin O’Malley, 52.

The average age of the 17 Republican candidates is 58. Four of them are in their 40s: Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, Rubio and Walker.

But Biden’s age may be a factor that encourages him to run.

“Whether Joe gets in depends on one thing: If he didn’t give it one last shot, how would he feel when he sees the new president inaugurated in January 2017?” Khachigian says.

The clock is ticking. If Biden decides to run, he’ll have to scramble to raise millions of dollars, create a campaign infrastructure in the early states and begin to meet primary filing deadlines in November in New Hampshire, South Carolina and several other states.

Place your bets: The first real deadline may be announcing in time to participate in the first Democratic debate, hosted by CNN on Oct. 13 in Nevada.

Follow @SusanPage on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1TKTsn6