An oil well near Tioga, North Dakota is shown. Karen Bleier/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images

IVAN MARTEN: While today’s oil-price environment continues to pose sizable challenges for upstream (that is, exploration and production) oil activities, it presents significant opportunities in asset-backed oil trading. Driving these opportunities is the market’s relatively high oil-price volatility, which has led to an increase in temporary pricing imperfections across markets and hence greater opportunities for arbitrage.

Today’s arbitrage opportunities fall into three main categories: time, geography and quality. Time-based arbitrage opportunities include so-called contango situations, in which prices for future delivery are higher than those for immediate delivery. Geography-based arbitrage opportunities are based on price differentials between and among locations. Propane prices in the U.S., for example, have been significantly lower recently than in non-U.S. markets, reflecting surging production spawned by the U.S. shale revolution.

BLOOMBERG/THE BOSTON CONSULTING GROUP

Quality-based arbitrage opportunities have arisen due to changes in price differentials between different qualities of crude oil, such as heavy and light grades. Companies that can recognize and exploit these different types of opportunity stand to reap a windfall.

Many industry players recognize the benefits of a greater focus on trading in today’s environment and are acting accordingly. Many European and U.S. major oil companies, for example, have already invested to increase the professionalism of their trading divisions.

But not all companies are acting.

One group of businesses that would benefit in particular from doing so, we think, is complex refineries operating in Asia. These companies can process many different types of crude oil and should be quick to take advantage of significant price differentials between different grades. Few of these refineries are doing so, however. Large oil producers and producing countries, including ones operating in the Middle East, are another segment that could benefit significantly by reconsidering the role that trading plays in their business.

Iván Martén is a senior partner at the Boston Consulting Group, and the global leader of its energy practice.

Read the latest Energy Report.