NEW YORK--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Univision Communications Inc., the leading media company serving Hispanic America, today launched “Univision Contigo” (Univision With You), an expansion of the Company’s investment and partnership efforts to serve and empower the 55 million Hispanics in the U.S. “Univision Contigo” builds on the Company's 50 years of service and engagement with the Hispanic community and will further enhance and focus its delivery and partnerships toward its top priorities:

Education : Increasing educational attainment toward college readiness and completion, with a concentration on early childhood education and preparation for the new Common Core State academic standards;

Increasing educational attainment toward college readiness and completion, with a concentration on early childhood education and preparation for the new Common Core State academic standards; Health: Improving health by focusing on wellness and access to healthcare, and supporting children in need with our annual Teletón USA and Radiothon initiatives;

Prosperity: Promoting financial literacy and small business entrepreneurship; and

Participation: Continuing to grow citizenship and voter participation to give Hispanics greater voice and influence in the political process.

Univision also announced a new partnership with Too Small to Fail, a joint initiative of Next Generation and The Bill, Hillary & Chelsea Clinton Foundation. The goal of Too Small to Fail is to help parents, caregivers, communities and businesses take meaningful, evidence-based actions that will improve the health and well-being of America’s youngest children, ages zero to five. The work with Too Small to Fail builds on the Company’s comprehensive efforts with its longstanding partners The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the U.S. Department of Education, and many other organizations to increase educational attainment. In just the past three years alone the effort has reached millions of families through quarterly television specials, engaged more than 100,000 students and parents in town halls and workshops, awarded more than 85 scholarships and assisted tens of thousands of callers through phone banks managed by Univision’s local television and radio stations around the country.

“Univision Contigo,” unveiled on Univision Network’s popular morning program “Despierta America” (Wake Up America), brings further focus and capability to the Company’s results-driven empowerment efforts under one umbrella to best utilize and deliver Univision’s extensive assets including its 12 television networks, 130 local TV and Radio stations, digital platforms, and highly passionate and committed employees across the U.S. The initiative also brings together over a dozen of partners working toward one goal of informing, empowering and helping Hispanics take action under “Univision Contigo,” including the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, California Endowment, Congressional Hispanic Caucus Institute, Congressional Hispanic Leadership Institute, Cuban American National Council (CNC), Kaiser Family Foundation, League of United Latin American Citizens, Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund (MALDEF), National Alliance for Hispanic Health, National Association of Latino Elected and Appointed Officials (NALEO), National Council of La Raza (NCLR), National Hispanic Medical Association, New America Alliance, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, U.S. Department of Education, United States Hispanic Chamber of Commerce, U.S. Hispanic Leadership Institute, Teletón USA, Televisa Foundation and the White House Initiative on Educational Excellence for Hispanics.

“Today there are more than 55 million U.S. Hispanics contributing at every level of government, the economy and culture, so for us ‘Univision Contigo’ is how we are taking our efforts to inform and empower our community to the next level by further investing and reaffirming our work with many partners who we know recognize the potential of a community that continues to grow and prosper,” said Randy Falco, president & CEO of Univision Communications Inc. “By working with new partners such as Next Generation and The Bill, Hillary & Chelsea Clinton Foundation, as well as existing ones including the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, NCLR, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, NALEO and LULAC, I am confident we will have an even greater impact.”

“We are delighted to partner with Univision so that together we can increase awareness of the importance of early learning with Hispanic families,” said Matt James, president and co-founder of Next Generation. "Parents and caregivers are their children's first teachers, and by working with Univision's talent and leaders, we will help Hispanic families get the resources and support they need to prepare their babies and young children for success in school and beyond.”

“‘Univision Contigo’ clearly expresses our long lasting commitment to stand side by side with our community as we inform and empower them to succeed on the opportunities most important to Hispanics,” said Roberto Llamas, executive vice president and chief human resources and empowerment officer of Univision Communications Inc. “As we expand our efforts, we are fortunate to have partners with a heartfelt interest in our community to help us further enhance the potential and prosperity of Hispanics in the U.S.”

“Univision is a powerful voice and a dedicated partner that has been instrumental in sharing the mission of St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital with the Hispanic community and beyond,” said Richard Shadyac Jr., CEO of ALSAC/St. Jude. “The support of Univision and its audiences is truly remarkable, and their ongoing commitment is helping us find cures and save children in communities everywhere.”

“NCLR welcomes ‘Univision Contigo’ as a new resource that will help our Latino community by providing them access to vital information on education, health, wealth building and civic engagement,” said Janet Murguía, president and CEO, NCLR. “This new initiative will be an important tool for Hispanic Americans that will enable them to achieve their dreams and increase their prosperity.”

“Working with Univision, we’ve moved the needle in educating Latinos about the importance of health care coverage,” said Robert K. Ross, M.D., president and CEO of The California Endowment. “People can only take advantage of the Affordable Care Act if they understand how it will impact them. Thanks to our innovative partnership with Univision, we've been able to educate and empower families to make vital health care decisions.”

“Univision Contigo” is launching with a multiplatform awareness campaign running across the Company’s media assets, including its broadcast and cable TV networks, local television and radio stations, and numerous digital platforms, and will then expand to grassroots activities and efforts. In addition, UnivisionContigo.com will serve as the hub for online resources and tools – in English and Spanish - to help families assess their current situation, set goals and take steps to succeed.

The community can stay abreast of the latest through Univision Contigo social platforms as well as join the conversation about the issues that matter most to them on Facebook.com/UnivisionContigo, @UniContigo on Twitter and using the hashtag #UnivisionContigo across social platforms. To learn more about Too Small to Fail visit www.toosmall.org, or on Twitter @2SmalltoFail, or on Facebook at Facebook.com/2SmalltoFail.

About Univision Communications Inc.

Univision Communications Inc. (UCI) is the leading media company serving Hispanic America. Its assets include Univision Network, one of the top five networks in the U.S. regardless of language and the most-watched Spanish-language broadcast television network in the country reaching approximately 96% of U.S. Hispanic television households; UniMás, a leading Spanish-language broadcast television network reaching approximately 89% of U.S. Hispanic television households; Univision Cable Networks, including Galavisión, the country’s leading Spanish-language cable network, as well as Univision tlnovelas, a 24-hour cable network dedicated to novelas, Univision Deportes Network, a 24-hour cable network dedicated to sports, ForoTV, a 24-hour Spanish-language cable network dedicated to news, and an additional suite of six cable offerings - De Película, De Película Clásico, Bandamax, Ritmoson, Telehit and Distrito Comedia; Univision Studios, which produces and co-produces reality shows, dramatic series and other programming formats for the Company’s platforms; Univision Television Group, which owns and/or operates 62 television stations in major U.S. Hispanic markets and Puerto Rico; Univision Radio, the leading Hispanic radio group which owns and/or operates 69 radio stations in 16 of the top 25 U.S. Hispanic markets and Puerto Rico; UVideos, the first bilingual digital network serving Hispanic America offering popular Univision and new original and third-party programming, to be an on-demand service on whatever device audiences choose; and Interactive, a network of digital products and offerings including Univision.com, which continues to be, the No. 1 most-visited Spanish-language website among U.S. online Hispanics, Univision Móvil, a longstanding industry-leader with unique, relevant mobile products and services; and Univision Partner Group, a specialized advertising and publisher network. Headquartered in New York City, UCI has television network operations in Miami and television and radio stations and sales offices in major cities throughout the United States. For more information, please visit Univision.net.