Police arrested a 52-year-old man who allegedly was refusing to check out of the Bar L Motel, 1524 Main St., after a computer check showed him to be wanted in Denver on a warrant for an aggravated motor vehicle theft charge. The motel manager told police that someone else had paid for the man's one-night Thursday night stay there but that the man refused to leave on Friday morning, slamming the door in the manager's face. Police said they found the man to have a butterfly knife in his pocket and that a search of his duffel bag after his arrest produced needles, small cotton balls, a spoon and elastic bands, suspected to be a kit used for consuming heroin. The man also had six debit cards in his wallet, cards under other people's names. He faces possible charges of illegal possession of drugs and drug paraphernalia, possessing an illegal weapon, illegally concealing that weapon, and attempting to spit at one of the Longmont officers after he'd been placed in a squad car.

Police received a Friday report that the company vehicle belonging to a business on the 1100 block of Kimbark Street had been vandalized with a BB gun. The case is closed, for now, due to a lack of information about a possible suspect.

Police are investigating a Friday report that the locks were cut on several trailers at a location on the 100 block of South Pratt Parkway.

Advertisement

A resident of the 1300 block of Venice Street reported Friday that someone had vandalized his vehicle when it was parked on the street near his residence. The case is closed for now due to the lack of information about a suspect or suspects.

A resident of the 1000 block of Lilac Street reported Friday that someone had vandalized his vehicle when it was parked on the street in front of his residence. The case is closed for now due to lack of information about suspects.

Police issued a summons on Friday to a woman suspected of shoplifting merchandise from a business on the 1600 block of Pace Street.

Police received a Friday report that a vehicle had been stolen from the 1900 block of Warren Avenue.

Police issued a summons on Thursday evening to a 33-year-old man suspected of a theft from a business on the 900 block of South Hover Street.