Tina Fuller adopted 3-year-old Squid, a weimaraner-pointer mix, in February after he was rescued from a farm in Kansas where he was left chained up outside.

Last week, Squid repaid the favor.

Squid's vigilance at Fuller's house in the 1300 block of Columbine Avenue in Boulder thwarted an attempted burglary, according to police, and led to the arrest of one of the suspects.

Fuller said Squid is typically a heavy sleeper, so it was a shock when the dog woke her up at 3:30 a.m. Tuesday.

"He was growling, and he usually sleeps like a log," she said.

At first, Fuller said she couldn't see what was bothering him, but then she saw two men dressed in black, carrying bags and snooping around some cars in the garage. Fuller called police.

Marshall Sommers and Tina Fuller with their dog, Squid, who helped bust a suspected burglar last week in Boulder, (Mark Leffingwell/Daily Camera)

Boulder police spokeswoman Kim Kobel said when officers arrived, they spotted two suspects carrying bags, one on foot and one on a bicycle. The suspect on the bike fled the area, but police were able to arrest the other suspect, identified as Thomas William Frampton, who told police he is homeless.

Police said they found items in Frampton's bag such as phone chargers, CDs and GPS units they think were stolen from the cars in the garage belonging to Fuller and her landlord. They also say some of the items may have been stolen elsewhere, and that Frampton and the second suspect may have burglarized other cars and homes in the neighborhood.

Frampton was arrested on suspicion of second-degree burglary and first-degree trespassing.

Advertisement

Police returned a case of CDs to Fuller, but she said the best thing about the suspect being caught was knowing Squid was the one who alerted everyone.

"I felt safe and protected," she said. "He's paying attention, and he is there for us just as much as we are there for him."

Just a few months ago, she said, Squid was a different dog. When she adopted him from Farfel's Farm on Pearl Street, he was timid.

"He had been chained up for three whole years," Fuller said. "His tail was always between his legs."

But since she brought Squid into the home she shares with her fiance, Marshall Sommers, he has become a loving member of her family.

"Now he's bright-eyed and bushy-tailed and just full of love and ready to jump in your lap at any moment," Fuller said.

So for Fuller, the incident last week wasn't just about Squid taking a bite out of crime. It was about him looking after his new home.

"He was really looking out for us," she said. "Our house is his home now."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Mitchell Byars at 303-473-1329, byarsm@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/mitchellbyars.