After a pirated version of the Batman V Superman Dawn of Justice trailer leaked online late Thursday night, director Zack Snyder decided to release the official trailer, rather than wait for when it had been scheduled to be released, on Monday. The trailer has met with a lot of comments, some fans liking it, while others have not been at all thrilled with many aspects about it. An HD version of the trailer is below.

According to tweets issued by Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice director, Zack Snyder, on Wednesday, the official trailer was meant to have hit IMAX theaters on Monday, April 20. However, somebody filmed the trailer using either a cellphone or a handheld camera, and then put the result, featuring Portuguese subtitles, on YouTube. The initial trailer was taken down, but it is still available to be seen, in different incarnations.

Zack Snyder decided to give the public a better version of the bootlegged trailer of Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, in advance of April 20. While not revealing really very much about the movie’s plot, or the other superheros who will be featured in it, the trailer presents a tantalizingly brief glimpse at a controversy and debate about Superman’s true nature and his intents.

In the Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice trailer, the voices of several commentators can be heard, overlapping each other, expressing various theories about Superman. He has not been universally welcomed warmly as a hero. Many media pundits are suspicious about Superman’s true intent and one commentator mentions humanity’s “horrible track record of following people with great power.”

While one lone commentator’s voice on the trailer of Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice suggests that Superman might be “just a guy trying to do the right thing,” that voice is the exception. Another commentator suggests that the real origins of devils is not hell, but is instead “from the sky.”

Then, the trailer of Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice shows a statue of Superman with the words “False God” in red, apparently having been painted there by someone. Once the seed has been planted in the minds of the public, possibly by Lex Luthor (played in the movie by actor Jesse Eisenberg), the theory sprouts and grows that Superman is trying to manipulate the public and is evil.

The idea appears to have even found fertile ground in the mind of Gotham’s human superhero, Batman. Ben Affleck, who is shown next in the trailer and who plays Bruce Wayne/Batman in Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, definitely has grave doubts about the intents of Superman.

Some fans who have seen the Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice trailer have commented that they do not understand why Batman would want to fight Superman, though superheros have often fought other superheros in several comic book series. The short answer to the question would probably be because Bruce Wayne does not yet know that Superman is on the side of truth, justice, and the American way. Instead, Wayne believes Superman is a villain with very dangerous powers, who needs to be defeated.

The Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice trailer then shows Batman being advised by his butler, Alfred, played by Jeremy Irons. Alfred tells Bruce Wayne that even good men can become cruel, if they experience rage and “the feeling of powerlessness.”

Batman flies his plane through explosions, and he fires back. He has developed a very dim view of Superman. Next in the trailer, we see Batman and Superman facing each other. Superman does not yet know all that much about Batman and does not seem to realize that Batman can be a very formidable foe.

After that, in the Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice trailer, Batman, in an armored costume standing on the ground in the rain, looks up at Superman hovering in the dark sky and famously asks him “Do you bleed?” Superman rapidly drops down and lands on the ground, and Batman tells him “You will!”

Besides Henry Cavill returning as Superman, as well as the other actors mentioned, like Ben Affleck, Jeremy Irons, and Jesse Eisenberg, the movie Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice features a cast including Diane Lane playing Martha Kent, Laurence Fishburne back playing Clark Kent’s boss, Perry White, and Amy Adams again playing reporter Lois Lane. Also, Aquaman will be played by Jason Momoa and Wonder Woman, making her first appearance in a movie, will be portrayed by actress Gal Gadot.

Before there can be any possibility of a dawn of the Justice League, as suggested by the movie’s title, Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, one made up of superheros from around the planet, the beef between Batman and Superman must be resolved. The trailer from the flick, below, leads up to the eventual formation of the Justice League. Exactly how much of the movie will deal with that, in comparison to what is expected to be an epic showdown and battle between Batman and Superman, is open to speculation.

With the release by director, Zack Snyder, of the Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice trailer on Thursday, in an effort to show the world a glimpse of the upcoming movie, the groundwork leading up to the battle between Batman and Superman has been established. If a large part of the movie will focus on the aftermath of the battle and the formation of the Justice League, it is hard to tell, from the trailer; but, if so, it could turn out to be a very interesting movie, and a potential blockbuster at the box office.

Written By Douglas Cobb

Batman V Superman: Dawn of Justice Official Trailer



Sources:

E! Online

Hollywood Reporter

National Monitor

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr