The lack of concern for the general public displayed by the plaintiffs in the Halbig v. Burwell case is nothing short of stunning. If the plaintiffs are ultimately successful, health-insurance subsidies will no longer be available in the 36 states – including Ohio -- using the federally managed marketplace.

There are already 4.5 million low- and middle-income subsidy recipients in these 36 states. According to a new analysis by Urban Institute researchers, that number will increase to 7.3 million by 2016. An unfavorable court ruling could make insurance unaffordable for many of these people.

Unfortunately, the Halwig v. Burwell case has broader implications for anyone who purchases insurance privately, not just those receiving subsidies to purchase insurance. To see this, one has to compare the market for private insurance today to the counterfactual: a post-Halbig v. Burwell America.

After the first round of sign-ups on the health exchanges, the private insurance market consists of three broad groups: healthy people who bought insurance in the marketplace; sick people – those with pre-existing conditions -- who also bought insurance in the marketplace; and those who were already buying private insurance without subsidies. Should Halbig v. Burwell succeed, we will mostly be left with the latter two groups.

The healthy group purchased insurance largely because they were subsidized to do so. However, Avalere Health estimated that stripping away the subsidies would raise average out-of-pocket premiums by 76 percent. With such an increase, most of the healthy group will simply quit purchasing insurance. It would become relatively expensive for a group that rarely uses the health care system.

The same does not hold true for the sick group. Even without subsidies, the Affordable Care Act still prevents insurers from denying coverage or charging a higher price for pre-existing conditions. As such, purchasing insurance remains an attractive prospect to this group and many of them will continue to purchase it.

Queue the "death spiral." This is a term health economists use to describe the process in which an insurance market collapses.

The first step in the process, which will occur if Halbig v. Burwell is successful, is the exit of the healthy group from the market. Step two is an increase in premiums by insurers who are now insuring a relatively sicker population. These two steps then continue ad infinitum.

Out of those enrollees left after the premium increase, the healthiest segment of the enrollees will drop their insurance in response to the increased price. Again, the insurers will raise the price, and the process will repeat all over again. Eventually, only the very sick are still purchasing very expensive health insurance. Finally, insurers find it impossible to break even, and they exit the market.

Although a complete death spiral is unlikely, an overall increase in premiums will result when insurers find themselves covering a disproportionate share of people with pre-existing conditions. While insurers cannot charge their enrollees with pre-existing conditions higher premiums, they can increase premiums for everyone. Therefore, the elimination of subsidies for states using healthcare.gov may result in increased health insurance premiums for the entire private health insurance market.

Policymakers could patch together a fix if Halbig v. Burwell is successful. The affected 36 states could create state-based exchanges, or create contractual arrangements with the federal government. Given that most of these states have Republican governors, this is not likely.

If congressional Republicans expect that they can simply dismantle the ACA in the wake of this lawsuit, then they are sorely underestimating the backlash that will occur if their litigation makes insurance unaffordable for millions of Americans overnight.

Assuming that Congress and President Barack Obama are not able to reach a compromise in a post-Halbig v. Burwell world, we are then left with a flawed health insurance market in up to 36 states where insurance outside of the workplace becomes increasingly unaffordable to a growing segment of the population.

I remain confounded as to how opponents of the ACA could envision this as a desirable policy change. Should the Halbig v. Burwell case achieve success in the Supreme Court, we will be left with a more dysfunctional health insurance system than at any point in our history.

Coleman Drake, an Ohio native, is a doctoral student and research assistant in health economics at the University of Minnesota.