Buy Photo David Young, Republican candidate for the 3rd district (Photo: Rodney White/The Register)Buy Photo

The Affordable Care Act is a bad law, but it's not likely to be repealed, Republican congressional candidate David Young said Monday.

Young, who is running for Iowa's Third District seat, said it might be possible to make "some tweaks here and there. But I think this law is going to be here to stay. … The president is not going to allow his keystone legislation to go by the wayside. So we're going to have to work to make it better."

Young was speaking at a health care forum at Des Moines University. He noted that some other politicians are vowing to repeal the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. He said he agrees with that sentiment. But he said at this point, it would be more productive to focus on what's possible, and to reach out to members of both parties to find compromises. "I'll be at the table trying to fix it," he said.

He said he favors using market forces and transparency, including on health care prices, instead of increased government regulation. But he said the country also needs a "strong safety net," to help people who fall through the cracks of the health care system. "I think it's always going to be a public/private partnership," he said.

He also pledged to keep a close eye on new regulations still coming out of the Affordable Care Act, to make sure they're not too burdensome on patients, health care providers or employers.

Young is the former chief of staff for U.S. Sen. Chuck Grassley. He said he learned from Grassley how to be an effective member of Congress.

"You hear a lot of partisanship out there on both sides; a lot of people banging their fists and screaming. That's not me," he said. "…I don't want to blow up the government, but I've got a stick and I like to whack it here and there."

He also said the current threat of the Ebola virus illustrates the need to fully finance public health agencies, including the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

He pushes for balanced budgets, but he said, "I could think of some other departments to go after." For example, he said, billions of dollars are being lost to fraud and waste in the Defense Department budget.

Young's audience Monday included Sally Gaer of West Des Moines, a Republican who helped lead the fight last spring to have Iowa pass a limited medical marijuana law. Gaer's daughter has a severe form of epilepsy, and the family wants to obtain a marijuana extract to help control her seizures. She noted that it's next to impossible for Iowans to use the state's new law, partly because of federal laws still banning almost any use of marijuana products. Gaer asked Young what he thought the federal government should do for people who have legitimate medical needs for the drug.

Young replied that he wouldn't support broad legalization of marijuana, but he said the government could take steps to have families like Gaer's. For example, he said, Iowa families with proper state permission should not be punished for obtaining the drug in another state and trying to bring it home. "We need to make sure you're not feeling like some kind of renegade when you're picking it up," he said.

He also said he would ask the Food and Drug Administration to study the issue of medical marijuana and make recommendations to Congress.

After the forum, a spokesman for Young's Democratic opponent, Staci Appel, accused Young of changing his stance on the Affordable Care Act now that he's in a general-election campaign. In an email, Nick Galbraith quoted from a Young Facebook entry from 2013, in which he said the Republican declared Congress should "rip out" the law. Now, Galbraith said, Young is saying he wants to fix it.

Young spokesman Tim Albrecht responded by saying that the Republican candidate has repeatedly said President Obama is unlikely to accept repeal of the Affordable Care Act. "David Young would work within the system to change this terrible piece of legislation, while Staci Appel continues to champion Obama's government takeover of our health care system," Albrecht wrote.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1xLyXbh