Video: Syrian Rebels Are Parading Prisoners In Cages To Ward Off Airstrikes

Rachel Stoltzfoos

An army of Syrian rebels reportedly paraded prisoners around in cages and then placed the cages strategically about their Damascus suburb in an effort to ward off Syrian and Russian airstrikes.

A video posted by Sham News Network shows men and women in giant cages being pulled around the suburb in trucks. The prisoners inside the cages include regime officers, soldiers and their families captured by Jaysh al Islam (Army of Islam), reported the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights.

Jaysh al Islam is one of the stronger insurgent groups fighting the Assad regime, and said the tactic is necessary to“lessen the air and missile bombardment” Russian and Assad forces are carrying out in the area, reported the Long War Journal. (RELATED: Russian Airstrikes Target NINE Hospitals)

Since Russia began conducting airstrikes in October, its primary target has been rebel groups such as Jaysh al Islam, rather than ISIS, as promised. Some of the strikes have targeted rebels backed and trained by the CIA.(RELATED: Hours After Russia Strikes U.S.-Backed Syrians, Kerry Shakes Foreign Minister’s Hand)

After parading the prisoners around and allowing onlookers to film the process and interview the prisoners, Jaysh al Islam “spread cages over several areas and squares” nearby, reported SOHR.

Jaysh al Islam has drawn attention for brutal execution tactics similar to those of another of the Islamic State, one of its other enemies. Executioners wore orange jump suits while executing alleged ISIS jihadis in August, reversing the ISIS custom of forcing its prisoners to wear orange jumpsuits.

WATCH:



Click here for reuse options! Copyright 2015 Daily Caller News Foundation

Content created by The Daily Caller News Foundation is available without charge to any eligible news publisher that can provide a large audience. For licensing opportunities of our original content, please contact licensing@dailycallernewsfoundation.org.