Proposed mental health laws aim to ease access to services, but critics fear they infringe on patients' freedom and right to privacy. (Getty Images)

Long-stalled federal legislation aimed at reforming the mental health care system is likely to come before Congress in the fall, but questions about patients’ rights and privacy threaten to derail any chance of passing a meaningful measure. Under pressure to act after a series of mass shootings, House and Senate lawmakers have proposed bills that would improve federal oversight and give patients more access to services. The Senate version, called the Mental Health Reform Act, was introduced Aug. 4 by Sens. Bill Cassidy, R-La., and Chris Murphy, D-Conn., while Rep. Tim Murphy, R-Pa., introduced the Helping Families in Mental Health Crisis Act into the House in June. Some reform advocates, pleased to see any talk of mental health reform on the Hill, have been hesitant to raise issues with the proposals. But the plans have their critics. They point to portions that would loosen the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act – a 1996 measure known as HIPAA that was intended to ensure patient privacy. Easing the privacy restrictions would enable family members to access dates and times of a loved one’s medical visits along with information about medications they are on so they can help in caregiving.



The proposals would also reform federal regulations that prevent doctors from accessing information about whether their patients have a mental illness or substance abuse disorder. Those rules were put in place in 1972 to keep doctors from discriminating against patients seeking treatment, but critics say that more recent laws prohibiting discrimination against people with disabilities have made them obsolete.

Critics also flag incentives for what’s called “assisted outpatient treatment,” in which a judge can order someone with a serious mental illness – including schizophrenia, bipolar disorder or post-traumatic stress disorder – to follow a treatment plan that may include medication. The House bill would reward states that implement these treatment programs with a 2 percent block grant, while the Senate bill includes mention of court-ordered treatment only in the form of a pilot program.

The Bazelon Center for Mental Health Law has said that the House bill takes the country in the wrong direction by promoting institutional and coercive approaches to treatment, adding concerns over whether it might actually lead to people becoming discouraged from seeking treatment.

“The bills will be a tremendous violation of freedom that we wouldn’t be OK with if it were any other group of people,” says Sera Davidow, direct of the Western Mass Recovery Learning Community.

In a hearing in June, Rep. Frank Pallone, D-N.J., said the HIPAA changes in the House bill would weaken privacy rights of people with mental illness. He also said he opposed the reward system proposed for states that adopt court-ordered assisted outpatient treatment.

But Murphy, who introduced the House bill, points to the spate of violence, in which several of the accused had cycled through treatment, as a need for these kinds of programs.

“That person has the right to be well, the right to get treatment,” he says. “Society has a right to feel safe.”

His proposals received tremendous support from various other groups, including the National Alliance on Mental Illness, the country’s largest organization representing people living with serious mental illness.

Those in favor of changes to the privacy laws, as well as to the need for outpatient assisted treatment, say that sometimes people with a serious mental illness do not recognize they need treatment or that they have an illness, and they say family members who are responsible for their care cannot access the information they need to help them.





Mark Covall, president and CEO of the National Association of Psychiatric Health Systems, says without treatment some can shuffle in and out of the emergency department or jails or become homeless.

“We understand and agree that you want to avoid an involuntary situation,” he says, “but for some people, because of their illness, that’s not possible.”

Creigh Deeds, a state senator from Virginia whose son had a mental illness and attacked him with a knife before killing himself, testified in a hearing on the House bill that HIPAA prevented him from accessing the information he needed to keep his son safe.

“Even though I was the one who cared for him, fed him, housed him, transported him, insured him, I was not privy to any information that could clarify for me his behaviors, his treatment plan and symptoms to be vigilant about,” he said. “I was in the dark as I tried to advocate for him in the best way I could with the best information I had.”

Though provisions for mental health services are in President Barack Obama’s health care law, the Affordable Care Act, studies by the National Alliance on Mental Illness have found gaps accessing medication or psychiatrists, as well as lack of funding at federal and state levels.

On the House side, this isn’t the first time Murphy, a clinical psychologist, has introduced legislation aimed at reforming mental health care – and it’s also not the first time he has done so on the information technology front of health care, where there is some agreement that privacy laws created decades ago need to be modernized.

“I understand the need to protect records, but I also know that to not have access to critical components of someone's health records can lead to a worsening of symptoms,” Murphy says. A doctor, for instance, could check before prescribing an opiate for pain to someone with a history of drug abuse.

“We’re dealing with a law around privacy passed so long ago when it was legal to discriminate against people based on an illness or on substance abuse, and it’s not legal to do that anymore,” says Paul Gionfriddo, president and CEO of Mental Health America. “You can’t treat a whole patient with half a record, yet that’s what we’ve been doing for years.”

But Davidow says sharing the information is dangerous, adding that she knows patients whose doctors can determine someone unable to make their own medical decisions who have detained patients because they declined to discuss a history of mental health issues detailed in their medical records. She is also concerned about sharing records with family, who can sometimes be the source of trauma, including sexual abuse or domestic violence. Adult children may also make decisions that are different from what their parents would recommend, she says.

Murphy says the bill would apply to people whose caregivers are their family members – and says doctors, based on their knowledge of a patient's history, would be able to prevent the sharing of information with people believed to be responsible for abuse or neglect. Therapy sessions, he says, would remain sealed.





Kevin Scalia, executive vice president of corporate development for Netsmart, which provides health IT services, says the Senate bill, in particular, wouldn’t share information without consent if the patient didn’t want that information shared. It specifically includes provisions through which a patient could provide consent each year.

“There are some people who don’t want to do this at all,” Scalia says. “They can opt out.”

But it was in large part the requirement for states to enact assisted outpatient treatment programs that caused a previous version of the bill to fall apart. Some say it is necessary at times for a judge to have the authority to force people to undergo treatment. It is aimed at patients who are most difficult to treat and would apply to fewer than 1 percent of people with serious mental illness, according to a summary about the House bill.

John Snook, executive director of the Treatment Advocacy Center, which supports outpatient assisted treatment, pointed to the fact that several groups have recognized it as a treatment option, including the National Sheriffs’ Association and the government's Substance Abuse and Mental Services Administration, as well as the Department of Justice.

Most states already have a law that allows courts to order treatment, with the exception of Connecticut, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Mexico and Tennessee.

Davidow says, however, that most states do not tend to use them. She is concerned that the federal incentives will place higher expectations on judges to do so.

“It’s a misnomer for something that involves force,” she says. “It’s being named that so consistently and being thought of as this benign thing. It’s not giving people a true picture of what it is.”

Ron Honberg, national director of policy and legal affairs for the National Alliance on Mental Illness, says the incentive piece for assisted outpatient programs is an improvement over the previous bill, which required it.

“We really do think there is something to work with now,” he says.