This story was published Aug. 21, 2015 in the South Bend Tribune.

SOUTH BEND — The storybook tale of a young couple buying a long vacant 1890s turreted mansion to renovate as their home has come to an end.

And the reason why is a mystery.

The house in question is "The Castle" — the distinctive Romanesque mansion at 803 W. Washington St., right across the street from Copshaholm, the former Oliver family mansion that is now part of The History Museum.

In late February, Trent Runyon and Leah Hudson-Runyon, a married couple from Niles, purchased the Kizer house and immediately set about making major improvements to turn it into their home.

"It's stunning. That's where I want to live," Hudson-Runyon said in a Tribune interview at the time.

The circa 1891, 7,000-square-foot granite mansion last served as a single-family home in the 1920s. After that, it was broken up into apartments, and in recent years has been mostly vacant.

The couple purchased it from Indiana Landmarks Inc. for about $50,000, with the agreement they would renovate the place as a single-family home.

The Runyons started work immediately. They renovated an apartment in the carriage house to live in while they worked on the mansion. They removed white siding from a rear porch. They tore out overgrown shrubs and outdated electrical wires. They sought estimates to replace the mansion roof.

They were doing most of the work themselves in their spare time. Hudson-Runyon, a real estate agent, and her husband, a mechanical engineering manager, have renovated and sold five houses in the past, including a small historic house at the corner of Oak and 14th streets in Niles.

The Runyons were chronicling their progress via photos and descriptions on a Facebook page, titled A Project Couple, and on a blog: aprojectcouple.com.

The project drew widespread public attention. The Facebook page has more than 7,200 followers.

The last blog post was July 7. Hudson-Runyon posted photos of the roof and said they knew when they bought the mansion a new roof would be needed.

The last Facebook post was on Aug. 8, when they posted: "Due to an end of summer mini-vacation, crazy schedules and the need for a small break, we won't be posting any house/project pics for the next week. Stay tuned after that!"

Word started circulating among residents in the neighborhood in the past few weeks that work had stopped on the house. Some neighbors said they saw trailers at the property and it appeared the couple had moved out of the carriage house.

In recent days, the property has stood quiet and apparently vacant.

Contacted this week by The Tribune, Hudson-Runyon said she and her husband still own the Kizer property but that she can't talk about it or about their plans. "I'm not at liberty to comment on it," she said.

Indiana Landmarks officials confirmed Thursday that the agency is in the process of buying back the mansion.

"We've agreed to take it back. We think it's in the best interest," Marsh Davis, president of Indiana Landmarks, said in a telephone interview from his Indianapolis office. The agency will buy it back for the purchase price, plus the cost of improvements made in the past six months.

He said the Runyons contacted his office by email about a month ago and asked if the agency would buy the property back. "I don't really understand all the issues involved. There are some things I'm not at liberty to talk about," he said.

After regaining possession, Indiana Landmarks will place the mansion on the market again, Davis said.

"Sometimes things just go differently than expected," said Todd Zeiger, director of the northern regional office of Indiana Landmarks. He said the agency appreciates the good work the Runyons have done on the house during their half year of ownership.

The South Bend Redevelopment Commission spent $441,000 in 2011 to buy the Kizer mansion property from Indiana Land Trust and John Friedline, according to Tribune archives. The redevelopment commission transferred the property to Indiana Landmarks with the understanding the agency would stabilize the house and seek a new owner and use that didn't include continued use as an apartment house.

The mansion is about 7,000 square feet. Much of the original woodwork in intact and there are at least 10 fireplaces.

It originally was home to William L. and Elizabeth Kizer and their three children.

Kizer grew up in South Bend and started work as a tax collector, then later worked in the real estate and insurance business for nearly 50 years. He also served as secretary of the Malleable Steel Range Manufacturing Co., as a trustee of St. Joseph County Savings Bank and a director of St. Joseph County Loan & Trust Co.

The mansion was the Kizer family home until 1929, then sat vacant for about five years, then was used as a sanitorium. In 1947, the building was divided into apartments and served as an apartment house for most of the years since then.

mfosmoe@sbtinfo.com

574-235-6329

@mfosmoe