Click photo to enlarge «

1

»

If you go What: Longmont City Council meeting When: 7 p.m. Tuesday Where: 350 Kimbark St. More info: http://goo.gl/XoZUYj

The Longmont Housing Authority is asking the City Council to consider a citywide zoning change that would allow long-term affordable housing in areas where it is currently not allowed.

The request is one of two property-related matters — the other being an annexation referral — that the council will take up Tuesday.

The property at 2000 Sunset Way used to be an extended stay Hawthorne Suites hotel but was purchased and renovated by the LHA for use as short-term housing. The property is zoned by the city as mixed industrial, which is intended for businesses such as manufacturing, warehousing and distribution. A strictly residential business is not allowed in a mixed industrial zone unless it is granted an exception by the council.

The LHA, however, would like to build long-term permanent affordable housing on the MI-zoned property, and instead of asking for an exception LHA leaders are asking the council to essentially change the city ordinance that prohibits residential developments, including affordable housing, in the zoned areas. The requested change to the ordinance would allow for "affordable housing in independent living facilities and multifamily dwellings ... in stand-alone residential buildings."

Advertisement

The proposed ordinance goes on to say that affordable housing in any MI area would be contingent upon the dwellings being near shopping, schools, parks and transit service and be compatible with the surrounding area. The Planning and Zoning Commission recommends the council approve the measure.

The city has 530 acres of MI-zoned property. If this ordinance is approved, the roughly 83 vacant acres MI-zoned land in the city would be available for affordable housing, although it does not mean it would be used for that purpose. The September 2013 flood exacerbated Longmont's affordable housing problem as high demand and dwindling supply caused prices of apartments and other rental properties to rise.

At a council meeting in November, OUR Center Executive Director Edwina Salazar informed the council that the median price for a one-bedroom apartment in the city now hovers at about $1,000.

Annexation

Paul Terhaar of Front Range Real Estate Partners LLC is requesting that the council direct the staff to work toward a possible annexation of 9.5 acres north of Nelson Road between Hover Street and Airport Road.

Terhaar said it's very preliminary at the moment but that he hopes in the future to develop the property into four to six one and two-story buildings.

"The end product will have a nice mix, I'm sure, of business from industrial to service, technology, medical, maybe food companies and retail at the front towards Nelson Road," Terhaar said.

Terhaar added in his letter to the City Council that the proposed buildings, ranging from 15,600 square feet to 46,100 square feet, are "small in size to meet the needs of an underserved market of smaller tenants."

If City Council members agree that the annexation jibes with the city's goals for the area, they can direct staff to keep working with Terhaar, and the annexation will be brought up again at a future meeting for approval.