Since the time I started working on reforming marijuana laws in Colorado nine years ago, I have been motivated by one goal: to regulate marijuana responsibly.

That was my goal last year as the co-director of the Amendment 64 campaign, which established the framework for regulating marijuana in the state. And it continues to be my goal as chair of the committee backing Proposition AA, the measure on this November’s ballot that will set statewide excise and sales taxes on marijuana.

While the 15 percent excise tax fulfills the promise of Amendment 64 by providing tens of millions of dollars annually for public school construction, the true import of the measure is ensuring that there are sufficient funds to enforce the regulations that will govern the cultivation and sale of marijuana in Colorado.

Proposition AA will raise the revenue needed for this regulatory oversight through a 10 percent sales tax on marijuana products. Compared to the state of Washington, which also passed an initiative to regulate marijuana last November and will impose a 25 percent tax on marijuana sales, this 10 percent figure is quite reasonable. It is also fair to the citizens of Colorado, since it ensures that marijuana users who take advantage of the regulated market will in essence be providing the funds needed to maintain it.

This is the responsible path. Through regulations, we are able to provide consumer protections, such as tracking, testing and labeling. We also protect our communities by diminishing the likelihood of marijuana being diverted out of the system.

We recently witnessed a spectacle in Civic Center in Denver, during which opponents of Proposition AA gave away free marijuana joints as a way of encouraging more people to oppose the measure. One of the organizers even falsely presented himself as a “co-drafter” of Amendment 64, in order to give the event — or perhaps himself — more credibility.

In reality, Amendment 64 campaign leaders like myself strongly support Proposition AA. It is consistent with the ballot title of Amendment 64, which began, “Shall there be an amendment to the Colorado constitution … providing for the regulation of marijuana?”

The people of Colorado responded affirmatively. And now, Proposition AA will provide the funding needed to regulate the system.

It is easy for activists to rile up a crowd with calls for no marijuana taxes, especially when they provide free marijuana. But it is not the responsible path.

We are at a turning point in U.S. history. While not everyone reading this column will have voted for Amendment 64 last November, my hope is that a growing number of Coloradans are beginning to appreciate that having marijuana cultivated and sold by regulated, taxpaying businesses is preferable to having those activities conducted underground, with profits flowing to drug cartels.

Even the U.S. Department of Justice is now on record acknowledging this benefit. In a memo issued by Deputy Attorney General James Cole last month, detailing how the federal government will respond to the marijuana measures passed in Colorado and Washington, he wrote that a “robust” system of regulations could address federal enforcement priorities by “replacing an illicit marijuana trade that funds criminal enterprises with a tightly regulated market in which revenues are tracked and accounted for.”

But the U.S. Department of Justice was not giving Colorado carte blanche to move forward with its regulated system. Rather, the memo provided a stern warning that the federal government would be monitoring the state to ensure that there were “necessary resources” to enforce the regulations that exist.

The acknowledgment of the benefits of regulating marijuana is a dramatic shift by federal law enforcement officials, and we are grateful for the respect they have given our state and its voters. In return, we are firmly committed to respecting their concerns by ensuring that the necessary resources they desire are available. This is not only the responsible thing to do, but it is also the intelligent thing to do.

Please join me in voting “yes” on Proposition AA so that Colorado can regulate marijuana responsibly.

Brian Vicente is partner at Vicente Sederberg LLC and chair of the Committee for Responsible Regulation.