By of the

Inject a gene from a certain cold-water fish into a strawberry, and the strawberry can withstand colder temperatures. But would you still want to eat it?

Such advances in genetic engineering have implications for helping feed a growing, hungry world — but a lot of people aren't too keen on eating those advances just yet.

Others wouldn't hesitate.

The difference reflects the "wild, messy debate" surrounding genetically modified food, with one of the more recent skirmishes centering on whether food labels should contain information about such ingredients, according to Nick George, president of the Midwest Food Processors Association, based in Madison.

Wisconsin's agriculture and food production industries find themselves smack in the middle of the debate.

"This is a big issue," George said. "It's not going away."

Neither, it seems, are genetically engineered crops in the American food chain.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture estimates that 93% of soybean acres and 85% of corn acres in 2013 were planted with genetically modified, herbicide-tolerant crop varieties.

The percentage of insect-resistant corn planted in 2013 stood at 76%, according to the USDA. The insect-resistant corn contains a gene from the soil bacterium Bt — Bacillus thuringiensis. The bacteria produce a protein that is toxic to specific insects.

Consider that there are nearly 1.3 million dairy cows in Wisconsin, and some of them are no doubt eating corn with genetically modified ingredients.

So should a gallon of milk or a block of cheddar cheese that is made from milk from cows that eat genetically modified corn have a label that says so?

"The questions you've asked are exactly what the people who are actually trying to produce food are worried about," said Michael Pariza, professor emeritus of food science at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, who led the university's Food Research Institute for 20 years.

"How do I prove that my chicken that's laying eggs didn't eat some genetically engineered soybeans? How do I know that my cow didn't eat some genetically engineered corn?" he said. "I mean that is exactly the question. You're into a real quagmire."

Requiring labels on food items containing genetically modified ingredients implies some risk is involved in consuming it, he added.

"If they force you to label it, that means there is some reason to worry about it," Pariza said. "It would have a huge impact on milk production. I think it would substantially hurt Wisconsin agriculture."

Fear of the unknown

There is an entire movement that argues there are risks to genetically modified food, not the least of which are unknown or unintended consequences of the products.

"Genetic engineering makes silent but fundamental changes to our food at the molecular and cellular level, the full human health and environmental consequences of which are still being discovered," according the Center for Food Safety. The advocacy group has filed documents urging the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to require genetically engineered ingredients to be added to food product labels.

Based in Washington, D.C., the Center for Food Safety describes itself as a "public interest and environmental advocacy organization" that promotes "organic and other forms of sustainable agriculture." Also signing the petition were Consumer Reports magazine, the Environmental Working Group and organic farming organizations.

Late last year, the Grocery Manufacturers Association, a trade group whose members include some of the biggest food manufacturers in the world, struck back.

"The use of genetically modified (GM) ingredients is not only safe for people and our planet, but also has a number of important benefits," the organization said.

This month, news that the grocery manufacturers were pursuing federal legislation of their own concerning genetically modified food product labels brought the issue back to the forefront.

The scope of the issue is enormous, with lobbyists and organizations across the globe taking positions on the issue.

No simple subject

Reducing the discussion to sound bites doesn't do the topic justice. It's not that simple, said Barbara Ingham, a food science professor at UW-Madison.

"It's very difficult to distill the arguments down while still providing consumers with accurate information," Ingham said. "There are too many qualifiers."

Genetic modification can refer to the types of plant breeding that farmers and others have done for hundreds, if not thousands, of years.

"The other side of that might be a discrete pocket of information from an unrelated species going into something that may be a food product," Ingham said. "That's a pretty broad spectrum."

It's one thing to make a corn plant resistant to corn root worms using a soil bacteria gene.

It's something else entirely to isolate the gene that prevents arctic flounder from freezing to death and combining it with strawberries and tomatoes to make the fruits resistant to cold.

"We're not even talking about the same species that we are working with," Ingham said. "We are taking two very disparate things — a flounder and a strawberry, and we're combining some information from that flounder into the strawberry, and the strawberry is then more resistant to cold temperatures because of the information that the flounder genetics carry.

"They've done that in the laboratory."

Food safety debate

If such fruits ever make it to market, should the process of how they are made be put on a label?

"The FDA has never mandated any labeling for genetically engineered foods because there is absolutely no evidence that the genetically engineered process, or the genes that are being used, have any harm at all to people," said Pariza, the UW-Madison food science professor.

The World Health Organization agrees — up to a point.

"GM foods currently available on the international market have passed risk assessments and are not likely to present risks for human health," the organization says on its website.

But it also qualifies the overall position on genetically modified organisms in food.

"Different GM organisms include different genes inserted in different ways. This means that individual GM foods and their safety should be assessed on a case-by-case basis."

When the subject is food, that makes the debate different from genetic advances in biology or medicine.

"You get into the food area and you get into things that are absolutely irrational," Pariza said. "There's just no tieback to anything except sort of hysteria: 'I don't want it. I don't like it. I don't understand it and that's the end of it.'"

'Food labeling chaos'

Groups that support labeling argue that everyone has an absolute right to know what is in their food, including whether there are ingredients derived from genetically modified organisms, or GMOs.

But labeling requirements could give some foods advantages over others in the marketplace, George said.

"The insinuation is it's not safe," George said.

And, food labeling is rife with suspect claims, so much so that the Center for Science in the Public Interest calls the situation "food labeling chaos."

That applies to the labeling of genetically engineered ingredients, the group says.

"Some manufacturers have voluntarily labeled their products as not containing any genetically engineered ingredients, but no government or third-party verification system exists to ensure the accuracy of those label claims," the center says on its website. "In addition, many of those label claims are misleading, since they falsely imply that the food made without genetically engineered ingredients is somehow safer than or superior to the same product made with genetically engineered ingredients."

In the U.S., certified organic products are the only ones that are required to be made without any ingredients derived from genetically modified foods.

There are no easy answers, said Ingham, the UW-Madison food science professor.

"The brush stroke that is sometimes applied that GMOs are bad is probably not correct," she said. "Are there advantages and disadvantages? There are."