Judy Miller works on writing workshop materials for a K-12 school on the Winnebago Reservation July 22 at her home in Longmont. ( Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call )

When Judy Miller reads to kids in the Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska, she might as well be reading on-air.

"I love it when she reads because she does it with more emotion. She's excited, and she changes her voice (for different characters)," Charli Earth, 11, said. "And when there are all capital letters, she says it in a bigger voice."

Miller lives with one foot in Longmont as a retired teacher and the other foot in the reservation's Winnebago Public School as a part-time literacy consultant.

Her hybrid lifestyle of keeping a house here and an apartment there might feel busy to some.

But come late summer, Miller feels ready to work at the reservation 570 miles away that tugs at her heart strings year round.

The bug bit to go back to school four years after she retired in 2000 after nearly 30 years as a teacher and literacy coach in the Boulder Valley School District.

At first, that meant teaching teachers how to use literacy tools from Boston-based publisher Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

Usually, her work brought her to distressed classrooms nestled in poor neighborhoods.

"Once, I was in the Bronx and escorted into an elementary school," she said.

The same business brought her in 2007 during a blizzard to the doors of the Winnebago Public School -- a school set in a reservation with 2,600 residents, 44 percent of whom live at or below the poverty level, according to the tribal website.

Advertisement

New York City seemed a world away from the desolate Winnebago Indian Reservation on 1,800 acres in northeastern Nebraska that spill into western Iowa.

"But it's the same everywhere. Until you get kids to believe that they are learners, it doesn't matter what program you bring. Nothing will change," she said.

Bridging two worlds

However, literacy challenges seem particularly entrenched on Native American reservations as compared to inner city American ghettos given tribal history, Miller continued.

Fifth grade students MacKenzie DeCora, 11; Charli Earth, then 10; and an unidentified girl (from left to right) crowd around Judy Miller, a literacy consultant, at the Winnebago Public School on the Winnebago Indian Reservation in northwestern Nebraska on April 10. (Courtesy Photo / Longmont Times-Call)

Kristine Earth, Charli Earth's mother and a cultural educator at Winnebago Public School, explains the resistance to book learning stems from when the federal government forced natives to attend boarding schools.

"Now, we're just trying to hang on to what we have left -- to let everyone know that we're still here. We're not a myth," she said. "But it is all about living in two cultures, two worlds. And Judy's trying to help with that."

Miller explained that working as a literacy coach in the alternative program for nontraditional learners at Nevin Platt Middle School in Boulder primed her for that role.

"I cry sometimes when I think about leaving that school," she said. "Teaching kids like that is my passion."

To teach kids and mentor teachers on the reservation, she needed to be a student first -- to pick up some of the native Ho-Chunk language taught in the school and to appreciate the annual blessing over the school and the students given by the head shaman at the beginning of the school year.

"Music and art are big thing for them to reach these young learners," she said.

In this case, elderly drummers invite children as young as 4 years old into a drum circle.

The musicians and the dancers pass along something culturally vital from the past into the future this way, Miller said.

"If I were ever going to be a native and be proud, it would be then," she said.

Christmas in July

By the end of the 2007-08 school year, Winnebago Public School administrators must have noticed Miller's sensitivity and curiosity -- even as she drove on and off the reservation while working for the publisher.

"They said, 'Well, we're writing a grant. We'd like to write you into it,'" she said.

So, she quit that job to invest more into the school where some children read multiple levels below grade level, she said.

"And the longer I'm there, the more excited I get about going back," Miller continued.

In July, she carefully wrapped cardboard boxes with Christmas paper on her kitchen table in Longmont. She then cherry-picked books from the goodreads she stashed in her garage after accumulating them over a lifetime as a mother, teacher and literacy coach.

She hopes students find the boxes holding the fresh collection of books on their teacher's desk eye-catching.

But the books themselves must capture something more, something Charli Earth senses expanding along with her vocabulary as she enters sixth grade this year.

"I bring my imagination with me into the book now," she said.

Pam Mellskog can be reached at p.mellskog@gmail.com or 303-746-0942.