Buy Photo Richard Thompson (Photo: News-Leader file photo)Buy Photo

Forty years ago a pediatrician and pioneer neonatologist (yours truly), troubled by shortcomings of hospitals where he practiced, went to work at the Joint Commission — a Chicago-based agency that accredits health care facilities.

One of my colleagues at the Joint, as I called it, was Barbara Mohr RN. Barb married Rich Umbdenstock, a hospital governance expert.

Fast forward to today. Rich and Barb live in Washington, D.C.; Rich is now president and CEO of the American Hospital Association.

Picture him around the inner circle table, a participant in framing the Affordable Care Act and now adjusting it in response to lessons learned during the law's fledgling years.

You might imagine Rich as part of government gridlock, a legalistic lobbyist stubbornly defending hospitals' special interests. You would be wrong.

Rich is a problem solver, not a position taker. Indeed, his collaborative leadership style reminds me of Springfield's own living legend, retiring Chamber of Commerce President Jim Anderson.

Rich serves his constituents in many ways.

When AHA honors a health care facility, urban or rural, Rich makes the effort to travel there and personally present the award.

He is a true expert on the convoluted health care financing system. When expanding Medicaid became an issue, I e-mailed him. "I know you are swamped, Rich, so please just answer Yes or No. Medicaid expansion?"

He took time to write a four- or five-screen reply that clearly explained this complex issue.

Also, because of who he is and probably also because of Barb's influence, Rich understands the health care business is special because its product is patient care. Rich cares.

A couple of weeks ago, Rich received B'Nai B'rith International's National Health Care Award. The gala honoring him included a video of testimonials and clips of Rich's speeches.

One of his lines is, "People say we cannot afford to provide care to the uninsured. I say we must provide that care."

Frankly, I don't know if Rich is Republican or Democrat. He simply does not think that way.

He is not blind to the ACA's weaknesses. He could have led his constituency to focus on them and attack reform efforts. Instead, Rich urged health care leaders to help build on the law's strengths.

Fast forward 40 more years.

Obstructionist voices will have been silenced. Reasonable heads will finally heed advice currently available but ignored. That is, the best national health policy for all is a uniquely American combination of entrepreneurial opportunity, straightforward financing and social responsibility.

By then or before, Republicans will regret that their predecessors nicknamed the Affordable Care Act "Obamacare." Because President Obama will get the lion's share of credit for laying the foundation on which a sensible system can finally be built.

However, credit must also go to the vision of Richard J. Umbdenstock — a gentle but firm, fair, knowledgeable, accomplished and practical man — someone you should know.

Richard E. Thompson, the author of health care books and articles, can be reached at

richard3487@gmail.com

.

Read or Share this story: http://www.news-leader.com/story/opinion/contributors/2014/06/26/know-rich-umbdenstock/11428631/