Two men died after a shooting broke out at an apartment complex in Denver on Sunday morning, according to Denver police.

Police responded to the shooting outside the Lex at Lowry apartment complex, 240 South Monaco Parkway, at about 12:40 a.m., according to the department.

Neighbors said a large party was going on at a recreation room in one of the seven-story buildings when partygoers began streaming out.

“All of a sudden, just a flood of people came running out,” one neighbor said.

The complex is made up of seven-story apartment blocks, as well as smaller, two-story units.

Sharon Gibeault, 58, who lives in building A of the complex, said she heard the shots but thought they were fireworks. “I came out on the balcony and there were like hundreds of kids running,” she said.

Her son and daughter, who live in building C, were returning in a taxi from a night downtown when they, too, heard the shots, she said.

The cab driver told them not to leave the car, she said. “They said, it’s OK, it is only fireworks,” Gibeault said.

When the pair left the cab, they saw the body of one man, and Gibeault’s son, a former U.S. Navy medic, went to help him.

“They realized the kid was beyond help and the shooter was still out here, so they left,” Gibeault said.

The two declined to be interviewed.

Tony Rangeo, 21, said after hearing the shots, he saw as many as 50 young people on the sidewalk in front of the building. “A lot of people were screaming,” he said.

When Rangeo came closer, he said he saw the bodies of two males on the sidewalk, one on either side of the door into the building. One had been shot in the head, he said.

One man was dead at the scene, and the second died later at a hospital.

Other residents said the complex, which includes a number of smaller buildings, is usually peaceful.

“We had a situation outside an apartment complex. We don’t know what transpired, but two were shot,” said Sonny Jackson, a Denver police spokesman.

Police are investigating, Jackson said.

Tom McGhee: 303-954-1671, tmcghee@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dpmcghee