Coming off a year when business owners and executives were much more optimistic about improving business conditions, many have changed their tune.



Confidence in U.S. business conditions this year has tanked compared with 2015, according to the McDonald Hopkins 2016 Business Outlook Survey. Just 44% of business owners anticipate improving conditions this year. Comparatively, 78% of respondents expected improving business conditions in the 2015 report.



The reasons for that 34 percentage-point drop in confidence are varied, but much of the concern is chalked up to the coming presidential election, stock market turmoil and the impact of government regulations.



“The future for the next four years is hinging on the election — no matter which way it goes,” noted one respondent.



The sixth annual survey was conducted throughout January. The firm does not specify how many individuals took the survey.



Notably, 28% of respondents say they actually expect business conditions to decline, compared with just 7% last year. Despite that, 63% of business owners expect conditions to improve within their own companies — just a decline of 10 percentage points from last year.



“It is particularly interesting that business leaders are more optimistic about their own organizations than the business outlook overall,” said Carl Grassi, president of McDonald Hopkins, in a news release about the survey.



Regarding the presidential election, most surveyed believe little will be accomplished in the way of tax reform. A majority of respondents (71%) say comprehensive tax reform is important to their companies, but 77% are not optimistic that the election will make that any easier to achieve.



Marking a continuation from 2015, increasing health care costs continue to top respondents’ list of challenges to companies in 2016 — 65% of those surveyed say they expect the Affordable Care Act to have a negative impact on their bottom line.



Behind health care costs, the other top concerns facing business owners, according to the survey, are retaining profit margins and government regulations.



“We continue to get buried with more and more government paperwork,” one respondent said. “It is nearly impossible to learn about and comply with the dozens of new regulations that get enacted, and the government doesn’t have the money or manpower to educate us about them.”