Sinai Health System CEO Alan Channing is retiring after 10 years as head of one of Chicago's most successful safety-net health networks.

With a keen ability to operate hospitals on a shoestring, Mr. Channing's efforts gained the system's flagship Mount Sinai Hospital a national reputation as an organization on a mission to serve the Southwest Side's poorest residents, regardless of the financial burden.

“I am proud of what we have accomplished together in my time here, and I know that Sinai is well-positioned to be successful in the future,” Mr. Channing, 69, said in a statement the health system issued late yesterday, adding that he will “play with the grandkids, annoy my spouse, rediscover my hobbies and be supportive of Sinai while exploring other options.”

Mr. Channing's biggest achievement came in early 2013, when he engineered the unlikely merger of Sinai, a nearly 100-year-old institution founded to serve Jewish immigrants, with its Catholic neighbor 7 miles to the south, Holy Cross Hospital.

STRATEGIC POSITIONING

That combination created a private safety-net system with more than $525 million in annual revenue and provided financial strength in numbers that neither hospital had alone.

Moreover, said former Holy Cross CEO Wayne Lerner, the merger strategically positioned both hospitals to serve the influx of Medicaid patients newly eligible as of Jan. 1 for the state-federal program as part of the Affordable Care Act.

“Alan resonated with that vision and Alan took the lead,” said Mr. Lerner, now a director on the Cook County Health and Hospitals System board. "He carried that ball with his board, and the board had the same vision."

Mr. Channing will serve until July 1. The Sinai board has started the process to name a replacement, with an announcement expected in May, Chairman Gary Niederpruem said in Sinai's statement.

Mr. Channing, a graduate of the University of Cincinnati and Ohio State University, joined Sinai in 2004 after serving seven years as CEO of St. Vincent Charity Hospital and St. Luke's Medical Center in Cleveland. Before that he was CEO at three hospitals in the New York City Health and Hospitals Corp.