When Erin Vincent asked her debutantes-to-be to pick a gift from the stack on the table, most of the girls went for the packages that were expertly wrapped.

However, when Vincent, director of Ladies Promoting and Advocating Sisterhood and Service, asked the girls to open their presents, it was the poorly wrapped ones that bore treasures, while the pristinely wrapped presents were full of wadded up paper.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

"Today's lesson is about self image," Vincent said. "You thought nice stuff was in it because the box was nice, right?"

The debutantes-in-training nodded their heads and Vincent proceeded with her lesson, teaching the girls the importance of appearance and first impressions during one of the debutant workshops held in a conference room at the Columbia Public Library.

Three years ago, Vincent was mentoring girls one day a week at Hickman High School. "It grew into something I loved so I took it and made it into my own," Vincent said of creating Ladies Pass three years ago. The following year she decided to add the cotillion and debutant program.

Vincent said the debutant program is open to girls in Columbia high schools and will teach them the different social skills — like proper self image, manners and confidence — that will take the young women into adulthood.

"After the six months of preparation it cumulates into the cotillion; that's where they'll be able to show Columbia — their friends, family and community leaders and members — what they've learned," Vincent said.

Rashaya Miller, 19, was crowned last year's debutante queen and has come back to help with the future debutantes. Miller said during her time in the debutante program, besides learning how to curtsey and waltz, she also learned about sisterhood and the importance of teamwork. "The most memorable experience was having your loved ones and friends come out and actually have some growth to show for," Miller said.

Miller added she hopes to one day be a leader in a program like Ladies PASS, just like Vincent.

Kiona Hughes, 18, is a senior at Hickman High School. She had seen Vincent, who also goes to her church, working with other girls in her school, so one day she got up the courage to talk to Vincent and became involved with the debutant program. "I'm learning about myself and how to get out of my comfort zone. Me doing the cotillion is a big step to build my confidence," Hughes said.

Chataqua Redmond, 14, a freshman at Hickman, said she's most excited for the ball where she and the other girls will get to wear white ball gowns and opera-length gloves. However, she said she's also learned a lot through the workshops. "I've learned how to be mature about different situations and what I can do to better myself," she said.

Alyssia Thorpe, 16, from Rock Bridge High School was one of the few girls who chose the poorly wrapped presents at the beginning of the workshop. Thorpe's gift was filled with makeup. Of the experience, Thorpe said she's learned how to dress like a lady. She said she used to wear sweatpants to school every day, but now she makes more of an effort to dress up.

Nine girls are in this year's debutante program.

The girls will be presented to society on April 6 at the Tiger Hotel.