The Republican presidential primary is not over. You wouldn’t know that listening to Donald Trump, who now claims to have won the race with a plurality of votes (and more importantly, delegates).

Because if Trump truly believed he was home-free, wouldn’t he reach out to the many, many elements of the party that he has spent months savaging?

But as Amanda Carpenter pointed out in the Conservative Review, Trump seems rather to be pivoting to a general election strategy, and voicing more centrist positions - without ever having expressed any conservative positions. In fact, he doesn’t seem interested in solidifying the conservative vote.

“We have now reached the pinnacle of Donald Trump’s primary campaign,” she wrote. “He is the only candidate left standing who can mathematically become the nominee on the first ballot of the Republican convention in July. So why is it still so hard for so many Republicans to support him? Why does it feel downright dirty to even entertain the possibility of slapping a Trump bumper sticker on your car?”

The reasons - and there are many of them - can be summed up in one notion. Trump disdains conservatism and the principles it’s founded upon - limited government, the Constitution, freedom and accountability.

“He’s willing to raise taxes,” she pointed out. “He thinks he can order military men and women to engage in ISIS-like torture methods. He is utterly unable to defend the pro-life cause. He supports ethanol subsidies. He has given money to Planned Parenthood and Obamacare-supporting Democrats. He wants to change free speech laws to make it harder for people to criticize him. He supported both the bank and auto bailouts. The list goes on.”

There’s really only one conclusion to draw here.

“He doesn’t want help from committed conservatives,” Carpenter wrote. “He’s making no effort to court them probably because he doesn’t want them. Why else would he skip CPAC? Or so many of the other activist-driven state party conventions where delegates are selected? To him, the conservative organizations that have thrown their heart and soul behind elected Tea Party insurgents are just as bad as the Bush boys. To him, they’re all part of the establishment and he’s ready to throw them all out. Just forget them all.”

Trump will be doomed in the general election, if he’s the nominee.

No one with his negatives can win, and that’s before the Democrats unleash the tidal wave of opposition research they’ve been collecting on his frauds, his failings and his ties to the mob.

But he is also doomed by his disdain of many in the party he so recently joined.

“There’s no room in the Trump Party for the conservative activists who believe in the quaint principles of liberty with those silly tri-corner hats. It’s all about Trump’s ego and the deals he makes. If Trump felt any differently, he would have at least tried extending an olive branch to conservatives.”

Thankfully, there’s still time for the conservatives in the party to prevent the Trump disaster that seems so imminent.