Coaches love to talk about big time players shining in the biggest moments, so it was no wonder that Tampa Bay Tech coach Jayson Roberts couldn’t wipe the smile from his face as he talked about senior quarterback Deon Cain’s performance in Friday’s 42-25 win against Durant.

In arguably his biggest game, the Titan senior carried the ball 26 times for 352 yards and five touchdowns, dwarfing his previous career best of 276 yards and two rushing touchdowns this season against Gaither.

“I had a feeling he was going to have a big night,” Roberts said of Cain. “I didn’t think they were going to be prepared for what we were going to do with him.”

On top of Friday’s touchdown rushes of 50, 3, 45, 48 and 50 yards, Cain had nine rushes for first downs. His yardage total (which also included 67 passing yards) topped his next nearest teammate by more than 300 yards as receiver Daquon Green rushed for 20 yards and caught a 16-yard pass in the win.

Cain admitted to a little chip on his shoulder against Durant, not just for the Week 2 loss TBT suffered to the Cougars this season, but dating to his sophomore year when the Titans’ season came to a close in the same round with a 34-7 loss at Ron Frost Field.

But on Friday, Cain’s celebration was short-lived. In the postgame circle, the senior and Clemson commit addressed his team saying, “This win is over, now we get to work again.”

The Titans take on Sickles next week, another team that defeated TBT (21-14) and held Cain in check (103 yards passing and 52 rushing).

“I’m glad it’s Sickles,” Roberts said. “Just like we were happy to have a second opportunity at Durant, we’ll be fired up for our second opportunity against Sickles.”

McCloud moves to top of county’s rushing list

It took four years and a playoff game on Friday night, but Sickles running back Ray Ray McCloud III finally passed all the great Hillsborough County running backs before him, including Carrollwood Day’s Robert Davis, Riverview’s Avious Steadman, Gaither’s Lydell Ross, Armwood’s Kalvin Bailey and …

Without question, there is no one left for McCloud to pass.

McCloud clinched the top spot after rushing 31 times for 141 yards in a 9-7 victory over Plant City. The effort gave him 5,579 career rushing yards, just three ahead of the mark set in 2012 by Davis.

Brooks questionable

Plant starting running back Patrick Brooks sprained his achilles tendon in the second quarter and didn’t return during the Panthers’ 29-7 victory over Orlando Boone.

Brooks, who rushed for 1,293 yards in the regular season, will be assessed on a daily basis and may still play in Friday’s second-round Class 8A playoff game against Dr. Phillips, Plant coach Robert Weiner said.

“He didn’t tear (the tendon) but he was wearing a (protective boot) Friday night,” Weiner said. “If he plays or notw depends on how he recovers the next few days.”

Top performers

Spoto’s Kevin Hobley and Todd Sims — Hobley threw two touchdown passes and Sims rushed for three in the Spartans’ 42-6 blowout of Lake Wales, the first playoff victory in Spoto’s football history.

Tampa Bay Tech’s Deon Cain — Cain’s performance from Friday night’s 42-25 victory over Durant is worth repeating: 26 carries, 352 yards and five touchdowns.

Armwood’s defense — The Hawks shut out Largo, 38-0, giving them eight shutouts on the season. Armwood also has allowed only three points in their last eight games and 23 total for the season.

Jesuit quarterback Trent Wessel — The senior rushed for three touchdowns and passed for another in the Tigers’ 35-28 victory over Auburndale.

Plant quarterback Rex Culpepper — The junior rushed for a touchdown and threw two more in the Panthers’ 29-7 victory over Orlando Boone.