This just in: Gravity was only a theory and no longer applies here on earth, mortality has been annulled and pigs do indeed fly. I have faithfully adhered to the old notion that Trump’s orbit would degrade and when it slowed enough the combination of friction and gravity would bring him down to earth in a fiery orange blaze.

Clearly, I have been wrong, really wrong, amazingly wrong. However, though wrong, I have not been lonely. Virtually all serious newsies have kept me company. Our “common wisdom” has proved to be the oxymoron that “common wisdom” usually is.

I have been in denial–and I remain in denial. I have no theory that gives Trump more than a majority of Evangelical voters. It’s damn liberal of them to back a libertine. I have no theory to deal with rock-ribbed conservatives, the so-called, “Movement conservatives,” voting for Trump–who is many things but conservative is not one of them.

Yes, it’s a strange year when Trump, who was a life-long Democrat until recently and Bernie, who still isn’t a Democrat, are where they are. It’s a stern rebuke to the party professionals that so many, both liberals and conservatives, feel angry and alienated.

It’s both a strange year, and a stern rebuke to our party system, when the two most likely nominees, Hillary and Trump, are the least liked, and will enter their cage match with higher unfavorable ratings than favorable. Both have core supporters, but their common task will be to motivate those lukewarm to come out and vote for them. How will Hillary get Bernie’s true-believers to vote for her? How will Trump get ethnic and religious minorities, women and principled conservatives to come out?

Their common tactic will be fear. Underlying their mutual attacks on each others character and honesty, will be the issue of the Supreme Court. It is true that the Supreme Court nominations are consequential. The next president will likely get three picks–including the currently vacant Scalia seat.

Hillary will claim, with reason, that Trump’s Justices would reverse Roe v Wade, fatally wound ObamaCare and eliminate environmental regulations. Trump will claim, with some reason, that Hillary’s Justices will revisit Citizens United, all campaign finance laws and find in favor of stricter gun regulations.

I hesitate to predict anything about this election cycle, having been so consistently wrong, but I figure with a record like mine, I’m due to be right. I mean the law of averages is on my side. So here it is (and it feels so safe as to be self evident): In terms of dirt and name calling, we ain’t seen nothing yet. The name calling will get worse. Trump will not hesitate to pillory Hillary with sins of omission and commission–not to mention Bill with his sins of emission. “Crooked Hillary,” is from the kinder and more disciplined Trump. Hillary’s surrogates, more than Hillary herself, don’t really need to manufacture anything to smear Trump. It’s out there and most of it is true. The problem is that it’s largely already known and hasn’t damaged him yet. Not even with religious conservatives.

I thought that Trump was a joke and so naturally, I laughed. I’m not laughing now. Paradoxically now that I realize the true gravity of the situation, gravity itself has been rescinded.

©2016 Jonathan Dobrer

www.Dobrer.com

Follow me on Twitter @jondobrer