Lt. Gov. Kathy Hochul in January announces a state task force to support the Rochester-Monroe Anti-Poverty Initiative. (Photo: Patti Singer/PattiSingerRoc)

Talking about how Rochester will take on the poverty that lands it on lists no city wants to be on, Assembly Majority Leader Joseph Morelle thought of another seemingly impossible challenge.

“I feel like (President John) Kennedy announcing we’re going to the moon,” Morelle said. “And they didn’t have anything built.”

The community got its blueprint Sunday when Lt. Gov. Kathy Hochul came to the Monroe Campus of the Hillside Family of Agencies to announce the Rochester Anti-Poverty Task Force. The plan, part of Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s 2015 Opportunity Agenda, brings together city and county government, business, nonprofits, service organizations and academia to coordinate services and evaluate what they’re doing based on changes in the lives of the people they are trying to help.

Rochester Mayor Lovely Warren and Morelle talked about the need for a coordinated effort.

“It’s a fundamental shift in how this community addresses poverty,” said Morelle.

The task force is one of several aspects of the governor’s economic opportunity agenda, which he’s been rolling out ahead of Wednesday’s State of the State address and release of the budget.

The Rochester initiative builds off a 10-point statewide plan Cuomo also announced Sunday to combat poverty and inequality. That broader initiative includes measures to increase the minimum wage to $10.50 per hour, double funding for urban youth jobs programs, invest in affordable housing, add to services for the homeless, boost funding for anti-hunger programs and increase opportunities for minority- and women-owned businesses.

As with the rest of the governor’s agenda, it will go before the legislature and likely be subject to budget battles.

But the task force is no pie-in-the-sky dream, Morelle said: “This is real.”

Morelle said he didn’t know how much it would cost to fix the ills that gives Rochester, compared to similarly sized cities, among the highest amounts of people living in poverty, the highest concentrations of poverty and the highest number of children in poverty, according to data from the Rochester Area Community Foundation and others.

He said smarter spending, not necessarily more money, could buy better results. The task force will focus on housing, health and nutrition, education, workforce training and jobs, and safe neighborhoods.

The task force has been in the works for months, since Cuomo told some community leaders to “think bigger” about ways to eradicate the poverty that has plagued certain areas of the city.

But it wasn’t ready to go public until Hochul made the official introduction of the task force.

“Poverty is everyone’s problem,” she said to approximately 150 representatives of the agencies that used to pretty much operate on their own and now are figuring out how to work together to solve it.

“We’re connecting the dots,” said Jaime Saunders, chief executive officer of Alternatives for Battered Women. “We can’t be in our own sandbox and make impactful change. The dialogue is focusing on one agenda.”

The problem has persisted for years — Warren said it was generational. That so many people turned out after getting an email of the event the night before was testimony to the urgency.

“We can’t stay the course,” Saunders said. “We’re responding to a crisis. We’re in a crisis ... The fact that the lieutenant governor is here is a game-changer.”

As the agenda develops, it will be about making individuals a partner in the process of ending poverty.

“It’s not about a handout but a hand up,” Warren told the group. “It’s not about how we can help you, but how we can help you help yourself.”

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1IZug1B