TRANSGENDER DEBATE

Driven by zealots

The current transgender “problem” has presented itself for the benefit of political opportunists who wish to garner the votes of biblical purists in Bible Belt states like North Carolina.

What toilet facilities were transgender people using before the subject was politicized? No one noticed because they were using the facilities they preferred.

That is, if you look and act like a female, use the women’s facilities.

And vice versa.

We will have serious problems if females that look like males start using men’s facilities.

And vice versa.

But this is the whole idea of the evangelicals who, of course, believe transgender people are sinful and should “ change their ways.”

Charles R. Rosenberger, Jacksonville

OBAMA’S RECORD

It’s hardly radical

I am replying to a recent letter by a Fleming Island writer criticizing President Barack Obama’s record in office.

It is so irresponsible and unintelligent to continue to use selective amnesia regarding Obama’s presidency.

From the moment of Obama’s inauguration in 2009 to the present day, it has been evident — as confirmed by the words of current Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell — that the Republicans in Congress were not going to carry out their constitutional duties at any point during his administration (though they failed to keep their vow to make Obama a “one-term president”).

The Constitution has been trampled on by the elected body in Congress, not by Obama, our elected commander–in-chief.

The Affordable Care Act was passed by lawmakers who saw the need for such legislation, and it has been upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court.

And, up to this point, all of Obama’s executive orders have been found to be constitutional. The reason they have become necessary is because of Congress’ inability to act.

The Supreme Court has followed the law except when it has been politically useful to carefully skirt issues to achieve the political goals of some of the justices.

Sadly, Congress is still doing harm to the country by refusing to acknowledge Obama’s nomination of Judge Merrick Garland for the Supreme Court.

The world is watching our country, one that is supposed to be the template for democracy. Right now, however, we appear to be a laughingstock.

Oh, but no problem.

Just blame Obama.

John Gay, Lake City

TRAUMA AWARENESS MONTH

A worthy cause

May is Trauma Awareness Month, but what many are unaware of is that UF Health TraumaOne — an adult and pediatric Level One trauma center — was the first trauma center in the state, beginning its work in 1983.

Since then, there have been everyday heroes in the form of:

■ Police.

■ First responders.

■ Helicopter pilots.

■ Nurses.

■ Specialised surgeons.

■ Numerous other medical experts.

And all of them have been providing life saving care to more than 4,000 trauma victims each year.

Serving 30 counties in Northeast Florida and Southeast Georgia, TraumaOne’s tagline is “Every Second Counts.”

And that tagline accurately describes the difference each second makes during a traumatic injury or accident.

Based on the goals of raising awareness, showing appreciation and raising funds, the 2nd annual Run for Heroes 5K will be held Saturday, May 28, in Unity Plaza at 220 Riverside Avenue.

The 5K run will begin at 8 a.m., and a one-mile Fun Run will be held at 9 a.m. There will be medals for every registered child and cold treats available at the finish line.

Join us as we:

■ Support TraumaOne.

■ Honor our local heroes.

■ Raise awareness during Trauma Awareness Month.

You can register for our event at this website: www.prsractiming.com.

Aly Leeper, race coordinator,

Jacksonville

DUVAL SCHOOLS

A lack of moral courage

The current members of the Duval County School Board should resign.

But their last act before resigning should be to fire School Superintendent Nikolai Vitti.

To even consider allowing boys into a restroom for girls is obvious evidence that someone is either too stupid to be in charge or so overeducated that they can no longer see the obvious.

If a male wants to get hormones injected and surgery performed to have a female’s anatomy, it doesn’t mean that person becomes a woman. We still have a male, just one who is mixed up.

If the School Board wants to hire a counselor to help these confused students, I would applaud it.

For the School Board members to be so timid, cowardly and unbelievably politically correct that they have not rescinded or overruled Vitti’s transgender bathroom decision is such an obvious affront to good sense, normal convention and generations of Judeo-Christian values that it defies belief by any rational person.

Such a lack of action and moral courage should cause any person with decency to resign in shame at being so demonstrably unable to lead.

Alec Lawson, Southside