The Democratic minority in the Alabama Senate says Medicaid expansion is its top priority for the legislative session.

The caucus met on Thursday and issued a news release today about its priorities for the session, which begins March 3.

Senate Democrats called for Gov. Robert Bentley to agree to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, as they have for the last two years.

They say it would provide 325,000 Alabamians with health coverage and would stimulate the economy, create jobs and help resolve the state's budget shortfall.

The Affordable Care Act allows federal funds to pay for most of the cost of expanding Medicaid coverage to households earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty limit. That would be about $33,000 for a family of four.

The state's costs would rise too, but a study by health care economists at UAB concluded that expansion would generate enough new tax revenue to more than offset that.

Another study by Troy University's Manuel H. Johnson Center for Political Economy reached a different conclusion, finding that expansion would result in a net cost to the state.

Bentley opposes expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, but has recently said his administration is exploring the idea of a applying for a federal block grant to expand Medicaid.

Bentley announced last week he would propose a $700 million tax increase during his State of the State address next week to address a projected shortfall in the state's General Fund.

In today's news release, the Democrats expressed concern about the burden of increased taxes on families and called for an end to loopholes that they say allow corporations to avoid taxes.

Democrats said they will work to prevent charter school legislation from reducing funding for public schools. The Republican majority has announced that it plans to pass legislation authorizing charter schools.

Charter schools are publicly funded schools which operate under rules in a charter, rather than all the normal regulations of traditional public schools.

Senate Minority Leader Quinton Ross, D-Montgomery, said he plans to sponsor a bill for universal pre-kindergarten in the state.

Prison reform is expected to be a key topic during the legislative session.

Related to that, the Democrats plan to support creation of a social justice training program. It would include sensitivity training for law enforcement officers to fight profiling, as well as teaching young people about their legal rights.

Democrats hold only eight seats in the 35-member Senate, down from 11 last term.