A woman holds a globe with the letters SOS while taking part in a march against climate change in New York on September 21, 2014. Reuters

ROBERT RAPIER: What is the most important question in the climate debate that supporters and opponents are overlooking?

The answer to this question is different for supporters and opponents. For opponents, the most overlooked question is whether they have attempted to quantify the possibility that they are wrong about the impacts of climate change, and whether some sort of risk mitigation is appropriate given the possibility they are wrong.

An analogy I use sometimes is that of homeowner’s insurance. The chance of a person’s house burning down is low, but the outcome is potentially devastating. Thus, regardless of whether a person believes that it is extremely unlikely that their house will burn down, they have homeowner’s insurance so they can afford another home should that low risk probability materialize.

In the climate debate, opponents have to acknowledge that there is some probability that they are wrong, and given the severity of the potential consequences risk mitigation is warranted even if they believe that there is a 99% chance that their position is correct.

On the side of supporters I believe the most important overlooked question is about the most likely outcome. When I am working on a problem, I often ask the questions “What is the optimal outcome?”, “What is the most likely outcome?”, and “How much influence do I have to make the ‘optimal outcome’ the ‘most likely outcome’?” If I find that the answer to the last question is “not much,” then I have to think about how to deal with the most likely outcome.

The Copenhagen Accord stipulates that in order to avoid the worst impacts of climate change, the global temperature rise needs to be kept below 2°C relative to preindustrial temperature levels. But studies have projected that even if the carbon-emission reduction pledges from the Copenhagen Accord are met, there is still little chance of keeping the temperature rise below 2°C.

Perhaps that would open the door for more serious discussion of radical options that climate-change supporters have generally resisted, such as geoengineering. That is of course not an option to be considered lightly, but if it’s highly likely that the temperature will increase by more than 2°C, we have to start broadening the possible mitigation options.

Robert Rapier (@RRapier) director of alternative-fuels technology for Advanced Green Innovations LLC, a Chandler, Ariz.-based technology-development company focused on alternative-energy resources and delivery mechanisms. He serves as managing editor for Energy Trends Insider and is chief investment strategist for Investing Daily’s Energy Strategist service.

Read the latest Energy Report.