Danica Patrick describes how racing drivers use aerodynamics to slow down their rivals. Jonathan Welsh

With the Daytona 500 just about a month away, racing fans are asking whether driver Danica Patrick could possibly match her performance in the 2013 edition of stock-car racing’s biggest event.

Patrick, who last February was embarking on her rookie season as a full-time driver in Nascar’s Sprint Cup series, grabbed the pole position in qualifying, led the Daytona race and finished 8th in an impressive debut. But the 31-year-old driver who has been racing since elementary school told Speakeasy she is looking for ways to top what she did last year, not match it.

“As soon as you do well there is pressure to do it again, and to do it better,” she said. And this year, new rules could help.

Nascar changed certain measurements for Sprint Cup cars in an effort to increase downforce that helps keeps the cars firmly planted on the track. New rules include a wider radiator pan, a part on the front end that should now generate more downward pressure. The cars’ rear spoilers will rise to eight inches high from 7.25 inches previously.

After completing pre-season test laps in the new racer, Patrick said the revised spoiler and front-end bodywork seem to make the cars more stable and should keep them from generating aerodynamic turbulence that can lead to loss of control when the cars are racing in tight packs. However, she has yet to drive the car “in traffic,” to see exactly how it will handle with others racing close by.

In the past, she said, many drivers have been known for getting their front fenders close enough to a rival’s rear spoiler that the resulting turbulence causes the car in front to become unstable and slow down.

The new spoiler should make it more difficult to do that, Patrick said.

The run-up to the Daytona 500 begins February 14 with practice for the Sprint Unlimited, a 75-lap invitational race that runs the next day. Racers will also compete in the two Budweiser Duel races Feb 20 before officially kicking off the season with the Daytona 500 on Feb 23.