Exploding target caught dry brush on fire

Crews battle a small grass fire west of Loveland near the 6500 block of North County Road 27. They contained the fire to 1.5 acres. (Loveland Fire Rescue Authority)

A grass fire was reported and quickly contained Sunday afternoon about three miles north of U.S. 34 on County Road 27.

Jason Starck, battalion chief with the Loveland Fire and Rescue department, said a man and his son were shooting at exploding targets on a neighbor's property — as they had permission to do — and one of the explosives caught fire on some dry brush.

The man, who didn't wish to comment, drove down to his home nearby and called the fire department at around 12:49 p.m.

Loveland Fire and the Larimer County Sheriff's department responded to the scene.

"Because of the high wind up there ... the wind was blowing it north," Starck said. "Our saving grace was the wind blew (the fire) into a rock face instead of down into the valley."

Starck said they initially sent two brush trucks and a water truck up to the scene, and then called in support from Poudre Fire Authority. They had 16 firemen up on a ridge west of County Road 27 to contain the fire, which only spread about one and a half acres.

"It's just a work of cleaning it up, making sure it's all out," Starck said at 2:45 p.m. To that end, firemen doused the entire area in water.

"We've had numerous problems with exploding targets," Starck said. "People don't realize how hot they burn or how easily they can catch fire."

He said while there has been moisture this spring, it just takes a couple days of 70- and 80-degree weather to dry out the brush and grass in the foothills.

Advertisement

"The gentleman said it was like gasoline, it took so fast," he said.

The National Weather Service issued a fire weather watch Sunday afternoon for Tuesday across Northeast Colorado and Larimer County below 6,000 feet. The alert at www.weather.gov said “strong winds will develop as a storm system exits northeast Colorado Tuesday morning. The strong winds will persist through the day. Low relative humidities in the teens and dry fuels will likely further exacerbate the fire danger.”

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com