Mabel Burrows never expected to marry the soldier she started writing letters to on a whim during World War II . She certainly didn’t anticipate spending the next 70 years with him.

Mabel and her husband, Robert, celebrated their 70th wedding anniversary Sunday.

“I met his sister, and we became good friends,” said Mabel Burrows, 88.

She began writing letters to Robert, who was overseas at the time, as a teenager.

“We wrote for a year or two,” she said. ” When he came home, we got married.”

That was in March of 1946. Since then, the couple has raised six children and witnessed the birth of 17 grandchildren, 27 great-grandchildren and five great-great-grandchildren.

“The Lord’s been good to us,” said Robert Burrows, 91.

Though the couple has endured its share of challenges, like caring for two disabled children, they said the keys are simple.

“Forgiveness,” Mabel said. “Always be considerate. Do what you can to try and help.”

Mabel and Robert keep the love alive through their shared passion for travel. Just last year, they took a trip to England. And they spend every Thanksgiving with family members in Arizona.

Almost the entire family came together Sunday to celebrate their anniversary. Friends and five generations of children and grandchildren filed into the Broomfield Community Center to congratulate them.

Mabel and Robert have defied the odds.

According to the American Psychological Association, 40 to 50 percent of all marriages end in divorce.

The couple’s granddaughter, Andrea Miller,said their happy marriage is something to aspire to.

“They’re inspiring to me,” Andrea said. “I would have moved mountains to be here today. When we get together, it’s familiar and comfortable. It makes you feel like you’re home.”

Pat and Lou Zoghby,friends of the couple, said Mabel and Robert have always gotten along well.

“I think it’s love and duty that made it work,” Pat Zoghby said. “They just complement each other.”

Katy Canada: 303-954-1043, kcanada@denverpost.com or @KatySusanna