Buy Photo Youth Gov. Tyler Dorr, left, talks with Juwan Cross after the State of the State address in the House chambers at the Capitol during the YMCA's Youth in Government Conference Friday in Nashville. (Photo: George Walker IV / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

The Tennessee House of Representatives was bustling Sunday with suits, blazers, heels, bow ties and even a pocket square or two.

But the people wearing the clothes weren't elected by voters across the state. Instead, they were high school students participating in the Tennessee YMCA's Youth in Government — a mock government program to draw students into the political process, replete with a press corps and robed justices.

The student government voted 26 bills into law over the four-day conference. The students penned legislation on topics that could be found on the agenda of the elected officials: health and safety, education, discrimination and the environment took priority.

"They are not here to play. They are serious. They give up their time," said Susan Moriarty, executive director of the YMCA's Center for Civic Engagement.

Story continues after the photo

One bill proposed by the youth governor, Tyler Dorr, would — hypothetically, of course — amend TennCare to include a diabetes prevention program sponsored by the YMCA. Dorr, a senior at Pope John Paul II High School, traveled to Washington, D.C., to meet with federal lawmakers about the program on a national scale.

"It helped people and saved money, so it just seemed like a great idea," Dorr said.

More than 600 students filled the Capitol from Thursday to Sunday, Moriarty said. More than 800 will walk the halls next weekend for the second conference. The program is split into two weekends to accommodate the number of delegates from high schools across the state.

There are more than three dozen state youth legislature programs across the country, but Tennessee is one of only a few where the students are able to use a working Capitol building.

"I think there are many great opportunities to get involved, no matter how young you are," Dorr said.

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 or on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1CeuGBG