Sick of faux Republican McCain? Dr. Kelli Ward is real!

Conservative Republican Senate candidate Dr. Kelli Ward seeks to liberate Arizonans and America from entrenched faux Republican Sen. John McCain. If you're like me, your heart cries out for GOP candidates who are who they say they are: morally straight people who will do what they say they will do when elected. That's the bottom line, folks. People (candidates) make all kind of promises when they want something from you (your vote). GOP voters hunger for conservative candidates who are real. Dr. Kelli Ward is a cool, refreshing drink of water in the desert, a ray of sunshine – a source of hope for the future. We live in a time in which politicians in both parties begin each day calculating, "How can I fool them today?" With Dr. Ward, what you see is what you get. In other words, Dr. Ward is real: a real saver of lives in her role as a medical doctor, a real wife and mother of three, a real freedom-loving patriot, and a real conservative. Be still, my wounded patriot heart.

Dr. Ward vows real opposition to Obamacare, calling it a disaster and declaring that it must be "fully repealed in favor of free-market solutions." Right on, Kelli! I feel so close to Dr. Ward as a kindred-spirit sister in our fight to restore America that I feel I can address her by her first name. Sister Kelli says we need to make adjustments that focus on the dignity and independence that good jobs provide. As a black person from the hood of Baltimore, I really respond to Kelli's sensitivity to instilling dignity and independence. Black unemployment under Obama is through the roof. Thank God I had a dad and mom who worked and taught my four siblings and me to work. A large percentage of my black relatives bought the Democrats' evil scheme to secure loyal voters – keep voting for us, and we'll take care of you. Consequently, generations of blacks including my relatives were robbed of the "dignity and independence" of earning money. Far too many of my relatives were serial baby-daddies, incarcerated, died young due to drugs, AIDS, and crime. An idle mind is the devil's workshop. This is why liberalism is evil and conservatism is real compassion. Kelli says securing our border is one of the most pressing issues for Arizonans. Like you, Kelli is fed up with the political games regarding illegals. She wants no amnesty for millions of illegals, no free rides for programs Americans have paid into. Along with welfare, food stamps, health care, free lawyers, and more, Obama's amnesty includes gifting illegals almost ten grand in cash. It is outrageous; pure insanity, folks. I envision an administration spokesperson sounding like a game show announcer: "But wait, there's more! For breaking our immigration laws by entering the U.S. illegally, Obama is giving you...a new car!" Kelli's voting record as an Arizona state senator confirms that she is a real-deal conservative. Kelli vows real opposition to gun-grabbing schemes. Kelli says the Second Amendment is one of our most treasured liberties and must be protected. The prestigious group Gun Owners of America believe her, awarding Kelli with their endorsement. Regarding faith and family, Kelli boldly proclaims that traditional principles and values strengthen communities and make America stronger. Kelly is pro-life, pro-family, and pro-freedom. Folks, like yours, my heart has been broken by the GOP. We fought valiantly to award them the House and Senate. And still, the GOP gives us excuses why its only option is to surrender to Obama, giving him everything he wants. The GOP's inability to muster the courage to defund Planned Parenthood after the exposure of all the evil going on behind the abortionists' walls tells me we are in big trouble. And yes, I can understand why renowned Christian leader Franklin Graham tore up his GOP voter card. While I agree with brother Graham that our real hope is in the Lord rather than politics, I believe that God wants us to be salt – making a difference, pushing back against evil, fighting for positive change in every arena of life. The left has infected every area of American life with its radical socialist/progressive agenda. It has become almost impossible to enjoy a TV show, cooking, sports, or whatever without producers cramming a liberal agenda item down our throats. Thankfully, Christians are employing a similar strategy to spread the gospel of traditional American values. As a Christian and patriot, I cannot simply check out of the political arena because we have lost skirmishes. To do so would be a slap in the face to all who fought and entrusted us to defend freedom from our founding fathers to today. Patriots, we must remain diligent in our quest to transform the GOP, to fill its walls with rock-solid, real conservatives – one candidate at a time. As chairman of the Conservative Campaign Committee, I am proud to say we support Kelli, our kindred sister. Please, please join us in offering your support to Dr. Kelli Ward, a real conservative Republican. Let's help sister Kelli set free Arizonans and America from RINO McCain.