Don't assume judges are political clones.

Models hand out fliers in Denver last year encouraging people to buy insurance on Colorado’s health care exchange. (Photo: Brennan Linsley, AP)

When the District of Columbia Circuit ruled last week that the Obama administration was violating the Affordable Care Act (ACA) in authorizing billions in tax credits, it took little time for leading Democrats to respond. Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid promptly labeled the ruling in Halbig v. Burwell "absurd," simply the work of "activist Republican judges." Less than two hours later, Democratically appointed judges across the river in Virginia reached the opposite result in King v. Burwell. The response from the right was equally predictable: The judges were Democratic drones carrying the water for the White House.

In a scripted town that defines all issues in blue or red, the lineup of the judges fits both parties' preferred narrative. The opposing side was reduced to shameless opportunists. With that, the world made perfect sense and everyone was happy. The Potomac became simply another river with a left and right bank. Where you stand determines what is true.

Faux partisanship

The only problem is that none of it is true.

The Halbig and King decisions had little to do with health care or contemporary politics. The courts rendered decisions on an arcane area called legisprudence, the study and interpretation of legislation. For legisprudence geeks like me, the decisions were the World Cup of statutory interpretation theory. The D.C. Circuit followed a long-standing approach that closely tracks the text to avoid large alterations in federal law through judicial decision-making. The Fourth Circuit followed an equally well recognized approach that resolves conflicts in laws according to more "holistic" readings of the law.

I view the D.C. Circuit as correct in its interpretation. However, I find it deeply offensive to see people attack the democratically appointed judges in the Fourth Circuit as ideologues. (The author of the opinion, Judge Roger Gregory, is actually a hybrid — having been given a recess appointment by President Clinton but permanently put on the bench under President George W. Bush.)

The King decision is well-reasoned and, more important, consistent with a common, if not dominant, view of statutory interpretation that looks to the overall intent of a law from both the text and legislative history to resolve conflicts.

Likewise, the portrayal by Reid and others of Judges Thomas Griffith and Raymond Randolph as Republican robots is equally unfair. These judges came to the bench with a defined view of judicial interpretation that seeks to avoid encroachment into legislative authority.

Real issues

At issue in the cases was the law's Section 1401 that expressly links tax credits to insurance plans purchased "through an exchange established by the state." For a textualist, that line clearly limits tax credits to states that created their own exchanges. Conversely, it means that citizens in 36 states without such state exchanges (where citizens must use "federal exchanges") would not be able to claim such credits. For an intentionalist, however, the overall law seems to favor such tax credits, and the Fourth Circuit found that the IRS was reasonable in extending credits to people in states with only federal exchanges.

The conflict could have involved chicken subsidies, and the result would have been the same.

Similarly, when the Supreme Court comes out with a 5-4 opinion, both parties denounce the justices on the opposing sides as ideologues — ignoring the obvious problem that the justices on their side showed the same predictable alignment. The reason that the result was predictable is that honest jurists strive to consistently apply principles of statutory interpretation.

Reid, however, assured Democrats that when the Halbig case goes before the full D.C. Circuit, a majority of Democratically nominated judges means it becomes "simple math." Republicans are saying the same about the Supreme Court lineup. Both sides could find themselves disappointed. Jurists are not so easily pegged by political affiliation like some election night red or blue states on CNN's "magic wall."

What occurred last week on either side of the Potomac captured a divide in legal theory that has existed for decades, not cheap partisan politics.

Of course, none of this matters in today's politics. People who disagree with us must be without honor. It is not enough to disagree with judges' opinions; we must despise the judges. Regardless of how the next group of judges come out on these interpretive questions, we should at least be willing to accept that they are acting on long-standing judicial principles, not the partisan emotions of the moment.

Jonathan Turley, the Shapiro Professor of Public Interest Law at George Washington University, is a member of USA TODAY's Board of Contributors.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the opinion front page or follow us on twitter @USATopinion or Facebook.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1n0kelc