Although it hasn't received final federal approval, the Corbett administration has notified nearly a million state residents of changes to their health insurance come Jan. 1.

On top of that, Gov.-elect Tom Wolf, who takes office Jan. 20, plans to undo those changes, which are part of Gov. Tom Corbett's version of the Medicaid expansion called for by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, better known as Obamacare.

Is a train wreck in the making?

In an interview this week, Beverly Mackereth, secretary of the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare, insisted the state is on a smooth track toward expanding government-subsidized health care to up to 600,000 people beginning Jan. 1, while also improving benefits to hundreds of thousands already covered by Medicaid.

"Our mission and our goal from day one is to ensure 600,000 individuals get health care by Jan. 1, and that's what we're trying to do," she said.

However, she acknowledged the potential for negative impacts for program users if Wolf puts the state on a different course after Jan. 20.

Following Corbett's election loss, Democratic-leaning advocates asked him to halt implementation of Healthy PA, which is Corbett's version of the Medicaid expansion that many Republican governors have resisted.

Mackereth said the state must continue to move forward to ensure the expanded coverage is available on Jan. 1. That coverage has already been available for nearly a year in states that accepted the Obamacare Medicaid expansion as is.

In devising Healthy PA, Corbett refused to expand coverage to people earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level, as prescribed by Obamacare, without first reforming the state's Medicaid program.

His reforms include reducing Medicaid from 14 benefit plans to three — a "high-risk" and a "low-risk" option, and one involving private coverage. Some of the affected people will have to pay a monthly premium equal to 2 percent of their income, although they can lower their premiums through healthy behaviors.

Democrats and advocates for the poor object to the changes, saying the premiums will be not be affordable for some people, that the changes involve a burdensome screening process, and that people will be vulnerable to losing coverage if they can't pay their premiums.

Mackereth insists program users will get better health care, and the program also is a better deal for taxpayers. She said Corbett seized an opportunity to reform a flawed program, while creating a new one to help up to 600,000 state residents who previously earned too much to receive Medicaid, but not enough to afford coverage on the Obamacare exchange.

"We want people to go to the doctor. We want people to get the health care they need. We want to keep people out of the emergency room. We want people to get preventive as well as long-term health care," she said.

She said streamlining and cost savings are achieved through steps such as the low-risk benefit plan, which is for people who don't have chronic medical conditions, and which will prevent the state from paying for unneeded benefits.

The part of Corbett's plan that extends benefits to up to 600,000 people, using private coverage rather than Medicaid, has received federal approval. But final approval is still pending for the changes to the Medicaid program.

Mackereth said it's not unusual for "amendments" to a state Medicaid plan to be implemented prior to receiving final federal approval. She said final approval is expected within three months. Further, DPW has been in regular contact with federal officials, who she said have signed off on components including the switch to the high and low options.

"We would not have moved forward at all had they not put that in writing," she said. "We didn't do this in a vacuum. We worked with them. There have been weekly, sometimes daily phone calls with them."

About 938,000 Pennsylvania households have received letters informing them of upcoming changes to their coverage. Some have received letters telling them their program will be discontinued and directing them to shop for coverage on the federally run exchange.

Asked about the potential for confusion, Mackereth said program users are accustomed to receiving registration notices and won't become confused. She also noted there are hotlines and a state website where people can obtain information or appeal if they feel the changes don't apply to them.

Meanwhile, Wolf has made it clear he plans to undo Corbett's plan, although exactly how and when remain to be seen.

Spokesman Jeffrey Sheridan said in an email, "As he has always said, Gov.-elect Wolf intends to fully expand Medicaid — Healthy PA is not that — and he will work with the appropriate parties to accomplish expansion. Expanding Medicaid as it is intended under the law will provide accessible health care for hundreds of thousands of Pennsylvanians, reduce unnecessary bureaucracy and provide billions for the state's economy."

Meanwhile, advocates are urging people to enroll in the new benefits — enrollment begins Dec. 1 — so they can be covered on Jan. 1. Information and a link to electronic enrollment can be found here.

Note: On Nov. 14, DPW Secretary Beverly Mackereth clarified her remarks, saying there could be assorted disruptions to health care programs and even some other programs that benefit people with lower incomes if Wolf undoes HealthyPA. This post was revised to reflect that.