The Rockies on Wednesday shut down rookie right-hander Jon Gray and veteran lefty Jorge De La Rosa for the season, manager Walt Weiss said.

Gray reached his pre-planned innings limit this season. Last season in the minor leagues, Gray pitched 124 innings. This season he increased to 155 between Triple-A and the major leagues. The Rockies called him up Aug. 4.

“It was pretty black and white,” Weiss said.

Gray’s poor outing Monday against the Pirates did not factor into the Rockies’ decision to end his season, Weiss said.

“It was never a thought,” he said.

WATCH: What’s your advice for Colorado Rockies’ Jon Gray?

Against the Pirates, Gray gave up two home runs in the first inning, then five runs on nine hits over 4 1/3 innings. He has struggled at Coors Field this season.

“I’ve pitched fine on the road,” Gray said. “I just can’t find that — whatever it is — to make an adjustment to pitch in this place.”

Gray compiled an 8.27 ERA at home, compared to 2.70 on the road.

“It’s been difficult for me, especially when you come from a road start and you come here,” Gray said. “You can’t start pitches where you used to.

Gray finished his debut season 0-2 with a 5.53 ERA in nine starts.

The Rockies’ plan for him in 2016 is to throw a complete season.

“He’ll still work on mechanics over the last couple weeks,” Weiss said. “And he’ll have a typical offseason. He should be built up and ready to go for a full season next year.”

De La Rosa aggravated a right Achilles tendinitis injury last week at Los Angeles. He was pulled from his turn in the rotation Wednesday and replaced by Christian Bergman, but the Rockies won’t try to bring him back next week.

The 34-year-old was also hampered by a groin injury and a finger blister on his pitching hand this season.

The Rockies now have a five-man rotation that includes Bergman, Chad Bettis, David Hale, Kyle Kendrick and Chris Rusin. Yohan Flande (knee bruise) was replaced by Hale for Friday’s start, but he still might pitch next week, Weiss said.