Bidding adieu to 2015 and looking ahead to 2016 and beyond, so much has gone wrong that only a fool (or a progressive) could fail to recognize the countless opportunities to learn from our mistakes.

Let’s learn from President Barack Obama’s disastrous track record. Obama endangered us and degraded the world’s view of the U.S. by embracing our enemies, by alienating, when not outright deserting, our allies and by advancing a foreign policy of haughty lectures that scold but fail to inspire, let alone instill confidence in friends or fear in foes.

Considering that the effect of his policies has been opposite what most Americans prefer, there are innumerable lessons to draw from the Obama misadventure.

Going into the new year, it is prudent to reverse each of the Obama trends: by delivering strong consequences when drawing “red lines” in the face of aggression, by standing by allies instead of pretending to “lead from behind” and by standing up to threats, as opposed to enabling, funding and tacitly approving them, as Obama has with Iran.

It’s wonderful how little muscle actually needs to be flexed when the other side believes you’re willing to flex it. And, as history teaches, it’s a horror to discover how much muscle eventually needs to be flexed after the other side assumed all along that you were unwilling to flex it.

It’s true that reversing seven years of feckless foreign policy isn’t likely to occur in the final year of this lame duck’s tenure. But, what is New Year’s if not a time of hope for change?

Congress, with the power of the purse, can, and should, at least slow down Obama’s runaway train in the coming year. Then the course can be reversed under a new president in 2017. The White House needs congressional appropriations, if not approval. It’s time for Congress to flex its muscle to get concessions and policy changes.

As long as we are facing facts, here are a few more to face up to so we can avoid living out that definition of insanity, which is doing the same thing and expecting different results.

Americans rightly place terrorism atop their list of concerns. Among lessons to learn are that Congress and public pressure must challenge this administration to reverse its foolhardy (at best) and devious (if you doubt Obama’s motives) approach to protecting the homeland.

Obama’s approach to terrorism within the nation’s borders would be ludicrous if it weren’t so dangerous. Nothing illustrates Obama’s counterintuitive national security folly better than his choice to head the U.S. Border Patrol, a former San Francisco police chief whose claim to fame was refusing to enforce federal immigration laws, instead, advocating a “sanctuary city” policy.

That’s on a par with Obama assurances that tens of thousands of Syrian refugees will be rigorously vetted, despite their hailing from a region where counterfeit passports and IDs are openly sold. He seems oblivious to the fact 29 individuals admitted to the U.S. from 2012-15 have been accused of terrorist plots, and that the federal government admits it can’t locate 9,500 foreigners whose visas have been revoked for terrorism concerns.

Republican presidential hopeful Ted Cruz explained the obvious: “[W]e can’t accept refugees that we can’t truly vet, and the vast majority of people coming from the Middle East are not people you can vet.”

There is something Obama has done right, but for the wrong reason. He has encouraged historically high levels of gun ownership. Granted, he says his intention is diametrically opposite the results he has achieved.

Americans who cherish their constitutional, God-given rights to self-defense of life and limb actually might say “thank you” for the anti-gun rhetoric coming from the White House. Obama the wannabe gun controller has become the nation’s leading gun salesman. We probably shouldn’t be surprised, considering that, as with so much in this counterintuitive administration, what is supposed to be the goal so often turns out to achieve the reverse. Obamacare was named the Affordable Care Act, if you need a reminder.

It may be difficult to improve on Obama’s positive results on gun ownership. But we should try.

One last hope for change in 2016 involves the increasing persecution and intolerance for Christianity, much of it codified in diktats like Obamacare.

Christians should learn from anti-Christian zealots who use the courts and law. Courts and law cut both ways. Civil government won’t bring heaven on Earth, but civil government can protect the heavenly minded.

The Apostle Paul invoked his legal rights as a citizen of Rome when threatened with unjust persecution. Contrary to many Christians’ belief that there’s something noble in being victimized, there is something far nobler in standing up for what’s right. That was the intention of the First Amendment’s freedom of religion, and 2016 is as good a year as any to invoke it.