Next Tuesday Denver attorney John E. Moye will get the recognition he’s had coming for decades: a national medal for serving the people and the electoral process of the state of Colorado.

The National Association of Secretaries of State Medallion Award is presented to those who have helped the organization advance the causes of “elections, civic education, service to state government and a commitment to giving,” according to Colorado Secretary of State Wayne Williams’ office.

White is a senior partner in the super-lawyer firm Moye White in Denver, which is ranked along with individual attorneys as among the best in the country. Around town, John Moye is also known for his generosity and service on civic boards.

He co-founded the Institute for the Advancement of the American Legal System, a national independent research center on the process and culture of the civil justice system, at the University of Denver. In 2012, the school dedicated John Moye Hall to house the institute. The faculty library for the university’s Sturm College already was named in Moye’s honor.

The university cited his dedication to DU “from his first days as an adjunct law instructor in 1969 through the present. He has served as a tenured professor and associate dean, and he is a longtime benefactor.”

His law firm bio describes him as “a respected professor and lecturer with a legendary energetic personality” who has helped more than 500,000 law students prepare for the bar exam, as well as training thousands of bank loan officers to forge proper contracts. Moye is a former president of the Colorado Bar Association.

Moye chaired the Denver Urban Renewal Authority as it revitalized downtown, and he is a former board chairman for the Stapleton Redevelopment Corp., who negotiated with the city of Denver to convert the abandoned airport into an urban infill neighborhood. He has been honored by History Colorado for his commitment to historic preservation.

Here is the press release sent out this week by the Secretary of State’s Office that details his work with the state elections system: