I have done some research on Cancer while at Johns Hopkins Univ. and The Cleveland Clinic from 1996-2003.I received American College of Gastroenterology in 2002 -Governor's award for Biomarker for cancer.

However, I have seen many suffer or die from 2003-2015. Here are my conclusions:

1) Biotech companies have given us hope and some good treatment options during last 5 years for some cancers. But money could dry up if drug prices are controlled, thus affecting new Venture Capital money. Big Pharma rely on innovative Biotech. companies to market the new products of these Biotech. That helps the growth of Big Pharma and helps the Biotech. to launch faster worldwide.

2) Politics in Washington in 2017 -2020 could impact the biotech and pharma co. positively or negatively. If you look at the Biotech. stocks, they have fallen sharply from July,2015 to now. That does not bode well in my judgement.

3) Cancer innovations is by far greater in USA than Europe or Japan because of ease of Venture Capital money.

4) So our best hope is to double up on Prevention. Example-if we can get Colon screening from 60% of people over 50,to 80% in 2018---2-3 years from now, we can save 25000 lives and a few billion$ in treatment cost. We are wasting money in treatment costs. Responsibilty for that lies with people and media which is not as effective in convincing people to get Colonoscopy.

What's the problem?

We think with Obama affordable care act ,every one gets free or fully paid Colonoscopy by insurance. Wrong again: People are shifting to higher deductibles to lower their premiums.

I asked one patient--why don't you get colonoscopy. We offer a very reasonable priced Colonoscopy. His response: 1) I don't have symptoms and if I get Colonoscopy-I will have to pay from my 2500$ deductibles. So I will take a chance and postpone my colonoscopy. If I get Colon Cancer--my insurance will cover over 2500$.He does not think that he could lose his job if he finds the cancer in later stage. Now that applies to women also. High deductibles are confusing people in making the right judgement about Prevention Vs. Cure. This is creating a problem for cancer prevention.

5) So VP Joe Biden --if you come across this article, please solve this high deductible dilemma. You can find a solution for this ,so people don't delay on screening for Colon Cancer.

6) If you like to reduce Cancer deaths, then petition JOE BIDEN to find a solution that everyone gets Colonoscopy to remove polyp before they become cancerous.



This item was posted by a community contributor. To read more about community contributors, click here.