CHICAGO--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Navigant (NYSE: NCI) announced today that Dorothy DeAngelis joined its Healthcare and Life Sciences Disputes, Regulatory, Compliance and Investigations practice as Managing Director. With more than 20 years of experience in the healthcare industry, DeAngelis expands the Firm’s managed care and pharmacy expertise and supports Navigant’s wide range of services offered to healthcare clients.

DeAngelis has experience helping health plans, pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs), pharmaceutical companies, and retail and specialty pharmacies address governmental compliance mandates and achieve successful business outcomes. She also has experience assisting clients with regulatory and operational issues related to Medicare Advantage and Part D, Medicaid, and Affordable Care Act.

“Dorothy’s experience, expertise and reputation in both the healthcare consulting and payer industries compliments Navigant’s strong team of healthcare and life sciences experts,” said Saul B. Helman, M.D., Managing Director and Leader of Navigant’s Healthcare and Life Sciences Disputes, Regulatory, Compliance and Investigations practice. “As business pressures mount and regulatory complexity in the payer arena continues to evolve as a result of the Affordable Care Act, our healthcare clients face new challenges and enhanced risk of government enforcement. Dorothy is one of the most uniquely qualified experts in the country, who brings a wealth of knowledge and experience to address clients’ legal, regulatory and compliance issues.”

At Navigant, DeAngelis will provide litigation support services including regulatory consulting and expert witness testimony in Medicare Advantage, Medicare Part D, health plan and PBM operations. Prior to joining Navigant, she was a Senior Managing Director and leader of the National Managed Care and Government Programs for FTI Consulting. In addition, DeAngelis held positions within KPMG Forensics’ Healthcare Compliance team as well as compliance leadership roles within Kaiser Permanente.

“I am thrilled to be joining a firm with a proven reputation of serving healthcare clients across strategy and operations to litigation, regulatory and compliance needs,” said DeAngelis. “Navigant’s commitment to healthcare clients as well as its scale of capabilities extends well beyond disputes, regulation and compliance. I look forward to working with a talented team of experts to bring innovative solutions and critical thinking to our clients as they continue to navigate the complex and ever-changing healthcare landscape.”

About Navigant

Navigant Consulting, Inc. (NYSE: NCI) is an independent specialized, global professional services firm that combines deep industry knowledge with technical expertise to enable companies to defend, protect and create value. With a focus on industries and clients facing transformational change and significant regulatory and legal issues, the Firm serves clients primarily in the healthcare, energy and financial services sectors which represent highly complex market and regulatory environments. Professional service offerings include strategic, financial, operational, technology, risk management, compliance, investigative solutions, dispute resolutions services and business process management services. The Firm provides services to companies, legal counsel and governmental agencies. The business is organized in four reporting segments – Disputes, Investigations & Economics; Financial, Risk & Compliance; Healthcare; and Energy. More information about Navigant can be found at navigant.com.