GE Aros smart window air conditioner, part of the Quirky + GE collection of connected products. General Electric

Is it ethical for a venture capital investor to praise a product put out by a company he’s invested in without disclosing his financial interest?

James D. Robinson IV, a founder of RRE Ventures in New York City, which is currently investing from a $280 million fund raised this year, did just that. RRE is an investor in Quirky Inc., Palantir Technologies Inc. and OnDeck Capital Inc.

In a review on Amazon.com, Mr. Robinson praised Aros, an air conditioner introduced in May by Quirky Inc. and General Electric, rating it a high five out of five stars.

“Beautiful, functional, smart,” he wrote. “As for cooling, seems to do a great job, and unlike some, it just doesn’t seem any louder to me.” The loudness remark was a response to some critics who had cited the “noise” in their own Amazon reviews.

Amazon.com

Mr. Robinson’s review, however, didn’t note that his firm, RRE Ventures, is an investor in Quirky and he is member of the company’s board of directors.

“It sounds like a pretty clear cut conflict of interest,” says David Hess, a professor of business law and business ethics at the University of Michigan’s Ross School of Business. “I would think that anyone who uses Amazon reviews would definitely want to know this.”

In an e-mail, Mr. Robinson called the omission “an oversight on his part.” He also said that he thinks “it is entirely appropriate as a private citizen to write a review about a product or service he actually uses.”

Ann Buchholtz, research director for the Institute for Ethical Leadership at Rutgers University says that, “as a private citizen, he certainly has a right to express his opinion. But,” she added, “he also has a responsibility to let people know any fact that would be appropriate for them to consider.”

After The Journal sought comment from him about his five-star review, Mr. Robinson added some new language to the text that accompanied his rating. In his update, he acknowledged that he was an investor in Quirky, but said, “my review is from my actual experience buying Aros through Amazon, and installing it myself.” Mr. Robinson added that he had since bought two additional Aros units.

Amazon.com

Quirky, General Electric and Amazon didn’t immediately respond to requests for comment.

Quirky, a five-year-old New York-based invention facilitating company, has a lot riding on Aros, which was launched in May. Best known for tchotchkes such as rubber bands with hooks and flexible power strips, the company is expanding to the connected home with products such as Aros and Wink, a software platform for smart-home products set up to connect products made by Quirky and major manufacturers.

GE has bet on Quirky, taking a $30 million stake in the company last year and announcing plans to develop several appliances in conjunction with the young startup.

The company says Quirky is just one of many corporate efforts to improve GE’s agility and speed in getting products to market, and an embrace of a startup culture that is willing to experiment with new product designs in order to find a hit. GE says it expects the market for “connected devices” to reach $25 billion.

The review by Mr. Robinson, a Quirky investor and board member, was more favorable than many of the initial assessments of the new air conditioner on the Amazon site. Just 32 of the 156 reviewers gave the product five stars; 42 of the reviews carried four stars.

Twenty-five reviewers gave the product one star and 29 two stars. “Great idea, attractive, but TERRIBLE air conditioner,” wrote one unhappy purchaser who gave the product one star.

Other purchasers complained about noise. “It is easily twice as loud as the 25 year old model I was hoping to replace,” wrote another Amazon shopper who gave the Aros two stars.

See also:

One Week, 3,000 Product Ideas – WSJ

GE’s First Quirky Device Isn’t Very Quirky – WSJ

Invention Isn’t Easy: Quirky’s Hits and Misses – Corporate Intelligence