Don't buy scare statistics about right-to-work laws. Instead, look at Indiana and Michigan's performance.

Mark A. Mix (Photo: Contributed)

In the increasingly intense debate over whether Wisconsin should become the 25th "right to work" state, news reports and commentary almost never cite the actual record in states where right-to-work laws have been enacted. What does the record really show in Indiana and Michigan, the two latest states to adopt right-to-work statutes?

According to the data currently available on the web site of the U.S. Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor Statistics, the average weekly earnings for private-sector employees in March 2012, the month the Hoosier State's right-to-work law took effect, were $732.48. In December 2014, the most recent month for which data are available, the BLS estimates that the average weekly earnings of Indiana private-sector employees were $803.58.

Another view: Right-to-work law will drive down wages

In a little less than three years, then, weekly earnings per private worker in Indiana have risen by 9.7 percent, or 7.2 percent after adjusting for inflation, as measured by the BLS's urban consumer price index. And this 7.2 percent real increase is more than double the real increase of 3.3 percent for comparable employees nationwide over the same period. In March 2012, average weekly earnings for private-sector employees in Wisconsin were marginally higher (by 12 cents) than for their Indiana counterparts. By December 2014, weekly earning in Wisconsin were $17.10 lower than weekly earnings in Indiana.

The actual experience of Hoosiers since their Right to Work law took effect bears not even the faintest resemblance to what putatively "nonpartisan" observers predicted when the statute was adopted.

In January 2012, just days after then-Gov. Mitch Daniels signed Indiana's ban on forced union dues, University of Oregon labor studies professor Gordon Lafer penned a shrill article for the far-left magazine The Nation, which was given the apt headline: "What 'right to work' means for Indiana's workers: a pay cut."

As we have just seen, Lafer couldn't have been more wrong. And he was just as wrong when he made the same prediction with regard to Michigan, America's 24th right-to-work state. Since March 2013, the month the Wolverine State statute took effect, real weekly wages per private-sector employee in Michigan have gone up by 3.3 percent, or almost double the average 1.8 percent gain for comparable employees nationwide and more than double the 1.5 percent gain for Wisconsin workers.

The fact that the doomsaying of Gordon Lafer and his ilk whenever a state considers a right-to-work law is never borne out when a state actually passes such a law doesn't appear to trouble them a bit.

And unfortunately, Lafer's miserable track record when it comes to forecasting what will happen if a state rolls back union bosses' monopoly privileges won't prevent many news reporters in Wisconsin from citing this former union strategist and organizer as an "expert" on labor-policy issues.

But ordinary Wisconsin citizens who know in their hearts that it's just plain wrong for any employee to be forced to bankroll an unwanted union as a job condition ought to be on their guard. A propaganda campaign designed to dampen their opposition to compulsory unionism by trumpeting the supposedly awful economic consequences of abolishing it will be intensifying in their state's media over the next couple of weeks.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1BnqKjj