The U.S. has become a less affordable place to live this year - but still trumps the UK and Australia in cost of living figures.

A survey reveals Australia is the sixth-most expensive state to live, and Britain the 10th, in 2015.

America clocks in at number 24 on this year's official chart, up from 28 last year.

The survey took into account cost of groceries, transportation, restaurants and utilities.

More expensive but not in the big leagues: The U.S. ranked 24th in the world's cost of living table

Switzerland, Norway and Denmark appeared in the top five for the third year in a row.

In a damning reflection of Venezuela's domestic problems, the Latin American country has climbed from 12th place in 2013 to third place in 2015.

Iceland has also jumped significantly - up from 10th place in 2013 to fourth in 2015.

The world report done by Numbeo was fashioned into an infographic by movehub - a resource for people moving abroad.

Pricey! Australia is the sixth most expensive place in the world to live in, according to new research

In it for the long haul: Switzerland is the costliest place to live in the world after four years in second place

All nations were compared to the cost of living in New York.

For example, if a country has a consumer price index of 70 on movehub's infographic then on average its cost of living is 30 per cent cheaper than that of New York's.

Movehub explains the cost of groceries took into account the price for meat, bread, rice, eggs, fruits, vegetables and alcohol.

While, transportation costs included one-way tickets, monthly passes, taxi fares, petrol prices and other costs related to running a car based on the use of Volkswagen Golf.

Top ten: The UK was 10th on the cost of living table which takes into account groceries and travel

India comes out as having the lowest cost of living, with poor wages matched by poor living conditions

Meal prices at expensive, mid-range and inexpensive restaurants were taken into account along with prices of coffee products, alcohol and water.

Electricity, heating, water the internet were the utilities assessed.

Therefore, the average cost of living for an Australian is almost one per cent cheaper than for someone living in the Big Apple.

Venezuela's tightening financial situation has fanned market anxiety about a default, especially as oil slumps to near six-year lows.

President Nicholas Maduro has vowed to pay bondholders and most economists doubt a default is coming in the near-term, but investors are getting skittish as the economic crisis worsens.

Venezuela depends on oil for 96 per cent of its export revenue.

There were not many surprises where it comes to the countries with the lowest cost of living.

India topped the pile in this regard, followed in by Nepal, Pakistan, Tunisia and Algeria.