On Monday, D Healthcare Daily ran a Q&A feature with Parkland Health and Hospital System’s new chief financial officer, John Moore. He started about two months ago. In the first part of the interview, we talked about his past, why Parkland was appealing to him, and he broke down the safety net hospital’s new financial assistance program and how it stands to impact patients.

Here’s the second part, in which we talk about broader themes that aren’t quite as immediately newsworthy: What are some of the things he’s noticed in his first eight weeks? What are his long-term goals for Parkland’s finances? What legislation is he keeping his eye on this session? The interview has been edited for length and clarity.

DHCD: So you’ve been here, what, about two months now? What are some of the things you’ve noticed in your time here?

Moore: This is finishing up my second month here at Parkland, yeah. And some things that come to mind when I reflect over two months is, in one word, it’s kind of ‘wow.’ This is a big operation.

The mission of what Parkland stands for really stands out: The types of patients that we take care of, knowing that we’re able to make a difference in people’s lives. And my part financially, setting the long-term vision and strategies in place so that we’re able to be financially viable in the future. And there are challenges in getting that model to work.

We don’t have that figured out just yet, but being a part of doing that is very exciting. There are lots of opportunities within Parkland, there are lots of challenges from our payer sources to some of the inherent obligations that we have to maintain that other models may not have. It ends up having some guidelines that are challenging to be successful in. and that’s part of the excitement.

DHCD: You mention long-term financial vision—what do you see that as being?

Moore: The long term financial vision for Parkland is one that we’re able to be financially viable, we’re able to keep our expenses in line with our revenues. It’s very similar to many other institutions around. You have to have that balance.

If our expenses end up exceeding our revenues that doesn’t make for a very successful business model or patient care model. In the end, everything we do, we reinvest into healthcare. If we don’t have any excess, it’s hard to reinvest long term and we have a new facility that’s going in and we’ve sold bonds to our bondholders and we do have to pay those back. So making sure that we’re able to meet those debt obligations and also able to fund any future capital expenditures, whether that be replacement of capital or new services or equipment we need in the future, we have to have our financial balance and discipline in place to ensure long term success.

DHCD: When you talk balance, once of the challenges Parkland is going to face in the coming years—and, really, is already facing—is the declining disproportionate share hospital payments. As you know, those got sliced in the Affordable Care Act under the idea that all states would have to expand Medicaid. The Supreme Court ruled that wasn’t the case, but the cuts remained. How do you overcome that?

Moore: It’s very difficult on the revenue side to make up any of the changes that we’ve had to incur with the anticipation of Medicaid being expanded. And it has had an impact on us, that long term, we hope that Medicaid gets expanded in the state of Texas. But in the case that it doesn’t, we have to make sure that our expenses again are in line with our revenues. They cannot exceed that.

So if there’s not a long-term expansion for Medicare on the forefront legislatively, we’ll have to adjust our operations as needed. As far as finding new forms of revenue, those are pretty difficult in this day in time, with a lot of the emphasis on legislatively with expansion being one thing, but our payer mix piece, when you look at the types of patients that come to Parkland to be treated, over 50 percent do not have insurance in any way, shape, or form. They’re self-pay or charity type of patients, so to grow services on some ends, we have to be very selective on that if the intent is really to grow revenue, which doesn’t always match with the mission of Parkland.

So it’s a difficult question to answer, and I don’t know if I have the best answer for you on that. It’s just that we will try to maximize our revenue opportunities when they come about. But we’re limited in how much we can have an impact on that as compared to other hospitals in the community.

DHCD: I know improving integrated care and preventive services is something Parkland’s really focused on in recent years. Do you see that as having an impact on your bottom line, or this balance you discuss?

Moore: Let me start on the public health piece of that. I think hands down it will have a positive impact on the health status of Dallas County. Anything preventive, which is really what we’re trying to do with the strategy on getting these different health clinics out in the community to where people can get primary care or preventive care or preventive testing close to home and not to have to come into a central location makes for better access to healthcare for patients. People are more likely to keep their appointments when it’s closer to home to get that test or the preventive care or primary care that they need.

Financially, we’re not in it to maximize the profits on this or our net margin, but what we want to do is make sure that it’s not being dilutive or a loss leader or anything like that. We want things, as much as we can, to generate a little bit of a positive margin, but I don’t anticipate it being a big positive margin revenue source for the system.

DHCD: So we’ve discussed long-term goals. Now, what are some things you’re focusing on immediately?

Moore: The first thing is making sure we have a smooth transition from our current facility into the new facility and anything that is in my area of responsibility that we’re able to support and guide, that it will be a success. That is such a big part of the long-term future of Parkland.

After that is getting the financial framework in place and making sure that the financial vision that’s going to accompany our strategic planning process has a framework in place that ensures that we’re able to be successful, that I have the infrastructure in place that we make smart informed decisions for future operational issues or capital purchases or services that we do. I want to have the infrastructure in place so that we’re able to make good decisions and be able to take Parkland to the next step from a financial operations basis.

DHCD: Finally, other than an alternative to Medicaid expansion, what are you keeping an eye on in the Legislature this session that could have an impact on Parkland?

Moore: Obviously, the Texas Way is one that we are very interested in and do support. We also would support the funding of DSH, or disproportionate share, by the Legislature. That would definitely benefit, not only Parkland, but the other hospitals in the state. Those are probably the two major impact topics that we’ve got right now that would have the most material impact. There are other smaller bills that are around, but nothing that would really have as large a material impact as those two.