Is there a chance these voices will abandon these refrains for the truth? Our ‘three branches of government’ have coalesced into a Politburo, yet many, well-meaning people stubbornly believe the GOP will save us from the big bad Democrats. Just how stubborn and stupid can people be? Who is going to protect us from the big bad GOP backstablishment?

The master manipulators have honed their devilish skills and attacks over many decades, while patriots and people of faith have been blissfully, almost willfully, ignorant of what has been happening behind closed doors, both within the U. S. and beyond our borders. We continue to hear the ‘Democrat equals bad, Republican equals good’ and/or ‘Republican equals a conservative’ refrains from the ‘conservative’ voices, yet these voices are livid at what the Republicans are doing.

As per Wikipedia, the term, ‘False Flag’, describes covert operations that are designed to deceive in such a way that the operations appear as though they are being carried out by entities, groups, or nations other than those who actually planned and executed them. It is a fact that the Democrats supplied all of the votes to ram through this unconstitutional legislation, but was this ‘by design’, to maintain the divisive ‘Democrat vs. Republican’ paradigm?

With the defection of Reverend Franklin Graham from the Gutless Opposition Party (GOP) following the latest, traitorous actions by the GOP backstablishment, in ramming through ESSA and the omnibus bill, maybe it is time to posit a thought that has been ruminating for quite some time. Most likely, this will never be discussed seriously, and without prejudice, within the mega propaganda machine, but with the continual betrayal by the GOP backstablishment, the question begs to be asked, ‘Was the ObamaCare vote a false flag’?

Even with all of the backstabbing actions of those atop the GOP, we are constantly told that as bad as the Republicans are, they are better than the Democrats. We’ve been inculcated into believing that with just a few more Republicans replacing Democrats, we will be saved! Really? How’s that been working since the historic midterm elections of 2010 and 2014? As a friend of mine might say, ‘If you believe this, I’ve got some oceanfront property in Kansas I’d like to sell you’!

Regarding ObamaCare, we are constantly ‘reminded’ that this purposely destructive legislation was rammed through without one Republican vote. While this is true, how did it come to a vote in the first place? Didn’t Olympia Snowe [R] vote to advance the draft bill out of the House Finance Committee? Any thinking person had to have known that a key to forcing this unwanted legislation upon us was to get it out of committee so that the Congressional manipulators could devise a plan to push the puppet president’s fundamental transformation of our healthcare system through both houses of Congress.

When there was an opening to shut down ObamaCare, who was it who saved it? Didn’t Chief Justice Roberts connive to rule ObamaCare to be constitutional, not just once, but twice? Who nominated Roberts to be Chief Justice? Wasn’t it puppet GWB? How much more of this form of conservatism can we withstand?

Also, while Republicans questioned the numerous voting districts that voted 100% (or more) for the puppet president in the 2012 General Election, they continue to brag about the 100% vote against ObamaCare by Republicans in the House and the Senate. I’m not a statistician, but what are the odds that all Republicans in both the House and Senate would vote against ObamaCare, unless they were instructed to do so by the backstablishment leadership?

Can’t you hear the howls by those who actually believe there is a fundamental difference between the two political parties? There may have been a fundamental difference between the two political parties in days of yore, but that is history that will never be taught under Common (Conformity) Core. These same loyalists actually believe that the Republicans fought mightily to prevent the passage of ObamaCare (the Patient Abandonment and Un-Affordable Care Attack). If this is so, why did Fuhrer Boehner and Zipper-Lip McConnell abandon the fight against ObamaCare? Why did both of them use almost identical comments about ObamaCare being ‘the law of the land’? Why did they ram through votes that fully funded ObamaCare, amnesty, etc., during the lame duck session following the 2014 midterm election? Why did Mick Mobster Ryan take the baton from Boehner in joining McConnell in leading the charge to ram through the ominous omnibus bill?

The puppet president is on record for lying about ObamaCare. Many people have not able to keep their insurance and/or their doctor, even though he repeatedly stated they would be able to do so, prior to the passage of ObamaCare. The promised reduction in premiums by up to $2,500.00 has given way to spiraling increases in premiums. After ObamaCare was rammed through, weren’t we told by the architect of ObamaCare that we were lied to, purposely, because the electorate is comprised of morons and to ensure that the unconstitutional legislation became law? But are the puppet president and his cabal the only liars regarding ObamaCare?

Didn’t Republicans promise that they would do everything possible to overturn and eliminate ObamaCare and amnesty, once in office and in the majority, not just stage meaningless show votes to string along the party lemmings? Didn’t voters respond dramatically, especially during the 2010 and 2014 midterm elections, to send reformers to Congress? So, why did the Republicans in the House, who control the power of the purse, sycophantically vote with Mick Mobster Ryan to fully fund the massive attacks upon the U. S. citizen/taxpayer embedded within the omnibus bill? Isn’t it obvious that the number one enemy of those in power within the District of Corruption isn’t a politician in the ‘other’ party, but that it is anyone who seeks to implement genuine reform, as demanded by an increasingly defenseless electorate? Regardless of the motivations of those within each party, isn’t a lie a lie?

Isn’t it time to break out of the propaganda programmed Republican paradigm to realize just how dangerous the GOP backstablishment is? Aren’t the members of the backstablishment nothing but puppets, too? Aren’t the most dangerous citizens those who can think for themselves? Why do you think the passage of ESSA was so urgent and bipartisan? The more generations of students who are indoctrinated into the anti-God, anti-traditional family, anti-Constitution and Bill of Rights, and anti-U. S. agenda, the easier it is to retain power and amass considerable wealth!

With the continued deployment of ObamaCare, Common Core, the theft of local control of schools (through strings attached via taxpayer money), amnesty and sanctuary cities, and the entire U. N. Agenda 21 under GOP-led government at all levels of government, have the GOP gains proven to be beneficial at any level of government? Besides, with the continual implementation of regionalism embedded within U. N. Agenda 21 at all levels of government, many of the historic GOP gains at the city, county and state levels of government may become null and void.

Isn’t it time for people to begin thinking for themselves? Why pay any respect to any politician or members of the propaganda machine when they refuse to respect us and have been the instruments of our demise? Isn’t it apparent that there are people outside of the ‘limelight’ who are pulling the strings of the political and propaganda puppets?

For those who seek a return to our constitutional form of government, founded upon Judeo-Christian principles, what we lack in money and power we make up in numbers and a faith in God. Do you believe in miracles? It will take a series of miracles to overcome the Satanic agenda being pushed upon us. As we head into the New Year, why not include within your resolutions a commitment to work against the destruction being pushed upon us by those atop both political parties and the propaganda machine? Become a profiler, recognizing the false flags that have become almost daily events to distract us from the attacks of the master manipulators. Once we get into the heads of those seeking our destruction, we can begin to push back. Let the fireworks of New Year’s ignite an energy to defeat every member of the GOP backstablishment up for reelection in the primaries and use this momentum to win in the General Elections!