The Rockies of 2014 are DOA.

The lifeless franchise demands a fresh perspective and a brilliant, creative, passionate, tough chief executive running the show.

“Bulldog” Orel Hershiser is the perfect choice to lead the Rox out of the Black Hole of Baseball.

The tall, lean, bespectacled Hershiser, who is in Denver this holiday weekend as a Los Angeles Dodgers TV analyst, won 204 games in his sterling career. He won a Cy Young Award and a World Series MVP trophy.

Since retiring in 2000, the 55-year-old Hershiser has worked for ESPN and served as a special assistant to the general manager and pitching coach of the Texas Rangers. He has been a managerial candidate twice and turned down an offer to become GM of a team in the East because he wants to remain in the West. This year, Hershiser returned to Los Angeles, where he was a starting pitcher for 12 seasons.

I was witness to possibly the most thought-provoking, brain-storming conversation ever held at Coors Field this past week, a discussion by visitors from an opposing organization — Hershiser and TV partners Nomar Garciaparra, the former all-star shortstop, and radio Hall of Fame baseball announcer Charlie Steiner. All I did was ask, “What would you guys do about the Rockies?”

Their solutions were inspired, imaginative and innovative.

All three agreed that the fences at the ballpark must be moved in — a fanciful scheme to most, but a relocation that should have been done years ago.

“It’s not the home runs that kill you here,” Hershiser said. “It’s all those runners at second and third practically every inning. The pitching staff has no chance.”

Coors Field, it’s been said, is where curveball pitchers go to die.

“It’s all about angles and release points and types of pitchers. The curveball won’t break, and because it leaves the hand at three-quarters, it rises as it gets to the plate. That’s the sweet spot for hitters,” Hershiser said. “You’ve got to throw tight sliders, because they don’t require as much spin. And you’ve got to have pitchers who have (nerve). When there are men at second and third with one out, you have to be aggressive and willing to throw a slider down and away. I knew when they signed Mike Hampton and Denny Neagle, a couple of curveballers, years ago, that would be a complete failure.”

Garciaparra said the Rockies’ world-famous humidor is “illegal” but does its job to keep down scoring. “They should put an umbrella (dome) over the stadium like in Seattle and create humidity,” he said.

Hershiser suggested gigantic spray-misters ringing the park.

“The problem isn’t just the pitchers,” he said. “Look at the (batting average) splits of even the good hitters. There’s little spin (on the ball) here, and Tulo (Troy Tulowitzki) adjusts. Batters recognize spin and react. Then, when Tulo goes on the road, he sees the same spin and reacts, and the ball breaks a foot more.

“You’ve got to pitch and hit one way at home and completely different on the road in order to win.”

Steiner said, “Put the walls closer and make ’em higher.”

“Use the space behind them for picnic areas,” Hershiser said.

“The gaps are too big in the outfield. Close them. Other teams with little parks win,” Garciaparra said.

Hershiser continued to recommend concepts and initiatives — i.e., more off-day side pitching for starters on the road, and a new approach to preparing the Rockies’ minor-league pitchers — and the trio finally had to stop talking Rockies only when they had to start talking on the air.

So, at last, I asked the man who holds the record for consecutive scoreless innings (59) and once was called the smartest, most competitive player in baseball: “Would you be willing to take over a team?”

“It would have to be an ideal situation, and challenging,” he said.

Point blank: “How about the Rockies?”

The ex-great pitcher balked. He respectfully declined to answer.

It is known, though, that Hershiser definitely would consider a proposition to become the Rockies’ executive vice president of baseball operations — with the same authority former superstar players John Elway and Joe Sakic have with the Broncos and the Avalanche, respectively.

The triumvirate of Dan “The Invisible Man” O’Dowd, Bill Geivett and Dick Monfort has proven conclusively they don’t know how to run the Rockies. No division titles and a losing percentage of 57 percent over the past 3½ seasons and an ongoing fiasco this season is further proof.

What to say straight-faced to the millions of distressed Rockies followers? It’s time for a significant change by the Rox ownership.

Hershiser should be hired to bring this franchise back from the dead.

Woody Paige: woody@woodypaige.com or twitter.com/woodypaige