LANSING, MI — Michigan Department of Community Health Director Jim Haveman has resigned, citing a desire to focus on his health after suffering a mild stroke in late May.

Gov. Rick Snyder on Thursday accepted Haveman’s resignation, effective September 12, and tapped Chief Deputy Director Nick Lyon to take his place at the head of the agency.

“It had always been my intention to stay in the position of director through 2015 but with the minor stroke I experienced on Memorial Day, Barb and I have decided it is best to re-evaluate that time table,” Haveman said in a statement.

“This has been a difficult decision because I truly love my work. I am humbled by all that we’ve accomplished and have come to greatly admire the dedication of this governor and administration, our management team and the employees at the department.”

Snyder appointed Haveman to the post in 2012, and he played an instrumental role in the governor’s push for and implementation of the “Healthy Michigan” plan to reform Medicaid and expand eligibility under the Affordable Care Act.

He's also worked with the government on a health and wellness education initiative and served on the Mental Health and Wellness Commission.

“Director Haveman’s leadership has been instrumental as we’ve navigated an ambitious health and wellness agenda that has led to inclusive, bipartisan support to implement a number of key health initiatives that are making a real difference in Michiganders' lives,” said Snyder.

“Jim’s commitment to the health and wellness of our residents has been evident in all that we’ve accomplished and I am grateful for his work. I understand and respect his decision to focus on his health and wish him and his family all the best. I know that Nick Lyon will be able to step in and continue the tremendous work and progress underway.”

Haveman, a West Michigan native, also served as MDCH director during former Gov. John Engler’s second term after leading the Department of Mental Health during Engler’s first term. He went to Iraq in 2003, serving under President George W. Bush as a senior adviser to the Iraqi Ministry of Health.

Lyons previously served as deputy director of the DCH Operations Administration from 2010 to 2011 and as deputy director of the Health Policy and Regulation Administration from 2003 to 2008, according to a release from the governor’s office. He earned a bachelor’s degree in economics and political science from Yale University.

Jonathan Oosting is a Capitol reporter for MLive Media Group. Email him, find him on Facebook or follow him on Twitter.