Joe Sakic was not obligated to allow prized prospect Mikko Rantanen to play for host Finland at the world junior championship. Sakic didn’t have to give the Avalanche’s 2015 first-round draft pick the opportunity to captain the Finns in Helsinki — and ultimately help knock his beloved Team Canada out of the tournament.

Sakic, the Avs’ general manager and a proud Canadian, could have kept Rantanen in San Antonio as the Rampage’s leading scorer and surefire American Hockey League all-star and rookie of the year candidate. Sakic could have called up Rantanen to the Avs, with whom he began the season.

Sakic could have prevented Rantanen’s Finns from beating the Canadians 6-5 in Saturday’s WJC quarterfinals.

Rantanen, a left-shooting right winger, signed his NHL entry-level contract with Colorado last summer, less than a month after he was selected 10th overall. He was property of the Avs, and unlike most players invited to play in the WJC, he required special permission to represent his country in the world’s premier under-20 tournament.

Good for Sakic and the Avalanche to let Rantanen go, even though it might have cost the Rampage in their chase for the playoffs. They have lost three consecutive games since Dec. 27, the first two by one goal and the third 3-1. At the time of his departure for the WJC, Rantanen led San Antonio in goals (10), assists (16) points (26) and plus-minus rating (plus-17).

Forward Colin Smith is tied with Rantanen with 26 points for the Rampage. But Smith has played 33 games, Rantanen just 22.

Rantanen was regarded as the best forward in last year’s WJC in Montreal and Toronto. Some said he had a better tournament than Connor McDavid and Jack Eichel, who were picked first and second in the 2015 draft by Edmonton and Buffalo, respectively. Sakic and many others were shocked that Rantanen was there at No. 10.

Rantanen has a modest two points (one goal) in five games at the WJC, where Finland is 4-1 and will play rival Sweden in Monday’s semifinals. Sweden is 5-0 and the only team to defeat the United States.

The Avs have two draftees at the WJC, and both are in the semifinals. Russian defenseman Sergei Boikov is a 2015 sixth-round draft pick by Colorado. He also has played all five games for his country.

Russia (3-2) plays the United States (4-1) in the other semifinal Monday. The Americans outshot Sweden 46-23 in their 1-0 loss last week and appear to be the team to beat.

Colorado products Brandon Carlo and Scott Eansor have played in all five games for Team USA.

Carlo is a shutdown defenseman from Colorado Springs who has a goal and an assist.

Eansor is a forward from Englewood who produced his first point, a breakaway goal, in Saturday’s 7-0 rout over the Czech Republic.

The WJC consists of NHL-drafted players or those who will be drafted in the 2016, plus a small amount of free agents who slipped through the cracks.

Historically, most WJC players go on to play in the NHL or AHL.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@ denverpost.com or @mikechambers

Spotlight on …

Nick Shore, F, Los Angeles Kings

When: The Avalanche hosts Shore and the Kings on Monday in the third game of a five-game homestand and a stretch that has Colorado at the Pepsi Center nine times in 10 games.

What’s up: Shore, a University of Denver product, has played in all 37 games and is often centering the likes of Olympians Marian Gaborik (Slovakia) and Dustin Brown (U.S.) on the second or third lines. He is a primary penalty killer and sometimes seen on the power play. His statistics — two goals and six points — suggest he’s on the brink of being sent down to the minors. But he’s in the lineup every night, and the Kings believe his scoring will come.

Background: Shore, 23, won the Calder Cup with the Manchester Monarchs last spring after the Kings missed the playoffs and chose to send him back to the American Hockey League for more seasoning. He had 18 points in 19 playoff games, with a plus-12 rating. Shore made his NHL debut last season, mostly playing on a fourth line, just one year after leaving DU following his junior year.

Chambers’ take: This is a story of a smart, two-way hockey player who is among the tidal wave of talent coming out of Colorado. Shore was born in Denver and was the second of three brothers to play for the Pioneers. He fits in nicely on an NHL team that makes winning puck battles the No. 1 job requirement.