Topics: annie, beyond the lights, dear white people, how to get away with murder, orange is the new black, Entertainment News

In Gina Prince-Bythewood’s film “Beyond The Lights,” one of the most unexpectedly arresting moments is a scene where the protagonist Noni, played by the extraordinarily talented Gugu Mbatha-Raw, performs the very mundane act of taking the extensions out of her hair. It’s grooming, after all—advanced grooming, maybe, as her violet, Hollywood extensions likely cost several hundred of dollars and took hours to apply to her hair. But the intimacy of the scene reveals Noni’s familiarity with this particular chore; her experience is lived-in, and her task both absorbs her and leaves her free to ruminate, the same way she might feel in the shower or behind the wheel of a car. It’s a moment for the character’s awakening to her own internal faultlines, a moment where she has the opportunity to shed the most visible shroud of artifice from her in exchange for what her hair actually looks like.

Changing a character’s appearance is a visual motif directors have leaned on since the birth of the medium—like this scene in Wes Anderson’s “The Royal Tenenbaums,” where Richie cuts his hair and shaves. It’s the attention to appearance that inspired Norma Desmond to theatrically descend the staircase, telling Mr. DeMille that she was ready for her close-up. Yet in “Beyond The Lights” it’s a storytelling device made anew, and that is because of Noni’s hair. Noni is biracial, and her hair is distinctly African. The experience of her hair is new for a lot of audiences—certainly new to me. And because her hair is a fundamental part of her, her hair is a fundamental part of the film, too. Noni’s hair is a reflection of her inner life and an expression of her mission as a musician.

The first scene of the film depicts a young Noni being driven frantically to a salon by her white mother, so that something can be “done” with her hair. “Beyond The Lights” is, on some level, an outsize version of the same journey—an attempt to bridge the gap between the mainstream, white perception of beauty and the reality of Noni’s day-to-day existence.

2014 may not have ended up being the year of diversity that some of us hoped it would be, but if there is one particular way in which it introduced texture and variety to the pop cultural landscape, it’s in the realm of hair. This year has seen attention drawn to natural hair on black women across television, from “How To Get Away With Murder” to “Black-ish.” It’s brought attention to the economy behind artificial hair via jokes on “Selfie” and storylines on “The Comeback.” It’s seen the films “Beyond The Lights” and “Dear White People,” both of which feature characters coming to terms with their ever-shifting racial identities through the canvas of their hair. After 2014, Noni’s mother wouldn’t have much of an excuse for not knowing what to do with her daughter’s hair—she would have had the chance to see its reality on-screen over and over again.

Without a doubt, the defining moment for natural hair this year was Viola Davis’ character Annalise Keating taking off her wig in “How To Get Away With Murder.” “Beyond The Lights” went for similar themes, but the film is going for quiet transformation. Davis is going for high drama—in the style of all of Shonda Rhimes’ shows, she’s going for operatic heights of emotion. And in “Let’s Get To Scooping,” she lands it: slowly stripping off not just her wig but her false eyelashes, her makeup, and the eyeliner that makes her look more “presentable.”