— A more user-friendly website and bigger in-person outreach has caused an uptick in the number of people signing up for health plans under the Affordable Care Act this year, according to staff at a storefront enrollment center on North Armenia Avenue.

While only a handful of people had come out for a sign-up event at the center by noon on Saturday, the state of Florida is leading the nation in Health Insurance Marketplace plans with more than 670,000 enrollees during the first month of open enrollment between Nov. 15 and Dec. 15, according to federal data.

With the sign-up period ending Feb. 15, walk-in centers like this one at 4816 N. Armenia Ave. are making a big push to let people know there’s step-by-step help available for navigating the many options available for health coverage.

“A lot of people don’t know you’re here until the last minute, so this year we’re trying to get the word out by fliers, by commercials, by radio, everything like that,” said Dionne Young, site supervisor for the Tampa center.

Young helped lead a similar center last year in Miami and says the sign-up process is significantly easier for this enrollment period.

“I’ve definitely seen a lot more turnout much quicker. Our numbers are a lot higher this time, I mean 10 times what they were last year at this time, because a lot of effort has been put into letting the consumers know we’re here and we’re here to help,” she said.

In the 37 states using the national HealthCare.gov platform, which includes Florida, nearly 6.5 million people had signed up for health plans through Dec. 26, according to the most recent data released by the U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services.

Another 600,000 people had signed up in other states that are running their own healthcare exchanges.

HHS has set a target of covering about 9 million people by the end of the year under the Affordable Care Act, commonly called “Obamacare.”

Tampa resident Carol Sheets came out to the Tampa enrollment center Saturday in hopes of finding a less expensive plan than what she signed up for last year. It took Sheets several phone calls and a personal visit to an enrollment center at the University of South Florida to get coverage last year.

“I’ve been unemployed since 2011 and I was forced into early retirement and I’m looking for a job and I need to get the cheapest healthcare I can get,” said Sheets.

Her marketplace coverage last year proved difficult to afford, and she was looking this year to see if she qualifies for better subsidies that might lower her costs.

“The insurance I was able to get last year was cost efficient for the month, but the insurance you get when you go to use it, as far as doctors and hospitals, I can’t meet the deductibles and the copays and stuff like that, so it still out-priced me,” she said.

About 87 percent of people who signed up for plans through HealthCare.gov for coverage starting Jan. 1 were deemed eligible for some kind of financial assistance compared to 80 percent of those who signed up in the same period a year ago, according to HHS.

Those who put off enrollment in 2014 will face bigger financial penalties if they fail to sign up by the Feb. 15 deadline this year.

The penalty will rise in 2015 from $95 per adult and $47.50 per child to $325 per adult and $162.50 per child, with a maximum penalty of $975, or 2 percent of annual income, whichever is higher.

In addition to special enrollment events, the center on Armenia Avenue has staff to help with signing up from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m. Monday through Friday, and from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. on Saturdays. Appointments can be scheduled by calling (813) 422-4917.

jboatwright@tampatrib.com

(727) 215-1277