(AP Photo/J. Scott Applewhite)

Here’s one thing that’s worth noting about the coming general election: Democrats are probably going to run a very similar playbook against the GOP nominee, no matter who it is. Sure, if it’s Donald Trump, they’ll go hard at his penchant for insulting women and immigrants, and if it’s Ted Cruz, they will focus on his singularly repellent aura and hard right positions on social issues.

But ultimately, Democrats are preparing to run hard against GOP fiscal policies — in particular, the Republican Party’s inevitable general election embrace of a tax plan that delivers a huge windfall to the wealthy — which will happen whether the nominee is Trump, Cruz, or some unicorn savior candidate.

Gallup has released some new polling today that reminds us of the degree to which the American public sides with Democrats on this issue:

Sixty-one percent of Americans think upper income Americans pay too little in taxes, a view that’s shared by 67 percent of moderates. But majorities of Republicans and conservatives think upper income Americans either pay the right amount or too much. Even more interesting:

Fifty two percent of Americans support this, even with very aggressive wording — the question raises the prospect of “heavy” taxes on the rich, in order to “redistribute” wealth. A solid majority of moderates agrees. But large percentages of Republicans and conservatives oppose it. (In fairness, some polling has shown that Republicans, too, favor tax hikes on the rich.)

We already know that the tax plans offered by Donald Trump and Ted Cruz would deliver large windfalls to top earners. Meanwhile, Ryan recently suggested in an interview with John Harwood that any tax reform the GOP embraces would likely cut top rates. Ryan has taken himself out of the running for president, but he functions as a useful generic unicorn savior candidate for now, a placeholder of sorts.

Obviously, Republicans argue that cutting taxes on everybody — including the highest earners — will unleash spectacular economic growth, lifting everyone’s fortunes. Ryan argued that in his interview with Harwood. But this has frustrated some reform conservatives, who point out that the Republican Party still remains trapped in a 1980s fiscal worldview even as Trump is moving into the vacuum this has left behind by more directly addressing the economic concerns that struggling GOP voters are experiencing amid globalization and technological change. (Trump is pulling a scam here, since his actual policies aren’t in sync with his rhetoric.)

Yet it’s arguably worse than this. The plans embraced by the likes of Trump and Cruz would not simply deliver a large windfall to the top earners. They would roll back the redistributive policies put in place by Obama, and do more on top of that. Both Cruz and Trump would repeal Obamacare, and any replace plan adopted by the eventual GOP nominee (and the replace plan that Ryan promises to introduce any day now) will almost certainly cover fewer low-income people, for the simple reason that it will spend less government money.

Meanwhile, the Tax Policy Center has estimated that Trump’s tax plan would produce a decline of $9.5 trillion in revenues over a decade, while Cruz’s plan would result in a decline of $8.6 trillion in revenues over a decade. That would likely mean massive cuts to government programs that might disproportionately hit lower income earners. We can’t know for sure what fiscal agenda the eventual GOP nominee will adopt, but it’s likely it will be framed around the idea that the primary problem facing economically struggling Americans is too much government-engineered downward redistribution of wealth. After all, the Gallup numbers above suggest that large swaths of the GOP base are hostile to any further efforts at redistribution.

Democratic operatives are already signaling that they will go hard at GOP fiscal priorities in the general election. As Clinton chief strategist Joel Benenson recently put it, all of these GOP candidates are aligned with a set of priorities that include bit tax cuts at the top, opposition to raising the federal minimum wage (if not getting rid of it entirely), and nothing to alleviate student debt or address gender pay inequity.

Whether the GOP nominee is crazy Donald Trump, nasty and vicious Ted Cruz, or Very Serious Wonk Paul Ryan — or some other savior candidate — he will all but certainly embrace an agenda shaped to no small degree around tax plans that deliver big cuts to the rich. Yet if Gallup is right, majorities think the current distribution of the tax burden is already unfair, and perhaps even favor redistribution in the opposite direction.