Topics: Economics, Editor's Picks, Gabriel Zucman, Inequality, tax evasion, Taxes, Thomas Piketty, Wealth inequality, News, Politics News

The growing wealth gap in developed countries is an incredibly disturbing development. New research suggests that inequality might be growing even faster than we thought. Worryingly, this concentration of wealth has coincided with a concentration of debt at the bottom, as families struggle to maintain their standards of living with stagnating incomes. But even this data understates wealth inequality, argues Gabriel Zucman in “The Hidden Wealth of Nations,” because official statistics fail to capture offshore wealth holdings.

Zucman is an assistant professor of economics at the London School of Economics and a visiting scholar at UC Berkeley. At only 27, he’s already co-authored papers with economics superstar Thomas Piketty. His most recent paper estimates that global offshore holdings total $7.6 trillion and rob governments of hundreds of billions in tax revenues each year. He also finds that over the past few decades, companies have stored more and more profits overseas, making the effective corporate tax rate less than half the tax rate on the books.

All of this is happening at the same time as Thomas Piketty’s blockbuster treatise, “Capital in the Twenty-First Century,” has brought the issue of wealth and income inequality to the forefront of the political discussion by introducing historical data on inequality. Piketty argues that the best way to address the data, political and economic concerns of wealth is a progressive international tax on wealth holdings, as well as policies to build wealth for the middle class. What was once a technocratic discussion about efficiency has become a deeply political debate about who gets what, as slow growth makes distribution more important. Even the most conservative economists have to grapple (albeit clumsily) with addressing the moral dimension of inequality.

The extent to which inequality has been a historic fixture of market economies, punctured only during what economists call “The Great Compression” of the mid-20th century, has led to an intense debate among economists. Was the “Great Compression” the result of forces like war, unprecedented innovation and environmentally unsustainable population growth or the rise of powerful working class interests? Is it possible for the middle class to fight against entrenched interests that increasingly control the political as well as the economic system?

I talked with one of the most luminous young economists on wealth inequality and how to fight it.

Starting on the more wonky side, there was a bit of a discussion in your research involving the distinction between tax evasion and tax avoidance. I believe the former being illegal and the latter being legal but sketchy. Could you talk a little bit about how you dealt with that in your research?

Absolutely. Several things to distinguish. On the one hand, there’s tax evasion by wealthy individuals, which is just having bank accounts in foreign countries and earning investment income on these accounts and failing to report that income to the IRS. That’s pure tax evasion. That’s completely illegal. Another thing is corporate tax avoidance, usually [by] multinational corporations [that] try to operate within the letter, if not the spirit of the law. You can say, “Well, it’s legal.” But it depends with the definition of legal. Usually some of them conduct illegal activities, but most multinational corporations at least try to stay within the letter of the law. I guess that’s the key distinction.

Then there’s another distinction, which is regarding households, regarding individuals. Some of them have bank accounts in tax havens in Switzerland and other countries and declare their holdings and their income to the IRS, to their home country tax authorities. Having foreign accounts is not illegal, per se. What is illegal is failing to declare the accounts and the income generated by these accounts. I’ve tried to take that into account in my computations: What’s the fraction of overall bank accounts of individuals which are declared to tax authorities? The existing evidence is limited, but what we have suggests that at least globally about 80 percent of the bank accounts in tax havens are not declared to tax authorities. The bulk of the private wealth held offshore evades taxes.

And is therefore illegal?

Yes, that’s completely illegal.

Now, $7.6 trillion I believe was the number that you came up with stashed in these offshore accounts. What is the impact of that with regard to the distribution of wealth?

That’s an interesting question. What I can say is that I think that today it’s increasingly difficult to measure wealth and to estimate the distribution of wealth. There are many reasons to believe that the estimates that we have — based on survey data, on tax data, or even the likes of Forbes Magazine, all these data sources — if anything understate the true level of wealth concentration. The reason is that there is a growing fraction of total world wealth held offshore. As I said, the bulk of it evades taxes so it’s not reported on tax returns. It’s unlikely that it’s reported in surveys and so on.

The big idea is that because of the development of the offshore wealth management industry, it’s getting more and more complicated to accurately measure the distribution of wealth at the very top, and it’s likely that we substantially underestimate wealthy inequality. Particularly in Europe and in developing countries, this is a first-order problem.

It seems the increase in wealth inequality has also coincided with an increase in debt inequality. There have been many more middle class and poor families taking on debt. Do you see those trends as at all correlated or is there anything there?