Overall, primary-care physicians did report increased demand for services under the ACA. Four in 10 (44%) said the total number of patients they see had increased since January 2014, and six in ten (59%) reported an increase in the number of patients who were newly insured or covered by Medicaid. But providers did not report that this increased demand was swamping their practices. [M]ost primary-care physicians (59%) said their ability to provide high-quality care to all their patients had stayed about the same since the ACA went into effect, with equal shares (20%) saying it had improved and had gotten worse. Even among physicians most affected by the coverage expansions–primary-care physicians accepting Medicaid and working in states that expanded the program, and those working in community clinics–most said their ability to provide quality care had stayed about the same, with about one in five saying it had gotten better and a similar share saying it was worse. Results were similar when we asked physicians about patient satisfaction and experiences with care: Most said things had not changed under the ACA.

All of the terrible, no good, horrible things that were going to happen under Obamacare still don't seem to be happening. Here's another one that's not happening: primary care doctors aren't overwhelmed with new patients, forcing everyone else to wait to get appointments say the Kaiser Family Foundation and the Commonwealth Fund.Most things not changing—except millions more having insurance—was the promise of Obamacare, so this on the provider side of things is really encouraging. It's not to say that further down the road the situation won't change, because there's still a shortage of primary care doctors , not enough medical students going into primary care, and an aging population that will create more demand. But all of that existed a year ago, too, when all these new Obamacare enrollees merged into the system. That suggests that there's time and opportunity to start addressing some of these issues. If we ever have a rational Congress to do it.