Economy Takes Center Stage at GOP Debate Scott Olson/Getty Images What Happened:



GOP candidates took to the stage again this week to discuss economic, tax and regulatory policy during another presidential debate, and no punches were pulled with respect to the Federal Reserve, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and minimum wage increases.



Candidates called for sweeping tax policy reform and said they wanted to repeal certain aspects of Dodd-Frank and the Affordable Care Act, with former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush vowing to repeal "every rule that Barack Obama has in terms of work in progress."



But along with the GOP's usual targets of the sitting president and Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton, Fed Chair Janet Yellen and the monetary-policy body she leads also drew plenty of criticism from the candidates.



"What we need is to make sure that they tie the monetary standard to something that makes sense, rather than their own whims," former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee said during the undercard debate.



Texas Sen. Ted Cruz also called for "rules-based monetary systems" that would tie Fed responsibilities like setting interest rates to automatic standards. If employment reached "X" or inflation reached "Y" under a rules-based system, for example, the Fed would automatically raise rates.



What It Means:



Nothing good for Yellen should a GOP candidate win the White House in 2016, especially under a hypothetical President Cruz, who also called for the Fed to peg the dollar to the value of gold. (By one study's estimates, that's almost universally considered a bad idea by economists).



Cruz also is a primary supporter of rival Republican and Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul's bill to audit the Fed and has repeatedly voiced his concern about transparency at America's central bank.



But the Fed is hardly the only institution to draw Cruz's ire. Under President Cruz, the IRS and the departments of Energy, Commerce, Education and Housing and Urban Development would all be put on the chopping block. The elimination of the Commerce Department alone would strip the country of the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the Census Bureau, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, to name a few. Retail Sales Stagnate Ahead of Holiday Season

Retail Sales Stagnate Ahead of Holiday Season Danny Johnston/AP What Happened:



Consumer spending again underwhelmed analysts as retail sales in October ticked up only 0.1 percent month over month, falling short of a 0.3 percent expectation, according to a report released Friday by the Census Bureau.



And downward revisions to September's numbers showed sales growth was virtually unchanged from August. So far this year, monthly retail sales have either been flat or negative for six out of 10 months.



Retail sales are calculated based on spending and aren't adjusted for price fluctuations, so continued weakness in energy prices again contributed to the indicator's sluggishness. Sales at gas stations were down 0.9 percent month over month and more than 20 percent year over year.



What It Means:



"The retail sales report was slightly weaker than expected, but consumers are still boosting their spending," Gus Faucher, a senior vice president and macroeconomist at The PNC Financial Services Group, wrote in a research note Friday, noting that "falling gas prices pushed down overall sales" particularly in the last three months.



Friday's sales numbers weren't particularly encouraging from a holiday spending point of view, considering November is generally calculated as the first month of the holiday retail sales season and has been preceded by several months of data sluggishness.



But expectations are still pretty good for end-of-the-year shopping. Advisory firm IHS in a research note earlier this week predicted holiday spending would grow 3.5 percent this year. That's not quite the pace of expansion seen last year (4 percent) but is still significantly better than years prior.



"We expect November to perform significantly better than October, since many shoppers were waiting for the deep and heavy price discounting and promotions that occur in early November," Chris Christopher, director of U.S. macroeconomics and global economics with IHS, wrote in a research note Friday. "This holiday retail sales season is looking rather good since consumer price inflation is modest, confidence is making a comeback, the stock market has stabilized, and pump prices are falling." Job Openings Remain High as Hiring Cools

Job Openings Remain High as Hiring Cools Wilfredo Lee/AP What Happened:



September held the second-most job openings of any month since the Labor Department began tracking the data back in 2000, according to the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Summary released Thursday.



That report found that there were 5.5 million jobs up for grabs in September, but hires dropped to a five-month low of just over 5 million. And the month's 3.5 percent hiring rate, which represents the number of hires made during a given month as a percentage of America's total employment, was at its lowest level since January.



The number of monthly quits, which are typically viewed as a sign of confidence among workers that they'll be able to find another job, also dropped to a five-month low of 2.72 million.



What It Means:



"Despite the continued uptrend in openings, the level of hiring actually declined to 5.05 million. The divergent trends between these series have persisted since late last year and highlight longer hiring times and increased caution among employers," a team of researchers at the Wells Fargo Economics Group wrote in a research note Thursday.



Job creation has been relatively positive this year, despite a few months of weakness in August and September. But hiring is beginning to stagnate as job openings hover near record levels, which suggests employers are having a hard time finding qualified candidates to fill the openings they have. This could force firms to eventually boost pay in an attempt to attract and retain talent.



And while it hasn't played out widely across the country just yet, salaries, benefits and signing perks are likely to increase as companies try to reel in the workers they want. China's Consumers Splurge on Singles Day

China's Consumers Splurge on Singles Day Andy Wong/AP What Happened:



A holiday for single people in China managed to generate $14.3 billion in sales this year, shattering Black Friday totals and punctuating the potential purchasing power of China's massive consumer base.



E-commerce titan Alibaba Group's annual Singles Day online sales event, which is essentially a cross between America's Cyber Monday and an anti-Valentine's Day, severely rocked the notion that China's economy is on the rocks. Singles Day sales more than doubled Cyber Monday 2014's more than $2 billion spending total in only 90 minutes and ended the day up more than 60 percent year over year.



What It Means:



China is in the midst of transitioning from a trade- and production-based economy to a consumer-driven one, and it is undoubtedly exhibiting growing pains. Economic growth has cooled in recent months, trade numbers have been notably underwhelming and the stock market has been anything but consistent. A report released Monday by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development predicted international trade weakness would ultimately hinder global growth this year, and China's slowdown was named as a primary culprit.



"Global trade, which was already growing slowly over the past few years, appears to have stagnated and even declined since late 2014, with the weakness centering increasingly on emerging markets, particularly China," OECD Secretary-General Angel Gurría said in a statement Monday. "This is deeply concerning, as robust trade and global growth go hand in hand."



But Singles Day shows that China's economy is far from in the hole. Its trade is undoubtedly slowing, but the country's increasingly prosperous consumers are likely to pick up the slack as China's economy leans more and more on citizen spending. IMF Speaks Out Against Interest Rate Hike