Property value protests Property owners have through June 1 to file protests if they disagree with the new market values assigned to the properties. Owners of properties in Boulder County can get information about filing appeals at the county assessor's website — BoulderCountyAssessor.org — or by calling the assessor's office at 303-441-3530. Owners of properties in southwest Weld County can get information about protest procedures through a "Property Info" portal on that county government's home page, co.weld.co.us, or by calling the assessor's office at 970-353-3845. Owners of properties in southern Larimer County can get information online — at co.larimer.co.us/assessor — or by calling 970-498-7050. Owners of properties in the City and County of Broomfield can get information at Broomfield.org/Assessor or by calling the assessor's office at 303.464-5819.

Property owners who disagree with the new real estate market values county assessors assigned to their properties have until June 1 to file protests with the Colorado county assessors in which those properties are located.

Advertisement

Assessors throughout the state mailed Notices of Valuation to property owners on Friday, specifying what those assessors have calculated those properties to have been worth as of June 30, 2014.

The new market-value figures represent a state-required reappraisal of changes in property values since mid-2012. Colorado law also dictates the methods assessors must use to determine those market values.

The official notices provide information about how owners can protest the assessors' newly assigned values.

The new property values will be part of the basis for calculating the owners' property tax bills that come due in 2016, but neither the county assessors who assign the market values nor the county treasurers who'll be sending out those bills next winter set those tax rates and mill levies.

Each property's eventual property tax bill will ultimately be result of the tax collection decisions made later this year by the local taxing jurisdictions in which the property is located — including the property taxes levied by school districts, counties, municipalities, fire protection districts, recreation districts, utility districts and other property-taxing authorities.

Colorado law doesn't permit the owners of homes or other properties to protest an assessor-assigned value solely on the basis of the owner's objections to past or projected property tax bills.

Boulder County Assessor Jerry Robert's value notices include estimates — based on current tax rates — about the potential property tax bill for each property under the new market value determinations.

However, in a joint Friday statement, Roberts, County Treasurer Paul Weissmann, and County Commissioners Deb Gardner, Elise Jones and Cindy Domenico said that "tax rates vary year to year based on legislative actions, ballot issues and limits and restrictions built into our state tax code to buffer taxpayers from major shifts in market value.

"Due to these limitations, property tax rates are prohibited from rising at the same rate of increase in property values," those Boulder County officials said. "In other words, the rate of increase in property taxes will be smaller than the percent increase in value."

Weld County government officials said in a Friday news release that "an increase in the market value of a home does not necessarily mean an increase in taxes" because of that county's home-rule charter limits as well as state laws and Colorado constitutional provisions that "prevent windfall tax increases."

Weissmann said that when it comes to affecting what those future property tax bills could turn out to be, "this is a good time for folks to get involved with their government entities and what they're doing to prepare their 2016 budgets."

Homeowners can, however, challenge the assessor's new value by producing documentation about such things as sales of comparable properties in the home's market area in the year or so prior to last June 30 — or by showing in their appeals how their property has a unique set of circumstances that sets it apart from comparable sales in their neighborhood.

Assessors suggest that protesting property owner provide information about the sales of three to four comparable properties in the same neighborhood, or a copy of a private appraisal of the owner's property, if those transactions or appraisals were completed before last June 30.

People can also seek changes in the assigned value if they can establish that the county's official information about the property — such as the number of bathrooms, the total square footage, or the finished square footage — was inaccurate.

"It's important to review your Notice of Valuation to make sure the details of your property are listed correctly," Broomfield Assessor Department director Sandy Herbison said in a recent news release.

"The value shown on the notice will affect the amount of taxes you pay the following January, and the amount of time to appeal is short and strictly enforceable by law," Herbison said.

John Fryar: 303-684-5211, jfryar@times-call.com or twitter.com/jfryartc