ZenPayroll, online provider of payroll, benefits, HR, and personal finance solutions, announced a name change to Gusto and the launch of integrated health benefits and workers’ compensation into its unified service.

The name change was inspired by “the energy that business owners have when they build something they care about,” according to the company.

Gusto’s new benefits and workers’ compensation capabilities have the same automation and services of the company’s payroll and finance tools. As employee data is centralized in Gusto, the new offerings are fully integrated with payroll and employees use dashboards to access and manage payroll and benefits information.

“I’ve never agreed with the term ‘Human Resources’ because humans are not resources—they are the most important part of every business. Gusto helps employers care for their teams and helps employees feel appreciated for what they do,” stated Josh Reeves, CEO and co-founder of Gusto. “We’ve transformed traditionally impersonal tools for employee onboarding, payroll, and health insurance into a service that connects companies with their teams in a more human way.”

Benefits of the integrated services include:

Faster, automated enrollment in benefits and workers’ compensation

Accurate employee information and payroll deductions in the unified system

Access to a large selection of healthcare plans and expert advice from licensed brokers, with benefits that are compliant with the Affordable Care Act and HIPAA regulations

Pay-as-you-go workers’ compensation that automatically calculates and pays premiums based on payroll data

In their personal Gusto accounts, employees can make changes to their health plans, contact Gusto’s care team regarding benefits-related questions, and access paystub and plan data.

“For many people today, health insurance is a burden or a hassle. It doesn’t have to be that way,” stated Reeves. “Health insurance is what makes it possible to take care of you and your family. We are automating all of the complex enrollment and administration, so that a business owner can offer this important service to their employees, without any headache.”

The rebranding follows the company's to-date fundraising of $86.1, including the lastet Google Capital-led $60 million Series B round in April. Gusto also recently opened its second office in Denver to help support its current customer base of more than 20,000.