The Chattanooga shooting topped your list of the top news stories of 2015 in Tennessee.

Heather Brame and her son, J.T., sign a poster at a makeshift memorial outside the Armed Forces Career Center on July 17 in Chattanooga. (Photo: Mark Zaleski / AP)

Tragedy struck Tennessee in 2015 when five U.S. service members were gunned down in Chattanooga. Nashville witnessed the drama of a high-profile rape trial of former Vanderbilt University football players, and the city ushered in a new mayor in a historic election. Republican lawmakers defeated Gov. Bill Haslam's plan to use federal money made available through the Affordable Care Act to expand health insurance to as many as 500,000 Tennesseans. And same-sex marriage became legal in the state after a landmark ruling by the U.S. Supreme Court.

Those are among the top news stories of 2015, as determined by reporters and editors at The Tennessean and ranked by readers on Tennessean.com.

1. Chattanooga shooting

On July 16 in Chattanooga, 24-year-old Muhammad Youssef Abdulazeez opened fire at two military installations, killing four Marines and a sailor and wounding another Marine. The community rallied behind the families of the victims, and Vice President Joe Biden spoke at a memorial for the five. In December, the FBI said the gunman was “inspired” by a foreign terrorist organization’s propaganda. Because it was terrorism, the U.S. secretary of the Navy was able to award the victims Purple Hearts.

2. Vanderbilt rape trial

In January, two former Vanderbilt football players were convicted of raping an unconscious 21-year-old woman in a university dorm room. But in June, two years to the day of the incident, a judge declared a mistrial in the case because a juror lied about being a victim of a sexual assault. The new trial is set for April. Two other former football players also are facing charges in the case.

3. Megan Barry elected mayor

Nashville voters elected the first female mayor in city history after a long, bruising and costly campaign. In fact, the race was the most expensive in city history. Megan Barry was the top vote getter among seven candidates in the August general election. She went on to defeat David Fox in a September runoff.

4. Insure Tennessee defeated

In January, Tennessee Gov. Bill Haslam rolled out an ambitious plan to expand health insurance for as many as 500,000 low-income Tennesseans. The plan would have used federal money made available through the Affordable Care Act. Haslam called a special session of the legislature to try and get his proposal passed. But the Republican governor quickly ran into resistance from his own party. A special Senate committee killed the proposal. It would later die in a Senate committee during the regular legislative session.

5. Antioch theater attack

On the afternoon of Aug. 5, Vincente Montano carried a hatchet, a fake gun, a backpack and supplies to make an explosive into a theater showing “Mad Max: Fury Road” at Carmike Hickory 8. Montano attacked a family with the hatchet, leading to a shootout with police. Police fired more than 100 rounds at the suspect, killing him. Montano, 29, suffered mental health issues and had been committed for care four times in 11 years.

6. Same-sex marriage win

In April, three couples who lived in Tennessee and a contingent of attorneys went before the U.S. Supreme Court in Washington, D.C., arguing for same-sex marriage. Tennessee was one of four states that brought the challenge to the nation’s highest court. In June, the U.S. Supreme Court made history and ruled that same-sex marriage was legal. The ruling overturned Tennessee’s law, which defined marriage as between one man and one woman, and led to marriages for same-sex couples in most counties the same day. It also launched a flurry of action by local and state lawmakers to try and resist the ruling.

7. Fred Thompson’s death

In November, Fred Thompson, a former U.S. senator from Tennessee, GOP presidential candidate, Watergate attorney and actor who starred on the television drama "Law and Order," died in Nashville. He was 73.

8. Tennessee Promise

The state’s ambitious plan to provide free community college rolled out in 2015, with the first set of 16,000 students entering community college through the program in the fall. The plan has received national attention and served as a model for President Barack Obama’s national community college plan, unveiled in his annual State of the Union address.

9. (tie) Metro schools director search

A July 24 morning news conference by Williamson County Schools Director Mike Looney officially marked the end of Nashville’s first search for a new director of schools and created uncertainty about how the district would replace retired superintendent Jesse Register. After a two-month period to reset after the failed search, the Metro school board hatched a plan in September to foster community voices to help recruit Nashville’s next director. The plan kicked off in December with a 17-member task force, led by Mayor Megan Barry’s office, meeting to answer the questions that will drive the next search. The board plans to find a new superintendent sometime before next year’s board elections.

9. (tie) The Amp dies

After spending millions of dollars planning and pushing for a bus-rapid transit project linking East and West Nashville, then-Mayor Karl Dean’s administration pulled the plug on what was known as the Amp. The Amp became controversial with residents worried about how dedicated bus lanes would affect traffic and access to neighborhoods. State lawmakers and other conservative voices also weighed in opposing the plan.

More top stories of 2015:

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1m3KLpj