Topics: Adolf Hitler, Barack Obama, Conservatives, drudge report, Glenn Beck, Louie Gohmert, Matt Drudge, Milton Wolf, Nazi Germany, Paul Broun, randy weber, Republicans, Rick Santorum, thomas sowell, Politics News

Texas Republican Congressman Randy Weber came under withering criticism last night after he posted a tweet comparing President Obama with Adolf Hitler. The occasion for such an incendiary comparison? Unlike Obama, who did not attend an anti-terror solidarity rally in Paris this weekend, Hitler did think it “important” to get to the city, Weber wrote, in a reference to Germany’s 1940 occupation of Paris:

Conservatives may spend a great deal of time asserting that Obama is a dirty socialist, but Weber, a Tea Partyer elected to succeed longtime Texas Rep. Ron Paul in 2012, is but the latest conservative to link Obama with the fascist dictator. Here are six others.

Louie Gohmert

In a 2010 House floor speech, America’s favorite bumbling conservative, who has represented an east Texas-based congressional district since 2005 but failed spectacularly in his bid to become House Speaker this month, approvingly cited conservative polemicist Thomas Sowell’s comparison of Nazi Germany with America in the Obama era.

“There’s a brilliant man named Thomas Sowell,” Gohmert said. “And I didn’t vote for Barack Obama in 2008, but I sure would have voted for Thomas Sowell. This man, well, his article says quite a lot. His editorial says here — and it’s just been posted this week — but it says, “When Adolph Hitler was building up the Nazi movement in the 1920’s” — and I’m quoting from Thomas Sowell in his editorial: ‘leading up to his taking power in the 1930s, he deliberately sought to activate people who did not normally pay much attention to politics.”

“‘Such people were a valuable addition to his political base, since they were particularly susceptible to Hitler’s rhetoric and had far less basis for questioning his assumptions or his conclusions. ‘Useful idiots’ was the term supposedly coined by V.I. Lenin to describe similarly unthinking supporters of his dictatorship in the Soviet Union,'” Gohmert continued, reading from Sowell’s op-ed.

“And this isn’t in the article,” Gohmert concluded, “this is my comment — but we do have useful idiots today, who are heard to say, ‘Wow, what we really need is for the president to be a dictator for a little while.’ They know not what they say.”

Paul Broun

Before Obama even took the oath of office, then-Georgia Congressman Paul Broun warned in November 2008 that the president-elect could usher in a “radical” dictatorship.

“It may sound a bit crazy and off base, but the thing is, he’s the one who proposed this national security force,” Broun said, referring to an Obama proposal for a civilian force to aid the military. “I’m just trying to bring attention to the fact that we may– may not, I hope not – but we may have a problem with that type of philosophy of radical socialism or Marxism.”