A year after UF Health Jacksonville warned it might have to close its doors — a fear amplified by nightmare scenarios of MASH tents erected at other hospitals — UF Health is on the mend.

It’s building a new $85 million hospital on the Northside. The metal girders and beams show the outlines of the five-story hospital that is being constructed next to UF Health Jacksonville’s medical office building.

Its financial numbers are trending in the right direction. It’s in the midst of its biggest year ever for revenue. Speculation has died down about the fate of UF Health’s main hospital on Eighth Street.

But the state budget approved last week by the Legislature highlights how UF Health Jacksonville’s financial health remains a year-to-year proposition.

In the best-case scenario, the budget would force it to absorb a manageable $1.8 million funding reduction, according to analysis by the Safety Net Hospital Alliance of Florida. In a worst-case scenario, the hospital would take a $17 million hit.

The picture is murky, too, with respect to how much the state will ask the city of Jacksonville to put into the pot. Various models range from about $33 million to almost $45 million, much more than the $26.3 million the city pays now.

UF Health Jacksonville officials declined interview requests. The hospital released a statement saying it will take more time to get a “complete picture” of the impact of the state budget, which still faces scrutiny by Gov. Rick Scott.

EXPANSION BUT CONCERN

The sight of construction cranes at the UF Health Jacksonville North campus might seem odd considering that just last year, hospital executives were warning the main hospital on Eighth Street was in financial peril.

But the hospital being built off Max Leggett Parkway on the Northside is a key part of UF Health’s strategy to attract more patients with commercial insurance. They would help ease the strain of being the go-to hospital in Northeast Florida for patients who are covered by Medicaid or have no insurance at all.

It appears to be a solid way forward, said former mayor John Delaney, who has called attention to UF Health’s plight from his perch as a JAX Chamber leader.

“Before the recession, there was a lot of middle-class housing being planned and platted for north Jacksonville,” he said.

When home-building resumes in force on that side of Jacksonville and up into Nassau County, UF Health will be well positioned as the hospital of choice for that area, just as Baptist Medical Center South was in the right place for residential growth in that area of the city and St. Johns County, Delaney said.

Constructing the 92-bed hospital carries some risk. When UF Health Jacksonville borrowed $85 million for the new hospital, Fitch Ratings downgraded its bond rating to BBB. Fitch said that even though the hospital makes business sense and the health system has improved its finances since 2012, UF Health’s bottom line remains weak.

DEALT A BAD HAND?

The biggest challenge came last year during the showdown over whether Florida would join other states that expanded their Medicaid programs to cover more people in the Affordable Care Act.

The Senate favored expansion. The House and Gov. Rick Scott stood firmly opposed; and the Senate finally conceded.

Meanwhile, the federal government had told Florida it would be closing down the Low-Income Pool program that safety-net hospitals like UF Health Jacksonville depend on. A complete cut-off of LIP would have dealt a devastating blow to UF Health Jacksonville, which is one of the region’s biggest hospitals with 695 beds and Northeast Florida’s only Level 1 trauma center.

Other hospitals would have been swamped, Delaney said.

Ultimately, the federal government agreed to keep LIP but said it would reduce the amount of federal dollars flowing to Florida for the 2015-16 budget and then again for 2016-17. Last year, the Legislature plugged the gap with state dollars, so the impact didn’t really hit home until lawmakers drew up the budget for the coming fiscal year while dealing with a $400 million drop in the LIP program.

All things considered, UF Health Jacksonville would come out “reasonably well” if it only gets a $1.8 million cut, said Tony Carvalho, president of the Safety Net Alliance of Florida.

State Rep. Mia Jones, D-Jacksonville, agreed that it could have been worse. But she said the state must do more in future years for hospitals that care for the highest proportion of poor and uninsured patients.

“All the safety-net hospitals have been dealt a bad hand,” she said. “They are the ones providing the difficult care and have the responsibility for a population that the other hospitals don’t want to take care of.”

TIES BIND CITY, HOSPITAL

Jones said she supports UF Health’s move to build a new hospital on the Northside, but the strategy must also involve upgrades to the Eighth Street campus.

“We’ve got to find a way to improve that physical plant to create a welcoming environment where they can compete with other hospitals that are putting together newer facilities,” Jones said.

UF Health’s push onto the Northside is already paying some dividends. A medical office opened in February 2015 on the north campus, which drove up patient visits. The system’s 2015-16 budget projects almost $665 million in revenue, a 12 percent increase from the prior year.

Still, the Eighth Street campus is by far the busiest location. The hospital employs 3,400 people, and when other operations are included, UF Health Jacksonville counts about 5,000 faculty and staff.

Delaney said he’s not sure what the city’s contribution should be for the hospital, but it needs to go up so more reinvestment can occur.

“If your X-ray machines work but are old, at some point you’ve got to replace them,” he said.

Even as medical costs have risen, the city’s indigent-care contract with UF Health (formerly Shands Jacksonville) stayed flat at $23.8 million from 2002 to 2013. The city bumped it to $26.3 million in 2014 and has kept it there since.

City Council President Greg Anderson said he expects the city will take a hard look at the contribution amount “because from my perspective, the success of Shands and the success of Jacksonville are tied together.”

David Bauerlein: (904) 359-4581