Steve Williams is a Senior Vice President and Head of Financial Planning, U.S. at BMO Private Bank. He oversees the strategic development and delivery of customized financial planning services to high net worth individuals and families throughout the United States. Steve joined the BMO in 1998 and has over 17 years of experience in the financial services industry.He is a Certified Financial Planner professional, Certified Investment Management Analyst and also a Certified Retirement Counselor.

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, ACA, also known as Obamacare, is a very sensitive topic that attracts strong opposing opinions.

It is a massive overhaul of the U.S. health care system that has many unknowns and possible unintended consequences. However, regardless of personal feelings concerning the ACA, open enrollment begins on Oct. 1, 2013, with plans from the health insurance exchange set to become active by Jan. 1, 2014.

As it was signed into law in 2010, some parts of the ACA are already in effect, with the rest to occur in 2014 and beyond. Therefore, it is important to know some of the facts, particularly for those nearing retirement, since health care costs can be such a large part of retirement expenses.

Basic points:

The stated goal of the ACA is to expand health care coverage and make it more affordable. The ACA doesn't replace Medicare, Medicaid, and private insurance. For those on Medicaid, coverage will largely stay the same.

A separate issue is whether individual states will participate or not in the expansion of Medicaid as called for by the ACA, which is out of scope for this article.

Some benefits for seniors

During the fall election cycle there was a lot of rhetoric about "cuts to Medicare" and interpretation of Congressional Budget Office statistics can be used to make a case one way or another. However, here are some of the positive changes for those on Medicare:

No out of pocket cost for preventative care. This includes screenings for cancer, diabetes, and high cholesterol, an annual wellness check, as well as vaccines for the flu and pneumonia.

The ACA is also attempting to close the "doughnut hole" on Medicare Part D, because above the deductible and below the top threshold prescription drug costs were all out of pocket. In 2012, seniors received a 50% discount on brand name drugs and 14% on generic drugs and these percentages gradually grow to 75% by 2020, at which point the doughnut hole should be virtually closed. The exception is for individuals with an annual income greater than $85,000, (or $170,000 for joint filers), where Part D premiums will increase as federal government subsidies decrease.

One of the goals of the ACA is to slow the rise in Medicare premiums and keep the program solvent. The law targets Medicare fraud and overpayments to private insurance companies.

With the exception of those with a Medicare Advantage plan, there is no obvious negative change to Medicare benefits for Part A (hospital stays) and Part B (doctor visits).

For example, the calculation for Medicare part B premiums is unchanged by the ACA. Opposition to the ACA predicts that some doctors may refuse to see Medicare patients resulting in longer waits for seniors but that is another unknown.

The bottom line for seniors, as always, is to know your Medicare benefits inside and out.

Also see: Obamacare: What retirees need to know

Negative impact on Medicare Advantage plans

The ACA does mandate cuts to Medicare Advantage programs, which are provided through private insurers but subsidized by the federal government.

Medicare Advantage plans are a type of Medicare plans that combine the benefits of Parts A and B under one policy through a private insurance company. The ACA reduces payments to these plans by approximately $150 Billion between 2013 and 2022, so Medicare Advantage owners should monitor how their insurance companies are going to respond.

Some general benefits of the ACA

In addition to the above for Medicare plans, for all health-care plans there are some new policies taking effect with the ACA in 2014 that most insured will view positively:

Phases out denial of insurance based on pre-existing condition by 2017. That is a huge benefit for anyone with an existing condition who has been unable to get a health care coverage.

Prevents insurance companies from writing a specific coverage (one more expensive) for people with pre-existing conditions.

The insured have a right to appeal when a health-care plan denies a claim for service or treatment.

Children can continue coverage on their parent's plan until they turn age 26 (this used to be age 19).

Lifetime benefit limits have been removed for all health plans.

Those under 400% of the Federal Poverty Threshold (for a family of 4 that is $92,200) may qualify for assistance (subsidies).

The wealthy pay higher taxes

When taken in total, there are several benefits for the insured, but where it gets very contentious is how these new benefits get paid for. Some of the cost for the ACA will be borne by the wealthiest Americans in the form of new taxes.

For this law, those who are subject to these taxes include individuals with modified adjusted gross income over $200,000 or $250,000 for those who are married and filing jointly.

A 3.8% surtax on investment income such as capital gains, certain home sales, and dividends

An extra 0.9% in Medicare taxes (from 1.45% previously to 2.35% starting in January 2013) on adjusted income over the above threshold

The other "tax," much talked about from the Supreme Court Decision, is also known as the individual mandate. Those currently without health insurance will have to buy it by March 31, 2014 or pay a penalty, collected through the annual IRS tax filing.

Per individual, the tax penalty for not having health insurance is $95 or 1% of Adjusted Gross Income (AGI) whichever is greater. This gradually increases to the greater of $695 or 2.5% of AGI by 2016. There also are other taxes such as the one slated to go into effect in 2018 as an excise tax on insurers of high-cost employer-sponsored heath plans, so called “Cadillac health-care plans."

For business owners it’s important to know that the ACA requires employers to provide health insurance for employees, but that doesn't apply to businesses with less than 50 employees.

Large employers (those with 50 or more full-time employees) must provide health insurance coverage to all employees beginning in 2014 or pay a penalty. The penalty is $2,000 per employee after an exemption for the first 30 employees.

Again, this is a massive change in the U.S. health care system, and there are likely to be problems like with any major government overhaul. However, those already on Medicare, those with pre-existing conditions, and those who may have to have significant future health care costs will find some benefits in the ACA to like.

How the health care overhaul affects you (4:00) WSJ peers into the future with this first-person look at how the Affordable Care Act, commonly known as 'Obamacare,' will impact individuals.

More from MarketWatch