(AP Photo)

(CNSNews.com) - House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi explained her support for the $1.2 trillion spending bill that the Republican Congress passed yesterday and President Obama signed into law by pointing out to reporters that the Republicans “were willing to concede so much” to get the bill passed.

The bill, Pelosi noted, did not stop funding of Planned Parenthood, and the Republicans “had to take out their provisions to destroy ACA”—the Affordable Care Act, AKA Obamacare.

Pelosi argued that the Republican leaders were so intent on getting a provision to allow exports of U.S. crude oil that they were “willing to give up so much.”

“The fact that the Republicans wanted big oil so desperately really argues for voting for the bill because they were willing to concede so much,” said Pelosi.

In the end, more House Democrats voted for the bill than House Republicans. It passed 316 to 113 with 5 members not voting. Those voting for the bill included 166 Democrats and 150 Republicans. Those voting against it included 95 Republicans and 18 Democrats.

The Congressional Budget Office says that the bill will cause $1,205,146,000,000 in federal outlays between now and Sept. 30.

Here are key excerpts from Pelosi’s remarks to the press on Thursday:

But the fact that the Republicans wanted big oil so desperately really argues for voting for the bill because they were willing to concede so much. This was their raison d'etre. We are here to export crude oil at the expense of American jobs, and so we're willing to give up so much.

So we're pleased that the legislation is rid of its poison pill riders, that what is in the bill is positive in terms of--well, let's talk about what they did. It eliminated riders to dismantle women's health, they tried to eliminate the clean power plant, they tried to eliminate, to weaken Dodd-Frank and our oversight of Wall Street, they tried to sabotage campaign finance reform and they failed on that, what they call Colorado II resolution. And they, of course, had to take out their provisions to destroy ACA.