Supporters of KidsCare rallied at the capitol calling on Senate President Andy Biggs. (Photo: Katie Faller)



KidsCare is back – for now, at least.

A coalition of House Republicans and Democrats revived the plan to restore the health insurance program for children of the working poor early Thursday evening.

It passed 38-21, giving senators the chance to show us exactly who they are.

Will they approve a program that would allow 30,000 Arizona children to get low-cost health insurance – a program that 49 other states offer? a program that would cost the state nothing?

Or do they stand on ideology and proclaim such a thing “un-American”, as Republican Rep. Eddie Farnworth of Gilbert did on Thursday?

Will these five guys stand for children?

All eyes turn now to Republican Sens. Jeff Dial of Chandler, Bob Worsley of Mesa, Carlyle Begay of Ganado, Steve Pierce of Prescott and Adam Driggs of Phoenix. Will they will join with Democrats so that Arizona can join the rest of the country in offering a hand to the children of these parents who work but don't make enough to afford private insurance. (Because clearly, we never got the affordable part of Affordable Health Care Act.)

Pierce and Begay were the only two Republicans to support KidsCare earlier this week, when it was defeated during a vote on the budget.

Will they stay consistent?

Will Worsley and Driggs, who voted no earlier this week, change their minds?

Will Dial, who took a walk when it came time to vote, this time take a stand?

To do so, they’ll have to roll over Senate President Andy Biggs, the Legislature’s staunchest opponent to KidsCare. It's been done before. See: Medicaid expansion, circa 2013.

Watch for Biggs to erect a roadblock

Expect Biggs to try to block Senate Bill 1457 from coming to a vote today. He’s done it all session.

That means someone needs to step up, declare a “point of order” and move that SB 1457 be brought to an immediate vote.

While we wait to see what manner of leaders we have, a round of applause, please, to the House Republicans who joined with Democrats to pass KidsCare on Thursday. They are:

Reps. Christopher Ackerley of Sahuarita, Regina Cobb of Kingman, Karen Fann of Prescott, Justin Olson of Mesa, T.J. Shope of Coolidge, Kelly Townsend of Mesa, Kate Brophy McGee of Phoenix, Heather Carter of Phoenix, Doug Coleman of Apache Junction, Rick Gray of Sun City, Frank Pratt of Casa Grande, Bob Robson of Chandler, Noel Campbell of Prescott and Jill Norgaard of Phoenix.

Hypocrite roll call, please

Please also take note of the Republicans who voted for KidsCare in March – when it was an up or down vote, without being attached to the budget -- but now suddenly oppose it.

They are: House Speaker David Gowan of Sierra Vista, Brenda Barton of Payson, Mark Finchem of Oro Valley, Jay Lawrence of Scottsdale, Vince Leach of Tucson, David Livingston of Peoria, Darin Mitchell of Litchfield Park, Steve Montengero of Litchfield Park, David Stephens of Sierra Vista, Bob Thorpe of Flagstaff and Jeff Weninger of Chandler.

I guess these are the legislators Biggs was talking about last month when he said “it just may be the case” that some House Republicans in March voted publicly for KidsCare but privately came to him to ask that he quietly kill it.

Statesmen, one and all.

Meanwhile, here are the Republicans who have consistently opposed KidsCare:

Reps. Paul Boyer of Phoenix, Anthony Kern of Glendale, Phil Lovas of Peoria, John Allen of Scottsdale, Sonny Borrelli of Lake Havasu City, Eddie Farnsworth of Gilbert, J.D. Mesnard of Chandler, Michelle Ugenti-Rita of Scottsdale, Rusty Bowers of Mesa and Warren Petersen of Gilbert.

Rep. Tony Rivero of Peoria voted for KidsCare in March but didn't vote on Thursday.

More from Laurie Roberts

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/26ZUCiO