Marco Rubio is the candidate that this country needs. During his time in office at state and federal levels, he has shown that he has a strong moral foundation. He wants to decrease government, supports a free market, and opposes Obama’s policies of healthcare and gun control. Rubio’s passion is restoring the “American Dream” to lower class Americans and immigrants alike.

Rubio’s parents were legal immigrants to the United States in a time when the American Dream was still economically possible. Rubio has noticed how difficult it has become to fulfill the American Dream, thus he writes “I believe that with a smart limited government approach, Americans can come together to revive the American Dream, bring it into the reach of more people than ever before, and usher in an American Century even more brilliant and prosperous than the last.”

One of the ways he plans to achieve this is to retract the government’s tentacles from the economy. Rubio wants to promote innovation and protect it from regulators. He worked with Senator Mike Lee to put forward a tax overhaul plan, which has been praised as pro-growth for both businesses and individuals. Overall, Rubio has been consistent in his support of free trade.

Rubio also has plans to repeal Obamacare, reform Medicare and Medicaid, and cut back the government’s involvement in the healthcare industry; in place of Obamacare, a competitive market would be encouraged so that health care prices would be lower and innovation would be more possible. Rubio has already had success in stopping parts of Obamacare, specifically the taxpayer-funded bailout of the health insurance industry.

Rubio believes that the Second Amendment is about the American Dream. He has been a strong protector of the Second Amendment, and himself holds a concealed weapons permit. Rubio believes that instead of attempting to control the weapons, we should both be examining the deeper societal issues that cause people to be more violent, and addressing the topic of mental illness more seriously.

Perhaps the most important issue facing this country is right to life. In the Declaration of Independence, Life is named as one of the inalienable rights. In both his public and private life, Rubio supports pro-life policies. As Rubio himself says, “If the right to life is not guaranteed for all, then our society is not truly equal. A nation that cannot guarantee a right to life cannot guarantee liberty.”