In U.S. Senate testimony Tuesday, a former chairman of the Kansas Wheat Commission joined Sen. Pat Roberts in calling on Congress to expand agricultural trade with Cuba.

“Agriculture has long been used as a tool — not a weapon — for peace and stability,” Roberts said. “It is my hope that Cuba will embrace the practices of free trade, enterprise and commerce, so that both countries will gain from increased relations.”

Roberts’ remarks opened a hearing of the Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry. The Kansas Republican is chairman of the committee.

Along with officials from the U.S. Agriculture, Commerce and Treasury departments, the Senate committee heard from members of the agricultural business community.

Doug Keesling, owner of Keesling Seed Farms in Chase, provided written testimony. Keesling, a Kansas wheat commissioner, traveled to Cuba last month with the U.S. Agriculture Coalition for Cuba, a group that advocates for enhanced trade between the two countries.

“From what I could see, there is a lot of potential in Cuba: potential in its own agriculture sector and potential as a market for U.S. agricultural exports,” Keesling testified. “As a Kansas wheat farmer, that potential was obvious every time a meal included bread.”

According to Keesling, Cuba imports 30 million bushels of wheat annually. “That would be over 10 percent of all the wheat grown in Kansas, going to this one island just a couple days sail from U.S. ports,” he said.

While commonly consumed on the island country, very little wheat is grown in Cuba. Cubans import grain from Canada and Europe but not the U.S. because of trade restrictions between the U.S. and Cuba dating back to the 1960 embargo.

In his State of the Union address this January, President Barack Obama urged Congress to begin lifting the Cuban embargo. The president has since re-established diplomatic ties with the Caribbean country.

“Foreign policy does not happen in a vacuum,” Roberts said Tuesday. “We have to take a realistic approach and work out a step-by-step plan towards lifting the embargo.”

In January, Sen. Jerry Moran, R-Kan., called for ending the embargo with Cuba, in part due to the possibility of enhanced agricultural trade for Kansas farmers.

“When wheat, for example, is not sold to Cuba, it’s not that they’re not buying wheat, it’s that wheat’s being purchased from some other place: our competitors,” Moran said in a speech Jan. 8.

In his testimony Tuesday, Keesling said federal restrictions on trade with Cuba are putting U.S. farmers at a competitive disadvantage.

“I can put my wheat in an elevator in Kansas, send it by rail down to the Gulf of Mexico, and put it on a ship that’s just a couple days away from the Havana Harbor,” Keesling explained. “But my wheat is still going to lose out to wheat that has to be on a boat for a week from Canada or two weeks from France.”

The reasons for that, according to Keesling, are laws such as the requirement that American exporters receive cash before they are allowed to unload their product in a Cuban port. By not allowing Cubans to purchase wheat on credit, American exporters are losing out to Canadian and European companies that don’t require cash transactions, Keesling said.

“It doesn’t make any sense to me that if somebody wants to buy the wheat I grow, they have to jump through all sorts of regulatory hoops,” Keesling testified. “No matter what kind of government a country has, everyone should have access to affordable food, and we should do everything we can with our policies to facilitate access to American food products.”

Keesling called on Congress to repeal regulatory obstacles and trade sanctions on Cuba.

“Cuba has enormous economic potential, and while it certainly remains a communist country, that hardly justifies the scale of the sanctions, especially when trade relations with other communist countries are growing deeper all the time,” he testified.

In a news release Wednesday, Kansas Secretary of Agriculture Jackie McClaskey said Cuba deserves consideration as Kansas farmers seek to expand their markets.

"Kansas ranchers and farmers produce some of the best beef and pork in the world and our wheat and feed grains are sought out around the world," McClaskey said. "It makes sense that we should be looking to add new trading partners."