Patrick Rizzo knew early in the Colfax Marathon’s half marathon event that it wasn’t going to be his day. As it turned out, he lost more than the race. He lost his course record, too.

Hais Welday of Eritrea, who came to Denver a week ago, won the race in one hour, 6 minutes, 44 seconds to break the record Rizzo set in 2012 by a minute and 25 seconds.

Rizzo, who ran the Los Angeles Marathon (2:21:54) two months ago in 90-degree temperatures, still hasn’t completely recovered from that race and a subsequent bout of giardia that caused him to lose 10 pounds. He finished second Sunday in 1:09:36.

“At about 5K, I knew I was struggling a little bit more than I really should be for a half marathon,” said Rizzo, 31, a resident of Colorado Springs. “I knew my fitness was going to inhibit me. I’m not out of shape, but I’m not race ready.”

Welday, 25, saw Rizzo early but dropped him easily.

“There was somebody there, there is good guy that was going with me for three miles,” Welday said. “After that I am going alone.”

PHOTOS: 10th Annual Colfax Marathon runs through Denver

Even winners humbled — Nicole Chyr won the women’s marathon for the fourth time in five years but it “felt awful.” The Highlands Ranch runner finished in 3 hours, 2 minutes, 4 seconds.

“My legs blew up on me at mile 20, worse than any marathon in a while,” Chyr said. “The marathon is just a humbling event. You forget how tough it really is. You hit that 20-mile mark and it is just mental at that point.”

Ramon Paredes-Becerra, a 20-year-old from Chihuahua, Mexico, won the men’s marathon in 2:36:13.

Olympian going strong — Nuta Olaru, a 2004 Olympian for Romania who has lived in Longmont since 2006, is still running strong at age 44. Olaru finished second in the masters division at the Boston Marathon last month and she won the women’s half marathon easily Sunday in 1:22:46.

“First mile there was some girls near me,” said Olaru, who became a U.S. citizen in 2011. “But after that I pushed by myself.”

Kristin Louderback of Highlands Ranch, who won the Cherry Creek Sneak 10-miler last month, was second in 1:24:23.

“I stuck with her for the first mile or two, and then she pulled away,” Louderback said. “You have to be smart and realize the talent that’s here and kind of run your own race. She’s in a different class, that’s for sure.”

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnmeyer