Rick Jago talks about his doctor at Northwestern University in emotional terms.

The 57-year-old Homer Glen resident credits Dr. Jyoti Patel with saving his life after he was diagnosed with lung cancer five years ago. He sees her every six months to make sure the cancer hasn't returned.

"I love this woman," said Jago. "The only woman I love more than her is my wife."

What he's not in love with is his health insurance. Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois is canceling his PPO plan at the end of the year. The big insurer offered to transfer him to another health plan, but there's a problem. Patel is not in the network.

Blue Cross took its PPO plan off the Illinois health insurance marketplace created under President Barack Obama's signature health care law. This change does not affect people enrolled in a Blue Cross PPO plan through an employer or Medicare beneficiaries who buy supplemental insurance from the company.

But the elimination of the plan has thousands of Blue Cross customers facing the prospect that they may not be able to see their doctors or go to their hospitals next year. That includes cancer patients like Jago who are concerned about the continuity of their care. Parents like Connie Wood, of Deerfield, who has a child with special needs and may be forced to choose between losing some specialists or paying significantly more for out-of-network medical services. Customers like Thomas Hansen, 64, who's upset about the loss of access to some of the Chicago area's top hospitals.

Altogether, about 173,000 people are in the PPO plan that Blue Cross, the state's largest health insurer, is dropping. That's nearly one-fourth of the individuals and families in Illinois who bought insurance in the marketplace under the Affordable Care Act.

Blue Cross customers will be automatically enrolled in a new plan, Blue Choice Preferred PPO, unless they choose a different insurance policy. But several of the region's prestigious medical centers, including Lurie Children's, Northwestern Memorial, University of Chicago and Rush University and most of the doctors affiliated with those hospitals, do not accept Blue Choice. Large hospital chains like NorthShore University HealthSystem and Advocate Health Care also are not in Blue Choice's network.

Providers say the reimbursement rates in the Blue Choice plan are too low for them to participate.

In a statement, Blue Cross said "the more competitive reimbursement rates allow us to offer more affordable plan choices for consumers." The company said the Blue PPO plan being eliminated has the highest medical costs. Federal and state laws require that the insurer set individual market plan rates based on the total medical costs of all of its Illinois individual members.

"If one product's cost is high, it raises the rates for all of our individual products, thereby making all products less affordable," Blue Cross said.

Several hospitals have reached out to patients alerting them that their facilities will not be in the Blue Choice network. Northwestern's letter to about 35,000 patients included the following in bold, underscored text: "If you prefer to remain with Blue Choice, you will be responsible for 100 percent of the out-of-network charges for all care provided by Northwestern Medicine. Pre-payment will be required prior to any scheduled services."

Even with the outreach, Northwestern and other hospitals are afraid that patients aren't paying attention to the major changes Blue Cross made and won't realize that the Blue Choice plan they were rolled into has limited out-of-network benefits. The deadline is Dec. 15 to sign up for coverage that starts Jan. 1.

"We want to make sure people are aware so there's not sticker shock," said Northwestern spokesman Christopher King. "But it's a struggle for us. It's going to cause significant confusion."

The out-of-network costs in the Blue Choice plan are enormous, providers said. In a Blue Choice Silver Plan, for example, members are responsible for the first $15,000 of medical costs, compared with a $3,250 deductible for in-network coverage. Blue Cross also removed the cap on out-of-pocket expenses for going outside of the Blue Choice network.

Julia Burton, a Chicago psychiatrist, said her out-of-pocket maximum on her family's canceled PPO plan was $18,000 if she went outside the network. Like a lot of health care consumers, she is willing to go out of network to get the best care. She fears that without a limit on out-of-pocket costs, a catastrophic accident or illness will bankrupt families.

"Isn't the whole point of insurance to give you peace of mind?" Burton said.

The discontinuation of the Blue Cross PPO plan has caught the attention of U.S. Rep. Jan Schakowsky of Evanston. In a letter to Blue Cross last month, the Democratic lawmaker expressed concerns about Blue Choice's limited network in the Chicago area and encouraged the company to expand the list of providers.

Blue Cross President Maurice Smith responded in a letter that federal and state regulators found the Blue Choice network to be sufficient under the Affordable Care Act.

Schakowsky's office provided both letters.

Leslie Combs, Schakowsky's district director, has been fielding calls and emails from angry constituents. She's encouraging them to shop for other options on the exchange. Coventry Health Care, which is part of Aetna, and two startups, Harken Health and Land of Lincoln Health, also offer PPO plans on the Illinois exchange, accessible at healthcare.gov.

Combs advises consumers to check the other PPO plans to make sure their doctors are in network. The other PPO plans also have no caps on out-of-pocket expenses for out-of-network providers, according to HealthCare.gov.

Wood, for one, is looking at other options to maintain access to specialists for her child, as well as the family's primary doctors who are affiliated with the NorthShore health system. Under other insurance plans, she said she faces higher medical costs.

Wood, whose husband died of cancer two years ago, has been working as an independent contractor to have more time to spend with her children. She's concerned that people who are self-employed will have to seek jobs with group health benefits due to rising insurance costs on the individual market.