Photo

Good Monday morning from Washington, where the health secretary, Sylvia Mathews Burwell, has embarked on an Affordable Care Act tour and President Obama has returned after a trip to Asia and Australia. As the week begins, we look to the Senate for a clue on how the rest of this session will go.

The post-election festivities are finished, and Mr. Obama is back in town. It’s time for the lame-duck Congress to get serious about what it will do — or won’t do.

The first real action comes tomorrow. That’s when the Senate will get the chance to send a bill expediting the Keystone XL pipeline to the president’s desk, or decide to leave the issue for the new Republican majority next year.

Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, said Sunday on CNN that pipeline supporters remained one vote short of the 60 votes needed and were no doubt burning up the phone lines trying to find another ally. If it does pass, the White House is prepared to send it back in what could be the beginning of a veto cycle for the president.

The Senate faces another test on a bipartisan plan to impose new rules on the National Security Agency’s mass surveillance program. It has the backing of a left-right coalition of progressive and libertarian-minded lawmakers. Advancing the bill would be an unexpected success.

Behind the scenes, there’s talk that Mr. Obama could by the end of the week issue an executive order protecting millions of undocumented immigrants from deportation. That action would touch off a furious Republican backlash and could make it difficult to get much else done this year, particularly a long-term spending deal.

The biggest spending decisions will not come until after Thanksgiving, when the Dec. 11 deadline for providing new government financing is imminent.

— Carl Hulse

In an era of emailed news releases and news announcements, President Obama’s statement yesterday afternoon on the killing of the American aid worker Peter Kassig by the Islamic State was released in a curiously old-fashioned way: handed out to reporters, who were flying back to the United States from Australia with the president on Air Force One.

Josh Lederman, a White House reporter for The Associated Press, then read the statement from a phone on Air Force One to the television networks, four news agencies, and The New York Times, which had a reporter on the plane.

The White House’s decision was dictated both by timing and by the protocol of press travel with the president.

The video depicting Mr. Kassig’s beheading was released while Air Force One was en route from Brisbane, Australia, to a refueling stop in Hawaii. Speaking to reporters on the tarmac there, the White House press secretary, Josh Earnest, said Mr. Obama had been briefed, but that the United States had not yet authenticated the video.

Shortly after Air Force One took off for Washington, the president’s aides got word that the intelligence agencies judged the video to be authentic. They drafted a statement in which Mr. Obama said Mr. Kassig “was taken from us in an act of pure evil by a terrorist group.”

Under normal circumstances, the White House would simply have released that statement electronically from Washington. But Mr. Earnest decided, as a courtesy to the news outlets flying with Mr. Obama, to hand it out to them first. Mr. Lederman was chosen by his colleagues to dictate the statement to editors.

— Mark Landler

Having opened the doors to the health insurance marketplace over the weekend, Sylvia Mathews Burwell, the secretary of health and human services, is on the road this week urging people to sign up.

She is leaving chilly Washington for sunny Florida, with plans to speak today in Tampa and Miami. She is headed for the Gulf Coast tomorrow to meet with a coalition of groups promoting enrollment in the Houston area.

Ms. Burwell is likely to be asked about the intersection of health care and immigration policy. Mr. Obama plans soon to announce an overhaul of enforcement priorities that would protect several million unauthorized immigrants from the threat of deportation and provide many with work permits.

People on the left and on the right are asking whether immigrants given a reprieve would be eligible for any benefits under the Affordable Care Act.

Ms. Burwell said federal aid could be available to children who are United States citizens living with parents who are illegal immigrants. Such “mixed families,’’ she said, “should not be scared’’ to come forward because they may be eligible for coverage and financial assistance.

— Robert Pear

Bill Clinton capped three days of basking in his accomplishments and catching up with old friends by visiting a Little Rock, Ark., food bank on Sunday wearing flashy red sneakers.

It was a fashion statement that summed up the 10th anniversary of the William J. Clinton Presidential Library.

On Friday night, Gov. Terry McAuliffe of Virginia was spotted dancing at a picnic set up in a heated tent. The next day, Vernon E. Jordan Jr. joked about his famous friendship with Mr. Clinton and Thomas F. McLarty reminisced about their Georgetown days during a reception hosted by Politico. Paul Begala sported a denim jacket from the 1992 Clinton-Gore campaign.

“Begala’s still got his jacket!” Bill said to Hillary as they greeted a small group of friends in the lobby of the library. “Oh, I love that one, oh my gosh!” Mrs. Clinton said.

The festivities drew the Clinton faithful as much for the whispered conversations about what comes next — like another Hillary run for the White House — as for the memories.

For all the hours of panel discussions and the Q. & A.’s about Mr. Clinton’s presidency, some shed light on how his wife would handle the job.

“On the Hillary side, leaking is bad. Don’t leak,” Karen Finney, a former press secretary for Mrs. Clinton at the White House, said at the Politico reception. “It was a little different on the president’s side.”

— Amy Chozick

President Obama will meet with advisers at the White House and have a private lunch with Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.

Mr. Biden will join a gathering of local leaders discussing climate preparedness and will attend an event for the House Democratic Caucus at the Library of Congress.

Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey is expected to announce plans for a two-day trip to Canada next month, where he will talk about the Keystone XL pipeline.

Gov. Mike Pence has ordered flags to be flown at half-staff in Indiana, the home state of Peter Kassig.

Are we about to see a higher national profile for Senator Al Franken?

The Minnesota Democrat kept his distance from the national media and the Sunday talk show circuit during his first term, preferring instead to focus on home-state news outlets. Given his former life as a comic and writer on “Saturday Night Live,” Mr. Franken seemed intent on showing that he was a serious person, particularly since he won his first race only after an excruciating recount.

But there he was on CNN’s “State of the Union” on Sunday calling Senator Ted Cruz wrongheaded and predicting that Hillary Rodham Clinton would face competition for the Democratic presidential nomination. He fit right in.

Old-school senators like to say they don’t take their colleagues seriously until they win a second term because that first victory could have been a fluke. After winning his second term fairly easily this month, Mr. Franken might figure it’s time to break out.

— Carl Hulse

George Packer writes in The New Yorker that he is skeptical that Republicans have abandoned their policy of “chronic obstructionism.”

Senator-elect Tom Cotton of Arkansas tells Fox News that the House could stop any presidential action on immigration by limiting Mr. Obama’s ability to pay for Social Security cards for illegal immigrants granted residency.

The biggest problem facing Gov. Chris Christie in a possible presidential run? It’s New Jersey’s “deep and varied” fiscal responsibilities, according to Politico Magazine.

Loren Steffy of The Houston Chronicle looks at the politics behind the fracking ban approved this month by voters in Denton, Tex.

Martha McSally has named a transition team even though her race against the Democratic incumbent, Representative Ron Barber, is headed for a recount in Arizona’s Second Congressional District, The Associated Press reports.