Businessman and philanthropist knocks taxes, national debt, drug laws and Social Security system

Peter Karmanos Jr takes part in a press conference at Hockey Hall of Fame and Museum on November 6, 2015 in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (Photo by Bruce Bennett/Getty Images) (Photo: Bruce Bennett, Getty Images)

Taxes. Tough drug laws. Lowest-bidder contracts for highway construction.

Those are a few of the scourges on businessman and philanthropist Peter Karmanos Jr.'s list of greatest absurdities in modern life. Karmanos on Thursday shared his full top 10 list of "things that are absurd," as well as some more serious life tips for young people, during a luncheon meeting of the Detroit Economic Club at the Townsend Hotel in Birmingham.

Karmanos, 73, has had the ear of the Detroit-area business community for decades. He is the co-founder of Compuware, benefactor to the Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute and owner of the NHL hockey team the Carolina Hurricanes. Since 2014, he has led a start-up firm in downtown Birmingham called MadDog Technology. Last year, he made it into the Hockey Hall of Fame.

He offered a buffet of observations, anecdotes and gripes during his roughly 25-minute presentation that was part speech, part off-the-cuff riff and provocatively titled "We Are Living in the Age of Absurdity.”

Some of the business leader's most practical musings came during the event's question-and-answer session. Karmanos was asked what advice he would give a young, motivated person who wants to become an entrepreneur.

"Plan on working hard, that’s the advice I’d give them," he said. "Don’t think that anything is going to come because you’re there. You need to work 60,70, 80 hours a week, or be prepared to work that.

“You’ll think about it every day, every waking moment. And you’ll wake up at 3 or 4 in the morning worrying about things. But that’s the best advice I can give you."

Asked what advice he would tell his younger self, Karmanos said he would suggest getting "a better background in finance."

Here is Karmanos' top 10 list of modern absurdities:

1.Taxes: "Absurd!"

2. Student loans: “All I have to say about student loans right now is thank God they weren’t available when I was 17 or 18. There would have been a four- or five-year party, and then when I was done and I hadn’t finished school yet, I’d complain how the government ripped me off.”

3.Health care: There was no tort reform with the Affordable Care Act. So a big opportunity to rein in excessive medical spending for "defensive medicine" was missed. "When President (Barack) Obama stood in front of the (American Medical Association) and his first statement was, ‘Don’t get excited, we’re not changing any tort laws,’ you knew the program was doomed."

4.The national debt: "That's absurd."

5.U.S. energy policy: “I’d be happy to discuss that one.”

6.Refugees in the Middle East: Karmanos suggested internationally supported temporary city settlements nearer to the areas in Syria from where people are fleeing, with available options for individuals who truly wish to resettle in another country.

7.Social Security: Karmanos said fears over privatizing the system are misguided. He suggested cutting Social Security payments into the system in half, then letting people invest the other half. The strength of the long-term investment returns would more than make up for any recessions or other down years in the markets. And a person's survivors could potentially inherit money. “Every single worker in this country could end up retiring with over $1.5 million dollars."

8.Media in the 24/7 news cycle: “How do you have news 24 by 7? How do you fill it? Not well."

9.U.S. drug laws: Karmanos made a case for legalizing some drugs to reduce violence, incarceration rates and the lucrativeness of the illegal drug trade. The country should follow lessons learned during the prohibition of alcohol, he said. “The only reason we even have drugs being trafficked in this country is because we create the pricing that has a bunch of people in Colombia and Mexico and Afghanistan saying, 'This is worth taking a risk on.’ "

10. Lowest-bidder contracts for highway repair: “That has really worked out well, hasn’t it?” (Audience laughs.) He speculates that when inspectors aren't looking, these lowest-bid contractors are stingy on the concrete to save money. "And then when the highway crumbles -— three weeks later, six weeks later, a year later — they get more business."

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1Sde04h