In the summer of 1974, Ron Cheyney was traveling the United States on a motorcycle when he ran out of money in Longmont. He worked a few odd jobs before accepting a job with the old Longmont Ledger, Longmont's weekly newspaper. When the paper went out of business in 1978, Ron rented the left-over equipment and started a one-man typesetting business.

Over the next few years, as business grew, Ron expanded into the world of offset printing. Today, Ron's Printing Center employs a staff of nine full-time people, is celebrating its 37th year in business, and is one of Longmont's largest printing companies.

Ron has been active in the community. He served on the Longmont YMCA Board of Directors for nine years, and the Longmont Area Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors for six years. He served as president of the Heart of Longmont Association, and served two terms on the Longmont Downtown Development Authority's Board of Directors.

Ron lives and works downtown. He says he couldn't think of a better place to be.

1. How does downtown Longmont compare to when you first got here in the 70s?

Oh, it's much more vibrant. Although back then it was the retail shopping area, we didn't have the mall or the other shopping areas. ... It was all Main Street. Over the years I watched a lot of buildings change hands. It was nice when new people came along and fixed things up.

2. What do you like most about Longmont?

I like the feel of Longmont. As a child, and young adult I lived in many towns and cities, both large and small. When I came to Longmont in 1974, I could tell that it felt like home. Longmont has a well-defined downtown that everyone recognizes as the heart of the city.

3. What else is special about the community?

We have tight-knit neighborhoods with people who care about their neighbors. We have an amazing amount of community events that bring people together. And best of all, we have a wonderful diversity of ethnic population. Want authentic Mexican Food? We have it. Want the best Asian food in Colorado? We have it. Like Indian cuisine? The best is right here. Have a hankering for Irish? Everyone in town knows where O'Shay's is. And of course, we have the finest brew pubs in a 50-mile radius! What's not to like? I love it.

4. Why do you think your business has succeeded through several economic downturns?

I started my business in 1978 with the simple premise — do quality work, for a fair price. Never let a customer leave unhappy, and give back to the community. For the past 37 years we have stuck to those beliefs. Sure, the technology has changed — and we have been smart enough to change with it. Printing is mostly digital now, instead of offset. But it's better quality, faster and less expensive for our customers. We have had to endure two streetscape projects, and an Alleyscape project, but I have always said, "If you do a good job, you could build a fence around your business, and people will climb over to get to you." I don't think we'll be building any fences, though.

5. Any suggestions for the downtown area moving forward?

Continue with the Alleyscape program. Also parking is becoming an issue, especially for those people who work downtown. We have to address the parking issue. We have to dig down or build up for parking.

Contact Vince Winkel at 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel