Union County offers free child safety seat inspections

On Saturday, Sept. 19, as part of “National Seat Check Saturday,” trained technicians from Union County’s Child Safety Seat Inspection Program will conduct child seat inspections at the Babies ‘R’ Us on Route 22 in Union (Photo: ~Courtesy of Union County)

The Union County Board of Chosen Freeholders announces free child safety seat inspection opportunities as new state law takes effect.

“If you have a baby or small child in your care, please come and take advantage of this free program, and make sure your safety seat is properly adjusted,” said Union County Freeholder Chairman Mohamed S. Jalloh. “Our experts can help you get familiar with a new seat, and they can help you spot any problems with an older seat.”

New Jersey’s new child safety seat regulations took effect Sept. 1, 2015. The new state law requires parents to adhere to American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommendations for child passenger safety.

The proper use of child safety seats is one of the simplest and most effective methods available for protecting the lives of young children in the event of a motor vehicle accident.

Union County’s Child Safety Seat Inspection Program is open every Wednesday and Thursday from 7:30 a.m. to 11 a.m. and is at the Garwood Rescue Squad at 401 Second Ave., in Garwood.

On Saturday, Sept. 19, as part of “National Seat Check Saturday” which is also the last day of “National Child Passenger Safety Week,” trained technicians from Union County’s Child Safety Seat Inspection Program will conduct child seat inspections at the Babies ‘R’ Us on Route 22 in Union, sponsored in part by AAA Northeast-NJ Division.

Certified child passenger safety technicians will check the car seat for proper installation and educate parents and guardians on using the seat correctly.

Under the new child passenger safety law:

Children under age 2 and weighting less than 30 pounds must be secured in a rear-facing child safety seat that is equipped with five-point harness and is in the back seat.

must be secured in a rear-facing child safety seat that is equipped with five-point harness and is in the back seat. Children between ages 2-4 and weighing up to 40 pounds must be secured in a child safety seat equipped with a five-point harness, either rear-facing (up to the height and weight limits of the seat) or forward-facing and is in the back seat.aw

must be secured in a child safety seat equipped with a five-point harness, either rear-facing (up to the height and weight limits of the seat) or forward-facing and is in the back seat.aw Children between ages 4-8 and less than 57 inches tall (4-foot-9) must be secured in a forward-facing seat equipped with a five-point harness (up to the height and weight limits of the seat) or in a booster seat.

must be secured in a forward-facing seat equipped with a five-point harness (up to the height and weight limits of the seat) or in a booster seat. Children ages 8 and older must use the vehicle seat belt. The safest place for children under 13 is the back seat.

Union County first launched the Child Safety Seat Inspection Program in 1999, in response to surveys showing that the overwhelming majority of child safety seats are improperly installed, even though most users are confident that they know the correct procedure.

Since 1999, approximately 50,000 Union County residents and visitors have used the Seat Inspection Program. It is staffed by personnel from the county’s Department of Public Safety who are certified by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and by the organization SafeKids. The program is credited with saving at least one life, when a toddler survived a 2008 vehicle rollover shortly after the seat was properly adjusted by county personnel.

The child seat inspection program is provided as a public service by the Union County Board of Chosen Freeholders, Union County Police Department, New Jersey Division of Highway Traffic Safety, AAA Northeast-NJ Division and Garwood First Aid Squad.

For more information about Union County’s Child Safety Seat Inspection Program, visit ucnj.org or call 908-789-6830.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1FhOQJo