Cigna Corp. CEO David M. Cordani's compensation totaled $49 million, up 80 percent from 2014.

The value of stock awards that vested and stock options he exercised in 2015 accounted for $44.6 million of the compensation.

However, the CEO was not the most highly compensated person at Cigna last year.

Cigna-HealthSpring President Herbert A. Fritch received $50.5 million last year, as he exercised stock options that had gained $44.4 million in value since they were granted.

His company was purchased by Cigna in 2012, and as part of the merger agreement, each stock option he held in his own company was converted to Cigna stocks, but he was allowed to exercise those stocks at prices linked to the company's stock value. Some of the options had an exercise price as low as $12.25.

Fritch's base salary was flat from 2014, at $1 million, and his cash bonus was $200,000 lower than last year. It was the only executive's cash bonus that was below the bottom of the target range.

The proxy statement, filed after the close of the stock market on Friday, said Fritch's bonus was below the target because his division did not meet its overall earnings targets. Also, the statement noted, federal regulators imposed sanctions in January against this division, which runs Cigna's Medicare Advantage and Medicare prescription plans. Those sanctions mean the company cannot sign up new customers until the government approves a plan to fix the violations in both programs it identified.

Separately, Fritch was awarded restricted stock and stock options worth $1.9 million during the year, which can provide value in future years if the stock price continues to climb.

The Courant calculates compensation as the sum of salary, bonuses, value gained on the exercise of stock options and the vesting of stock awards, and the value of perquisites, such as the 401(k) match and personal use of the corporate aircraft.

As a result of Obamacare, Cigna is not allowed to deduct the salaries, bonuses, stock awards and option awards it grants employees of any amount past $500,000. Most companies can deduct salary up to $1 million, and bonuses and stock and option awards are not subject to the cap.

The compensation committee wrote that it's not restricting incentives and pay to its executives because "it believes that shareholder interests are best served by not restricting the committee's discretion and flexibility in crafting the executive compensation program."

Cordani's pay included $1.2 million in salary and a $2.9 million in cash bonus.

The bonuses were based on profit growth, revenue growth, operating expense ratio improvement, and customer perception of the company's products, services, pricing and providers.

Across the company, profit improved by 5.9 percent, and the operating expense ratio improved by 0.1 percent.

Chief Financial Officer Thomas A. McCarthy received $4.6 million in compensation last year, not including $2.7 million in stock and option awards. His compensation climbed 47 percent.

General Counsel Nicole S. Jones received $8.1 million in compensation last year, not including $1.8 million in stock and option awards.

Matthew G. Manders, president of U.S. Commercial Markets and Global Health Care Operations, received $7.3 million in compensation, up 42 percent, not including $2.4 million in stock and option awards.