Rep. Louie Gohmert, R-Texas talks during a TV interview about the impasse over federal funding and the Affordable Care Act, Monday, Sept. 30, 2013, on Capitol Hill in Washington. Hours before a threatened government shutdown, the Senate has the next move Monday on must-do budget legislation that has fueled a bitter congressional dispute over President Barack Obama's signature health care law. (AP Photo/J. Scott Applewhite)

Rep. Louie Gohmert, a leader in the anti-Speaker John Boehner movement, will speak Saturday at the Doubletree World Arena just as Republicans in the U.S. House of Representatives struggle to fill a leadership vacuum caused by Boehner's resignation.

"I don't think it's a leadership crisis. I think it's a leadership opportunity," Gohmert said in an interview Tuesday with The Gazette. "It's what so many of us have been hoping and praying for, for so many years."

Gohmert, a Republican from east Texas, put his name forward in January as an alternative to Boehner

The unsuccessful coup made headlines as Gohmert became known for his humor and became simultaneously hugely popular and unpopular.

"I don't regret what I did. ... I think it led to the day where we are now, where we've got a real opportunity to come together and heal and start keeping some of our promises. But it means they wouldn't elect me pooper scooper around here," Gohmert said. "There are still some people very angry with me from January."

Gohmert said he doesn't support Rep. Paul Ryan for speaker because of "some very critical issues we have disagreements about."

Ryan was rumored to be close Tuesday to making a decision on whether he would run for speaker but the Washington Post reported Ryan's allies said he wouldn't stand for the leadership position unless he had close-to-unanimous support.

Gohmert represents a very conservative block of House members who were vocally opposed to Boehner and could make life difficult for a new speaker who doesn't have their support.

Chair of the Colorado GOP Steve House said Gohmert was wildly popular at the Western Conservative Summit this summer and was on a short-list of potential speakers. House said those who have heard Gohmert speak know he can entertain.

"He's a very colorful and popular former candidate for speaker," House said.

Gohmert also represents a side of the party that isn't heard from all that often, House said.

The event is co-hosted by the El Paso County Republicans, the Colorado Republican Party and the Cheyenne Mountain Republican Forum.

A VIP reception begins at 5 p.m. Saturday. Tickets to that event are $100. The dinner starts at 6:30 p.m. and individual tickets are $80. A table of 10 is available for $1,000. For tickets, go to cologop.webconnex.com/gohmertdinner, call 303-758-3333 or email events@cologop.org.

-

Contact Megan Schrader: 286-0644

Twitter @CapitolSchrader