Two of the three escaped inmates from Choctaw County, Ala., are now back in custody of authorities.

Sheriff Tom Abate confirms that Gemayel "Coby" Culbert has been taken into custody, along with Justin Terrell Gordon. Culbert was in jail for capital murder charges with his fellow cellmate and escapee, Demarcus Woodard. Gordon was incarcerated for armed robbery charges.

Gordon was taken into custody Saturday night around 7 p.m. in the parking lot of a movie theater in Tuscaloosa. He was in a vehicle with two other people when he was surrounded by U.S. Marshals and local law enforcement with guns drawn.

“As the United States Marshal teams made their approach to arrest him, he had his hands up and was arrested without incident,” U.S. Marshal Supervisor Inspector Chad Hunt says.

Sheriff Tom Abate says they thought the two people with Gordon were the other inmates, but that turned out not to be the case. This morning authorities tracked down Culbert who was hiding at his grandmother’s house in Bellamy, Ala.

“We arrested him at his family’s house. Again, there was no incident whatsoever," Hunt says. "We, the teams of the United States Marshals, and our task force officers made the apprehension.”

Now the focus turns to Woodard, who was in for capital murder and is still somewhere out there. Sheriff Tom Abate, along with U.S. Marshals, say they are closing in.

“We've been receiving information as we go along. It’s very fluid at this time. We were hoping to have him under arrest at the time of this briefing. That’s why we’re a little late. Things are still happening,” Sheriff Tom Abate explains. “I really believe he has nothing to lose. I tell the public not to take any chances with him. If he is spotted, please contact your local agency immediately, 911, or however. We do not take this individual lightly.”

Police say information from the community and a joint effort from a multitude of law enforcement agencies helped lead to the apprehension of two dangerous individuals.

“We could not do this without the citizens' help - an outpouring support from citizens providing tips. These tips have led to the arrest of the two individuals we have in custody,” Hunt says.

The sheriff wants anyone with any information on Demarcus Woodard to contact local police. U.S. Marshals are offering a reward of up to $5,000. Call 1(877)WANTED2 if you have any information.