This week, O'Reilly Factor correspondent Jesse Watters traveled to Cambridge, Mass. for the annual Harvard/Yale football game.

Two female Yale fans told Watters they were having a 'very classy tailgate', while a male Harvard tailgater later commented on the visiting Bulldogs using an expletive.

Watters asked a number of fans of both teams about ObamaCare architect Jonathan Gruber, a professor at nearby MIT, who came under fire recently after videotapes surfaced of him discussing 'the stupidity of the American voter'.

"Have you ever heard of the Jonathan Gruber controversy?" Watters asked one fan.

"I take 'Ubers' every day," the man answered, likely referring to a popular metropolitan taxi ridesharing service.

"Grouper?" a woman asked.

Another fan asked whether Watters was referring to 'MacGruber', a Will Forte movie character satirically based on the 80's adventure program protagonist MacGyver.

Later, Watters asked a health economics major about Gruber.

"It's not a familiar name to me, I apologize," the man told a quizzical Watters.

"He's that MIT professor that called you stupid..." Watters said to a young woman, who was shocked to hear of Gruber's criticism.

In the midst of interviewing another Harvard fan, host Bill O'Reilly made an unsuspected visit to the correspondent's World.

"You scared her away," O'Reilly joked, as the woman slipped out of sight midway through her conversation with Watters.

Watters then asked fans about President Obama's recent executive order regarding illegal immigrants.

"He's doing a presidential executive order, instead of going through Congress," the fan said.

"How do you feel about that?" Watters asked.

"I like it," the fan answered.

"Do you lock your doors?" Watters asked. The fan nodded.

"But you want the country to lock its doors?" he continued, receiving a confused look from the fan in response.

Back in New York, O'Reilly asked Watters which team's fans were more informed on pressing current events.

"At the last minute, Yale won," Watters said, noting that the verdict was controversial, as a Harvard student ran away before answering the final two questions.

"Head to head, Yale won, but if it was a test, they both bombed," he added.