Wide receiver Demaryius Thomas hauled in the pass and burst downfield last Sunday. He straight-armed a defender and romped into the end zone. Just feet from where rapper Wiz Khalifa stood on a makeshift pregame stage extolling the crowd with “Black and Yellow,” the gray began to lift on the Broncos’ slump.

They led the Steelers 27-10 in Pittsburgh. Everything seemed possible, including a franchise-record seventh road victory. Then came the second half. Steve Harvey crowned Denver the winner. Lucy pulled away the football.

Everyone in Colorado, from coach Gary Kubiak to the most angry fan, continues to ask the same question: How can the Broncos offer such a contradiction, dominating the first half of games before disappearing after halftime?

“It’s been a little puzzling, but there are other things that are puzzling too,” Kubiak said. “You have to work through them and keep pushing. We’ll keep digging until we find a way to come out of the locker room the right way.”

The numbers are blunt. Denver has been outscored 36-0 in the second half of the past three games, including back-to-back losses to Oakland and Pittsburgh that have placed this season on the brink. No NFL team since the 2003 New York Giants has gone four consecutive games without a second-half point.

What makes Denver’s spiral jarring is the juxtaposition. In December, the Broncos have held a combined 56-16 advantage in the first half. Nothing illustrates the climb and subsequent cliff dive like third down. During the past three games, the Broncos have converted on 17-of-23 first-half third downs, while going 2-of-25 in the second half.

They have become to halves what the Rockies are to home and road splits.

“We just have to find a way to finish for 60 minutes,” running back C.J. Anderson said. “That’s on us. We don’t want to blame anybody. We’re not going to blame the coaches. It’s on us to make it go.”

“Play with excitment”

No one person can be fingered. The answers for the collapses are complicated because they reveal problems across the board and leave flaws exposed. While Kubiak’s arrival in Denver was welcomed, it came with baggage. His Houston Texans teams struggled down the stretch over his final three seasons, going 18-12 through their first 10 games and 8-14 thereafter.

Kubiak earned his reputation as a premier offensive coordinator by scripting the game’s first 15 plays. He has experimented with scripting them in the second half. Nothing has clicked this month.

“I have done a little bit of everything in my career. The bottom line is that you are talking and making adjustments,” Kubiak said. “How are you getting played? What are they doing to you? To be honest, it’s like anything in football. If it’s not going good, you find a way to change it.”

If the Broncos don’t rebound in the second half, they face the possibility of becoming the first NFL team to start a season 10-2 and miss the postseason.

The Broncos entered halftime leading each of the past three games: 17-3, 12-0 and 27-13. They knew opponents would switch up their defenses. In San Diego, Denver turned conservative, correctly believing the Chargers’ offense stood no chance against the Broncos’ defense. But in the consecutive losses, the lack of counterpunch has been striking.

This Broncos offense doesn’t resemble those of 2013 and 2014. Audibles typically feature two options: a tweak of the called play or a single alternative. Under former offensive coordinator Adam Gase, quarterback Peyton Manning had an entire playbook at his disposal at the line of scrimmage.

Lack of creativity, lack of balance — Denver gained only 25 yards rushing in the second half of the past two games — has created results that are lacking.

“As an offense we just really need to play with excitement and play loose,” said offensive tackle Ryan Harris. “You can’t worry about last week. We’re practicing loose, we’re practicing fast, we’re having fun. As long as we continue to do that, I think we will be very confident.”

The Raiders, recognizing Denver’s inability to run well enough to force a safety to drop down into the box, became more aggressive up front. It led to linebacker Khalil Mack obliterating tackles Michael Schofield and Harris for five second-half sacks. The Raiders surprised the Broncos by staying in cover-two and cover-three zones. The Broncos rarely exploited seam routes, and on the few times they did, drops followed.

The Steelers reacted by blitzing more in the second half and ditching their soft coverage.

And no Broncos player could camouflage the offense’s weaknesses by making a big play.

Over the past three weeks, quarterback Brock Osweiler has completed 73 percent of his first half passes compared with 49 percent in the second half. Opponents recognize if they take away Osweiler’s first read, he has a tendency to hold the ball too long and drift in the pocket.

Appearing overmatched

“It boils down to the fundamentals,” Osweiler said. “I know it sounds basic, but it’s the little things that get you back on track. I am the first one that needs to fix things. I need to play better in the second half, and I will.”

The players take ownership across the board, with no one publicly grumbling. But it’s fair to wonder if Kubiak has too much faith in his players in this scheme, given the injuries to two left tackles, left guard Evan Mathis, Anderson and Manning. He has said repeatedly that sometimes it comes down to players “winning their one-on-one” battles.

Still, this isn’t the Super Bowl title teams when the Broncos featured seven offensive Pro Bowlers and three Hall of Famers. This year’s offense placed no one in the Pro Bowl, and players appear overmatched in the second half the past three weeks, averaging just five first downs and 100 total yards.

The three-and-outs — which feature penalties and sacks — sting. Momentum shifts become drastic with opponents gaining confidence from Denver’s mistakes.

“The key thing is those third downs, because it keeps you on the field,” general manager John Elway told the team’s website. “We know where we have been the last couple of weeks. We haven’t performed in the second half like we’d like to, but I think the key thing is that we do control our own destiny. We have to play 60 minutes. We’ve done a good job, especially the last couple of weeks, in the first 30 minutes, but we played very poorly that second half. So we have to put 60 minutes together. Fortunately we’re going to be back at home against a very good Cincinnati Bengals team. If we play 60 minutes like we’re capable of, then we can beat anybody.”

As the Broncos practiced Wednesday, a workout multiple players said was the team’s best of the season, Eminem’s “Lose Yourself” blared at Dove Valley:

“Look, if you had, one shot, or one opportunity

“To seize everything you ever wanted. In one moment

“Would you capture it, or just let it slip?”

The answer lies in the second half.

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or @troyrenck

Can’t go halfway

For the Broncos to qualify for the playoffs, they must finish what they started. They are trying to avoid becoming the first NFL team since the 2003 New York Giants to not score in the second half of four consecutive games: