Buy Photo Jaylani Hussein is a St. Cloud State University graduate and executive director of CAIR-MN. (Photo: Times file photo)Buy Photo

Editor's note: The St. Cloud Times is working to enlighten the debate about refugees and immigrants who have made their homes in this community. We are asking readers to submit their questions and we will answer them in a series of stories over the next several months.

Question: Do Muslims buy insurance?

Answer: This question is a simple one but, because of that, it's a little more complicated to answer. When it comes to auto insurance, new state legislation went into effect on Jan. 1 requiring vehicle owners to provide insurance information when obtaining license tabs, transferring titles or applying for a new title or registration.

All drivers must provide the name of their insurance company, a policy number and expiration date in order to comply. Without looking at statistics, but based on anecdotal evidence from officers and sergeants, St. Cloud police aren't hearing more instances of uninsured Somali drivers than those of any other group, Assistant Chief Jeff Oxton said.

Health insurance also is federally required by Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. In Minnesota, anyone who doesn't get health insurance on their own, through work or MNsure is subject to a tax penalty that increases over time. There are exemptions, primarily for people with low incomes, but no Muslim group (or Christian group, either) has qualified under a statute that defines exempt religious groups in the health care law.

When it comes to other types of insurance, Muslim participation becomes more varied.

"The only insurance Muslims would have reservations against is life insurance," said Jaylani Hussein, a St. Cloud State University graduate and executive director of the Minnesota chapter of the Council on American-Islamic Relations. "As far as auto insurance, basically you can't drive by law if you don't have it. And home insurance is sometimes necessary, too. Historically, there have been rumors — and I think it may be more about Latino drivers than Muslim immigrants — who are uninsured and hit somebody and they just run or something. I don't think that's true."

Buy Photo Jaylani Hussein is a St. Cloud State University graduate and executive director of CAIR-MN. (Photo: Times file photo)

Life insurance can be different.

"Muslims believe that your life is something that is not insured," Hussein said. "The reason many people get life insurance is so they can leave something behind. Traditionally, there are reasons why that type of insurance isn't accepted."

Hussein said Muslims do not object to life insurance that is provided automatically by an employer, for example. However, those where people must pay out-of-pocket premiums can be shunned for religious reasons and cultural reasons. Hussein said Muslims also avoid situations where they would incur or collect interest from a financial arrangement. Buying a home, for example, generally requires a loan — and that generally makes home insurance mandatory. Whole life insurance policies usually increase in value.

"Interest is frowned upon by many religions," Hussein said. "Biblically, or in the Torah or the Quran, there is reference that you should not be a buyer or seller of interest. This is something that's a part of Islamic law, but it's also a part of Judeo-Christian law. It's not exclusive to Muslims, it's just that Muslims are more likely to practice it."

To submit a question to Immigration Fact Check, send an email to onyourside@stcloudtimes.com or leave a message on the tip line at 320-255-8757.

Follow Kevin Allenspach on Twitter @KevinAllenspach. Call him at 320-255-8745.

Read or Share this story: http://www.sctimes.com/story/news/local/immigration/2016/02/07/fact-check-do-muslims-buy-insurance/79693600/