Several multi-sport athletes power Cougars

1202 SPO RCSbsktbll_02-srs.jpg Resurrection Christian's Brock Buxman, right, drives with the ball around Cole Watson during practice Tuesday, Nov. 26, 2013 at RCS. (Photo by Steve Stoner/Loveland Reporter-Herald) ( Steve Stoner )

They know theroutine.

As the fall leaves blow away and frost takes its place, multiple seasons change. Similar to the hours of daylight, winter sheds some of the game day equipment needed for the 11 Resurrection Christian athletes who are currently making the transition from competing on the football gridiron to the basketball court.

"We just roll straight from one to the other, you have to switch your mindset from sport to sport. I think it's great because it helps build friendship and unity," senior Brock Buxman said. "Football didn't end the way we had hoped, so we take that feeling into basketball knowing we don't want to feel that way again."

With the rapidly-growing expansion of the school, it has also brought a boom in participation with the Rez athletic program, which has presented a number of two, sometimes three-sport athletes. For the first time in his five years at Rez, coach Bruce Dick feels like he has options with his basketball team, rather than forcing puzzle pieces together.

"I see it as a real positive. They learn to compete well and a lot of them also are doing summer sports which adds to that," Dick said. "I like having the dual-sport guys because I just think they bring a lot to the table."

However, the Rez coach is aware that a long list of pros also entails a short set of cons, by laws of nature.

Advertisement

"I think it will take us longer this year to hit that midseason form," Dick said. "The guys went deep into football and we haven't been able to practice together as much. We're going to have to really learn on the run."

The Rez basketball team returns to the court with Buxman holding the leadership role. There are three seniors who have played under Dick for his time at the helm, Buxman being the primary starter as he looks to improve his average of 16 points per game from the 2012-13 season.

Heading into this year, Dick has unofficially appointed Buxman the honor and responsibility of taking care of his fellow teammates.

"I can definitely feel it during practice with the other guys. Bruce and I have been together through all four years and I can tell that he's put his trust in me like I do for him; I know that it's my turn to step up," Buxman said.

And he prefers it that way.

Buxman has his heart set on personal goals, although he admits the focus of the team outweighs everything else because he feels that being a team player is better than any other individual accomplishment.

As a team, Buxman is looking to get Rez to advance the competitive level it has already developed. The Cougars expect to be competitive in the 2A Mile High basketball conference, seeking out a league title. Another thing he'd like to get his hands on is a state championship, after coming close in multiple sports but never bringing one home.

Looking to pursue football in college, this is Buxman's last basketball chance.

"It makes us want it that much more because we want to do well for him," junior Luke Mondt said. "The rest of us will have the chance to come back and try again, but we want to send him out of here with what he deserves."

Sports writer Quentin Sickafoose can be reached on Twitter @QSickafoose.

Thompson Valley

The Eagles are heading into the 2013-14 season with big expectations. After reaching the Sweet 16 in last season's playoff tournament, they keep a 15-point defeat to Thomas Jefferson that ended their season in mind.

Thompson Valley finished with a 17-7 standing in 2012-13, and expect to improve on its record and postseason push returning all but one player who graduated. The Eagles are stacked with eight seniors, and coach Josh Robinson is ready to have a starting lineup composed of final-year athletes.

"This is going to be a big year for us because we're very senior-oriented. This one has been in their sights," Robinson said. "We expect to build upon what we made for ourselves last year, competing for the conference championship is going to be a big focus."

Loveland

Indian coach Reece Gliko takes pride in the fact that a good portion of his athletes have success thriving at the next level after his team with them expires. Last year, Loveland graduated five seniors from the 2012-13 roster, three of whom are now participating in Division I athletics.

Now, Gliko has come back for his third year in control, in what he calls reloading rather than rebuilding. The Indians will rely on three key returning players to carry the majority of the load as they seek to improve on the 15-10 finish they ended with just a year ago.

According to Gliko, David Schlect, Hunter Wylie and Jacob Weinmsater can be expect to be frequent producers for Loveland this season.

"Unless you win a state championship or overachieve throughout the whole season, you're never truly satisfied as a coach,"Gliko said. "We should be able to have six or eight players who can put up 10 or more points in any given night, and with that you expect to be successful."

Mountain View

Mountain View is in the stages of recuperating after finishing with a 4-20 record from the year past. The good news for the Mountain Lions in 2013-14 is that all but two of their key starters from last year will be returning for a shot at redemption.

Jerrod Klug, Jonah Kunisch, Jose Orrantia and Hunter Porterfield are all expected to make an impact for a second-consecutive season.

According to first-year coach Mike Jobman, there are seven or eight players he could randomly select from to produce when needed.

"The belief level that is in this group of kids is strong, more than I've seen before," he said. "The teams that used to look past us before can't do it any longer because now we're for real."

Mountain View and Berthoud will get the chance to prove their seasons are heading in the right direction on Monday night, when they square off against each other in the season-opener.

Berthoud

The story of the Berthoud boy's basketball season in 2012-13 was simple: close but not enough. The Spartans closed out with a 4-19 standing, however many of their games came down to the wire. Berthoud was handed nine losses with a margin of 10 points or less, leaving it looking to improve in high-pressure situations.

"We've been preparing to come up on the other end in those situations," coach Pete Scheck said. "You always have those games that can swing in either way. Our focus is to convert those back to our side."

After losing only three key players from last year's lineup to graduation, the Spartans are looking to bounce back with a veteran set of players who have claimed the starting positions. The five-man front is composed of four seniors and one junior, with Nick Dietz and Ryan Vasquez leading the pack.

Roosevelt

The RoughRiders' basketball program is beginning to develop a reputation. In just his three years as coach, Joe Brown has led Roosevelt to the playoff tournament twice, and expects it to continue.

The Riders picked up their first-ever postseason victory last year, before suffering a season-ending loss to eventual state champion Lewis Palmer.

"We're really doing everything to set the standard of winning. The first few times we made it, it was great," Brown said. "Now it's about how we're going to that next level."Roosevelt returns to the basketball court with five players who had significant playing time from a year ago, three of which have already been named starters. Similar to Rez, Roosevelt has a football star making the transition in Omar Rivera, who will be accompanied by Colby Best Walter and Cameron Weber in the featured five.

The Riders also bring three juniors and four sophomores to the table, setting up an interesting assortment of options for Brown.