Many of today's civic problems reside in a conspicuous yet infrequently referenced source: the opportunity to profit financially, ideologically, and even emotionally without exposure to personal risks for bad decisions or ill-advised conduct.

Identifying this source should not be understood as partisan. No matter which end of the political spectrum focus is cast upon, policy hobby-horses of activists seem aimed at generating an upside without a corresponding downside, at maximizing yield while externalizing costs, at privatizing gains while socializing losses.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

If "skin in the game" is not required by law or the market, perverse incentives result. Incentives that both fly in the face of encouraging individual responsibility, and undermine meaningful efforts to address pressing social and economic problems.

Take the recent mortgage and financial crises that imperiled the world economy. Increased home ownership and economic growth are admirable goals. But in seeking those goals through policies resulting in taxpayer-funded bailouts for Wall Street lapses, and allowing the mortgage process to be carved into innumerable discrete pieces, each able to generate revenue while shifting to unsuspecting mutual fund holders the likelihood of default from half-a-million dollar loans made to fast-food employees, where is the risk that incentivizes circumspection?

And what about campaign finance laws that permit funding of issue ads while shielding donor identity. Or health laws that result in the cost of emergency room care for the uninsured being passed along to others. How is it that anonymity tempers the urge of some wealthy citizens to weigh-in with outrageous or false campaign assertions? Or that hospitals passing along costs to those fortunate enough to be insured pushes the uninsured to make better choices, or providers themselves to minimize avoidable revisits?

Beyond these examples are the recent disclosures regarding pharmaceutical companies outsourcing drug testing to clinics recruiting the homeless as subjects, with test protocols overseen by poorly informed institutional review boards having financial conflicts of interest. Each entity in pharma's chain is thus able to claim no responsibility for the creations or practices of others, or, plead inadequate understanding of relevant protocols.

And at a level revealing how thoroughly this problem pervades every aspect of life, take the case of courts permitting an incompetent parent's "nest-egg" to be used to pay both sides' lawyers in legal battles, ostensibly concerning parental care, but driven by feuding family members impelled by sibling animosity. By allowing angry litigants to off-load the monetary burden of their actions, how has the system incentivized good judgment?

What has dissuaded us from thinking such litigants always make better choices when unable to fund expenses from innocent third-party sources, and scientists and inventors more meticulous when willing to test creations on themselves or those intimately known to them?

How have we come to the point of believing the chances of sound economics flows from bankers and financial professionals profiting off wagers of other peoples' assets, yet not risking their own? Why are we convinced politics operates best when benefactors of political causes are left in the shadows, or the price of medical care is constrained when uninsured patients and hospitals treating them are able to shift costs to others?

Increased specialization and accompanying modern-day complexity may be responsible for opening opportunities to escape having "skin in the game." Nonetheless, such need not be tolerated. Through law or the market, we must restore personal risk to its rightful position in public policy decisions, or be prepared to embrace often profoundly untoward consequences.