Buy Photo Fireworks light up the sky at Louisville’s Fourth of July celebration on the waterfront in 2010. (Photo: C-J/file)Buy Photo

After a one-year hiatus due to a slashing of state funding, the longtime Louisville tradition of Fourth of July fireworks on the downtown riverfront is returning this Independence Day.

With major support from the Louisville Orchestra, Thorntons Inc. and metro government, the Waterfront Development Corp. has cobbled together $180,000 and lined up significant in-kind service providers to ensure an evening of holiday fun for that Saturday evening.

Activities will start around 5 p.m. and be centered on the Great Lawn at Waterfront Park.

They will include fireworks around 10 p.m. by Zambelli Internationale, which produces the fireworks for Thunder Over Louisville. The fireworks are being sponsored by the Louisville City Football Club, a pro soccer team that will be playing the Richmond Kickers that evening at nearby Louisville Slugger Field.

The fireworks will be preceded by a full-member Louisville Orchestra concert laden with patriotic music starting around 8:30 p.m., with earlier performances on the Great Lawn stage by several local bands, and children's activities galore.

There will be food, including salads and other healthful cuisine — and alcoholic beverages, including a beer garden — aplenty for purchase. But, otherwise, everything will be free and open to the public.

People are encouraged to bring blankets and lawn chairs, said Ashley Smith, the waterfront agency's director of events, who led the fundraising effort. She said the event should not produce any red ink.

July 5 has been designated as the event makeup date, in case of a Fourth of July drenching, Smith said.

Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer will announce details of the return of the Fourth of July fireworks and festivities at a news conference at Waterfront Park on Tuesday at 9 a.m.

The 2014 Kentucky General Assembly provided zero state funding for the waterfront agency, after providing $420,000 a year for many years.

The funding reduction prompted the waterfront agency, among other cutbacks, to shelve the longstanding tradition of a free, two-day Fourth of July gala at Waterfront Park with two nights of fireworks and major musical entertainment.

The two-day Waterfront Independence Festival, traditionally sponsored by Fifth Third Bank, often drew about 150,000 people over the two days.

In 2013 the event ended up about $80,000 in the red — a sum the waterfront agency had to cover and didn't feel it could overcome last year with the loss of the state funding.

"We were very disappointed when we had to cancel the Fourth of July celebration" last year, David Karem, the waterfront corporation's executive director, said Thursday. "But now, with the support of Thorntons, we are extremely pleased to bring back this free, community celebration."

Matt Thornton, CEO of the oil company and also volunteer chairman of the waterfront agency board of directors, committed a substantial donation to start the fundraising effort that has led to the restoration of the holiday event. Smith declined to say how much Thorntons is providing.

But she said metro government then chipped in $50,000 and has agreed to substantial in-kind help, including public safety and public works support. Other contributions came from the Galt House, Louisville Third Century and numerous local media outlets.

But waterfront officials said the event also required the large participation of the orchestra and its music director, Teddy Abrams, who curated the program, according to orchestra spokeswoman Michelle Winters. She said the orchestra members will be paid for the evening.

She said Abrams was instrumental in lining up the talent that will play between 5 and 7:45 p.m. on the riverfront stage. The scheduled groups — including the Kentucky Salsa Rhythm Band, Liberation Prophecy and Lazy Sunday — are giving the sponsors a special deal on performing, Smith and Winters said.

The orchestra's Independence Day concert will include the national anthem, the 1812 Overture and, the finale, "Stars and Stripes Forever."

Performing with the orchestra as featured artists will be Ben Sollee, a cellist, and Jecorey "1200" Arthur, a hip-hop classical performer.

Abrams said that the event provides the orchestra "our musical vision with the entire Louisville community. I want to show the extraordinary diversity of music that an orchestra can play — Beethoven, local hip-hop, Bernstein, folk and much more — and celebrate the day with all the virtuosity and power of this extraordinary orchestra."

Smith encouraged families to come early, because there will ample free activities for youngsters starting at 5 p.m. spread out on the Great Lawn.

The Kentucky Science Center and the Kentucky Museum of Art and Craft will have organized games and educational offerings. Steam Exchange, a Smoketown-based arts organization, will have screen printing for T-shirts and posters. And Louisville Public Media and the Louisville Orchestra plan a children's workshop with instrument making and other activities.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1HGDhB5