Topics: Adolf Hitler, Benjamin Netanyahu, Germany, GlobalPost, Israel, Jerusalem, Politics News

This article originally appeared on GlobalPost

JERUSALEM — Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has stirred controversy by intimating the Holocaust may not have been Adolf Hitler’s idea, and that in fact, he had been led down the garden path by the then Grand Mufti of Jerusalem, a Palestinian.

Germany’s response: No, no, it was us.

“Hitler didn’t want to exterminate the Jews at the time, he wanted to expel the Jews and Hajj Amin al-Husseini went to him and said if you expel them they’ll all come here. So what should I do with them? He asked. Burn them, he said.” These were Netanyahu’s words before the World Zionist Congress on Tuesday night.

If such a sentence were uttered by anyone but the leader of the Jewish state, one might be tempted to call it Holocaust denying, or at least a radically revisionist narrative of what happened.

But, Holocaust experts say, the interaction the prime minister described is a fiction.

“This conversation never took place,” said Dr. David Motadel, a historian and author of “Islam and Nazi Germany’s War.”

“The mufti was not involved in the planning of the Holocaust.”

“The Nazis had started to murder Jews on the eastern front in the late summer of 1941, long before the mufti arrived in Germany. The Holocaust had already started.”

The only time Mufti Husseini was received by Hitler was on Nov. 28, 1941, Motadel points out, when the Holocaust was already underway. The dynamics were also different from those Netanyahu alluded to. “There was of course a power imbalance. Hitler did not accept the mufti as an equal. The Germans had in fact a very patronizing attitude toward Amin al-Husayni. They used him as a propaganda tool in the hope to win over the Muslim world. But his influence in Berlin was limited.”

The German government was equally adamant that Netanyahu was mistaken.

“We know that responsibility for this crime against humanity is German and very much our own,” said Chancellor Angela Merkel’s spokesman Steffen Seibert when asked about the remarks. “This is taught in German schools for good reason, it must never be forgotten. And I see no reason to change our view of history in any way.”

This is not Netanyahu’s first such claim. During a 2012 Knesset speech he referred to Husseini as “one of the leading architects” of the Final Solution. Experts on the Holocaust disagree.