Amid growing healthcare disparities in the nation’s African-American communities, as well as rising concerns related to the underrepresentation of minority leaders in healthcare management, the National Association of Health Services Executives (NAHSE) will convene to address these and other healthcare issues at its 29th Annual Education Conference, Business Meeting and Exhibition, Oct. 14-17, in Detroit.

At a press conference held Tuesday morning, Aug. 26, at the Detroit Marriott at the Renaissance Center, several key members of the organization were on hand to discuss the event. Those in attendance were Anthony V. King, president-elect of NAHSE; Tyra Tomlin, president of NAHSE’s local chapter; Jennifer Campbell Fitzgerald, cochair of the 2014 NAHSE conference; and Denise Brooks Williams, cochair of the 2014 NAHSE conference.

Under the conference’s theme, “Transformation in Leadership: From Volume to Value…Be the Change,” event organizers expect to welcome more than 500 healthcare professionals representing more than 165 healthcare providers, insurers and companies from throughout the United States.

On this year’s conference theme, Fitzgerald said, “Traditionally, the business of healthcare has been about volume, number of beds filled and how many people come through your doors. Now, the focus has shifted. What we want to do is prepare and empower our members, from an educational perspective, how to better understand that through the Affordable Care Act, quality, not volume, is the most important thing that we must give our patients.”

Tomlin, healthcare administrator at Henry Ford Health System, said, “We are very excited about this conference coming to Detroit. We are ready to welcome the many healthcare professionals from around the nation. There will also be many local professionals representing healthcare facilities and organizations from this region. We have been informed that the conference will bring about $700,000 to the local economy.”

The 2014 HAHSE conference will feature numerous workshops, programs and activities, created to educate, train and provide resources to improve every aspect of delivering healthcare services to underserved and underrepresented segments of American communities. The conference will feature speakers and presenters such as Drs. Sampson Davis, Rameck Hunt and George Jenkins, all of whom as youngsters growing up in Newark, New Jersey made a pact with each other to become medical doctors.

In addition, Jeff Johnson, an award-winning journalist, social activist and political commentator, will speak. Other speakers and presenters include Dr. Ronald M. Wyatt, a medical doctor with the Joint Commission, and Dr. Gail Christopher, vice president of program strategy for the W.K. Kellogg Foundation.

The conference will also offer attendees the opportunity to participant in a golf tournament and fitness challenge. A community service project, aimed at empowering Detroit’s communities through a partnership between NAHSE and Detroit’s Focus: HOPE, will also be implemented.

Headquartered in Washington, DC, NAHSE is a not-for-profit membership association of minority healthcare executives with a mission to elevate the quality of healthcare services rendered to minorities and underserved communities, and to promote the advancement and development of tomorrow’s minority healthcare leaders.

“As healthcare professionals and healthcare leaders, we are all interested in the impact the Affordable Care Act and other healthcare initiatives have on minority communities across the nation,” said King, who in addition to being NAHSE’s president-elect, ready to assume office in 2015, is CEO and executive director of the Detroit-based Wellness Plan Medical Centers.

“At NAHSE conferences, attendees always have unique experiences in how to best elevate healthcare services to best benefit minorities and underserved communities across the nation. We anticipate that this year’s conference will also be extremely impactful.”

For more information on the 2014 National Association of Health Services Executives conference, visit www.nahse.org.