Young mothers abound in Paraguay, a country that has some of the strictest abortion laws in the world.

Young mothers abound in Paraguay, a country that has some of the strictest abortion laws in the world. Alessandro Bianchi / Reuters

In May, government officials in Paraguay refused to allow a 10-year-old pregnant girl who had been raped by her stepfather the ability to have an abortion. The girl, who is now 11, has now given birth to a baby girl, according to CNN.

While the girl and her child are reportedly in good health, the event reopens the debate over Paraguay’s draconian abortion laws — which don’t allow anyone to have an abortion unless it puts the mother’s life at risk. Abortion is considered a crime in nearly all other cases. Earlier this year, officials decided the pregnancy did not put the girl’s life at risk, despite protests from human rights groups.

“Paraguayan authorities decided to gamble with the girl’s health, life, and integrity despite overwhelming evidence that this pregnancy was extremely risky and despite the fact that she was a rape victim and a child,” according to Amnesty International.

The girl’s mother, as well as the stepfather who raped her repeatedly, have been arrested — charged with child neglect and rape/abuse of a child, respectively.

Paraguay is one of the many developing countries that sees scores of young girls under the age of 14 with pregnancies. Many of these girls are survivors of rape and sexual abuse. In 2013, the UN released a report that found that two million births a year occur to young mothers under the age of 14, and many are faced with serious health complications later in life.

“Too often, society blames only the girl for getting pregnant,” the UN stated. “The reality is that adolescent pregnancy is most often not the result of a deliberate choice, but rather the absence of choices.”

The baby girl was delivered by C-section and weighs about 6.6 pounds. According to a psychologist speaking to CNN, the young mother is supposedly in good psychological condition. But Guadalupe Marengo, deputy director for the Americas at Amnesty International, believes that’s not the case — not even one bit. “The physical and psychological impact of forcing this young girl to continue with an unwanted pregnancy is tantamount to torture,” he said.