Ricardo Diaz (standing) executive director of United Community Center, where President Barack Obama will visit Thursday, stops in for a visit Wednesday at the senior citizens center at the UCC. Seated are Alvaro Villegas (from left), Gladys Sandoval and Maria Segura. Credit: Michael Sears

By of the

Thursday will be like most any other day at the United Community Center on Milwaukee's near south side.

There will be 1,250 kids in classes at the Bruce-Guadalupe Community School and 200 seniors on the agency's sprawling campus, either eating meals or arriving for daily care.

Boxers will show up for training in the afternoon and dozens more people will use the fitness center. And a book fair will get underway at 3 p.m.

One more visitor plans to drop by, too. That would be President Barack Obama, who will travel to the United Community Center to praise how Milwaukee signed up thousands of people under the Affordable Care Act.

"This is the leader of the free world," said Ricardo Diaz, UCC executive director. "And to be able to say, he's coming to your neighborhood, regardless of your politics, these are important moments."

Diaz said he gets emotional about the impact of the visit on the center and the community.

"We have a mantra here: We don't make excuses," he said.

UCC was picked as a spot for the presidential visit because of a role it played in helping provide information to the city's residents on the Affordable Care Act. In February, Milwaukee won the White House's Healthy Communities Challenge, a contest among 20 cities to sign up people to health plans.

About 38,000 people in the Milwaukee area were newly enrolled in a health plan on the federal marketplace. In all, about 89,000 people in the Milwaukee area selected a 2016 marketplace plan, the White House said.

"Put all the political drama aside, I think that's a really good thing that working people can get health coverage," Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett said.

Barrett said for UCC, the presidential visit will be a huge honor. George W. Bush visited UCC while running for his first presidential term.

"I've oftentimes said I wish I had a dozen UCC's in this city; that's how good it is," Barrett said.

Founded more than 40 years ago as a teen center called The Spot, the UCC has grown into a multiservice nonprofit organization that employs 250 people and operates on an annual budget of $21 million.

On Wednesday, there was an air of expectancy across the UCC campus. Dinorah Marquez, director of the renowned Latino Arts Strings Program, said 12 children were selected to play two traditional songs during the presidential visit.

"That he chose our agency is very important," she said. "This is an affirmation of our community and agency."

For Diaz, Obama's visit is a milestone for the organization he has guided in two stints. He ran UCC from 1984 to 1988 and returned in 2003.

It also marks another remarkable point in his personal journey that has taken him from Cuba, to New Jersey, Puerto Rico and Carroll University in Waukesha.

Diaz, 64, was part of Operation Peter Pan, an exodus of unaccompanied Cuban minors to the United States in the early 1960s. He lived with relatives in New Jersey, where he was eventually reunited with his parents and sister. They then moved to Puerto Rico.

In 1970, Shirley Hilger, who directed admissions at Carroll, came to Puerto Rico and recruited Diaz and two others to attend the school.

"We didn't have much conversation about winter or the weather," Diaz said. "The rest is history."

Diaz has a long career in community and public service. He worked for the City of Milwaukee under Mayor John Norquist, serving as commissioner of city development and executive director of the Milwaukee Housing Authority.

The UCC is the organization that is closest to his heart. Diaz's two tours here bookended the 14-year tenure of his one-time mentor, Walter Sava, who turned UCC into one of the prime Latino agencies in the city.

Diaz spearheaded expansion that includes a Latino Geriatric Center to serve those with Alzheimer's disease, a senior living complex and a renovation of the school.

Milwaukee, he said, is one of the most livable cities for Hispanics in the country. For just one moment, Diaz said, he and others will be awfully proud to show off a small slice of the city to the president.

"I always say, 'If Hispanics were a stock, go out and buy it,'" Diaz said. "Short term, long term, it's an incredible investment."

Presidential coverage

Go to JSOnline.com for coverage of President Barack Obama's visit.