President Obama used a few moments of his end of the year press conference to remind Republicans and the American people of the many successes of his administration in 2015.

The President said:

As I look back on this year, one thing that I see is that so much of our steady, persistent work over the years is paying off for the American people in big tangible ways. Our early actions to rescue the economy set the stage for the longest streak of private sector job growth on record with 13.7 million new jobs in that time. The unemployment rate has been cut in half down to five percent, and most importantly wages grew faster than at any time since the recovery began.

So over the course of this year, a lot of the decisions that we made early on have paid off.

Years of steady implementation of the Affordable Care Act helped to drive the rate of the uninsured in America below ten percent for the first time since records were kept on that. Health care prices have grown at their lowest level in five decades. Seventeen million more Americans have gained coverage, and we now know that 6 million people have signed up on healthcare.gov for coverage beginning on January 1. 600,000 on Tuesday alone. New customers are up one-third over last year, and the more who sign up, the stronger the system becomes. And that’s good news from every American, who no longer has to worry about being just one illness or accident away from financial hardship.

On climate, our early investment in clean energy ignited a clean energy industry boom. Our actions to help reduce our carbon admissions brought China to the table, and last week in Paris nearly 200 nations forged a historic agreement that was only possible because of American leadership.



The President also listed the Iran nuclear deal, reopened Cuban relations, and TPP. He also pointed out that marriage equality also became the law of the land.

This has been a very good and successful year for President Obama. The economy has continued to grow; wages rose, the ACA is stronger than ever. On the international front, Obama has been able to add to his legacy with several landmark agreements. The spending bill that will keep the government funded was also a victory for this president.

One of the main reasons why Republicans can’t stand President Obama is that he has been successful in all the areas where George W. Bush failed. Obama has been better on the economy, better on national security, and better in both the foreign and domestic realms than the last Republican president.

Mostly, though, Obama has won. For years, President Obama has emerged from every showdown with Republicans as the winner.

After seven years of disrespect, this president has earned a victory lap, and it is worthwhile to remind the American people how good of a job he continues to do.