Ben Carson speaks in Ankeny, Iowa, on Oct. 2, 2015. (Photo: Charlie Neibergall, AP)

In early 2013, Ben Carson was largely known as a best-selling author, a celebrated pediatric neurosurgeon and subject of a television movie starring Cuba Gooding Jr.

It was a compelling narrative: a boy brought up in poverty in southwest Detroit by a single mother; a lousy student with a bad temper who turned it around to graduate from Yale, get a medical degree from the University of Michigan and become the youngest doctor, at the age of 33, to head a surgical division at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.

"Gifted Hands," the book and movie about his transformation from young punk to neurosurgeon, sold 614,000 copies, according to Nielsen BookScan, a business that tracks print book sales, and introduced him to a large swath of Americans, including many high school students who were assigned the book in classes.

But that life story began to change dramatically on Feb. 7, 2013, when Carson took on President Obama during a National Prayer Breakfast in Washington D.C. While Obama sat just a few feet away, Carson gently, but forcefully, criticized the country’s tax and health care policies.

“We need good health care for everybody. It’s the most important thing that a person can have,” he said. “But we’ve got to figure out efficient ways to do it. We spend a lot of money on health care — twice as much per capita as anybody else in the world — and yet, we’re not very efficient.”

Ben Carson signs a book for Maryland state Del. William Frank in Annapolis on March 8, 2013. (Photo: Brian Witte, AP)

Carson, who was set to retire a month later and return to his home in West Palm Beach, Fla., with his wife, Candy, became a conservative rock star.

His speech got more than 2 million views on YouTube in the weeks after the breakfast. The Wall Street Journal ran an editorial headlined “Ben Carson for President,” and proclaimed: “The Johns Hopkins neurosurgeon may not be politically correct, but he's closer to correct than we've heard in years.”

Sales of his book, "America the Beautiful," which was published in 2012, spiked and the political tome jumped to the top of The New York Times best-seller list and stayed in the top 20 for 19 weeks.

But Carson was still wary of running for office, telling conservative media host Glenn Beck in March 2013, “It is not my intention to run for office, because I would be a terrible candidate. There is no way I would get into that slime pool with all the special interest groups.”

Supporters, though, began to organize a concerted effort to get the doctor to officially switch from medicine to politics.

“I suppose it was the National Prayer Breakfast speech that first attracted me,” said John Philip Sousa IV, the great grandson of the famous composer and founder of the “Run Ben Run” super PAC in 2013 that has since transformed into "Win Ben Win!" the 2016 Committee.

“His strength and his courage and what he had to say, and the forum he elected to use, was incredibly impressive to me, I did more research to learn more and what I found, I really liked.” Sousa said.

And Sousa and other Carson supporters began paying closer attention. When Carson told the media he wasn’t particularly interested in running for president but might change his mind if people clamored for his candidacy, Sousa began circulating petitions urging Carson to run.

“Every week, I sent him a personal note with about 5,000 to 6,000 signatures that we had gathered,” he said.

Carson is a renowned pediatric neurosurgeon. (Photo: Caring Institute)

Carson was still reluctant in mid-summer of 2014, as he started the book tour for One Nation, which also leapt to the top of the best-seller list and ended up selling nearly 400,000 copies, according to Nielsen BookScan.

He told CNN in June 2014 that a run for president, “Is certainly not what I desire to do. You have to be a little bit nutty to want to do a position like that. But I do recognize that sometimes we’re placed in positions that are not of our choosing, so I’m keeping my eyes and ears open.”

Carson also was sending signals that a campaign might materialize. His book tour took him to the crucial state of Iowa in August, and he said he was waiting for the results of the 2014 midterm elections to see how that might affect the leadership in the Senate.

The super PAC responded by running radio ads in Louisiana and North Carolina with the goal of defeating Democratic Sens. Mary Landrieu and Kay Hagan. Both lost their re-election bids, and Republicans regained a majority in the Senate.

“We invested a lot of money in those races,” Sousa said. “We were solely focused on what’s going to cause this guy to run.”

Along the way, they got some encouragement from Carson himself, who told an interviewer that he knew of the group that had mailed out 75,000 mailers to conservative voters in the fall of 2013 and wouldn’t interfere or try to stop them.

“That gave us a hint that maybe we were on to something,” said Sousa, who has only met Carson once but has field organizations operating in Iowa, New Hampshire and South Carolina and a stable of 35,000 volunteers.

Those efforts certainly had an impact on Carson, said his communications director, Doug Watts.

“They did a very good job of organizing in several states and getting public supporters out. They’re impossible to miss at a lot of these public events, with their signs and T-shirts,” he said. “Even though we have zero to do with them, he recognizes that they’ve been exceptionally helpful in the launching of our campaign and the sustained level of our campaign.”

By December 2014, the super PAC had raised $14 million, and by the following March, Carson had formed a presidential exploratory committee, officially announcing his candidacy May 3 in Detroit.

“At some of those book signings, we had 1,000 people, standing in the sun or rain and waiting for him to sign their book. That’s pretty heady,” Watts said. “It was those continued expressions of support that he found out there. People were saying, ‘Please the country needs you.’ That has an impact.”

Ben Carson is surrounded by supporters as he waits to be interviewed at the annual Conservative Political Action Conference at National Harbor, Md., on Feb. 26, 2015. (Photo: Nicholas Kamm, AFP/Getty Images)

And now, more than five months after entering the race, Carson is running consistently in second place in the polls behind New York businessman Donald Trump.

It’s part of a trend of Republicans abandoning the more polished politicians in the race for outsiders, something bright and shiny and new. The Pew Research Center found that sentiment in a recent poll released last week that showed 65% of the Republicans surveyed said it’s more important for a candidate to have new ideas than political experience and a proven record.The same poll had Carson in second place with 16% of the Republican primary voters, behind Trump’s 25%. All the other GOP candidates were in single digits.

“There is this fervor in the United States from people who want someone who’s not a politician, someone who doesn’t live off of sound bites,” Sousa said. “The majority of people just don’t trust our politicians. We gave Republicans control of the House and most of us are disappointed. We know that you’re not going to repeal Obamacare, but we’d love to see more of an effort.”

The transformation of Carson from doctor to candidate has hit a few stumbles. He’s been widely criticized for recent comments about Muslims and guns and flubbed an answer on what he’d do as president when a hurricane hits. “I don’t know,” he said.

But Carson is unapologetic, saying his remarks have been taken out of context, and besides, he doesn’t believe in being politically correct.

“He does dig his heels in when he thinks he’s being managed or cajoled to give the politically correct, politically balanced answer, sometimes to a fault,” Watts said. “It’s a long-term adjustment for him. We have assiduously avoided managing or handling him because it’s part of his appeal, it’s an important part of his appeal.”

As for Carson, he told USA TODAY’s Capital Download newsmaker series last week, that at first, he thought all the fuss about a possible presidential campaign “was kind of ridiculous.”

“But it didn’t go away. It just kept building. And that’s when I started thinking, should I be listening to these people?” he said. “The pundits said it was impossible. But if you open the door, I’ll walk through it.”

Follow michpoligal on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1LqXawu