MORE ABOUT ‘A HEALTHY FLORIDA WORKS’ PLAN

How is this different from previous attempts to expand Medicaid or come up with an alternative to provide health care to roughly 1 million poor Floridians?

Unlike other failed plans, this one was crafted by a coalition of business and health care groups. Its backers are making the business case — that the plan would save the state and employers money — in hopes this may convince Republican House members who previously have blocked attempts to accept $50 billion in federal Medicaid expansion dollars.

Didn’t we try this before?

Yes and no. In 2013, the Legislature tried to pass a health plan that would reduce the number of uninsured Floridians but the House and Senate each stood behind their own separate proposals and failed to reach a compromise. This year, supporters of Medicaid expansion are urging the state’s powerful business industry to take the lead in pushing for a deal, which could carry weight in the conservative Florida House.

How does “A Healthy Florida Works” program compare to the House and Senate proposals that failed in 2013?

The plan can best be interpreted as a compromise between the two, though it has its own unique components.

Like the Senate plan, it uses an estimated $50 billion in federal funds to provide health coverage for roughly 1 million poor Floridians and complies with the federal Affordable Care Act.

Like both failed plans, “A Healthy Florida Works” requires participants to pay monthly premiums for coverage.

It is similar to the House’s failed plan in that it also requires most non-disabled participants to either work or receive job or education training.

Unlike the other two proposals, the “A Healthy Florida Works” Program is more like a true expansion of the state’s existing privatized Medicaid program. It would allow more Floridians to qualify for Medicaid and sign up for coverage through one of the existing managed care options, which are private companies that administer the Medicaid program in Florida. Other insurers would eventually be added to the list of options.

Is the Legislature taking this plan seriously?

Lawmakers aren’t saying much yet, but that is partially by design. Health care and business leaders are working behind the scenes to shore up support and are hopeful that it will get a full vetting in the upcoming legislative session that begins in March.

Gov. Rick Scott said this week that he has not yet been briefed on the plan. Senate President Andy Gardiner is a proponent of using the federal money to help reduce the number of uninsured Floridians and said last week that the Senate continues to show a willingness to explore options.

House Speaker Steve Crisafulli said that he has unanswered questions about the latest proposal but also expressed his doubts.

“If this is just another attempt to expand the failed Obamacare plan, I would predict it would garner very few votes in the Florida House of Representatives,” he said via email Friday.

So what are the odds anything gets done?

It’s hard to say what will happen during the session that begins in March and ends May 1.

Supporters say the “A Healthy Florida Works” Program is the state’s best chance at getting Medicaid expansion done. But the Florida House will be a tough sell, even with several provisions, such as required job training, intended to make the plan more attractive to conservatives. The plan is also very fluid now, with certain details yet to be ironed out. Supporters are hoping that happens when lawmakers agree to introduce legislation and vet the program in the committee process.