Christmas is one of the best times of the year to celebrate the people that give the best kind of gifts: the ones that are intangible.

One local coach gives his time, energy, and even sleep to investing in his athletes.

The only gift he wants in return is seeing his team succeed on and off the court.

It wasn't too long ago that the Wichita South High School Girls' basketball program had only seen two wins in three years. But that's when head coach Antwain Scales stepped onto the sidelines.

He reflected, "The program wasn't in good standing prior to me getting here but I prayed for this job and for this opportunity. Most people don't get into the spiritual realm but I just wanted that opportunity and once I finally got that chance I knew I would make the most of it."

He certainly did, in his first year as head coach, Scales lead South to the state tournament. The following two years, the Titans won the title. But it's not the wins and losses that drive Scales to coach.

"It's just a ministry really for us. It's bigger than basketball. That's what I tell the kids and their parents. It's bigger than us teaching the game of basketball. It's life skills, the importance of education, discipline, accountability. A lot of things come into play in teaching basketball," explained the fourth year head coach.

Scales walked the South High halls in the early nineties as a player when he was on two state championship teams himself. But the school is now more familiar to him than ever as he coaches here and spends his nights working as a third-shift security guard for the school district.

While driving through the cold December night, Scales explained the draw to the job, "You're kind of alone. It gives you a lot of time to think and reflect and, honestly, go over game plans."

Scales first got into coaching when he helped with his five kids' youth teams. One of his daughters is currently on the Titans roster. She says she rarely sees her dad sleep.

Mauri Scales, a sophomore guard, smiled, "I know he's tired a lot so it just shows he's dedicated to what he does and he loves what he does."

Her dad agreed, "I'm a workaholic and I'm passionate about what I do. I think once you're successful, then you can sleep later on."

Most would think that two state titles in three years would count as success but Antwain Scales won't rest until he sees that the South community is safe and his players' futures are sound.