Boulder recreated the Victorian tradition of picnics among the gravestones with a Sunday supper fundraiser at the city's historic Columbia Cemetery.

Participants at the inaugural event took tours to see examples of the cemetery's Victorian tombstone symbolism and epitaphs, along with listening to live music and watching dancers while they ate.

"The cemetery is at the height of its beauty in June," said Mary Reilly-McNellan, Columbia Cemetery preservation manager.

The event, sponsored by Boulder's Parks and Recreation Department and Historic Boulder, raised money cemetery preservation efforts.

A volunteer corps of conservationists has worked for years to restore battered gravestones and identify grave sites. For some gravestones in disrepair, the cemetery turns to restoration professionals.

Deborah O'Sheerin, left, and Susan Stephens find a quiet place to have their supper on Sunday. For more photos and a video, go to www.dailycamera.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

About 6,500 people are buried at Columbia, which was established in 1870 during the Victorian era. The cemetery, on 10.5 acres at Ninth and Pleasant streets, originally was established a half mile from the city — and now would be considered near the city center.

During the Victorian era, cemeteries were the first manicured "green spaces" available to the public, with families often picnicking on blankets at the grave sites of their deceased loved ones on Sundays, Reilly-McNellan said.

Reilly-McNellan, who also helps organize the popular biannual "Meet the Spirits" event at the cemetery around Halloween, talked about the cemetery's history as she led one of the tours.

"Cemeteries are marvelous teaching tools," she said.

Advertisement

She pointed out fraternal order tombstones, including those of members of the Mason and Woodmen of the World members.

Then there are the cemetery's refurbished cast-zinc — a.k.a. "white bronze" — grave markers that were manufactured by the Monumental Bronze Co. in Bridgeport, Conn., between 1874 and 1912.

Marble also was popular for tombstones at the time, especially for children, she said. Rosebuds, lambs and other symbols of nature were often used on tombstones for children, representing innocence. A tree stump shows a life cut short.

Mary Reilly-McNellan, center, gives a tour of Columbia Cemetery during the supper. Boulder's Parks and Recreation Department and Historic Boulder, Inc., hosted a "Midsummer's Eve Supper in the Cemetery: A Victorian Celebration of Life and Death," Sunday at Columbia Cemetery. For more photos and a video, go to www.dailycamera.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

"The Victorians softened death with their text and their pictures," she said. "There's so much love in the cemetery."

Many dressed for the occasion, with women in long dresses and elaborate flowered hats and men in suits. Among those dressed in Victorian garb were members of the Victorian Society of Colorado.

"It's our opportunity to dress up and show off our vintage outfits," said society member Janet Tucker, who lives in Aurora. "And we love history."

Boulder's Sally Powell-Ashby said she and her husband switched Mother's Day and Father's Day so he could go cross country skiing when it snowed on Mother's Day. She picked the cemetery picnic, she said, because she likes the celebration of life and death.

Plus, she said, "It's gorgeous now."

Boulder's Michael Stack brought his wife and 3-year-old daughter, Odessa, for a picnic.

"We came to learn a little bit about Boulder's history, and we have a tradition of picnicking on Father's Day," he said.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa