It's become a bit of a cliche for Americans of a passing generation to reflect on where they were at the time of John F. Kennedy's assassination on Nov 22, 1963. I was in Dallas and was, for resume-padding purposes, part of United Press International's prize-winning coverage team.

I haven't written about it in the intervening 50 years for good reason: I never felt particularly qualified — which isn't the most confidence-inspiring thing for a journalist to admit.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

But I had moved to Dallas in August 1962 and was only three months removed from my first job at the Cushing Daily Citizen. It was prior to the Bernstein-Woodward era, and journalism schools weren't exactly overflowing with aspirants; anyone with a modicum of experience on a small-town newspaper could easily move on to a metropolitan paper or wire-service job.

My reporting as part of the UPI team was not a matter of journalistic merit; it was a geographic happenstance. I was there, and it was part of my job. I couldn't have avoided it if I had wanted to.

Thus, rookies were thrust into the mix with the real pros that weekend in Dallas. And the pros arrived in droves. Bob Considine, the veteran syndicated columnist for what had been the International News Service, set up shop in the UPI office and quickly did a "mood of Dallas" piece, a perspective that, according to newsroom chatter, was gleaned from within the confines of the Press Club.

People of today's generation of smartphones, Twitter and Facebook cannot fathom the extent to which communications have changed since 1963. That was the era of typewriters. Information was transmitted, aside from live radio and television, by land lines, thence by teletype machines. A rate of 300 words a minute was considered fast.

The press car trailing the president's limousine that day did have a mobile phone — one! And the fact that White House correspondent Merriman Smith of UPI had it in his possession during the ride to Parkland Hospital was one of the contributing factors in his Pulitzer Prize-winning reporting of the assassination and its aftermath.

I wasn't scheduled to work the day JFK came to Dallas; I'd finished my shift at midnight Thursday and had gone to my bank in Oak Cliff late Friday morning to deposit my check. There, in the lobby, someone had brought in a portable TV set — it was long before the days of ubiquitous monitors that now plague such establishments — and there came the news that something had gone horribly wrong.

I took my wife, Dru, and our 2-year-old son, Shawn, home and went to the UPI office. I wouldn't see much of them for the next week.

My parking space outside the bank was in front of the Texas Theatre, where almost two hours later, Lee Harvey Oswald would be apprehended. Although I missed the drama of that capture, I would later that day be among the crowd of reporters facing Oswald as he was processed into the Dallas police headquarters, where I had been assigned after reporting for duty.

A couple of things about that first day remain vivid in my memory a half-century later. One was Oswald, being led through the throng of reporters at police headquarters, shouting, "Get me John Abt."

I had no idea who John Abt was or how to spell his last name. A member of the Washington press corps — I think it was Richard Dudman of the St. Louis Post-Dispatch — supplied the answer.

Abt was a leading left-wing lawyer from New York who had represented the Communist Party USA. Apparently during interrogation later in the evening, Oswald told detectives he didn't know Abt personally but wanted him as a lawyer. But nothing came of it, and Abt later told the Warren Commission he had no connection with Oswald.

It seemed to me at the time that Oswald's remark sounded like one he had been instructed to make.

Later that evening, Marina Oswald was brought to the police station from where she had been living in suburban Dallas. Little was known about her at that point, except the fact that she was Russian. There was speculation among the press as to how much English she spoke.

The elevator door opened, and Marina was subjected to a cacophony of questions by the milling crowd. Her first words were, "Oh, go away!" Well, that was plain enough.

By Saturday, the more seasoned UPI personnel were arriving; we rookies were delegated to the mundane newsroom chores, but not before I got my first bylined story:

"DALLAS (UPI) — Police said Saturday they have an airtight case against pro-Castro Marxist Lee Harvey Oswald as the assassin of President Kennedy, including photos of him holding his rifle. ... 'This case is cinched', said Homicide Chief Capt. Will Fritz."

The actual wording was a rewrite by UPI Southwest Division News Editor John Fallon.

A cub reporter can learn a lot by keeping his mouth shut and observing the veterans, but the old pros, too, have their foibles. The same Washington-circuit reporters who were excoriating Dallas police Friday night for their refusal to parade Lee Harvey Oswald before them for a question-and-answer session were, two days later, ridiculing authorities for inadequate security in transporting him.

Those first few days were a madhouse of seeking leads on anyone connected to the principal players. Within two weeks, the bloom was off that rose.

Marguerite Oswald, Lee Harvey's mother, it was quickly learned, was not at all reticent about speaking to the press. Five or six days after the assassination, a "stringer" (reporter for a UPI-affiliated member) from a Fort Worth radio station called to say he had an exclusive 15-minute interview with Marguerite.

By that time, the only response was, "How did you get away from her after only 15 minutes?"