In response to new ACA needs, Skanska USA has been selected to spearhead construction of a 236,800-square-foot addition to a hospital in central Texas.

Dale Woodin, ASHE

Skanska USA has been selected to spearhead construction of a 236,800-square-foot addition to a hospital in central Texas. Per terms of the contract, the developer will pocket $65 million to complete the project.

Aside from the regional location of the hospital, Skanska is presently contractually prohibited from sharing any further details on the location of the project, a company spokesperson told Commercial Property Executive. The expansion of the hospital will entail the addition of seven floors, as well as an undisclosed amount of horizontal space. Skanska is on schedule to commence construction this month, with an expected completion date in September 2016.

The central Texas project marks the third hospital construction contract Skanska has announced in the last three weeks. During the first week of December, the company entered into a $120 million agreement with NYU Langone Medical Center to erect a new 161,500-square-foot ambulatory care center in New York City. And just days before the start of the New Year, Skanska signed on to construct the 301,400-square-foot Rex Heart and Vascular Hospital at the Rex UNC Health Care Campus in Raleigh, N.C.

Skanska is benefiting from a major change in the healthcare landscape, spurred predominantly by the Affordable Care Act.

“Today you can’t talk about construction without talking about health reform,” Dale Woodin, senior executive director with the American Society for Healthcare Engineering, noted in the 2014 Hospital Construction Survey, conducted jointly by Health Facilities Management magazine and ASHE. “The fact that more than half of hospitals and healthcare facilities are including the ACA in construction planning shows they are thinking about this proactively. This has huge implications on facility planning.”

Fifty-one percent of participants in the 2014 HFM/ASHE survey responded that they were taking ACA into consideration in discussions regarding potential alterations to existing facilities or campus designs, marking a notable increase from the 34 percent in the 2013 survey.