Buy Photo Asbury Park Superintendent of Schools Lamont Repollet speaks during a public forum, Thursday, December 11, 2014, at Asbury Park High School. Jason Towlen/Staff Photographer (Photo: Jason Towlen/Staff Photographer, Gannett)Buy Photo

The word of the night on Thursday was patience.

"Rome wasn't built in a day," Lamont Repollet, the newly-minted Asbury Park schools superintendent said during a forum at Asbury Park High School held by the Asbury Park Press and Asbury Park Public School District.

Asbury grad rate drops, school leaders talk solutions

But he says he's already begun constructing the foundation upon which the district can build. During a panel discussion held by the Asbury Park Press in partnership with the district, Repollet said his plans for the district include assessing curriculum to determine shortcomings, drafting a five-year construction plan to address aging facilities, and working with organizations with proven success records to help support district students.

About 70 members of the community and Shore area organizations showed up for the forum despite Thursday night's snowfall. Repollet during the event answered questions from Press reporter Nicquel Terry, columnist Randy Bergmann and the public in the school's media center.

Repollet this school year took the reins in the district, which has seen its graduation rate slip below 50 percent along with shrinking enrollment as students leave for charter and parochial schools.

He's since hired administrators including Deborah A. Sylvia as supervisor of school counseling services, Melissa S. Lopusznick as supervisor of world language, bilingual and English as a second language studies, and Dr. Roxanne Johnson, interim director of special services. Sylvia, Lopusznick, and Johnson also served on the panel Thursday.

Repollet said he also would welcome support from the community in the task before his team — he suggested that area businesses could help recognize high-achieving students, or adopt a district school to provide needs for students.

Asbury Park Press Regional Director of Engagement Alesha Williams Boyd said APP Connections, a coalition of Shore area non-profits and community groups in partnership with the Asbury Park Press, will be connecting with the district to develop programs in alignment with the superintendent's wish list.

"The end goal of all of this is to provide Asbury Park's children with the brightest, best possible futures," Boyd said. "And I think everyone here showed up to the high school tonight because they have the same goals in mind."

Repollet said that he hopes that school's recovery will be an integral part of the city's turnaround, stressing that they are "one Asbury Park" and that he plans on forging a connection with the city.

"If the school district is not healthy and vibrant, that's going to slow down the rebirth of the community," he said. "The key with Asbury Park is that we want to have families move in as well as young professionals.

As such, Repollet said, his efforts also will include engaging parents and offering them training on how to best support their children academically.

"So in one aspect, we have to make sure that we have some program that is in place as well have the school system running on all cylinders so we can get parents coming back to the district."

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1AofsX3