SANTA CRUZ >> Remember the board game where Mr. Monopoly, the man in a top hat, has his trouser pockets pulled out to show they are empty? With negotiations for employee contracts on the horizon, that is what Santa Cruz County Board of Supervisors face.

The bad news was delivered Tuesday after supervisors presented awards for excellence — bronze, silver and gold — to 76 employees.

With more than 2,350 workers, county government is the second largest employer, taking in $453 million in revenue and spending $472 million. There’s no cash windfall in the cards.

Edith Driscoll, the county’s auditor-controller, explained half the revenue comes from the state and federal government as reimbursement for county services.

Taxes comprise 22 percent of revenues: property taxes, $53 million; vehicle licenses, $27.6 million; sales tax $10.6 million; hotel tax, $6.6 million; deed transfer tax, $2 million and cannabis tax $1.6 million.

Salaries and benefits make up almost half the expenses.

Driscoll noted property tax delinquencies at 4 percent, up from 3.5 percent from the year before.

“It is an indicator of an economic challenge,” said Susan Mauriello, the county administrative officer, citing difficulties in the real estate market and the governor’s prediction of a recession. “If real estate falters, our revenues will fall ... It’s something to be worried about.”

Home values have been rising, with the median price — the midpoint of what is sold — hovering around $700,000 for a single family home and topping $500,000 for a condo.

It takes a year for property to be reassessed, a supplemental tax bill issued and funds paid into county coffers.

The county has restored 200 positions of 470 cut during the downturn. Most of them are in health with reimbursement from the Affordable Care Act or in criminal justice with realignment funded by the state.

Carlos Palacios, assistant county administrative officer, put the “structural deficit” at $10.7 million plus $2 million spent on capital projects.

“We’re chipping away at it,” he said, noting furloughs helped but nothing has made up for the loss of the utility user tax.

The county uses one-time funds from reserves to balance the budget. Reserves are slated to be 8 percent next year and the end-of-the-year fund balance 10 percent.

Advertisement

With salaries and benefit costs increasing 8 percent under existing contracts, and health insurance and retirement set-asides increasing, Palacios said money left over on June 30 will be inadequate to cover the “structural deficit,” let alone invest in capital improvements or start new programs.

One such program, the Nurse-Family Partnership, was presented two weeks ago to put 100 babies born into poverty on a better trajectory; $500,000 is needed to cover the $857,000 expected cost.

Supervisor John Leopold called the deficit, projected at $5 million last June, as “sobering” and “alarming.”

Looking to next year’s budget, he told Mauriello, “I thought the worst years were behind us. Sharpen the pencils as much as possible.”