SHARE Mayor Tom Barrett Dr. Gregory Thornton

By

For all the talk about how Milwaukee Public Schools should be bold with its next superintendent, I'd settle for the School Board just letting the next superintendent do his or her job.

The takeover that didn't take

But before I go there, we can't really talk about Gregory Thornton's time as head of MPS without talking about the proposed takeover of 2009-'10. For those unfamiliar, the Obama administration decided to double down on President George W. Bush's policy of using federal education data to push for improved outcomes — in large part because the United States was (and still is) lagging so far behind the rest of the developed world.

MPS was designated as a district in need of improvement, according to all of our test data. In other words, it was failing. Reading, writing, math, you name it. Gov. Jim Doyle, Mayor Tom Barrett and Common Council President Willie Hines (then my boss) held a press conference announcing their resolve for dramatic change. A takeover, by which the mayor would choose the next superintendent (or potentially appoint a board) and be politically accountable for improvement.

I'm not sure this was ever articulated very well, but what it came down to was that many, many more people vote in mayoral elections, and every leader in the city must deal with the mayor of Milwaukee at one time or another. Conversely, depressingly few people vote in School Board elections, and those board members traditionally have little interaction with other city leaders.

In short, it would elevate the importance of public education across Milwaukee.

A roaring chasm opened up among Milwaukee Democrats with legislators such as state Sen. Lena Taylor, Rep. Jason Fields and Rep. Pedro Colon (now a judge) advocating new governance, while others such as state Sen. Spencer Coggs (now city treasurer) and Rep. Tamara Grigsby were against any change. The business community (and some MPS parents) also squared off against the unions (and some MPS parents). Coggs famously said that MPS needed a "makeover, not a takeover."

Well, MPS never got a makeover or a takeover, but it did get a new superintendent: Thornton.

Schooled by Bonds

School Board President Michael Bonds shrewdly outmaneuvered everyone and signed Thornton to a new contract, effectively pulling a checkmate that blocked any potential reform, much less a takeover by the mayor. If the state had actually approved a proposal — I don't think the Democratic caucus even let it come up for a vote — then, at that point, MPS would have been forced to pay Thornton's $250,000 annual salary anyway, so the whole thing became moot.

Thornton basically got off his flight from Pennsylvania with nearly no chance of success. I mean, why would Hines, Barrett, Doyle, Taylor, Fields, Colon, business leaders or pro-improvement families want to work with the guy who took away our best opportunity to elevate public education for future generations? (By the way, then-County Executive Scott Walker sat on the sidelines during this debate, taking no position on this issue.) Yet, somehow — against all odds — Thornton made significant inroads with the very people who never wanted him here in the first place.

Ironically, those who thought MPS should be run under the mayor soon came to appreciate Bonds' choice of superintendent. Hines and Barrett seemed immediately impressed by Thornton's energy, professionalism and can-do attitude. The business community embraced him, with historic public-private partnerships emerging between MPS and companies such as GE Healthcare and Northwestern Mutual.

The problem with hiring good people: They always want to do good

Unfortunately, the teachers unions, which fought tooth and nail against the takeover, began to sour on Thornton, especially when he tried to establish partnerships with business groups and high-performing charter/choice schools. (As an aside, I personally know of a few anti-takeover types within MPS who were so upset about the proposal that they voted for Walker over Barrett in the 2010 gubernatorial election. Whoops.)

It got to the point where even the School Board, which had anointed Thornton as its savior, became embittered by his ecumenical approach. For example, when Hines and I kept hearing from neighborhood stakeholders about their frustrations with empty MPS buildings, we worked with state Sen. Alberta Darling to craft legislation allowing the city's Department of City Development to intervene. Somehow, I ended up in a heated on-air radio discussion with Bonds, who was miffed that we hadn't consulted him; I explained that Thornton was briefed extensively on the idea, and I'll never forget Bonds' response:

"Dr. Thornton doesn't run MPS. The board does."

That shocked me, especially in light of how Thornton had mended fences throughout the community, established new resources and refocused nearly everyone (everyone except the board, it seemed) on the overarching purpose of high-quality public education.

Why bring a man to your city and pay him $250,000 per year if you don't want him to do his job and run the district? That brand of disrespect seemed to resurface time and time again during Thornton's tenure, as he attempted to carry out common-sense policies to improve outcomes. Such as when Roosevelt Middle School reached a crisis point and Thornton wanted to shut it down to new students in order to resurrect the high-achieving culture for existing students, and the board essentially said: "It isn't that bad."

Back to school

When I think about how the state has decimated public education under Walker and how Thornton pretty much did everything short of walking on water — only to be subjected to non-stop opposition from those who were supposed to have his back — I'm not surprised that the city that inspired "The Wire" looks like a step up to him. (Apologies to all my Baltimore friends.) It's definitely our loss.

So, instead of being bold, how about if the board simply empowers the next superintendent to be successful? Let him or her do the job of superintendent instead of getting in the way. Yes to oversight, but no to micromanagement.

Or, if that's too radical an idea, maybe we can still elevate public education by putting the takeover back on the table. I'd love to know what Thornton thinks of the idea.

Alex Runner is an MPS parent who lives and writes in Milwaukee's Sherman Park neighborhood. A version of this ran previously in his "Urban Center" blog, a part of Purple Wisconsin.