*Despite all the crazy things he’s said in the past, Dr. Ben Carson wants Republicans to know that he deserves their support for running for president on the party’s ticket.

Oh yeah. And one more thing he wanted you and his fellow conservatives to know. He’s not “crazy.”

According to Mediaite.com, Carson made his case known recently while speaking at the Republican National Committee’s winter meeting in California. As for all those minuses against him (Calling Obamacare “the worst thing that has happened in this nation since slavery“; suggesting last year’s Veterans Affairs scandal was a “gift from God“; and saying present-day America “very much like Nazi Germany”), Carson dismissed them as items hyped up by “the liberal media.”

“I stand by those” remarks, Carson told the crowd, according to The National Journal. “I don’t think there’s anything crazy at all.”

The Journal pointed out that Carson remained his controversial self while stating the country has lost that sense of urgency after chatting about the bravery of America’s founding fathers, who he said were “willing to die for what they believed.” The sense of urgency, he argued now belongs to enemies of the US like the Islamic State.

“They’ve got the wrong philosophy but they’re willing to die for what they believe,” Carson said of ISIS, “while we’re busily giving away every value and every belief for the sake of political correctness.”

Seeing the impact of his comments, Carson quickly added that the media would take what he said out of context.

“They are just so ridiculous,” Carson said about the reporters in the back of the room.

Apparently Carson got on a roll, which extended to an interview he did with Fox News. The Washington Times reports that the neurosurgeon turned conservative made claims in the interview that the US’ war with ISIS shouldn’t have any laws because…. the rules of war are “politically correct.”

“If the president wants to have a good legacy, this would be a good time to start it,” Carson told Fox News that if there are going to be any established rules for war, the main one ought to be “no war.” “We have people trying to manage the military who know nothing about the military, who know nothing about military strategy. Our military needs to know that they’re not going to be prosecuted when they come back because somebody says, ‘you did something that was politically incorrect.’ There is no such thing as a politically correct war.”

11 SHARES Facebook Twitter

Want to read more articles like this one? Subscribe to EURnewsletter.

Got A News Tip or Video You Want to Share? Contact us HERE.