For years, Denver Mayor Michael Hancock’s appealing vision of an aerotropolis growing up around Denver International Airport appeared based upon pie-in-the-sky dreams for what he hoped would be the cornerstone of his legacy.

Suddenly, those dreams appear on the way to reality, although Denver and the cities around the airport must come to an agreement before development will truly take off.

Hancock’s vision, however, got a major boost when Panasonic announced last week it would build a technology center and business solutions hub at the rail stop at 61st Avenue and Peña Boulevard.

The venture will bring in as many as 400 new jobs and generate as much as $82 million in economic benefit to the region. The complex will be part of a mixed-use development with multifamily residential, office space and retail shops.

“This is without question the catalytic opportunity we have been waiting for,” Hancock said at a press conference.

In other words, very good news.

The company chose Denver out of 22 cities, partially as a result of Hancock’s aerotropolis vision, said Jim Doyle, president of Panasonic Enterprise Solutions.

The operations base and assembly facility will make large-scale audio-visual displays and solar panels.

Denver and the state of Colorado sweetened the pot with a total of $3 million in incentives.

The announcement of Panasonic’s move to Denver is occurring while city officials are still in negotiations with Adams County, Aurora and communities around the airport over how the property inside and outside DIA should grow.

Hancock told us last week that negotiations on the conflict are going “phenomenally well” and he is “beyond optimistic” an agreement will be reached. Negotiations are now cloaked in secrecy, but the mayor hopes for an announcement next month.

That, too, is an important development for Hancock’s vision.

Communities battling Denver have claimed Hancock’s plans for an “airport city” and aerotropolis would violate a two-decade-old intergovernmental agreement over how the land Denver annexed should develop. Discussions got so strained a year ago that Adams County threatened to take back DIA’s land.

Clearly discussions have calmed enough for Panasonic to announce its move into DIA’s shadow.

A reasonable outcome to the squabble was always possible; now, fortunately, it appears inevitable, too.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.