Naperville unemployment a concern

The Naperville Area Chamber of Commerce, which released the figure and tracks economic data specific to the area, has made job advocacy a top priority, said Mike Evans, president and chief executive officer.

While the economy in Naperville shows signs of recovery, including an increase in sales tax receipts and several major developments in the works, the city's June unemployment rate of 8.7 percent, not seasonally adjusted, remains a concern.

Mike Evans, Naperville Area Chamber of Commerce president and CEO, said the organization has made job advocacy a top priority. (Kristy Kennedy, Special to the Tribune)

"Jobs are still first and foremost in our minds from an advocacy standpoint," Evans said.

He anticipates the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate for Naperville will drop to about 7.5 percent when the Illinois Department of Employment Security releases its latest figures. Still, he said, the number of people actively looking for work here, 6,889 in June, is too high.

Higher, in fact, than in 2012 and 2011, when Naperville's seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was 6.82 percent and 7.36 percent, respectively. In 2006, the figure was 3.06 percent.

Part of the increase in Naperville's unemployment rate is due to the increase in job creation in the area, showing more people are looking for jobs. The Chicago-Joliet-Naperville region saw a 1.9 percent uptick in job growth in July, according to the IDES.

But Evans also hears business owners say they are reluctant to hire because they are unsettled over health insurance, taxes and Illinois' pension funding crisis. At the same time, business owners know they can make do with fewer workers.

"I think you are seeing a lot of fear from companies saying they need to figure out what to do with their workforce because they don't know what is going to happen with the Affordable Care Act, tax reform at the federal level and in Illinois," Evans said. "All of those conversations force businesses to go back to their roots."

He explained business owners who made it through the recession by cutting staff and learning to do more with less now know they can get by without hiring more employees or by hiring people on a temporary or part-time basis. Also, some jobs can't be filled because of a gap in worker skills like welding, Evans said. Employers also are being picky and are more willing to wait for the best candidate since they know they can manage without that worker for a while.

"Companies are looking for employees who already have the skills they need," Evans said.

Other than the unemployment rate, the Naperville area is performing well. Sales tax receipts of about $861,000 from the first three fiscal quarters of this year are up by 4.51 percent compared to last year, according to the Chamber. The increase shows people are shopping and feel they have money to spend, signifying strength in the economy, Evans said. Also, the Water Street development that will put a hotel in downtown Naperville and Freedom Plaza development including plans for a hotel, restaurants and conference space reflect the health of the area.

"You don't make those investments if you don't think the market can't support it," Evans said.

triblocaltips@tribune.com