As much as it pains me to make this statement, it hurts more knowing that the Republican Party is destroying America through its histrionics and predetermined inaction.

Over the past six years, there has been an execrable assault launched on President Obama and his presidency. While searching for scandal after scandal, members from the Republican Party have forsaken their duties in working for the best solutions to alleviate our nation's numerous issues.

After the presidential election of 1964, the Republican Party mutually agreed to embrace a southern, evangelical strategy that resulted in abandoning the minority voting bloc. As a result, they've developed into a shell of its former self. The political party once associated with the eponymous President Abraham Lincoln has become the voice of extremism and vulgarity.

Most Republicans can argue until they're red in the face that this isn't the case, but the visceral images we continue to see, and the truculent rhetoric used by their party's representatives suggests otherwise.

Republican Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell and the rest of the Republican brass stated on day one that their primary goal was to make President Barack Obama a one-term president. Despite all of their puissant efforts, the president was successful on issues, ranging from the rebirth of the auto industry to affordable healthcare, as well as his bid for a second term.

Let's be clear: He has received not an inkling of help in all these matters from the other side of the isle. During the first two years of his term, he wanted to work in a bi-partisan manner, but each time the olive branch was extended; it was ignored.

Since Speaker John Boehner has assumed control in Congress, the level of ineptitude in passing legislation for raising the minimum wage, renewing unemployment insurance, implementing gun control measures, and passing meaningful immigration reform has overwhelmed the Republican Party. They're living in their collective bubbles where facts are foreign and lies are commonplace. This current Congress is on pace to become the most otiose in the history of this nation.

Thus, Washington, DC continues to be a place where congressional dysfunction reigns supreme, and the American people deserve much better than we're receiving. If the average citizen were performing at their job with six percent efficiency, they would be fired without hesitation. Perhaps, this is a glimpse into the bleak future of U.S. politics. It seems the rival factions within the Republican Party are operating on a potent mixture of obstruction and disrespect, and the future of our country hangs in the balance.

Why are they even in politics?

This is a fair question to ask. They've voted 54 times to repeal the Affordable Care Act. They've preceded over eight hearings on the Benghazi tragedy. They've demanded to see President Obama's birth certificate. They've held hearings on Capitol Hill regarding the potential of bringing articles of impeachment against the president. They've spearheaded the charge of holding Attorney General Eric Holder in contempt for withholding "evidence." They've shut down the federal government and threatened to default on our country's loans in an effort to repeal the Affordable Care Act. It's gotten so ridiculous that they've discussed the possibility of impeaching Majority Leader Harry Reid from his position in the Senate.

A government continuously operating under crisis mode can't be what our founding fathers envisioned two hundred and thirty eight years ago. It seems most Republicans have a superficial interest in making the three branches of U.S. government work for the good of every citizen. We've elected men and women to positions of power who are influenced more by the power of a dollar rather than the power of the people.

Money has always been the common denominator in politics, but it is destroying the fabric of our democracy. In our current political climate, there is one political party fighting to preserve altruism to their plutocracy while the other political party galvanizes around what's left of a fleeing democracy.

The recent rulings on campaign contributions handed down by a conservative laden Supreme Court are continuing their willful destruction. Another example is, the conspicuous amount of legislation being passed through Republican-led state legislatures across the nation to repress voting rights, women's rights, and public education. They must have a zany thirst to be on the wrong side of history.

Furthermore, their unremitting abuse of the Constitution and rules within the House and Senate has allowed them to successfully manacle anything that the Democratic Party has put forth as a form of legislation to pass into law. Moderate voices, balanced budgets, and common sense are retired notions. Gerrymandering congressional districts has become the Republican Party's formula for success. They've fallen victim to fanatical right wing media voices and their monotonous agendas. Lacking a progressive direction and diversity (of thought, gender, class and race) within their ranks will be their ultimate undoing.

Some Republicans have acknowledged that, if they don't make sweeping changes in their attitudes toward minorities, their party will become extinct. It would benefit the country to have a legitimate, viable second option to choose from that has the best interests of everyone in mind. Until this happens, the future of America and her citizens will stand on shaky ground.

It is up to the American people to decide if they want to keep their front row seats to this dysfunctional circus or demand a change this November.

Follow Chris Williams on Twitter: www.twitter.com/iamchriswms