President Barack Obama, center, with Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel, left, and Gen. Lloyd J. Austin III, commander of the U.S. Central Command, talk before the start of a briefing at MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa, Fla., on Wednesday. Pablo Martinez Monsivais/AP

As the United States begins air strikes in Syria, President Obama travels to the United Nations this week aiming to prove he has the right stuff to lead an international coalition against Islamic extremists in the Middle East and around the world.

Several Muslim-majority nations have joined the United States and are assisting with the air strikes, which began Monday night, U.S. officials said. These countries include Bahrain, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. But none of these nations has publicly agreed to provide the combat troops that are considered necessary to accomplish Obama's goal of destroying the extremists.

The U.S. attacks in Syria appear to be targeting command and control centers and weapons depots, and have been focused on Raqqa, a stronghold of the extremists. Pentagon officials said the strikes were being conducted with bombers, Tomahawk missiles and fighter jets.

Retired Gen. Jack Keane told Fox News Tuesday morning that the air strikes might create momentum for solidifying support and possibly expanding the international coalition when Obama visits the United Nations. Keane said the strikes appear to be going well but he added that ground forces also will be needed to defeat the Islamic State group..

On Wednesday, Obama is to address the UN General Assembly and lead a Security Council session where he will call for passage of a resolution requiring countries to stop their citizens from joining extremist groups such as the Islamic State group.

Since early August, there have been nearly 200 U.S air strikes against extremist targets in Iraq, but military strategists said the extremists were using neighboring Syria as a safe haven, a situation that President Obama decided could not be allowed to continue.

The situation is complicated because the government of Iraq has supported the U.S. strikes but the government of Syria under President Bashar al-Assad has opposed U.S. air strikes in that country. Obama long ago called for Assad's ouster.

Most Americans have opposed massive U.S. intervention until recently. What turned around public opinion in favor of air strikes in Syria and Iraq were the military advances made by the Islamic extremists, and in particular the videotaped beheading of two American journalists.

Congress has authorized the administration to begin training and equipping "moderate" Syrians to fight the militants.