This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

... the new trend in health insurance is an insurance at all it's a difficult concept in ... the New Testament all the disciples were together in the share but they have with each other and that's what you doing ... the Warsaw's are members of Samaritan Ministries International ... where members share each other's medical bills instead of contributing to a health insurance plan ... these ministries have seen a boom since the Affordable Care Act ... in part because members are exempt from the mandate requiring health insurance coverage ... here's how Samaritan Ministries works you have to be a Bible believing ... Christian ... yet to be going to church three a three week so for this edition of faith with a number of tenants that you have to agree with us so it's essentially a group of them are easily like minded people each month the Warsaw's received a letter from the ministry telling them about another members inadequate ... okay so their infant daughter was born eight weeks early so it creamy ... the Warsaw's then sending set monthly amount with the ministry called the family share ... directly to the family he did ... in industries role is to collect all of the medical bills for members the month and then divide that cost among its members ... the Warsaw's or one of many families who will send a check to the family is that premature baby ... it's nice to be able to ... know where your money's going because you wrote the name of that I'm I'm pretty cool ... the worst offer only cemented the handful of their own claims in their twenty one years in the ministry ... the biggest expense beanie hundred thousand dollar medical bill ... after their daughter was born with an axe treat each chromosome ... when we had our daughter Grace she lives thirteen days after she was four ... D ... Khorasan letters that we got ... from people after she died in the Dow was ... a huge emotional support for us and in the high point of our day was going out to the mailbox ... and get an email and seeing the school cards and letters and ... people sharing their experiences ... which ... that doesn't happen with an insurance company ... but with skyrocketing membership ministries of also ran into problems ... most don't cover preexisting conditions or medical expenses that don't conform to Christian morals ... like smoking or sex before marriage ... and several lawsuits being filed against the ministry's because member see their medical bills were never shared to the word eat ... there's no regulation to guarantee members medical needs will be key ... for that the organization will have enough funds ... so I'm really as out by anywhere or cayenne and Tarkan situation where ... if you go into this you have to know that there is no ... regulation and our government ... agency that is looking over the shoulders of this company ... looking into their books to make sure that they do actually have ... the money there ... to pay those payouts really as ... um Alito think literally at um and figuratively aam has said ... aam whether you can be protected on the road ... but members liked or show see the benefits like self p discounts the Dili to choose their own doctor are worth the risk and they're confident that if the ministry members didn't share an expense ... it would be looking for an out of pocket ... American or another ten thousand dollars because if there's a trough of strong ... confidence that God will provide ...