State Representative and House Majority Whip Chris Hagenow (R-Windsor Heights) decided not to run in the open seat in Iowa’s 3rd Congressional District after Congressman Tom Latham announced that he will not run for re-election in 2014. State Senator Jack Whitver (R-Ankeny) also decided not to run, and David Young decided to run for Latham’s seat instead of running for U.S. Senate. Young joins Des Moines teacher Joe Grandanette as candidates for the seat. State Senator Brad Zaun and Iowa Secretary of State Matt Schultz are still considering running.

Below is Hagenow’s email to supporters:

For two decades, Iowa has been incredibly fortunate to have the leadership and service of Tom Latham in the United States Congress. Last month, Congressman Latham announced that he would not seek another term in 2014. I want to publicly thank him for his service, and wish him the very best in his retirement from public life.

Over the past few weeks, I have heard from many friends, colleagues and supporters about me running for this open congressional seat. It has caused me to reflect on my own service and the challenges facing our country.

My time in the state legislature has been closely marked by my years as a father. My son Owen was born the day I first announced that I was running back in December of 2007. My goal as a legislator has always been to help preserve the American dream, and to pass along to the next generation the freedom and opportunity to build a better life.

Like you, I am frustrated at a federal government that has lost its way. It is immoral that our country continues to mortgage our children’s future to keep up with reckless, out of control spending. The catastrophe of Obamacare threatens not only our healthcare system, but our entire economy. Personal liberty and traditional values are constantly under siege.

We must choose as a country whether or not we want to return to limited government and prosperity, or stand as a witness to the slow decline of a great nation.

My wife Amanda and I both share a conviction to this cause. Yet, we also share an even deeper commitment to our children. Serving in Washington D.C. at this time will not allow me to be the husband and father that I have promised to my family. After prayerful consideration, we believe that I can best serve the people of Iowa by continuing my work in the state legislature.

I intend to seek re-election to the Iowa House, continue as Majority Whip, and to help grow our Republican majority. I am excited to continue our work to balance budgets, cut taxes and grow Iowa’s economy.

I am humbled to have been considered. I strongly believe that in November, this district will elect a conservative leader to help carry on the work of Congressman Latham, and fight to ensure that America’s brightest days are ahead.

“Do not be afraid; keep on speaking, do not be silent. For I am with you, and no one is going to attack and harm you, because I have many people in this city.”

-Acts 18:9-10 (NIV)

Thank you to everyone for your support and friendship.

Chris