A sycamore tree provides shade, grows quickly and is known for its hardiness. As you watch Clemson play later this week, there’s connection to this tree with deep green, large leaves and the nation’s only undefeated team.

When 9-year-old Tony Elliott moved to James Island to live with his aunt and uncle, Blondell and John Kidd, he had already learned quite a bit about life.

At the age of 4, Tony, his little sister, Brandi, and their mom were homeless in Los Angeles. His dad was in and out of jail.

A church shelter would eventually provide safety. His mom remarried and this blended family was on its way to a California church on a summer morning in June 1989 when their van was broadsided by another car.

After the van flipped and spun to a stop, Tony unhooked his sister and stepbrother from car seats hanging upside down. Their mother was lying motionless in the road after flying through the windshield. The deadly wreck occurred at the intersection of Sycamore Street and Harbor Boulevard.

Tony would come to James Island to live with the Kidd family. His sister moved to Atlanta with another aunt.

Tony the Tiger

As Elliott learned the ways of the Lowcountry, he also became a two-sport star at James Island High. He accepted an opportunity at the U.S. Air Force Prep School, but he left after one year. He spent the next year working construction and at Publix to save money for college.

He entered Clemson in 2000 and played on the football team as a walk-on receiver. His junior and senior years, he was awarded a scholarship. His wide receiver coach was a young assistant named Dabo.

In 2003, Elliott graduated with a team-high GPA of 3.55 in industrial engineering.

Elliott landed a job with Michelin paying good money with benefits. Something was missing. He married Tamika and they moved to Orangeburg where he coached for two years at South Carolina State University. In 2008, he and Tamika moved again to Greenville where he coached for three more years at Furman.

While attending a coach’s clinic in Los Angeles in 2010, Elliott runs into Swinney and invites him to go for a ride. They end up at the intersection of Sycamore and Harbor.

He wants to show his old coach where his mom died.

Crossroads

A year later, Swinney calls Elliott in Greenville and invites him and his wife to join the Swinneys for dinner at his house in Clemson. Elliott considered his former coach as his mentor and was excited about the visit.

Swinney offered his former player a job as an assistant coach. He specifically wanted to make the offer at his house because the Clemson head coach lives on a street named Sycamore.

For four years, Elliott coached the Tiger running backs. In early 2015, Elliott was promoted to co-offensive coordinator and the Tigers have won every game since.

Most of this story has been told by ESPN and newspapers across the state, but since this time of year is especially dedicated to perspective, here’s just a little more.

A sycamore tree grows quickly. It’s resistant to high winds and hail. As Elliott talks to his head coach through those head phones in the coach’s box, you might now have a better sense of just how hardy, resilient and trusting these two men are. Not at all unlike a sycamore.

Reach Warren Peper at peperwarren@csuniv.edu.