By Rachel Mullen | Watchdog Arena

The United States Supreme Court heard oral arguments yesterday that could have serious implications for the Affordable Care Act.

King v. Burwell is centered around subsidies; specifically, it challenges tax subsidies given to people who purchase health insurance on the federal government’s marketplace.

Thirty-seven states don’t have state exchanges. Instead, citizens of those states who receive subsidies get them on the federal marketplace. This is at odds at how the law is written, and that is what is being challenged in King v. Burwell. The law states that subsidies are available “through an exchange established by the state.” Since a majority of states do not have exchanges, this has presented a challenge. A King victory would eliminate subsidies for 7 million people in those states without exchanges.

Ohio does not have a state-run exchange. Ohioans requiring a subsidy rely on the federal exchange. The possible implications of a ruling striking down these subsidies are creating concern for Ohio politicians.

Democratic state Reps. Michael Stinziano and Nickie Antonio are planning legislation to create a state run exchange in Ohio in an attempt to resolve this issue.

“If we wait for the Supreme Court’s ruling, we’re going to find ourselves at a disadvantage,” Stinziano said, the Dispatch reported. He said that losing subsidies would increase insurance premiums by 35 percent, forcing some Ohioans to drop health care coverage and thus raising insurance rates even more. “Now that we have so many Ohioans enrolled [in federal health care plans], this has a significant impact on their care and what direction we’re going as a state,” Stinziano told the Washington Post.

Both branches of the Ohio Legislature are dominated by Republicans, so it would be unlikely to envision this legislation being easily passed. However, Gov. John Kasich has not completely shelved the idea.

“I don’t like to get ahead of ourselves on what the Supreme Court might do,” he said. “But if it threw a half a million people without insurance, we’d have to look at it.”

Obamacare is deeply unpopular in Ohio. In 2011, Ohioans approved the Healthcare Freedom Amendment by a whopping 65 percent. This called for exempting Ohioans from national healthcare mandates.

If Kasich were to push for a state exchange, he would find himself at odds with most Ohioans who object to Obamacare. As Kasich considers a possible run for the White House, he will certainly be weighing the effects of a state run exchange on his political prospects.

Kasich already has felt the heat from conservatives as a result of Medicaid expansion. When the Ohio House of Representatives refused to go along with expanding Medicaid, Kasich jammed it through the Ohio Controlling Board after the Speaker of the House and Senate President removed members of the board who opposed it and replaced them with those who approved. In its first year, Kasich’s Medicaid expansion was substantially over budget, raising concerns with Ohio legislators.

Former Ohio Majority Whip and current candidate for State Senate, John Adams, has been critical of Obamacare and Ohio’s Medicaid expansion. His concerns highlight those of many conservative Ohioans.

“As with those states that took the Medicaid Expansion “free money” bribe, the ACA bribe continued in the form of tax credits. The federalism argument vs the larger statutory context is what is at play. We have been let down before but I’ll remain optimistic.”

Obamacare has had serious effects on Ohioans. Premiums have risen dramatically, and the policies were crafted with lobbyists and politicians in mind, as opposed to permitting consumers to determine what is best for them. While politicians promised lower premiums and better access to services, the reversed has happened.

Many Americans, Ohioans included, have had their previous policies cancelled. They now face skyrocketing policies monthly with deductibles so high they don’t meet their needs.

The impact of this law is still being demonstrated to average citizens facing the daunting prospects of unaffordable insurance and high deductibles.

This article was written by a contributor of Watchdog Arena, Franklin Center’s network of writers, bloggers, and citizen journalists.