Print Email Font Resize Font Resize Troops parade in London for queen's birthday

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

3

4

5

» LONDON (AP) — Hundreds of British soldiers in tall bearskin hats and ceremonial dress marched Saturday in central London for the "Trooping the Color" parade, an annual display of pomp and pageantry that marks the official birthday of Queen Elizabeth II. The queen, who wore a pastel blue outfit, rode in a vintage horse-drawn carriage with her husband Prince Philip, starting from Buckingham Palace. She then inspected more than 1,000 soldiers at Horse Guards Parade. "Trooping the Color" originated from traditional preparations for battle, when flags were carried or "trooped" down the ranks for soldiers to see. The queen turned 88 on April 21, her actual birth date, which is usually celebrated in private. The monarch traditionally marks her birthday publicly in June. Britain's Prince William rides his horse as he escorts Queen Elizabeth II, as they leave Buckingham Palace to attend the Trooping the Colour parade, in central London, Saturday, June 14, 2014. Queen Elizabeth II is celebrating her birthday with traditional pomp and circumstance. More than 1,000 soldiers, horses and musicians are taking part in the parade known as ?Trooping the Colour,? an annual ceremony.(AP Photo/Lefteris Pitarakis) (Lefteris Pitarakis/AP) Other senior royals also turned out for the ceremony: Prince William and his father, Prince Charles, rode on horseback. The Duchess of Cambridge, William's wife Kate, rode in a carriage with Charles' wife Camilla, the Duchess of Cornwall, but left her baby boy George at home. A huge crowd later gathered at Buckingham Palace, where the royal family appeared together on the balcony to watch a ceremonial Royal Air Force fly-past.

Advertisement

Britain's Prince Charles, left, and Prince William ride their horses as they escort Queen Elizabeth II, leaving to attend the Trooping the Colour parade, in central London, Saturday, June 14, 2014. Queen Elizabeth II is celebrating her birthday with traditional pomp and circumstance. More than 1,000 soldiers, horses and musicians are taking part in the parade known as ?Trooping the Colour,? an annual ceremony.(AP Photo/Lefteris Pitarakis) (Lefteris Pitarakis/AP)

Britain's Queen Elizabeth II, left, accompanied by Prince Philip, leaves in a horse drawn carriage to attend the Trooping the Colour parade, in central London, Saturday, June 14, 2014. Queen Elizabeth II is celebrating her birthday with traditional pomp and circumstance. More than 1,000 soldiers, horses and musicians are taking part in the parade known as ?Trooping the Color,? an annual ceremony.(AP Photo/Lefteris Pitarakis) (Lefteris Pitarakis/AP)

Britain's Kate, Duchess of Cambridge, right, leaves in a horse drawn carriage to attend the Trooping the Colour parade, in central London, Saturday, June 14, 2014. Queen Elizabeth II is celebrating her birthday with traditional pomp and circumstance. More than 1,000 soldiers, horses and musicians are taking part in the parade known as ?Trooping the Color,? an annual ceremony.(AP Photo/Lefteris Pitarakis) (Lefteris Pitarakis/AP)

Britain's Prince Harry, centre, talks to Prince Philip, left, as Kate, right, Duchess of Cambridge, looks on, as members of the Royal family appear on the balcony of Buckingham Palace, during the Trooping The Colour parade, in central London, Saturday, June 14, 2014. Hundreds of soldiers in ceremonial dress have marched in London in the annual "Trooping the Colour" parade to mark the official birthday of Queen Elizabeth II. "Trooping the Colour" originated from traditional preparations for battle, when flags were carried or "trooped" down the rank for soldiers to see. (AP Photo/Lefteris Pitarakis) (Lefteris Pitarakis/AP)