Florida man William Hager, 86, was arrested on charges of first-degree, premeditated murder after fatally shooting his wife as she slept. According the arresting officer’s report, Hager had called 911 himself and freely admitted his actions after being booked.

As tragic as this case is on the surface, the death of Hager’s wife, Carolyn Hager, is not so straighforward. While being questioned at the St. Lucie County Sherff’s Office, Hager explained that his wife had a number of illnesses that required various medications.

Because the couple had become unable to afford her prescriptions, Hager says his wife was in continual pain. He says she had told him that she wished to end her life, though she did not specifically request that he kill her. In his confession, Hager explains that he came to his decision after several days of consideration.

Though medical privacy laws have prevented the public disclosure of Carolyn Hager’s illnesses and medications, records show the couple filed for bankruptcy in 2011. In an effort to bring in money to keep his wife’s prescriptions current, William Hager started working at a Sears, officials say. That paycheck was evidently not enough.

William Hager has yet to face a criminal trial and not all details about the shooting have been made public. However, it’s not difficult to see what happened here — vulnerable members of our society were left to fall through the cracks and pushed to take desperate measures. One might argue that what William Hager did was not so much homicide but euthanasia — an act of mercy.

Last year Florida’s Republican-dominated House of Representatives nixed plans for the state to expand its Medicaid program per the Affordable Care Act. This was the third time funds aimed at helping 650,000 Floridians gain health insurance were rejected by the state’s lawmakers.

Despite the fact that the expansion would have come with more than $18 billion in federal funds, one staunch opponent says expanding Medicaid in Florida is “something we cannot afford.” Republican Rep. Doug Broxson worries about the costs on a national level, saying, “I’m very concerned that we could spend all our gross national product on healthcare.”

Noble as it is for Rep. Broxson to fret over the nation’s pocketbook, his position is in dire need of perspective. Here in the United States, the wealthiest nation in history, millions of Americans are still uninsured. Yet at the same time, the United States also has the distinction of spending 33 cents of every dollar spent globally on its bloated military.

Almost one in four Florida residents — 4.8 million — lack health insurance. It is entirely possible that Carloyn Hager was one of these people.

So while her husband pulled the trigger and admitted doing so, was William Hager wholly responsible for Carolyn’s death? Perhaps some blame could be placed at the feet of the conservative Florida lawmakers whose priorities are focused more on expanding and protecting the rights of gun owners rather than keeping its constituents healthy.

It certainly says something about Florida politics when someone like George Zimmerman can obtain a concealed carry permit and kill an innocent black teen with the law’s protection — but when the Hagers were forced into an extreme situation, William will now likely spend his remaining years behind bars.

What’s wrong with this picture?

Photo Credit: KatarzynaBialasiewicz / Thinkstock