Paul mostly kept his head down during the budget battles. Shutdown brings out Paul's soft side

Rand Paul is no wacko bird. Just ask Lindsey Graham.

“Rand Paul’s been incredibly responsible,” Graham (R-S.C.), who has clashed with Paul in the past, said just before the Senate voted to end the government shutdown. “I’ve seen a side of Rand I haven’t seen before. That’s one of the pluses of this whole deal. He’s been great.”

Story Continued Below

According to many moderate GOP observers, the Kentucky Republican and likely 2016 contender has deftly maneuvered the past several weeks of shutdown politics, toeing the conservative line without alienating the rest of the party — especially compared to his frequent sidekick, Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas).

A key challenge for Paul if he runs would be to make himself acceptable to — if not win over — traditional Republicans. His low-key approach to the shutdown and debt limit drama could help that cause.

( WATCH: 7 defining quotes from Rand Paul)

“He was a reasonable voice in a very difficult time for the party,” said one top national GOP strategist. “He wasn’t as strident as Cruz. When he recognized there was no real end game in sight, he recoiled. He wasn’t on the tip of the spear. I think that did him a lot of good with a lot of Republicans, a lot of conservatives.”

Even Rep. Peter King (R-N.Y.) — whose budding presidential campaign is predicated upon taking on Paul and the tea party wing of the GOP — had kind words for how the Kentuckian has acquitted himself.

Paul is “a gentleman,” King said. In contrast, “Ted Cruz is totally different,” he continued. “I consider him to be a demagogue. … I’d say by comparison, Sen. Paul has gotten better. I have real problems with Sen. Paul’s positions, but Ted Cruz is in a class by himself.”

( QUIZ: Do you know Rand Paul?)

Paul was deemed a “wacko bird” in March by Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) — who later apologized and told POLITICO their relationship is “cordial” — and he isn’t reincarnating himself as a moderate. The Kentuckian was one of 19 senators to vote with Cruz on a cloture vote concerning a spending measure that set the government shutdown in motion, and he opposed the final deal. But it was Lee who was leading the charge with Cruz on the procedural cloture vote, in which Obamacare funding was a key sticking point — not Paul.

Over the past few weeks, Cruz talked for 21 hours against a spending measure that eventually moved forward with the GOP leadership’s support; refused to condemn threats to wage primary challenges against his GOP colleagues; and generally urged Republicans to not budge in the face of a government shutdown. The Texan was widely seen, among Democrats and Republicans alike, as leading the party into a unwinnable battle over Obamacare and leaving the GOP with a big black eye that party hands can only hope will heal before next year’s midterms.