Q: What causes an itch, and why does it feel so good to scratch?

A: Dr. Gil Yosipovitch, chairman of dermatology at the Temple University School of Medicine and director of the Temple Center for Itch, explains that itching and scratching engage brain areas involved not only in sensation, but also in mental processes that help explain why we love to scratch: motivation and reward, pleasure, craving and even addiction.

What an itch turns on, a scratch turns off -- and scratching oneself does it better than being scratched by someone else.

Itching was long overshadowed by pain in both research and treatment, and was even considered just a mild form of pain. But millions of people suffer from itching, and times have changed. Research has found nerves, molecules and cellular receptors that are specific for itching and set it apart from pain, and the medical profession has begun to take it seriously as a debilitating problem.

Within the last decade, there has been a flurry of research into what causes itching and how to stop it. Along with brain imaging, studies have begun to look at gene activity and to map the signals that flow between cells in the skin, the immune system, the spinal cord and the brain.

The concern is not so much the fleeting nastiness of mosquito bites and poison ivy, but the unending misery caused by chronic itching.

In people, there are different types of itching. The most familiar, from a mosquito bite or hives, occurs when cells in the skin release histamine, which causes nerves in the skin to fire off signals to the spinal cord and brain. Antihistamine pills or creams usually bring relief.

But antihistamines are often no help for chronic itching, which can be caused by skin diseases like eczema or psoriasis, kidney or liver failure, dry skin, an overactive thyroid gland, certain cancers, and pinched or damaged nerves. And the itching from psoriasis almost certainly has a different mechanism from that caused by a pinched nerve.

Recent research has shown that substances other than histamine, released from inflammatory cells, are involved in chronic itching, along with three types of nerve cells.

Drug companies are trying to find ways to block those substances.

Many researchers say that one of the most important advances in the field was reported in the journal Nature in 2007 by a Washington University team led by Zhou-Feng Chen.

Working with mice, his team was the first to find a receptor in the spinal cord that was specific for itching. The discovery helped prove that signals for itching and pain travel on different pathways.

Chen said that mice without the receptor -- or with the receptor blocked by a drug -- did not itch. Nor was the group without a receptor harmed by the lack of it.

The receptor is present in humans, too, and Chen said it might be possible to develop a drug that would block it.

–Denise Grady, The New York Times