Photo: Bill Shaw/Indiana Public Media News Benchmark plans are the second-lowest-cost plans in the silver tier of the federal health care marketplace.

Hoosiers buying health care coverage on the federal marketplace could see a significant decrease in their premium costs in 2016.

The benchmark premium cost in Indiana will drop an average of nearly 13 percent next year. That decrease is the largest in the country.

Across the 37 other states in the federal health care marketplace, the average benchmark premium price increased approximately 7.5 percent.

Benchmark plans are the second-lowest-cost plans in the silver tier of the federal health care marketplace.

Covering Kids and Families of Indiana Policy Director Caitlin Priest says this is a good sign for the Hoosier State.

“That’s really a sign the ACA is working here,” says Priest. “It’s showing us that Indiana’s insurers have experience with the Affordable Care Act now, they know what the market is like and they have a better sense of what they’re consumers health needs are.”

Priest says it’s not immediately clear why Indiana’s premiums are dropping while other states’ are rising — it could be the state started with its prices too high when it joined the marketplace in 2014 — but she says it could be a result of the increased competition in Indiana’s health care marketplace.

“When the ACA first rolled out in Indiana in 2014, there were four qualified health plans on the marketplace,” she says. “Now, there are eight or nine — that means we have a lot more competitors looking to insure Hoosiers through the marketplace.”

But as the Indianapolis Star reports, not all Hoosiers say they’re seeing savings.

Anthem, the insurer that covers the most Hoosiers buying plans on the exchange, is raising rates by about 4 percent on average, according to rate filings with the Indiana Department of Insurance.

Anthem customer Les Kiesel, of Haubstadt, however, said the premium for his family plan is increasing from $1,068 a month to $1,269, a 19 percent increase.

“Anthem has totally priced me out,” he said.

Kiesel, 47, said he hasn’t seen any control in insurance costs in recent years. Instead, he thinks he’s buying coverage that — because of its high deductible — protects him against only major bills, but without the low premiums that used to be available for “catastrophic” plans.

Priest says consumers still need to shop around for a health care plan because tax credits to offset the cost of a marketplace plan are tied to the benchmark plan’s costs and premiums.

Open enrollment for 2016 begins Sunday, Nov. 1.