Republican presidential candidate, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie responds to a question as questioners Dana Bash, center, and Hugh Hewitt, right, look on during the CNN Republican presidential debate at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library and Museum on Wednesday, Sept. 16, 2015, in Simi Valley, Calif. (Photo: AP)

Let’s put it on his desk and make him veto it, one Republican candidate exclaimed. Another candidate declared, let’s force the president to do what he says he’ll do.

It was like the Republican presidential field had leaped into a time machine, landed in 2013 and picked up the debate on shutting down the government as if President Barack Obama still had something to lose.

The question of whether Republicans in Congress should use the looming federal budget deadline to advance partisan legislation is a defining one for GOP presidential candidates. The CNN presidential debates on Wednesday highlighted the divisions among candidates on whether to allow a government shutdown to push for cutting off federal money to Planned Parenthood.

The conversation started in the “undercard” debate, with a spirited exchange between Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal and South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham. The two candidates did an excellent job of staking out their roles: Jindal as the outsider frustrated with GOP leaders for not going to the mat for conservative principles; Graham as the pragmatic insider unwilling to waste political capital on futile gestures. If you missed the debate, at least check out the transcript.

“If we can't defund Planned Parenthood now, if we can't stand for innocent human life after these barbaric videos, it is time to be done with the Republican Party,” Jindal said.

Graham was just as passionate in arguing that if Republicans want to defund Planned Parenthood, repeal Obamacare and tank the Iran nuclear weapons deal, they need a new president. Shutting down the government over these issues only hurts the GOP’s ability to win in November, he said.

“You know, Bobby, we're running to be president of the United States, the most important job in the free world,” Graham said to Jindal. “With it comes a certain amount of honesty. I'm tired of telling people things they want to hear that I know we can't do.”

The argument continued in the second debate. Ohio Gov. John Kasich said he supported cutting off federal money to Planned Parenthood but disagreed with a government shutdown. However, he said, he’d like to see Republicans put tax reform on the president’s desk and dare him to veto it.

Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas, one of the leaders holding out for the repeal of Obamacare that led to the 2013 shutdown, and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie argued in favor of allowing a government shutdown over Planned Parenthood. Christie said GOP leaders were giving Obama a pass by not making him either sign or veto a bill.

“Let’s force him to do what he says he’s going to do. Now I don’t know whether he’ll do it or not, but let’s force him to do it,” Christie said. Carly Fiorina agreed that Republicans should “force President Obama to veto this bill.”

Conservatives in Iowa and elsewhere are more likely to agree with Jindal, Cruz, Christie and Fiorina on shutting down the government over Planned Parenthood money.

But a majority of Americans do not want the government to shut down over that issue, according to a CNN/ORC poll released Monday. The poll found 71 percent of Americans say it’s more important for Congress to approve a budget resolution to avoid a government shutdown. That’s compared with 22 percent who said it’s more important to eliminate all federal funding for Planned Parenthood. In September 2013, a CNN/ORC poll showed 60 percent of Americans wanting to keep the government open, compared with 34 percent saying it was more important to defund Obamacare.

Republicans in the recent poll were more divided on the issue, with 48 percent saying keep the government open over 44 percent choosing to defund Planned Parenthood.

Republicans talking about forcing Obama’s hand seem to be forgetting that it’s 2015, not 2013. They couldn’t back him down when he was facing tough midterm elections, and they won’t do it now when most Americans oppose another shutdown. Obama has little to lose by refusing to accept partisan riders on a budget resolution. If the government shuts down, he has plenty of Republicans to blame.

Mark J. Terrill/AP From left, former New York Gov. George Pataki, former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, and South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham, talk at the finish of their CNN Republican presidential debate Wednesday in Simi Valley, Calif. Republican presidential candidates, former New York Gov. George Pataki, left, former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum, second from left, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, second from right, and Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., talk together at the finish of their CNN Republican presidential debate at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library and Museum on Wednesday, Sept. 16, 2015, in Simi Valley, Calif. (AP Photo/Mark J. Terrill) (Photo: Mark J. Terrill, AP)

Buy Photo Kathie Obradovich (Photo: The Register)

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1F8XgbD