Government & Politics An Invitation to Stand With America First

This is a call to those on the political Left who know their party has abandoned them, or to any who are simply disgusted with the abject rot that is now accepted normalcy in a nation founded on hard work, honesty and personal liberty.

A line of decency has been crossed by those rewriting America’s history, those who arbitrarily apply the law to patronize certain voting interests and disgustedly dismiss the love of America residing in the hearts of millions of hard-working men and women.

There was a day in the not-too-distant past that the distinctions in political parties were found in their party platforms, specified by their policies and ideologies. Today, the partisan party platforms vary, but the messages of elected officials often share the same poisonous root — pandering for their popularity and their pocketbooks.

Today, the flag of the United States of America gets trampled upon as a “symbol of oppression” by those who likely wouldn’t survive a week in any other nation, so dependent are they on their state-provided Obamaphone, Obamanet, Obamahood and ObamaCare.

Today, black-robed activists posing as Supreme Court Justices rewrite the U.S. Constitution, and the “Supreme Law of the Land” is flagrantly dismissed by a tyrannical president.

Today, to board a plane, law-abiding citizens must strip to their socks and dismantle their carry-on gear, then face the twin indignities of being groped and radiologically scanned by callous TSA agents. Meanwhile, America’s porous southern border and its liberal-backed sanctuary cities both sully and endanger our great nation and its citizens.

Today, in contrast to our national history of standing fearless and resolute in the face of evil, our tepid, patronizing president, his pack of pacifist sycophants in tow, seeks to appease Iran with the world’s largest economic stimulus package, despite the potential of this Middle East nation becoming a nuclear-powered terrorist mill. Make sense of this logic: Iranians hold four U.S. citizens hostage, and rather than completely boxing them in to force the downfall of their evil regime, we offer the country an opportunity for hundreds of billions of dollars in oil revenue through lifted sanctions.

Today, if you predicate your marriage, how you raise your children, or how you run your business upon the Judeo-Christian ethic, you run the risk of not just being labeled intolerant or a bigot — incendiary terms used to marginalize your freedom of religion and ostracize you from rational debate — but of losing everything you have.

Today, Bruce Jenner is regaled as the face of courage for declaring himself to be a transgender woman named Caitlyn. This vile slop insults the true courage of America’s military, law enforcement and first-responders, men and women who unceremoniously and heroically risk their lives on a daily basis.

Today, Americans are being fed pure lies about our homeland security. Seven attacks by Islamic terrorists have occurred in America — not abroad or on the battlefield, but right here in our cities and military bases. Yet for Barack Obama and his pathetic faculty-lounge academics, the priority for America’s Armed Forces is making sure transsexuals can serve openly.

But here’s the optimistic truth: America is great because Americans are great.

Average Americans are devoted to the care, education, and protection of their families. Average Americans want to work hard and keep their earnings for personal use, savings or investment in their own lives. The average American believes in a higher power that loves humanity but has established a standard of good and decency. The average American understands Islamic terrorism is evil, and expects good to triumph over such bitter malevolence.

This is an invitation to live your life boldly, to fly your American flag proudly, to fearlessly bow in prayer and stand knowing you represent the best of America.

The loud, audacious and intimidating minority that despises America and Americans cannot be permitted to keep winning. Begin asking questions of your elected officials, both Republican and Democrat, to hold them accountable. Show up at town hall meetings. Email questions to elected officials and reject any cookie-cutter responses. Pull the ballot, not along party lines, but based upon those who most vehemently stand for the genuine freedoms of the greatest nation on the face of the planet — the United States of America.

We have two options. We can either permanently establish a post-constitutional government, one that bleeds the dwindling working population dry while destroying their authentic rights to religion and the protection of family and property, or we can reverse course and excise the destructive forces running roughshod over the basic freedoms that form the framework of this great society.

Don’t fall for heated rhetoric and election cycle promises coming from the same politicians who stand fully responsible for our great nation’s receding greatness.

As Ronald Reagan noted, “Freedom is never more than one generation away from extinction. We didn’t pass it to our children in the bloodstream. It must be fought for, protected and handed on for them to do the same, or one day we will spend our sunset years telling our children and our children’s children what it was once like in the United States where men were free.”