Topics: cisgender, Editor's Pick, greek life, Higher education, Life stories, Love and Sex, Life News

When I arrived at Sarah Lawrence College in the fall of 2006, I saw banners hanging across the front lawn that said, “Gender Fuck; Fuck your Gender.” I didn’t have a clue what it meant to fuck your gender. I thought gender was something you were born with, something you couldn’t fuck with.

The gender fuck banner was hung between trees on the main campus, which made up the original Lawrence family estate. The manicured look of the Tudor mansions and floral pergola were what initially drew me to the school. But here was this bizarre and shocking thing blocking the picturesque view.

Despite the campus aesthetic and finishing school history, by the time I arrived, Sarah Lawrence was a place where students could, to a greater extent than in most other academic environments, avoid the norms that govern most of the world. With no grades or academic honors, it was non-hierarchical and academically noncompetitive. But rather than embracing the freedoms of that new environment, I felt drawn to recreating oppressive structures, albeit ironically. That’s what led me to create an ironic sorority. Okay, a somewhat ironic sorority.

At that time, the Sarah Lawrence student body was 75% women, and many of the men I met were gay. The near absence of straight men created what was for me a new kind of social scene. For some students, Sarah Lawrence must have been a utopia where, for the first time in their lives, social structures did not revolve around straight dating rituals or hook-up culture. But I am straight, and I was confused about where I fit into the new, liberated environment.

I went sheepishly to a gender-bending party, dressed in a Risky Business style men’s shirt and no pants. When I arrived I saw that other women were wearing facial hair and socks in their pants. Clearly we were not on the same page. My efforts to be fem-sexy and cute (like Paris Hilton in a Fedora or girls in boyfriend jeans) were out of place among other students’ transgressive gender experimentation. The gender-bending party was my first exposure to this kind of boundary-breaking among women—and it shocked me. I was more than a little unprepared for the new world I had encountered.

In high school I spent a lot of time getting dressed for parties. I would try on shirt after shirt, trying to calibrate an impossible balance between sexy and cute. I looked for outfits that didn’t “try too hard.” I wanted something that said, “oops, I’m hot.” And then, running late to meet friends, and sweating beneath my winter coat in the cold, I felt ashamed of my vanity and need for positive male attention. I didn’t want to be the butt of those ubiquitous jokes about women who took too long to get dressed. But I didn’t see a way out. I wanted to be a different kind of woman than the one I was, but I was unable to imagine how this woman would feel or dress or think. Paying scrupulous attention to how I dressed felt like it was necessary for me to survive, in order to feel good and accepted.

My high school was a modern orthodox Jewish day school where feminism was a word I heard used rarely and derisively. The acronym LGBT was, perhaps intentionally, confused with BLT. In religious classes we learned that men and women are essentially different and were created to fulfill different roles in life. In the mornings we prayed, boys on one side of the room and girls on the other, separated by a makeshift mechitza – a traditional barrier segregating the sexes for worship.

In this high school context, girls were held to specific standards of dress and behavior. Those who did it best wore cashmere or Petit Bateau cotton shirts, like younger versions of their Scarsdale mothers. They spoke in that uniform cadence of privileged New York-area teen girls. Their hair was silky and straightened or curly and gelled stiff—a desirable look in 2006. That was hot; they were hot. From a young age I knew that receiving male attention was social currency. I could mimic my classmates’ cadence and save up for their clothes, but I believed I could detect a patronizing tone in their polite questions. I grew up around lots of girls like that. As early as elementary school they asked skeptically, “Where are you from?”

I grew up in Soho, in the same tiny one-bedroom apartment that my mother moved into in her twenties. Back then Soho had some grit, she said. “That’s so cool you live in Soho,” a classmate once said. “Are your parents, like, Bavarian?” My parents were and still are kind of Bohemian. They were writer-performer-waiters. They were also observant Jews who chose to send me to Jewish schools, where our financial situation and quirkiness often left me feeling out of place. Like them, I was arty and liked to write. Perhaps consequentially, my clothes, my school supplies, even my cultural points of reference were never quite right, as if my subconscious was willing me not to conform while the conscious me wanted to badly. I was highly critical of my surroundings. But I also totally bought into the expectations of those around me and was conscious of how I fell short.

The homogeneity of my school — we were all white, Jewish, New York-area kids — amplified other types of differences. I imagined that everyone knew that my parents had financial difficulties. The college admissions process felt like a magnifying glass held to my family’s lack of resources. Our school was academically competitive and known for sending students to Ivy League schools. I applied almost exclusively to elite schools and was rejected from all but Sarah Lawrence and SUNY Binghamton. I believed that going to a public school would perpetuate my family’s limited access to wealth and privilege, confirming in the eyes of my peers that I was different.

But the Sarah Lawrence name had cachet. They offered me a generous scholarship that enabled me to become a part of the school’s legacy. I had a dated fantasy of the place as a prim, WASPy finishing school for artistically inclined girls. That elitist fantasy appealed to me. More recent cultural references to Sarah Lawrence, like Julia Stiles’ character in “Ten Things I Hate about You,” who rejected mainstream culture and was a self-proclaimed feminist, might have been alienating to me if I’d paid attention to them. I had no idea what I was in for when I sent in my confirmation of enrollment. I was clueless that in choosing Sarah Lawrence, I was not only choosing an elite academic experience but a social experience that contrasted sharply with the one in which I’d come of age.

During my first few months of school, I made friends with other conventionally feminine girls and even took pleasure in thinking we were cuter or more “normal” (meaning less challenging of mainstream culture) than anyone else there. But I had a nagging insecurity about not having a “normal” college experience.

One night in the library I used the reference computer to look through Facebook pictures of high school classmates. I fixated on an album, “We’re bringing sexy back! Sorority Rush ’07,” that featured pages full of girls carefully posed with red Solo cups. In some pictures they wore sized-down football jerseys and temporary cheek tattoos to University of Michigan football games. So this is what everyone else is up to, I thought. While I navigated genderfuck parties, my Scarsdale-bred high school classmates were dressing up in identical packaged Halloween costumes. I was put off by the kind of imposed homogeneity—and the self-inflicted objectification (a very external show of internalized sexism). But at the same time that it all seemed totally insane, it was also oddly attractive. I felt excluded; this was major FOMO before I had an acronym to describe it.

I googled “sorority rush” and diligently studied the protocol with a mix of disgust, amusement and envy. I was particularly drawn to the formal social hierarchy of the system; how you could tell who was hot, who was rich and who was cool by the fraternities or sororities they were admitted to. During rush, sorority members observed subtle social cues in order to discern who belonged. There were blogs that advised girls about what to wear. They warned against looking “trashy” or “slutty” and advocated for chaste dress combined with endless enthusiasm. They imposed a strict conception of white femininity and upheld a subtle classism:

“When you enter the room there will be loads of girls chanting and cheering! Keep a big smile on your gorgeous face!”

“Don’t wear too much jewelry, avoid loud make up or too-tight tops; a sorority is not a nightclub.”

“Dress like you’re going out with your girlfriends for ice cream.”