<p>West's Seth Marshall (7) beats tackles by William Blount's Gabe Emert (53) and Jacob Krajnik (17), from left, on a quarterback keep during a high school football game at West High School on Friday, Oct. 10, 2014. (ADAM LAU/NEWS SENTINEL)</p>

By Mike Blackerby of the Knoxville News Sentinel

In customary fashion, West High School quarterback Seth Marshall made things happen Saturday for the Tennessee all-stars against Kentucky's all-stars in the annual Border Bowl high school football game.

Marshall threw two touchdown passes as Kentucky edged Tennessee 33-32 at the University of the Cumberlands in Williamsburg, Ky.

The annual all-star bowl series is tied 4-4.

Marshall, who directed West to the state Class 5A championship in December, also led Tennessee in rushing with 30 yards on eight carries.

Central coach Bryson Rosser, who was Tennessee's offensive coordinator, said that Marshall is a playmaker no matter where he lines up.

"Seth is a versatile guy who could play a bunch of different positions," said Rosser.

"He was originally on the roster to do some other things, like running back, but I personally thought he was a pretty good quarterback and we wanted to work him into the rotation there. We were able to get some good stuff going with him running the ball."

Marshall, Sullivan South's Dylan Wieger and Campbell County's Ethan Jeffers all saw playing time at quarterback.

Marshall connected with Science Hill's Mikey White on a 26-yard touchdown pass in the second quarter.

He also threw a 61-yard scoring strike to Lucas Harrison of Giles County in the fourth quarter.

Tennessee rallied from a 33-19 deficit in the fourth and had a late two-point conversion attempt for the win fail.

Marshall finished 5 of 8 through the air for 110 yards.

The Tennessee all-star team featured more than 20 players from the PrepXtra coverage area.

Farragut receiver Derek Williams had four passes for 35 yards.

Anderson County running back Matt Fox ran for 16 yards on seven attempts.

Defensively, Rosser said that defensive lineman Hayden Hester of Midway was a force.

"He plays like a beast," said Rosser.

"He was all over the place. That kid is legit."

Rosser also lauded the play of defensive tackle Hunter Lane of Gibbs.

Mike Blackerby is a freelance contributor