Casual, meet-and-greet program has been growing since 2006

Walk through the University of Colorado student center on a Friday afternoon, and it's hard to miss the huge crowd of students sipping coffee and chatting about anything and everything.

The gathering is International Coffee Hour, a growing weekly event designed to help CU's international student population connect with others on campus through casual conversation.

The program has grown from about 20 people each week in 2006 to an average of 175 people each week this year, according to Rebecca Sibley, who coordinates international student programming for the Cultural Unity and Engagement Center. She's also staff adviser to the student group CU International, which hosts the coffee hour.

More than 90 countries are represented on CU's Boulder campus, which enrolled 2,152 degree-seeking international students in the fall of 2014. That's up from 1,818 international students in the fall of 2013.

CU has been adding or improving services on campus to better serve its growing international student body, but the weekly coffee hour has remained relatively the same since it started.

The consistency and simplicity of chatting over coffee, with no other motive than getting to know people, is what appeals to students, Sibley said. It's a friendly, no-stress environment, she added.

Advertisement

"What's made it grow and thrive is that it is very simple and we haven't tried to do too much with it," Sibley said. "Essentially it's just a time at the end of the week for people to socialize and become acquainted and let their hair down a little and find out what everyone's weekend plans are."

The organizers ask everyone to sign in and wear a nametag to help others with pronunciation, Sibley said.

Based on data she's been collecting over the years, around 60 percent of the attendees are international students and around 40 percent are domestic students.

She's also learned that coffee hour represents more than 50 different languages, which is helpful for domestic students who want to practice a language with a native speaker.

That's what initially appealed to fifth-year student Cayley Buie, who's getting degrees in Japanese and music education.

She's been learning to speak Japanese for around seven years she said, and it helps to speak casually with other speakers. Buie said she comes to coffee hour nearly every week and has made friends from Canada, China, Taiwan and other countries.

"For me it's pronunciation," she said. "It's really helpful for pronunciation because if the only person you ever hear is your teacher, you don't really get the full experience of slang and stuff like that.

"I can talk about a lot of common topics or issues that are going on in their country in their own language. I think they also feel comforted by being able to speak (Japanese) with someone because it's not very common in America."

Freshman Yuhta Katai, who came to CU from Japan, said he goes to coffee hour to improve his English and to get outside his comfort zone a bit.

"It's a marvelous place to interact with people, make friends and talk," said Katai, who's studying psychology. "I'm kind of an introvert. I like to stay in my room all the time. So from time to time, I wanna go out and interact with people so this is like a haven."

It's a safe space to chat with strangers because everyone is there for the same reason — to meet new people. That appeals to juniors Natalia Marroquin, of El Salvador, and Haley Stein, of Kentucky.

On a campus with roughly 30,000 students, it can be intimidating to meet new people, they said.

"Only people who actually want to have a conversation come here," Marroquin said. "They're sort of in the same place, being international students. You meet here and you become friends."

Stein said she came for the coffee originally but stayed because she got to meet interesting people every week.

"I love coffee and international students," she said. "I find them interesting. It's a lot of different people, different cultures, different majors. It gets you out of the lab or the studio or wherever you spend all of your time."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta