By Arian Campo-Flores

Kentucky Lt. Gov. Jerry Abramson explains the new state-run health care exchange on the first day of sign-ups for the federal Affordable Care Act in Louisville, Ky., on Tuesday, Oct. 1, 2013. (AP Photo/Dylan Lovan)

While Kentucky’s health-insurance exchange experienced some glitches when it launched Tuesday, it seemed to perform better than many of its peers.

State officials and outside experts attribute the smoother rollout to a variety of factors, including intensive testing of the system, a less-flashy but more-efficient website and strong coordination among state agencies involved in the effort.

As a result, Kentucky’s exchange, dubbed Kynect, logged solid results in the first day and a half of operation. As of 4:00 p.m. Wednesday, 10,766 applications for health coverage had been initiated, 6,909 had been c

ompleted and 2,989 individuals or families had enrolled in new coverage.

To be sure, the rollout wasn’t glitch-free. On Tuesday morning, the rush of online applicants overwhelmed the system, and users were soon prevented from setting up accounts. They could still browse the site and look at different plan options, but couldn’t file an application.

Technicians responded by bringing two more servers online and adding processing power to computers. “We added 50% more horsepower,” said Chris Clark, technology program manager for the exchange. By 3:00 p.m. Tuesday, the website was fully functional again, state officials said.

Overall, though, the Kentucky exchange performed comparatively well. “Kentucky seems to have a smoother rollout than some other states,” said Jennifer Tolbert, director of state health reform at the Kaiser Family Foundation. When she visited various exchange websites Tuesday morning, she said, “the one I got through most easily on to get prices and comparisons was the Kynect site.”

Though Ms. Tolbert said she wasn’t certain why the Kentucky site functioned more effectively, she speculated that one reason could be its somewhat pared-down design. It “doesn’t have all the bells and whistles that other states tried to incorporate,” like interactive features, she said. “It’s very straightforward in allowing consumers to browse plans without first creating an account.”

Joel Ario, a managing director at Manatt Health Solutions and a former Health and Human Services official, cited another potential factor: the grouping of many key state agencies, including the Department for Medicaid Services and the exchange office itself within the Cabinet for Health and Family Services.

“That may also be a virtue,” Mr. Ario said. “They know each other well. They’ve worked on a lot of projects together.”

State officials said the cabinet’s technology staff had recent experience setting up other complex systems, such as a prescription-drug monitoring database. They also had some pre-existing systems, including one for document management, that could be folded into the health exchange.

The state tested Kynect extensively before the launch date, Mr. Clark said. Kentucky was among the first wave of states to test its system in conjunction with the federal data hub in June.

The trial runs helped identify problems early on. Among them were lengthy delays for the system to process an application for a household with a varied mix of earnings. It would sometimes take minutes for the range of eligibility options to pop up.

“We spent an enormous amount of time making it more functional,” Mr. Clark said. “Now we’re able to provide [the information] in under 10 seconds.”

Eager to sign up for coverage, Kendell Nash said she logged on to Kynect at 5:30 a.m. Tuesday. She and her 9-year-old son have insurance through her husband’s job as a food-service worker, but his contribution is so steep—more than $18,000 a year—that it swallows almost his entire paycheck.

After Ms. Nash, a 38-year-old director of a nonprofit organization in Louisville, filled out an application online, the website returned numerous options. They included gold-level and platinum-level plans that would run $575 to $775 a month for all three of them. That would mean savings of roughly $5,000 to $6,000 per year, accounting for coinsurance and other payments, she said.

Ms. Nash, whose total household income is about $78,000 a year, said she isn’t sure whether they qualify for a subsidy. While the system said they did, the amount came in at zero—a discrepancy she hopes to work out with a call to Kynect representatives. Given they will save money regardless, the only decisions left for her family to make are what plan to choose and whether her husband will keep his employer coverage or join her and her son buying a policy on the exchange.

“I’ve been counting down the days” to this moment, Ms. Nash said.