On-call, duty contracts for criminal solicitors to attend police stations and courts will be slashed from 1,600 to 527 in England and Wales, the Ministry of Justice has confirmed.

The announcement that ministers intend to go ahead with restructuring the profession, despite being defeated in a judicial review of the initial consultation, was greeted with dismay by solicitors.

Fresh invitations to tenders for the new contracts have been sent out by the Legal Aid Agency in the expectation that the criminal law market will be forced to undergo a process of merger and consolidation. Savings will be made, the LAA believes, by solicitors’ firms combining to make economies of scale to compensate for 17.5% cuts in fees being introduced in criminal cases.

Responding to the news, Andrew Caplen, president of the Law Society, said: “We are extremely disappointed with this announcement. In our view the scheme fails to meet the ministry’s own objectives of ensuring that criminal legal aid must be sustainable with enough solicitors doing criminal duty work.

“Some areas of the country could be left with no legal representation for anyone accused of a crime, depriving vulnerable members of the public from access to justice. We are very concerned that the ministry has not taken into account the views of the overwhelming majority of our members who responded to the consultation, or to the independent consultants who raised concerns about the economic impact on the supplier base.”

Jon Black, president of the London Criminal Courts Solicitors’ Association, said: “This is a really depressing day. The MoJ has shown that it’s hell-bent on forcing through these cuts whatever the warnings, whatever the price to society and justice.

“Civil courts are imploding under the strain of legal aid cuts. The criminal courts are going the same way. By the time the public is really aware of the effects of this attack on our criminal justice, it will be too late,” he said.

“This carve-up of solicitor contracts in police stations and magistrates’ courts, combined with yet more cuts will cause terrible collateral damage. A fair defence for those who aren’t wealthy will become a lottery.

“As firms start to close or cut corners to keep afloat we’ll see plummeting standards of defence and miscarriages of justice. It would seem that the government is unconcerned by this. But no one should be hoodwinked, it’s too high a price to pay.”

The shadow justice minster, Andy Slaughter, condemned the cuts. “This is a slap in the face to legal aid practitioners and is a frankly pathetic response to the consultation. This does nothing to fix the growing crisis in legal aid and only further highlights how the government are belligerently sticking to their already failing programme,” he said.

“Cuts to legal aid have led to justice increasingly becoming a privilege for the wealthy few. This is all the more reason why we need a fresh review into the overall impact of the changes.”

An MoJ spokesperson said: “Legal aid is a vital part of our justice system. We must ensure it is available for the individuals who need it, sustainable for the lawyers who provide it, and affordable for the taxpayers who ultimately pay for it.

“Nothing will change for anyone accused of a crime, they will still have the same access to a legally aided lawyer as they do now.

“When we began reform, we had one of the most expensive legal aid systems in the world at around £2bn a year. Given the financial crisis this government inherited, we had no choice but to make significant savings. However, we do understand reform will not be easy for some lawyers, so we have introduced a range of measures to support them.”