East Henderson's boys' basketball team spread the love on Tuesday night.

The Eagles were dominant from the start en route to a 62-35 victory over Polk County (2-3).

That dominance began with defense, East coach Bruce Gilliam said. His team forced turnovers and the lead grew over the course of the game.

The Eagles (2-2) led Polk 16-9 in the first quarter and expanded that to 32-22 at the half. By the end of the third quarter that lead had swelled to 46-30.

East turned up the heat in the fourth quarter and outscored the Wolverines 14-5.

“Our defense turned into offense and it was nice,” Gilliam said.

The key was holding Polk's best player, Jamal Wheeler, in check. That happened on Tuesday night.

The senior guard scored just four points.

“We wanted to make sure we stopped him and kept him in check,” Gilliam said.

Polk's top scorer was Daniel Painter with 12 points.

East, however, spread the scoring around. Everybody got into the action. Daniel Parker had 15 points. Nykeem Brooks had eight points and five steals. Malik Alston had 10 points and six rebounds. John Nabers had 12 points and seven rebounds. Josh Glynn chipped in six assists.

Earlier in the night, the East (2-2) girls beat Polk 51-50.

The Lady Wolverines led the way in the first half. Polk led the Lady Eagles 25-19 at the half. The Lady Eagles, however, came out focused and driven in the second half.

East jumped to an 8-3 run and took its first lead since the first points of the game.

It was the fourth quarter that clinched the victory though. A Kayla Johnson 3-pointer started an 11-3 run that pushed the Lady Eagles over the top.

Johnson said that confidence was the key to Tuesday's victory.

“Whenever we get more confident, we pass the ball well,” the guard said and that “creates space and easier shots.”

Johnson finished with 11 points. Drew McMillan had 12 points, four assists and three steals. Tristan McCary had 12 points and 13 rebounds. The Lady Eagles (2-2) shot 6-for-8 from the free throw line.

Polk was led by Hayley Kropp's 24 points.

East will play at Owen tonight at 6:30. Polk will play Friday night at Madison at 6:30.