New York Mayor Bill de Blasio last month. Eduardo Munoz/Reuters

One of Hillary Clinton’s rivals for the 2016 Democratic presidential nomination received an informal boost Wednesday from a curious source: Mrs. Clinton’s former campaign manager, New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio.

Mr. de Blasio, who managed Mrs. Clinton’s winning 2000 campaign for Senate and supported her 2008 presidential bid, said at an unrelated news conference that “I’ve always liked what I heard from Bernie Sanders,” the independent Vermont senator who is running for the Democratic 2016 nomination.

“I think Bernie Sanders is a great senator, is a great voice for a fair society and a fair economy,” he said.

Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, also said that he wouldn’t attend Mrs. Clinton’s campaign rally on Saturday in New York City, on Roosevelt Island.

“I’m waiting to hear, as I’ve said, her larger vision for addressing income inequality,” Mr. de Blasio said when asked if he would attend her June 13 event. “I look forward to that.”

Mr. de Blasio has sought lately to cast himself as a national voice for liberalism.

A spokesman for Mrs. Clinton didn’t immediately respond a question about whether Mr. de Blasio was invited to the rally, nor to a request for comment on the mayor’s remarks about Mr. Sanders.

The mayor also praised Mrs. Clinton more extensively on Wednesday than he has since the start of her campaign.

“I’ve been very impressed by the comment she’s given so far on a host of issues,’’ he said. “I saw her speech on voting rights — it was very powerful,” he said. “I thought her vision for that was exactly right. I’m very impressed by her criminal justice reform speech. What I am waiting to hear about is the fight against income inequality, how we raise wages and benefits.”

Mrs. Clinton last week proposed that Americans be automatically registered to vote when they turn 18, unless they opt out, and called for an expansion of early-voting opportunities across the country.

Mr. de Blasio has had a lengthy relationship with both Mrs. Clinton and former President Bill Clinton, in whose administration he worked as an official at the Department of Housing and Urban Development.

This isn’t the first time Mr. de Blasio has distanced himself from Mrs. Clinton’s campaign or expressed reservations about her platform. In recent months he has said repeatedly that he hasn’t decided whether to endorse her 2016 presidential bid.

In April, Mr. de Blasio said in an interview on NBC that he wouldn’t endorse her “until I see an actual vision of where they want to go.”

“She’s a tremendous public servant,” he told NBC. “I think she is one of the most qualified people to ever run for this office. And by the way, thoroughly vetted, we can say that. But we need to see the substance.”

Mara Gay contributed to this article.