FARGO – The number of people living with HIV or AIDS in North Dakota has risen sharply in recent years, partly reflecting the state's population growth.

"Over the last five years the number of cases has really risen," said Lindsey VanderBusch, the HIV/AIDS program manager for the North Dakota Department of Health. "Things have definitely increased."

The number of newly reported cases of HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, almost tripled from 2010 to 2014, increasing from 25 to 74. The number of new cases hovered between 16 and 28 from 2000 to 2008, and jumped to 39 in 2009, according to state figures.

Increased testing and better access to health care, partly due to the Affordable Care Act, account for most of the increase in recent years, VanderBusch said.

"Our cases are increasing at a steadier rate than our population," she said, adding that about two-thirds of last year's new HIV cases were people who moved to the state with the diagnosis.

The primary risk factor for HIV infection was male-to-male sexual contact, followed by heterosexual contact and intravenous illicit drug use.

African-Americans in North Dakota figured disproportionately in the rate of HIV infection. The rate of African-Americans with the infection equates to about 1,000 per 100,000, significantly greater than the 42 for whites and 88 for American Indians.

"That's how dramatically that population is affected," VanderBusch said. Many African-Americans with HIV came to North Dakota from foreign countries, she said.

From 1984 through 2012, the most recent figures available, 187 North Dakota residents died of HIV/AIDS and 297 were living in the state.

Minnesota has seen a relatively stable trend in new HIV diagnoses over the past decade, with about 300 new reported cases each year, according to the Minnesota Department of Health. In Minnesota, almost one of every three people have AIDS at the time of diagnosis, said Krissie Guerard, who oversees sexually transmitted diseases and HIV in her portfolio with the Department of Health.

In the United States, one of every three known patients with HIV is receiving antiretroviral drug therapy, which allows patients to live for years without symptoms of the disease. In Minnesota, the rate is much higher — 63 percent are "virally suppressed," which is the status of actor Charlie Sheen, who recently disclosed he has the diagnosis.

"It's turning more into a chronic disease, not the death sentence it once was," Guerard said.

VanderBusch agreed that the HIV virus is now well-treated with improved medications and refined dosages, making it possible for many patients to manage the condition with a single pill a day.

But both said the medications can have significant side effects, so prevention and risk avoidance remain the priority of public health officials."Those medications are hard on the body," Guerard said. "Even though there's medication, there's still not a cure."