Community Health Systems: A must-read company overview PART 2 OF 11

Analyzing Community Health Systems’ revenue streams

Segmental revenue breakup

The net operating revenues of Community Health Systems (CYH) decreased by 0.2% from $13.03 billion in 2012 to $12.9 billion in 2013. Community Health Systems operates under two main divisions, represented by hospital operations and home care agencies.

Hospital operations include acute care hospitals and related healthcare entities that provide inpatient and outpatient healthcare services. Inpatient services require the patient to be admitted to the hospital for monitoring during the service and during recovery. Conversely, outpatient services don’t require hospital admission and can be provided out of the premises of the hospital. Home care agencies provide in-home, outpatient services and have been included along with Hospital Management Services in the Corporate and Other segment.

The graph above shows that hospital operations contribute to about 99% of the total company revenues and have grown 9% from 2011 to 2013, while corporate revenues increased by 14% in the same period.

Inpatient and outpatient revenues

Growth in the number of standalone outpatient healthcare facilities and increases in the services they provide have led to a rise in the use of outpatient services. Major payers like Medicare, Medicaid, insurance companies, and managed care plans are also exerting pressure on hospitals to reduce hospital stays and provide care on an outpatient basis. The graph above shows a gradual shift in the revenues from inpatient services to outpatient services for Community Health Systems. This reflects in the decline of 7.2% in same-hospital inpatient admissions from 7,01,837 admissions in 2012 to 6,51,044 admissions in 2013.

Tenet Healthcare (THC) also displayed a similar trend, with a decline of 2.3% in same-hospital inpatient admissions. On the other hand, HCA Holdings (HCA), Universal Health Services (UHS), and Tenet Healthcare (THC) displayed a small increase of inpatient admissions, by 0.1% and 0.2%, respectively.

You can keep yourself immune from these company-specific trends by investing in the Healthcare Select Sector SPDR ETF (XLV) while getting exposure to the hospital sector.