TALLAHASSEE — Prompted by Sen. President Andy Gardiner, senators on Tuesday gave their most vocal backing yet of an alternative plan to expand Medicaid while imposing work and co-pay requirements.

But the proposal already faces staunch opposition in the House, which has balked at expanding Medicaid under the Obamacare umbrella for the past two years.

A Senate committee unanimously passed SPB 7044, a bill that would draw $52 billion in federal funds over the next 10 years to expand health care coverage to about 800,000 Floridians. It would apply to those who earn too much to qualify for Medicaid but whose incomes aren't low enough to be eligible for subsidies under the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare.

"I think just from the Senate standpoint we've been deliberate and prudent in seeing what are the options," said Gardiner, R-Orlando.

The plan would move some newly eligible Medicaid recipients into the state's existing managed care program on July 1, then open a state-run exchange, named the Florida Health Insurance Affordability Exchange program, or FHIX, by Jan. 1.

Recipients would be required to pay monthly premiums of $3 to $25, be employed or looking for work and face co-pays for using emergency care services in non-emergency situations.

The plan would require a federal waiver in part because it includes a requirement that a person be employed or looking for work to get coverage. However, that could involve a lengthy process, and Senate staffers said the federal government hasn't approved any waiver for other states for that reason.

The Senate passed a similar proposal in 2013 but the House, over the objections of Democrats, refused to go along.

And House leaders reiterated their opposition to alternative Medicaid expansion plans Tuesday. They have called Medicaid a broken program and said they don't trust Washington to follow through with all the money.

"I can tell you I have absolutely no desire to expand Medicaid," said Rep. Matt Hudson, R-Naples, the House's chief healthcare budget writer.

Although the House hasn't budged from its position, those in favor of expansion have renewed hope that a vocal backing from large business groups this time around will push the bill through. Associated Industries of Florida and the Florida Chamber of Commerce both have their own alternative Medicaid expansion plans, much of which are included in the bill.

But Chamber president Mark Wilson said he'd like any program to include cost cutting, as well as a cap on annual Medicaid spending. He estimated that expenses could come down about 8 percent as enrolled low-income patients receive preventative care instead of more expensive emergency care.

"We want to make sure that whatever we do here that 8 percent goes back to the [consumers]," Wilson said.

The standstill between the House and Senate over the issue is already bleeding into early budget talks. Sen. Bill Galvano, R-Bradenton, said the Medicaid expansion plan would be integral to the Senate's spending plan.

"I assure you this will be the cornerstone of our '15-'16 budget," Galvano said.

House Speaker Steve Crisafulli, R-Merritt Island, was unfazed by having such a big part of the budget split the two chambers.

"We're certainly going to have things that probably play in our budget over here that isn't a part of their budget. It's early. In a couple of weeks that'll be a different conversation," Crisafulli said.

Compounding the complex situation is a separate Medicaid program called the Low-Income Pool, which pays for health care for low-income and uninsured patients. Officials have said the program won't be extended "in its current form."

The $2.2 billion program includes more than $1 billion in federal funds and is set to expire June 30.

Gov. Rick Scott reiterated Tuesday he would be "disappointed" if the LIP funds were not extended and said the issue was separate from Medicaid expansion.

A staunch opponent of Obamacare, Scott said in 2013 he would accept federal funds for Medicaid expansion, but Democrats have criticized him for not pushing hard on the issue.

Sen. Don Gaetz, R-Niceville, seemed to chide the House for wanting the federal government to approve LIP funding but rejecting Washington money for Medicaid expansion, though he later said he was referring to free-market interest groups that have criticized the Senate's position.

"The burden lays heavy on those who for two years have done nothing," Gaetz said.

grohrer@orlandosentinel.com or (850) 222-5564