Recently, Connecticut obstetrician-gynecologists were given an unwelcome surprise — massive cuts in payments for providing obstetric services to the state's Medicaid patients. The goal of these cuts is to slash the cost of the HUSKY program, which provides health care to low-income families. But the real cost will be to the pregnant women whose access to needed prenatal and neonatal care will suffer.

Because 42 percent of babies in Connecticut are born to mothers who receive health care coverage from Medicaid, this is significant.

Massive cuts to Medicaid ultimately force physicians to limit the number of low-income patients they accept. This makes it harder for women to get the prenatal care that can keep them, and their babies, healthier, and avoid costly preventable complications associated with delivery.

This is the wrong approach to take for Medicaid patients. Moreover, it is a double whammy for OB-GYNs, whose primary and preventive care services are already undervalued by Medicaid.

It's time to take a long-view look at how to improve care and to lower overall spending. A focus on prevention and promoting primary care is the right way to achieve cost savings — not draconian cuts that will affect low-income women and families.

Connecticut's Medicaid program provides more than 700,000 people — including families struggling to make ends meet — with help getting the medical services they need.

The General Assembly is considering legislation to help more low-income families get preventive care to keep families healthy and help our health care system to work better. This legislation has one big — and easily corrected — flaw. It leaves out women's health. By not recognizing the role that obstetrician-gynecologists play in well-woman care, this bill doesn't do enough.

Too many Americans learned the hard way that an insurance card does not guarantee care, especially when it comes to health coverage through Medicaid. The recent obstetric cuts are a painful reminder of this.

But the problem extends beyond obstetric care, because rates for care unrelated to obstetrics are even worse. In 2012, Connecticut Medicaid paid doctors treating low-income citizens only 71 percent of what they would have been paid for treating an elderly or disabled citizen for the same primary care services. That's just not right.

These low payments force doctors to limit the number of Medicaid patients that they can see.

When this happens, families go without essential primary care services like vaccinations, screenings and wellness exams, services that can save our system a lot in the long run. Instead, we're left with an uneven system of care that ignores the cost savings of prevention and wellness.

To fix this problem, Congress included a two-year increase in reimbursement that brought Medicaid rates in line with Medicare rates for primary care services and immunizations in the Affordable Care Act. This helped to ensure that patients can focus on getting and staying healthy, not searching for a physician.

Recognizing the success of this temporary federal program, the legislature is considering a bill that would continue Medicare equity in Connecticut. But unfortunately, both the federal law and the legislature's bill failed to include OB-GYNs, who provide women with quality preventive and primary care services.

While steps are being taken to improve primary care for American families, women in Connecticut — both pregnant and not pregnant — are being left behind. These women need access to care.

There's no doubt that OB-GYNs provide primary care to women; for many women, an OB-GYN is the only physician they see regularly. That's why recognizing OB-GYNs as primary care providers will help more women get and stay healthy.

The more than 600 OB-GYNs in Connecticut are committed to the good health of all women, regardless of income or life circumstances.

Between the cuts to obstetric services and the undervaluing of preventive care, women enrolled in Medicaid in Connecticut are on the losing side of the health care system. It's time for the legislature to make sure coverage means care for all patients — including women — and supporting a Medicaid program that works is a critical step forward.

Susan M. Richman, M.D., of Branford is chairwoman of the Connecticut section of the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Mark S. DeFrancesco, M.D., of Cheshire is president-elect of the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.