Sunday Show Preview: December 27, 2015

Written by Nick Field, Managing Editor

Every Friday afternoon, we provide a preview of the various Sunday morning political talk shows that are filmed and broadcast throughout the commonwealth.

Our hope is to alert readers to the important interviews and insights that each show in their region offers.

Face the State

CBS21-Harrisburg-8:30 a.m. (Rerun PCN-9:00 a.m.)

This week—2015 Political Review. We’re taking a look back at all the political highlights of the year with a look ahead to 2016 with the Presidential election.

Inside Story

6abc-Philadelphia-11:30 a.m.

Matt O’Donnell and the Inside Story panelists wrap up 2015 with a review of some of this year’s most talked about topics.

KD/PG Sunday Edition

CBS2-Pittsburgh-8:30 a.m.

This Sunday morning at 8:30 a.m., on KDKA-TV’s “KD/PG Sunday Edition” broadcast, with KDKA-TV News Anchor Ken Rice and David Shribman, Executive Editor of the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette:

Last week, the Federal Reserve Board voted to raise interest rates by one-quarter percent – something it hasn’t done, for the last nine years.

How will higher interest rates affect borrowers and savers, and the national economy?

Our guests are Augustine “Gus” Faucher, Ph.D. – Senior Vice-President and Senior Macroeconomist for PNC Financial Services Group – and Jay Sukits – Clinical Assistant Professor of Business Administration and Finance, at the University of Pittsburgh’s Katz Graduate School of Business.

Please join Ken Rice and David Shribman – Sunday morning at 8:30 a.m. – for the “KD/PG Sunday Edition”, and have a healthy, Happy New Year!

Pennsylvania Newsmakers

WGAL Channel 8 (Harrisburg and Lancaster) Sunday, December 27th at 11:30 AM

Pennsylvania Cable Network, Sunday, December 27th at 8:30 AM

WBPH (Lehigh Valley and Philadelphia) Monday, December 28st at 8:30 PM

WKBS 47 (Altoona) Saturday, January 2nd at 9:30 AM

WPCB 40 (Pittsburgh) Saturday, January 2nd at 9:30 AM

This week’s Pennsylvania Newsmakers features Gene Barr, CEO of the Pennsylvania Chamber of Business and Industry, and David Taylor, President of the Pennsylvania Manufacturers’ Association, who discuss the big political stories of 2015 and provide an update on the state’s economy. Then, joining host Terry Madonna is Rob Glus of Conrad Siegel Actuaries, for an update on the implementation of Affordable Care Act and its effects on consumers and employers. Link here.

The Sunday Business Page

CBS2-Pittsburgh-6:30 a.m.

This Sunday morning, at 6:30 a.m., on KDKA-TV’s “The Sunday Business Page” – with KDKA-TV’s Money & Politics Editor Jon Delano:

Even though the temperature is unbelievably warm, for this Christmas weekend, cold weather is certainly on the way, for January – through the end of winter, and many people in Southwestern Pennsylvania continue to struggle with the challenge of paying heating bills. Our guests – Rita Urbaniak – Manager of Universal Services & Products for Peoples Gas – and Jackie Ziemianski – Coordinator of Corporate Affairs for Peoples Gas – join Jon Delano, to talk about the great value of the Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) – and how it can help qualified customers save money on their winter heating bills.

Then, the story of YouthWorks – now, a program of Goodwill of Southwestern Pennsylvania – which provides critical job training and interviewing skills for at-risk youth, in our area. YouthWorks’ Director – Tamica Mickle – talks with Jon Delano – about the important skills that YouthWorks participants will take with them – to the workforce.

Finally, the intriguing story of a well-known, local corporate executive, who found a new calling – as a writer of short stories! Chris Allison – known for his experience as Chairman and CEO of Tollgrade Communications — discusses his new book –“Snowflakes – and Other Stories” – and the challenges of his latest work.

Please join Jon Delano – Sunday morning at 6:30 a.m., for “The Sunday Business Page”, on KDKA-TV.

December 26th, 2015 | Posted in Features, Front Page Stories, Top Stories | 1 Comment