Rapid City, SD

Rapid City voters said "no" last week to a $180-million expansion of the civic center that could have expanded the 38-year-old facility to 19,000 seats. The search for an alternative plan has already begun.

And some officials warn that time means money.

So what's next? It's the big question in Rapid now. Project opponent Richard Wahlstrom, a member of the Vote No-Fix the Plan Committee that opposed the plan, says there will be one certainty in the search for another plan.

"I can virtually guarantee you that whatever plan comes out of it will not include a maximum of 19,000 seats," Wahlstrom says. "Not if we have anything at all to say about it."

Wahlstrom and the committee, which included five former Rapid City mayors, criticized the size and cost of the plan passed by the Rapid City Council in December. More than 60 percent of city voters agreed on Tuesday, leaving council President Jerry Wright pondering options.

"I don't know what we can change. We're going to have to see," Wright says. "We'll obviously have to meet federal regulation for the disability act."

Fixing Americans with Disabilities Act violations could cost $38 million alone. Other code upgrades could double that. Then there's the expansion question, something that was proposed in a big way - as in up to 19,000 seats.

Wahlstrom says a sizable expansion is not a given in his mind, but it is a possibility. It's all dependent on marketability, he says.

"If increasing the marketability of the civic center requires some expansion to that existing space, then that has to be on the table," Wahlstrom says. "But not the doubling in size or building another arena, which was rejected by the voters."

Whatever the next proposal turns out to be, it will surely be smaller and less expensive than the last one. Wright understands that. But right now he's more worried about time than size. He fears delays will mean higher interest rates and construction costs on whatever project is eventually approved.

"That concerns me," he says. "We'll have to work on this diligently, I think work on it quickly, get things done. Because as the old saying goes, time is money."

It won't be $180 million, but it will still be a lot. And there isn't a great deal of time to come up with an alternative.

The U.S. Department of Justice has imposed a 30-month time line for Rapid City to address the ADA violations at the civic center. Those ADA problems, how to fix them and what it will cost will be first on the list of many considerations in developing the new plan.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.