WINTER HAVEN | Long before he became a senior citizen himself, Dr. Gordon Rafool spoke with conviction about elderly patients' needs.

Although the family practice specialist treated a wide age range, older patients were one of his passions.

He got a certificate of added qualifications in geriatrics in 1990 and renewed it in 2000.

From September 2014 into February of this year, however, he experienced being on the other side of the patient-doctor relationship.

Diverticulitis and a colon resection, then inflammation of the lining around his heart and a bout with pneumonia, kept him sick for much of those six months.

Recognition of his mortality, and some urging from his wife, Shirley, has led the well-known physician to announce an upcoming July 7 retirement from Gessler Clinic.

Rafool, 72, has practiced in Winter Haven since 1971.

"I was praying to God, 'When should I retire?'" Rafool said. "He hit me with a 4 by 4."

Retirement is, of course, a subjective state of mind.

Rafool, one of the first two doctors to volunteer at The Haley Center, a free volunteer clinic in Winter Haven, intends to keep volunteering there, probably more than the twice a month he does now.

Along with that, he's promised his friend, Dr. Richard Honer, medical director of Angels Care of Eloise, to volunteer at that free clinic also.

"He's dedicated," said Donna Armes, director of The Haley Center. "He brings to the table his many years of experience ... He's the kindest person I've ever worked with."

Rafool, pronounced Ray-fuhl, said he expects volunteer clinics of their type will be needed a long time, regardless of the outcome of Florida lawmakers' debate on Medicaid or a pending U.S. Supreme Court decision on Affordable Care Act subsidies.

"We have so many people who have no insurance," he said, explaining that some are undocumented and others "can't afford Obamacare."

Also on his agenda:

The devout Catholic intends to earn a degree in theology online from the new St. Thomas Aquinas Institute.

He and his wife, whose 50th anniversary will be Aug. 31, are building a beach house on Palm Island, a Gulf Coast island accessible only by ferry.

Dr. Peter Verrill, who has been friends with Rafool since 1976, praised his compassion, intelligence and work ethic.

Rafool gets up at 4 a.m., arrives at the office at 5 a.m., goes to Mass at 6:30 a.m. and is back at Gessler Clinic to see patients before 8 a.m., Verrill said, calling him "a wonderful friend and colleague."

Gessler Clinic Administrator Sharon Hart said Rafool's "care and compassion for his patients" has been his contribution to medicine.

"They just love him," Hart said. "He has been caring for patients and, in some cases, generations of families since he arrived to the Winter Haven area. Dr. Rafool truly cares about their overall well-being and health."

Although it's hard to imagine Rafool as anything other than a doctor, it wasn't the only career he considered.

"At one point, I was going to be a priest but, when I found out you had to be celibate, it was a whole different story," said the Illinois native, whose family moved to Georgia when he was 15.

While working at the family's restaurant in Toccoa, for $1 a day and tips, an encounter with a customer who cut his arm on a broken car window led him into his medical career.

"I went into action when I saw him bleeding," Rafool recalled. "I knew he needed help. It felt like 'This is what I needed and wanted to do' ... I felt this was God's call."

Rafool, board-certified in family practice, said family practice is the backbone of a multi-speciality clinic.

Licensed in Georgia in 1968, he got a Florida license in 1971 and began practicing in Winter Haven that year with Dr. Wiley Koon.

Their family practice added three more doctors and then, on May 31, 1985, merged with 13-doctor Gessler Clinic.

Rafool, vice president at Gessler, has been on its board since the merger. He's been involved with the recruitment and hiring of each of its doctors since 1985, Hart said.

Administrators too, Rafool said.

He wrote columns for the Winter Haven News Chief for more than 20 years and for about 10 years was editor of a Polk County Medical Association magazine.

He would like more doctors to specialize in geriatrics, but he isn't optimistic.

"Young people are not going into geriatrics," he said, because payment rates already are low for family practice and elderly patients need longer visits than younger ones.

Rafool is one of the classic family practice doctors who "took care of you from cradle to grave," Verrill said. "They were a trusted friend and confidante."

He treats patients like his family and will be missed, Verrill and Hart said.

CT scans, non-invasive procedures for conditions once needing open surgery, the advent of computers, the rise of preventive care and an explosion in drug treatment choices are among the changes that have shaped the medical world in which Rafool practices.

Some medical maxims, however, haven't changed.

"I would like to say to physicians, we physicians are the advocates of the patients," he said. "Not to forget that is our role and the last thing is 'be compassionate.'?"

As for patients, he urges them to take care of themselves and listen to their doctors.

"Keep your weight down," he advises. "Learn something new in your day and don't forget God in your life."

[ Robin Williams Adams can be reached at robin.adams@theledger.com or 863-802-7558. Read her blog at robinsrx.blogs.theledger.com. Follow on Twitter @ledgerROBIN. ]