Given my choice of which disreputable Illinois political figure I'd rather see repudiated in Tuesday's presidential primaries, I'd probably pick Bruce Rauner. Governor Grabitall is a very underrated member of the national Republican gubernatorial clown show. But, if it has to be Rahm Emanuel who gets a humiliating public kneecapping, well, I can certainly live with that, too. After all, Rauner is their foul-tempered incompetent. Mayor Rahm is all ours: Made his bones in the 1992 Clinton campaign; got tossed from the Clinton White House for being too much of a dick to too many people; served six relatively nondescript years in the House of Representatives; worked hard to steal credit from Howard Dean for the Democratic victories in the 2006 midterms; was unaccountably hired as White House Chief of Staff in 2009 by the president, in which capacity he did his hippie-punching damnedest to submarine the Affordable Care Act, and then left, one step ahead of the disastrous 2010 midterms, to become mayor of Chicago, in which capacity he has managed to alienate every Democratic interest group while courting various dilettante plutocrats for the purpose of destroying public education in that city. There are calls for his resignation.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Did I miss anything?

It seems that Bernie Sanders has decided to make a meal out of Mayor Rahm. Nom, nom, nom.

"Hillary Clinton proudly lists Mayor Rahm Emanuel as one of her leading mayoral endorsers," Sanders said at a downtown news conference. "Based on his disastrous record as mayor of the city of Chicago, I do not want Mayor Emanuel's endorsement if I win the Democratic nomination. That is not the kind of support I want. We want the endorsement of the people who are fighting for social and racial justice. We do not want the support of people who are indebted to Wall Street and the big money interests…The mayor has no problem putting pressure on teachers when he wants concessions from them. He has no problem arm-twisting the parents on the South Side or the West Side when he wants to close their schools. He is really tough, isn't he? Taking on the children and the parents. But he ain't so tough taking on the big money interests on Wall Street."

Most Popular

All of which puts Hillary Rodham Clinton in something of a bind. She's tied to Emanuel through his work in her husband's administration and through her support for him in his previous runs for public office. If the Democratic primary has become a kind of referendum on Clintonism, and it has, then this is a fairly important bellwether. If, at the same time, Rahm Emanuel gets a pie in the face, that's just a bonus.