Sorrel Sky Gallery hires sales associate

Sorrel Sky Gallery welcomes new sales associate, Ariel Rodriguez, to its team.

Rodriguez has a specialized knowledge of diamonds and a background in fine jewelry sales. She recently relocated to Durango and is currently attending Fort Lewis College as a pre-law student.

For more information. visit www.sorrelsky.com.

Chamber to host Lunch & Learn

The Durango Chamber of Commerce will host a Lunch & Learn program, “How to Cash Out and Move on from Your Business,” at noon Nov. 18 at the Durango Community Recreation Center, 2700 Main Ave.

The topic will be presented by Charles Spence with the law firm Maynes, Bradford, Shipps & Sheftel, LLP. This presentation is targeted toward business owners and is pertinent for private or closely held corporations, partnerships, joint ventures, limited liability companies and sole proprietors.

A well-devised exit plan shows business owners how to begin to position themselves and their businesses so that the owners can accomplish all their personal, financial and business goals. The cost is $10 for chamber members and $20 for nonmembers. Reservations are required.

To register, visit durangobusiness.org or call 247-0312.

Durango Land, Homes announces co-owner

Chris Bettin is the new managing broker and co-owner with Christina Rinderle of Durango Land and Homes, located at 528A Main Ave.

Bettin was most recently the managing broker at Durango Mountain Realty, Purgatory’s real estate brokerage. Bettin and Rinderle purchased Durango Land and Homes from Joe and Heidi Burtoni. Joe Burtoni will continue to be a licensed broker with Durango Land and Homes.

For more information, call 828-2222.

First National announces hires

First National Bank of Durango announces these new hires:

Micaela Padilla is a loan operations specialist. She is originally from Durango and attended school in Aztec. Padilla most recently worked for City Market as an assistant manager and has been living in Durango for the last 13 years.

Amanda Valdez returns to work for First National as a lending assistant in Bayfield.

For more information, visit www.fnbdurango.com.

Land surveyors to meet Tuesday

The next chapter meeting for the Professional Land Surveyors of Southwest Colorado will take place at 6 p.m. Tuesday at the Durango Community Recreation Center Sunlight Room, 2700 Main Ave.

The guest speaker will be Pamela Fromhertz, the Colorado State Geodetic Advisor, of NGS. Fromhertz will give a presentation on current NGS activities and projects. In particular, she will discuss the Geoid Slope Validation Survey of 2016. The survey will be conducted along U.S. Highway 160 from Walsenburg to Durango. This route was selected to quantify the accuracy of gravimetric geoid modeling in a high and rugged environment. The gravimetric geoid will become the reference surface of the new vertical datum on 2022. She also will talk about the need to collect GPS data using OPUS-Share.

Insurance, financial advisers to meet

The National Association of Insurance and Financial Advisors South Western Colorado will meet at noon Thursday in the Oak Room at the Strater Hotel, 699 Main Ave.

The cost is $15 for nonmembers. Two presenters will offer information on Social Security and affordable health plans compared to the Affordable Care Act, often called Obamacare.

Randy Wimsatt, president of New Mexico NAIFA, will give an update on Social Security, “What You Thought You Knew About Social Security Yesterday, Changed Today!”

Mary Hunt, district manager for US Health Advisors, will discuss the affordable health plans offered by US Health Advisors compared with Affordable Care Act plans and group plans. She has been a licensed agent since 2010.

For more information, call Judy Simmons at 247-1413. This is open to all insurance agents, financial representatives and the public with an interest.

SunShades & Optics announces opening

SunShades & Optics of Durango announces its opening at 1006 Main Ave.

The business is owned by Tammy King an optician with a background in marketing and business. The sunglass and prescription optical retail shop is open from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday to Saturday. The shop offers more than 550 sunglasses to choose from and a large selection of prescription frames. King has owned a second store location in Taos, New Mexico, since 2009.

For more information, call 247-1489.

Priority Financial Partners opens branch

Wealth-management firm Priority Financial Partners has opened a Durango location at 143 E. 10th St.

President Trent Porter was born and raised in Mancos, and he graduated from Colorado State University with undergraduate and graduate degrees in business and accounting. From guest hosting the “Your Money” show on SiriusXM to his recent interview on NPR’s “Morning Edition,” media outlets frequently reach out to Porter for his expertise. His firm specializes in fee-only, zero-commission financial advice and second opinions.

For more information, visit PriorityFP.com.

Travel agency announces changes

Dwight and Katherine Burgess, owners of Colorado Travel Connection, have announced new affiliations with Montrose Travel of California, and Ensemble Travel Group.

These affiliations will allow Colorado Travel Connection to offer low prices and the most current promotions with major travel suppliers. The owners also have changed the business name to CTCVoyages to better reflect its specialization in small ship and medium ship luxury cruising, adventure and exotic destinations, independent and escorted educational and family travel. Special promotions, along with the ability to price and purchase airline tickets and cruises, are available at the new website at www.ctcvoyages.com. The Burgesses are previous owner-operators of Uptown International Travel in Dallas, and they have more than 30 years of experience in the travel industry.

For more information, email katherine@ctcvoyages.com or call 259-4008.

Chamber to host Business After Hours

The Durango Chamber of Commerce will host Business After Hours from 5 to 7 p.m. Nov. 20 at the Homewood Suites by Hilton, 15 Girard St.

The event will feature food, drinks, networking and door prizes. The cost is $7 for chamber members and guests.