The Washington County Playhouse Dinner Theater and Children’s Theater, 44 N. Potomac St., downtown Hagerstown

Shows run Friday through Sunday, unless otherwise specified. Friday and Saturday shows begin with dinner at 6 p.m.; Sunday matinees begin at 1 p.m.

Cost is is $39 for dinner and show (beverages and gratuity are not included); $19 for ages 5 to 12.

Call 301-739-7469 or go to www.washingtoncountyplayhouse.com.

“Greater Tuna”

Friday, Jan. 16, through Sunday, Feb. 15

What do Arles Struvie, Thurston Wheelis, Aunt Pearl, Petey Fisk, Phineas Blye and the Rev. Spikes have in common? In this hilarious sendup of small-town morals and mores, they are all among the upstanding citizens of Tuna, the third-smallest town in Texas. Two actors portray all 20 characters in one of the most produced plays in American theater history.

“The Marvelous Wonderettes”

Friday, Feb. 27, through Sunday, March 29

This smash off-Broadway hit takes you to the 1958 Springfield High School prom, where we meet the Wonderettes, four girls with hopes and dreams as big as their crinoline skirts. As we learn about their lives and loves, we are treated to the girls performing such classic ‘50s and ‘60s songs as “Lollipop,” “Dream Lover,” “Stupid Cupid,” “Lipstick on Your Collar,” “Hold Me, Thrill Me, Kiss Me,” “It’s My Party” and more than 20 other classic hits. You’ve never had this much fun at a prom, and you will never forget The Marvelous Wonderettes in this musical trip down memory lane.

“The King & I”

Saturday, April 11, through Sunday, May 17

With songs like “Getting to Know You,” “Hello Young Lovers,” “Something Wonderful” and “Shall We Dance?” the audience can watch as Anna and the King of Siam struggle toward mutual respect in this unique love story.

“Lend Me a Tenor”

Friday, June 5, through Sunday, July 19

“Lend Me A Tenor” is set in September 1934. Saunders, the general manager of the Cleveland Grand Opera Company, is primed to welcome world-famous Tito Morelli, Il Stupendo, the greatest tenor of his generation, to appear for one night only as Otello. The star arrives late and, through a hilarious series of mishaps, is given a double dose of tranquilizers and passes out.

“Murder at the Howard Johnson’s”

Friday, July 31, through Sunday, Sept. 13

Love, marriage, betrayal, mayhem and checkout time at 11 a.m. Laughs come rapidly in this comedy about an ill-fated love triangle. Chaos ensues as a woman, her lover and her husband plot and scheme to murder one another in a Howard Johnson’s Motor Inn.

“Cabaret”

Saturday, Sept. 26, through Sunday, Nov. 15

The Emcee welcomes you to the decadent Kit Kat Klub, where British singer Sally Bowles begins a stormy romance with American novelist Clifford Bradshaw as the Nazi Party quietly takes hold of 1930s Berlin. “Right this way, your table’s waiting” at John Kander, Fred Ebb and Joe Masteroff’s Tony-winning musical about following your heart while the world loses its way.