Diego Suarez, 18, has a childhood memory very few people share. When he was a 7-year-old-boy, he discovered a dinosaur that turned out to be a whole new species. And now, to make it even more awesome, the “beastie” has been named after him.

Chilesaurus diegosuarezi was uncovered quite by accident in 2004 when the boy and his family visited Chile, USA Today reported. His parents are geologists, and that year they went on a research expedition to study rocks in the Andes, The Week added, taking their kids along.

Suarez said he borrowed his mom’s pickax, went to a hillside and started digging away at a Jurassic-era site. There, he discovered some bones that his parents realized were the rib and vertebra of a small dinosaur. Mom, dad, Diego and his sister Macarena kept digging, Smithsonian added.

“Out of nowhere, two small things appeared. … They were fossils,” the boy recalled. His parents “were amazed. You (can) imagine it was, to them, like winning the lottery.”

The dinosaur bones were a bit odd-looking – in fact, they seemed to belong to a variety of dinosaurs, rather than just one. The man who ultimately authored a study about the new dinosaur, Fernando Novas, and fellow scientists went to the site a few times over the next few years to excavate completely. They eventually discovered a dozen dinosaurs and four almost-complete skeletons.

Now, the beastie has a new name and possibly a momentous distinction – at 145 million years old, the dinosaur may be one of the oldest theropods in existence. A theropod is an ancestor to birds, which eventually evolved from meat-loving to vegetarians. Chilesaurus raises questions about that the timing of that transition.

The newly-discovered dinosaur is much like the more terrifying Tyrannosaurus Rex – star of Jurassic Park – and shares some qualities with it and other carnivores. But something about the dinosaur was off: It has a small head, plant-eater’s teeth, three stubby fingers and two claws, was about the size of a turkey and may have had feathers. It also has the vertebrae of a predator, but the feet, ankles and pelvis of a plant-eater.

“It’s like a T. rex that’s been shrunk but not shrunk equally. This animal would’ve looked more silly than fearful … more similar to an ostrich than to T. rex,” said Chicago Field Museum associate curator and dinosaur specialist Pete Makovicky.

Chilesaurus poses some interesting questions – like when its ancestors turned away from meat and started eating plants, and the role it played in the ancient ecosystem; scientists believe its abundance at the site Diego found as a boy suggests it was quite important.

And it all started with a boy. Now grown up and in college, Suarez is proud to have been part of this new discovery.

“It’s amazing to have found this new species. I feel this incredible joy from being able to be part of something big.”

[Photo Courtesy YouTube Screengrab]