Paisley and Underwood will pair up to preside over music ceremony for the seventh consecutive time

We think we’ve heard this song before…

Brad Paisley and Carrie Underwood have been tapped to host the 48th Annual CMA Awards, marking the seventh consecutive time that the pair will have emceed the awards show.

This year’s CMA Awards will air Nov. 5 on ABC at 8 p.m. ET, live from the Bridgestone Arena in Nashville.

Also read: Ratings: ABC’s ‘CMA Music Festival’ Down Against Competition From ‘Talent’

CMA CEO Sarah Trahern touted the pair’s comedic skills and rapport while announcing that the pair had saddled up for another run.

“Carrie and Brad are unmatched as a hosting team,” Trahern noted. “They have impeccable comic timing, industry credibility, critical acclaim, and a natural rapport that makes them popular with our live audience and the viewers at home. We are delighted to have them presiding over “Country Music’s Biggest Night.'”

Also read: ‘American Idol’ Lawsuit Claims Label Shorted on Kelly Clarkson, Carrie Underwood Royalties

“American Idol” favorite Underwood, meanwhile, noted the evolution of pair’s hosting duties over lo, these many years.

“Over time, there’s been an evolution of who we are as hosts of the show — what fits, what’s comfortable, what’s real,” Underwood said, “and we love being a part of the creative team. We feel the responsibility of what this night means to our music community, to our fellow artists and to the viewers at home.”

Today’s announcement follows last night’s (Aug. 5) airing of the “CMA Music Festival: Country’s Night to Rock” on ABC which included performances by both Paisley and Underwood among others culled from last June’s four-day CMA Music Festival. The show saw its ratings dip ten percent from last year, in part because of competition Tuesday night from NBC’s “America’s Got Talent.” Still, ABC won in the key demographic, while NBC had the biggest audience of the night.

For now, let’s celebrate news of Paisley and Underwood’s return with the Blake Shelton chestnut “Same Old Song,” shall we?