Fronteras: The Affordable Care Act aims to increase access to healthcare, but for those in the so-called "affordability gap" insurance may still be out of reach. We speak to Politico about a program just launched to provide scholarships for undocumented student immigrants. Also, it was 150 years ago that Mexico was invaded by the French and ruled by Maximilian. It was a time of betrayals, brutality and war, but who was Maximilian?

Healthcare Access & Debt Part 1

Like it or not, the Affordable Care Act was designed in part to give more people access to health insurance. The act could solve a number of problems for low income people: better access to care, better health outcomes, and a reduction of medical debt.

However, there are huge gaps in the plan. In the first of a two part series, Tristan Ahtone reports on some people who will continue to fall through the cracks -- running the risk of not having care or running up huge medical bills.

$25 Million Scholarship Program Launches For DREAMers

This week a national scholarship program was launched targeting undocumented immigrant students referred to as dreamers. Twelve American universities are taking part, including the University of Texas at El Paso, but the number is expected to quickly grow. Reporter Hadas Gold covered the story for POLITICO. She joins us on the program with more details.

Maximilian and Carlota: Europe’s Last Empire in Mexico

It was 150 years ago that Mexico was once again invaded and occupied by a foreign power. This time it was the French,lured by what they thought would be the rich plunder of a poor nation.

Maximilian was installed as the emperor of Mexico. And while Mexico’s elite rallied around their new ruler, the rest of Mexico fought back and drove the French out.

It’s history that reads like a novel -- filled with bigger than life characters, betrayals and twists of fate -- and it’s told in the new book “Maximilian and Carlota: Europe’s Last Empire in Mexico.”

Mary Margaret McAllen is the author. She spoke with TPR’s David Martin Davies on this episode of Fronteras.