LUMBERTON — Although the message of a breast cancer awareness fair on Friday was serious, the atmosphere at Biggs Park Mall was anything but somber.

It was upbeat — and for good cause.

“We’re just so happy to be survivors,” said Nancy Sykes while sitting with fellow cancer survivors she met through Gibson Cancer Center as line-dancers weaved steps to music and friends greeted each other with hugs.

Sykes, who was diagnosed with breast cancer in 1999 and again in 2013, was one of many survivors at the part health fair, part celebration Mardi Gras Mammogram Madness event put on by Southeastern Health as part of Breast Cancer Awareness Month, which is October. Organizers handed out shiny pink bead necklaces in a cheeky twist on the infamous Mardi Gras tradition meant to encourage attendees to get a mammogram.

The event, which kicked off with a parade, aimed to bring together resources available for preventing breast cancer and organizations that provide financial help to those who need them.

“It’s not enough for us to get the word out about mammograms if we don’t have a way for people to pay for it,” said Catherine Gaines, a certified physician assistant and lead patient navigator for Southeastern Health.

Robeson Health Care Corporation introduced people to its Breast and Cervical Cancer Control Program, which helps the uninsured get mammograms. Gibson Cancer Center staff took down women’s names to schedule them for the screenings and handed out pamphlets on how to conduct a breast exam. Legal Aid and Enroll America guided attendees through the Affordable Care Act.

Gaines said it is particularly important to inform black women in Robeson County about the importance of early detection. Although white women have the highest breast cancer incidence rate, black women are twice as likely to die from the disease.

Gaines has been delivering that startling statistic at churches countywide, telling women “if you find something, get it checked right away.”

One in eight women will be diagnosed with breast cancer in their lifetime, according to the American Cancer Society, and the disease is the second leading cause of death in women. Family history doesn’t play much of a role, as 85 percent of women with breast cancer do not have it in their family.

The American Cancer Society recommends that women start getting annual mammograms at age 40. Women should conduct self exams monthly.

Regular doctor visits were critical for Sykes, who said she did not feel a lump in her breast before being diagnosed on her 63rd birthday.

“Twenty-five years ago, it was a death sentence,” she said. “But now, we have so many survivors. If you go and get your mammogram and catch it early, you can survive.”

Kimberly Worley, who was diagnosed with breast cancer in 2011 at age 39, said events like Friday’s health fair aren’t just informational, they’re also good for the soul.

“We want them to leave educated. But it also helps with your attitude. It makes you feel better about yourself knowing you’re not alone,” said Worley, who was decked out in pink ribbon jewelry.

“We know their feelings, we know what they’ve been through,” said Linda B. Rice, who was diagnosed with colon cancer in 2009.

Angelicia Hicks is putting her experience with cancer on the stage. Hicks, the owner of Angelyric Productions, had a booth at Friday’s fair introducing attendees to the play she wrote, produced and directed, “I Too Survived.” Hicks, whose aunt had breast cancer, said the play shows a woman’s cancer diagnosis and its effect on her family through her husband’s perspective.

Like Friday’s fair, the play incorporates some fun and humor.

“I didn’t want the show to necessarily be sad. Whenever you hear about cancer, you hear about the negatives things … you can also be uplifted,” she said. Hicks’ play hits the stage Oct. 24. For information, visit angelyricproductions.com.

Sykes, Worley and Rice encouraged others — whether they’ve had cancer or not — to celebrate Breast Cancer Awareness Month by wearing pink, patting a survivor on the back or donating to organizations that pitched in at Friday’s event. And, most importantly, by getting a mammogram.

“That little bit of discomfort is worth it to find out,” Worley said. ” … Don’t let fear keep you from doing what you need to do for yourself.”

Sarah Willets | The Robesonian Attendees at a Mardi Gras Mammogram Madness event put on by Southeastern Health on Friday learned about breast cancer prevention and financial aid. The disease is the second leading killer of women. http://robesonian.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/web1_cancer-fair1.jpg Sarah Willets | The Robesonian Attendees at a Mardi Gras Mammogram Madness event put on by Southeastern Health on Friday learned about breast cancer prevention and financial aid. The disease is the second leading killer of women. Courtesy photo Southeastern Health coordinated a “human pink ribbon” at Biggs Park Mall on Friday in observance of Breast Cancer Awareness Month. Nancy Sykes, left, Linda B. Rice and Kimberly Worley are all breast-cancer survivors. http://robesonian.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/web1_cancer-fair31.jpg Courtesy photo Southeastern Health coordinated a “human pink ribbon” at Biggs Park Mall on Friday in observance of Breast Cancer Awareness Month. Nancy Sykes, left, Linda B. Rice and Kimberly Worley are all breast-cancer survivors. Sarah Willets | The Robesonian Nancy Sykes, left, Linda B. Rice and Kimberly Worley are all breast-cancer survivors. http://robesonian.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/web1_cancer-fair-21.jpg Sarah Willets | The Robesonian Nancy Sykes, left, Linda B. Rice and Kimberly Worley are all breast-cancer survivors.

Event offers information on killer disease

By Sarah Willets [email protected]

Sarah Willets can be reached at 910-816-1974 or on Twitter @Sarah_Willets.

Sarah Willets can be reached at 910-816-1974 or on Twitter @Sarah_Willets.

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus