Buy Photo A new 98-foot trailer adorned with the image of David and Sandi Rasanen, whose memory inspired Memorial Ministries, will be used to pick up donations this week in Shreveport, Mansfield, Many, Florien, Natchitoches and Leesville. (Photo: Special to The Times )Buy Photo

This time of year brings a mixture of excitement and sadness for those involved in Memorial Ministries. Because if it wasn’t for a tragedy 10 years ago, the ministry that provides shoes, clothing, household essentials and canned goods to needy families in Mexico likely wouldn’t exist today.

Memorial Ministries was born from the death of David and Sandi Rasanen. David, a second-year orthopedic surgery resident at LSU Health Sciences Center, and Sandi, a third-grade teacher at Shreve Island Elementary, were killed on Nov. 19, 2004 shortly after they began a trip to Iowa to visit with their families for the holiday.

A 16-year-old Arkansas teen struck their vehicle head-on on U.S. Highway 71 in north Caddo Parish. All three were killed.

Days later, hundreds of medical students, teachers, church members and friends attended memorial services for the Rasanens, a young couple who in their short 27 years on Earth impacted so many lives.

Candi Funderburk was one of the lives touched. A nurse anesthetist resident at LSUHSC at the time, Funderburk only met David briefly the week before his death. But reading articles about him and Sandi afterwards made her realize they had dreams for someone other than themselves.

Funderburk said God inspired her and laid out a plan how she could help ease the pain of the couple’s grieving families. What started as a simple shoe drive in 2004 has grown into a full-blown ministry that continues to grow annually to reach people in need in Mexico – something that David and Sandi planned to do once he completed his residency.

Why shoes and why Mexico? When David was in the 8th grade he accompanied his church youth group to Mexico. He gave away every pair of shoes he took with him.

“It was the summer of 2002 that I attended a mission trip to Mexico with our youth and would you know the very first thing I did on the very first day was give away a pair of shoes,” Funderburk said.

But before she launched on the idea to honor David and Sandi, she wanted the stamp of approval from David’s parents, Jeff and Monna Rasanen, and Sandi’s parents, Brian and Diane Carleson, all of Iowa, to do the shoe drive in their names. It wasn’t hard after that to get David’s hospital coworkers, Sandi’s fellow teachers and administrators and the couple’s church members at Broadmoor Assembly on board, too.

The first shoe drive brought about 4,000 pairs of shoes that were carried to Mexico in a 35-foot livestock trailer covered from floor to ceiling. Year two, there were 10,000 shoes in two trailers. You get the picture.

Donations then began including clothing and food items. The generosity increased so much that this year’s 10th anniversary saw the opening of “HOPE reSTOREd,” a warehouse where donations can be collected and stored throughout the year. A 98-foot trailer, adorned with David and Sandi’s image, will carry the goods this year.

Memorial Ministries partners with a missionary family in Mexico that has a homeless feeding program. Three churches and a prison ministry have been started.

“This ministry continues to be a blessing as it grows more and more,” said Diane Carleson in a telephone interview from her Waterloo, Iowa, home. “We’re just grateful something good came out of this tragedy.”

At times it seems like it was yesterday that Diane and husband Brian lost Sandi, their first-born child. David was the first-born child of Jeff and Monna Rasanen.

Both families still get together at Thanksgiving to share their continued grief over the loss of their children, but to also rejoice in the reports they receive of how Memorial Ministries is furthering David’s and Sandi’s dream of being medical missionaries.

“In these 10 years, we’ve seen the different students of Sandi and friends of David who still tell us how their lives were affected by them. It’s encouraging to know they touched so many lives and it helps us to hear those stories,” Diane Carleson said.

For Jeff and Monna Rasanen that knock on the door on Nov. 19, 2004 by a deputy sheriff informing them of David’s and Sandi’s deaths is still fresh. Both were “exceptionally kind individuals” who shared a faith that was reflected in their everyday life, the couple shared in an email to The Times.

“It is difficult as individuals of faith to know why tragedy strikes. But when it does and you have a faith in God you have two choices. You can become bitter or you can step back and allow God to rescue you and once again life can be good, not the same, but good. Our families, the Rasanens and Carlsons have made the choice to continue believing in a God who loves us and is near to those who suffer,” Jeff and Monna Rasanen wrote.

They added: “I believe we are more compassionate, more aware of the pain of others and have an eternal perspective in our everyday life. We want to do things that really matter and have eternal value. David and Sandi would agree with that way of living. That is how they lived their lives even at a young age. We are sad but not in despair because we will see them again.”

Diane Carleson said the families have contributed financially to the shoe drive but has yet to be able to visit Louisiana at a time the collection process was underway. And they only met Funderburk in person three years ago on a brief visit to the area.

But the two sets of parents are already discussing plans to make a definite trip to Shreveport either next year or the year after to join Funderburk in gathering up the donations.

“Our hearts have always been there. It’s just been so hard for us to make plans to get there because we live so far away and because it is such a hard time for us all,” Diane Carleson said. “David and Sandi are still very missed.”

Twitter: @vawelborn

How you can help

Memorial Ministries is accepting donations of shoes, clothes, household items, toys, blankets, beans, rice and canned food from today through Thursday. Donations will be transported to Mexico starting Saturday.

Here are the drop-off locations:

• Gateway Church in Shreveport.

• Southside Baptist Church in Mansfield

• Many City Hall

• Florien Town Hall

• District Eight office in Natchitoches

• Byrd Regional Hospital in Leesville

Or call Candi Funderbuck at (318) 508-2009 to schedule a pick-up.

Read or Share this story: http://www.shreveporttimes.com/story/news/local/2014/11/17/shreveport-couples-deaths-continue-inspire-ministry/19150331/