BERKELEY, Calif. — Shootouts may be fun for fans, but they don’t make the losing side feel any better. Especially when the free-for-all goes into overtime.

Make that, double overtime.

Colorado got a school-record 521 yards of total offense and seven touchdown passes from sophomore quarterback Sefo Liufau, including three to Nelson Spruce, but Liufau was stopped on a fourth-down keeper on a busted play from the 1-yard-line in the second overtime Saturday and California rallied from a halftime deficit for a 59-56 victory.

“If you’re on the losing team, it’s gut wrenching,” Colorado coach Mike MacIntyre said.

Both teams scored on touchdown passes in the first overtime. Colorado had the ball first in the second overtime. After the Buffs failed to score, California only needed a field goal for the victory and got it — a 34-yard field goal by James Langford.

Colorado’s last play was not intended to be a carry by Liufau. Evidently, the play was designed for Liufau to pitch the ball to running back Tony Jones.

“There was a miscommunication,” said Spruce, who set a school record with 19 catches, breaking his former mark of 13 a week earlier against Hawaii. “Sefo was supposed to flip it to one of our backs.”

MacIntyre said “that play didn’t cost us the game. We just didn’t make a few plays in regulation.”

A Memorial Stadium crowd of 39,821 watched California (2-2, 1-1 Pac-12) win its first Pac-12 game under second-year coach Sonny Dykes. This was the highest-scoring game in Cal history.

It also prevented Colorado (2-3, 0-2) from claiming its first Pac-12 road win under MacIntyre, who also is in his second year in the league.

California sophomore quarterback Jared Goff also passed for seven touchdowns and matched Liufau’s total of 449 passing yards. Following an interception by linebacker Jake Kearney, Goff hit Chris Harper for a 40-yard TD with 2:29 remaining in regulation to put the Golden Bears up 49-42.

But Liufau marched the Buffaloes down the field and hit Bryce Bobo for a 30-yard touchdown with 21 seconds remaining in regulation to send the game into overtime.

“I was just mentally focused to go down and score,” Liufau said. “I thought I’d given the game away (with the interception). I had to right the wrong.”

Colorado twice led by 14 points before halftime but couldn’t build on its early lead and California dominated the third quarter to catch up.

“It’s probably up there with the craziest game I’ve ever been a part of,” Cal’s Goff said.

Usually dependable senior kicker Will Oliver missed three field-goal attempts for the Buffaloes. Langford missed a 42-yarder with 7:21 remaining that could have broken a 35-35 tie.

“My teammates told me they completely support me,” Oliver said. “That made it hurt worse.”

Colorado jumped to a 21-7 lead, but California’s offense is too explosive to keep down for long. The Golden Bears cut the deficit to a touchdown with the longest touchdown pass play in school history — a 92-yarder from Goff to fleet running back Daniel Lasco down the left sideline and along the California bench.

Colorado’s defense got sloppy on the play, which appeared to be a short gain. But three Buffs defenders overran the play, and then two others missed tackles for an improbable breakaway play.

The Buffs finished the first half without two key starters who went out with injuries. Sophomore safety Tedric Thompson, who set up Colorado’s first score with an interception, injured some ribs and was replaced by Marques Mosley. And sophomore linebacker Kenneth Olugbode hurt a shoulder and was replaced by Ryan Severson.

Olugbode returned for the second half but the Buffs felt the absence of Thompson.

“We just have to learn to finish (games),” CU defensive back John Walker said.

Tom Kensler: tkensler@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tomkensler

Game balls

Sefo Liufau, Colorado, QB: Set CU single-game records with seven TD passes and 521 yards of total offense.

Nelson Spruce, CU, WR: Broke his own school record with 19 catches.

Jared Goff, California, QB: Matched Liufau with seven TDs, 449 yards passing.

Tom Kensler, The Denver Post

Record-setting day

CU set numerous school records Saturday against California, including:

521 yards of total offense for a game by QB Sefo Liufau with 449 passing, 72 rushing.

7 touchdown passes in a game by Liufau.

19 catches in a game by WR Nelson Spruce, breaking his single-game record of 13 set a week earlier against Hawaii.

46 completions and 67 pass attempts by Liufau.

7 straight games with at least one TD catch by Spruce.

56 points in a loss.

Source: CU sports information office