Jan. 4

An officer responded to the 1500 block of Grand Avenue to assist Fremont County deputies with an underage drinking party.

Officers responded to the 2000 block of Fremont Drive for a suicidal party. He was transported to STMH.

An officer responded to the 1100 block of North 15th Street to take reports of some vehicles that had things taken out of them.

Officers responded to the 900 block of North Seventh Street for a reported sighting of a most wanted fugitive, but it wasn't him.

Officers responded to the 600 block of Raintree Boulevard to check on a dog's welfare, it had already been taken inside.

Officers responded to North 15th Street and College Avenue for a two-vehicle non-injury accident. Sabrina Clement, 21, was cited.

Officers responded to an accident at Berry Parkway and U.S. 50, one party was transported to STMH.

Officers responded to another accident at Central Avenue and Field Avenue. There were no injuries. Taylor Vestring, 18, was cited for exceeding safe speed for conditions.

An officer took a report of a theft from the 3100 block of U.S. 50.

Officers responded to a report of someone walking around a house in the 800 block of North Orchard. There were no footprints in the snow. No one around.

Officers responded to a commercial burglar alarm in the 1900 block of East Main Street.

Advertisement

Jan. 5

Officers responded to a commercial burglar alarm in the 1200 block of Main Street. It was a false alarm.

Officers took a report of harassment in the 800 block of Candlewood Drive.

Officers responded to a trespass complaint in the 600 block of Family Center Drive. The party had already left.

Officers responded to the 100 block of South Raynolds for a disorderly juvenile.

Officers responded to a verbal harassment complaint in the 200 block of Justice Center Road. Jimmy Kellough, 52, and Amanda Kissinger, 34, were both given summons for harassment.

An officer took a report of credit card fraud in the 1500 block of U.S. 50.

An officer responded to neighbor disagreement in the 500 block of Field Avenue.

Officers responded to the 200 block of Main Street for a reportedly suicidal party. It was unfounded.

Officers responded to a possible domestic in the 1100 block of Main Street. It was someone who was locked out.

An officer responded to a one-car traffic accident in the 1300 block of College. No injuries.

Officers responded to another accident at East Main Street and Rhoades Avenue, there were no injuries.

Jan. 6

Officers responded to the 300 block of U.S. 50 for a disorderly, intoxicated male. Jesse Elias Baca, 22, was arrested for 2nd degree criminal trespass and disorderly. Held on $500 bond.

An officer responded to the 100 block of Catlin Avenue for a concrete street sign that had been knocked down.

An officer took a report of damage to a mailbox in the 200 block of Highland Avenue.

A party in the lobby of the police department reported a hit-and-run accident in the 1700 block of Fremont Drive.

Officers responded to a two-car accident with injuries at North 10th and Harrison Avenue. Tyler Kuretich, 29, was cited for exceeding safe speed for conditions.

Officers responded to the 2400 block of East Main Street because a male was throwing clothing out of his car onto a driveway there.

An officer witnessed a near accident at Field Avenue and Cherry. Tyler Ratzlaff, 18, was cited for driving under denial and careless driving.

Officers responded to the 1700 block of Fremont Drive for a juvenile female shoplifter. She was issued a summons and released to her mother.

An officer responded to the 200 block of Justice Center Road to pick up a gun that was found by a party.

Officers had numerous cases and contacts with a male party who was having issues in his life this day. At one point, he was checked at STMH and released only to be contacted by officers twice more as he walked back to his vehicle across town, after refusing a courtesy ride.