I've been telling people how to be happy for 30-something years. Today I'm taking the day off.

Here are eight habits of Highly Miserable People, compiled by master family therapist, Cloe Madenes, whose books have been translated into over 20 languages.

Her guide, "Honing Your Misery Skills," presents simple practices you can do -- right now, starting today! -- to make your life duller and drearier. Why be the life of the party when you can be the party pooper? Cool.

"When you're miserable, people feel sorry for you," Coach Cloe explains in a recent psychotherapy newsletter, a popular read in my house. "Not only that, they often feel obscurely guilty, as if your misery might somehow be their fault. This is good!

"There's power in making other people feel guilty. The people who love you and those who depend on you will walk on eggshells to make sure that they don't say or do anything that will increase your misery."

Ready to stop pursuing happiness and start feeling your worst?

1. Blame your parents. "Blaming your parents for your defects, shortcomings, and failures is among the most important steps you can take," Madenes advises. "Your parents made you who you are today; you had nothing to do with it. If you happen to have any good qualities or successes, don't give your parents credit. Those are flukes."

2. Practice sustained boredom. Complain a lot about how bored you are. Keep repeating how everything in life is predictable and unexciting. Tell everyone you know so they'll feel they're part of the problem.

"Consider provoking a crisis to relieve your boredom," Madanes suggests. Have an affair, go on shopping sprees, quit your job, have another child, or my personal favorite: Start meaningless fights with your partner, boss, children and friends. Your level of misery is guaranteed to skyrocket.

3. Don't enjoy life's pleasures. Take no pleasure in things like food, wine, music, theater and beauty. Those are for boring, flighty, shallow people. If you unexpectedly find yourself admiring a sunset, playing with a puppy or enjoying a walk on the beach, stop!

Remind yourself that these are what Madanes calls "transitory pleasures." They can't compensate for the misery, suffering, poverty and illness that we find all over the world.

If you can see the beauty of nature as a total deception -- the mountains, rivers, sunrise -- you are well on your way to making your life more miserable.

4. Ruminate. This has nothing to do with cows. To ruminate is to spend a great deal of time focused on yourself.

"Worry constantly about the causes of your behavior, analyze your defects, and chew on your problems," counsels Madanes. "This will help you foster a pessimistic view of life. ... The point is to ensure that even minor upsets and difficulties appear huge and portentous."

5. Be critical. Develop an endless list of dislikes and voice them often. For example, never hesitate to say, "That's what you chose to wear today?" Be creative. Everyone dislikes traffic and mosquitos. Find new ways to be contrarian and set yourself apart from others. Your negativity can be applied to almost anything. Even Obamacare.

6. Avoid gratitude. "Research shows that people who express gratitude are happier that those who don't," explains Madanes. "So never express gratitude. Counting your blessings is for idiots. What blessings? Life is suffering, and then you die."

7. Give yourself a negative identity. Make your condition the focus of your life. If you're depressed, become a Depressed Person. If you suffer from social anxiety, read up on all the symptoms so you can speak about them endlessly.

"Practice putting yourself in the physiological state that represents your negative identity," counsels Madanes. If your negative identity is as a Depressed Person, hunch your shoulders, stare at the floor and breathe shallowly. Never smile. You want to keep your body as depressed as you are.

8. Whatever you do, do it only for personal gain. Sometimes you may be tempted to help someone or contribute to a charity. Resist! Don't do it unless there's something in it for you.

"Remember," says Madanes. "Your primary goal is to take care of Numero Uno, even though you hate yourself."

Marilynn Preston is a fitness expert, personal trainer and speaker on healthy lifestyle issues. She has a website, marilynnpreston.com, and welcomes reader questions, which can be sent to MyEnergyExpress@aol.com.