Obama­care means more work­ers are get­ting health in­sur­ance. And that could mean more money for wo­men.

First, wo­men spend more on health care than men. On av­er­age, a wo­man spent $5,246 on health care in 2012, com­pared with a man’s av­er­age of $4,125, ac­cord­ing to the Health Care Cost In­sti­tute. This is partly be­cause wo­men paid high­er in­sur­ance premi­ums — in­surers used to be able to charge wo­men more than men for the same health plan, a prac­tice that was banned by the Af­ford­able Care Act. But wo­men also have high­er costs be­cause they use more health ser­vices: They are more likely to go to the doc­tor when they get sick, they live longer, and they have ba­bies.

So the Af­ford­able Care Act is sav­ing wo­men money on premi­ums. But it could also save them money each time they go to the doc­tor, be­cause more wo­men are get­ting health cov­er­age in­stead of pay­ing out of pock­et. Big em­ploy­ers are re­quired to of­fer it, the ACA in­sur­ance ex­changes provide more choices for in­di­vidu­al shop­pers, and par­ents can al­low their daugh­ters to stay on their plans longer un­der Obama­care. More in­sured wo­men means more wo­men who can split the cost of health care with their in­sur­ance com­pany.

But that’s just the tip of the ice­berg on why the Af­ford­able Care Act could boost wo­men’s in­come and help close the gender wage gap, says Amy Al­lina, deputy dir­ect­or of the Na­tion­al Wo­men’s Health Net­work.

Al­lina says the health law’s new cov­er­age op­tions mean wo­men don’t have to worry about in­sur­ance when look­ing for a job, and that means they are more likely to shop around and find the best job with the highest wage or highest earn­ing po­ten­tial — not the one with the best health be­ne­fits.

Not re­ly­ing on an em­ploy­er for health in­sur­ance re­duces the feel­ing of “job lock,” the idea that people stay in a job that oth­er­wise pays poorly or does not of­fer op­por­tun­it­ies for ad­vance­ment be­cause they de­pend on the health cov­er­age provided by the em­ploy­er.

Wo­men are more likely to stay in a job for health in­sur­ance than men, be­cause wo­men value health in­sur­ance more, says Heidi Hart­mann, an eco­nom­ist who is also the pres­id­ent and founder of the In­sti­tute for Wo­men’s Policy Re­search.

“Wo­men have high­er out of pock­et health care costs than men, and any­thing that im­proves your dis­pos­able in­come by re­du­cing your costs is likely very valu­able,” Hart­mann said.

Hart­mann and Al­lina agree that the free­dom to shop around for a bet­ter job is im­port­ant — and Al­lina says the flex­ib­il­ity can help young wo­men pick a high-pay­ing job that will set the bar on their lifelong earn­ings.

“If you look for­ward in their lives and see what the be­ne­fit is of start­ing at a high­er wage, they will likely have high­er earn­ings over the course of their life,” Al­lina said. “Your start­ing place af­fects your end­ing place in terms of lifelong earn­ings.”

She points to some evid­ence from states that al­lowed young adults to stay on their par­ents’ plans be­fore the Af­ford­able Care Act was passed. In those states, a re­cent study from the Journ­al of Health Eco­nom­ics found, young adults saw a mod­est wage in­crease from stay­ing on their par­ents’ plans. For men, stay­ing on their par­ents’ plans meant they could stay in school and get a bet­ter de­gree — hence the wage bump. For wo­men, Al­lina says, that in­crease in earn­ings came at least in part by the flex­ib­il­ity of shop­ping around for a high­er-pay­ing job.

But not every­one agrees that Obama­care will lead to a health­i­er fin­an­cial fu­ture for wo­men. Some eco­nom­ists re­ject the idea that there are good-pay­ing jobs that wo­men just can’t take be­cause they don’t of­fer health be­ne­fits.

“Wouldn’t that be nice if it were ac­tu­ally true?” said Joe Ant­os, a health eco­nom­ist at the Amer­ic­an En­ter­prise In­sti­tute, whose résumé in­cludes time at the Con­gres­sion­al Budget Of­fice and the Health and Hu­man Ser­vices De­part­ment. “Jobs that don’t of­fer health in­sur­ance typ­ic­ally pay less. They’re aim­ing at a lower skilled part of the labor mar­ket. Tak­ing a high­er pay­ing job that didn’t have health be­ne­fits is a non sequit­ur.”

Ac­cord­ing to the Census Bur­eau’s 2012 Amer­ic­an Com­munity Sur­vey, 93.5 per­cent of full-time, private-sec­tor work­ers earn­ing an­nu­al salar­ies up­ward of $80,000 were re­ceiv­ing health in­sur­ance from their em­ploy­er.

But that’s not the only reas­on some eco­nom­ists doubt the Af­ford­able Care Act will have a pos­it­ive ef­fect on the gender wage gap. They also say that the costs as­so­ci­ated with hav­ing health in­sur­ance still re­duce over­all in­come.

Kath­er­ine Baick­er, an eco­nom­ist and a pro­fess­or at the Har­vard School of Pub­lic Health, who also serves as an ad­viser to the Con­gres­sion­al Budget Of­fice, points out that wo­men who don’t get their in­sur­ance from their em­ploy­er — wheth­er they’re stay­ing on a par­ent’s plan or shop­ping for cov­er­age on their own — are still pay­ing a por­tion of their wages to­ward the cost of health in­sur­ance. A job that of­fers health in­sur­ance prob­ably pays less than a job that of­fers no be­ne­fits, but that’s be­cause health in­sur­ance car­ries a mon­et­ary value when em­ploy­ers are eval­u­at­ing an em­ploy­ee’s total com­pens­a­tion.

“Hav­ing health in­sur­ance in and of it­self seems un­likely to af­fect the gender wage gap,” Baick­er wrote in an email.

Wheth­er the health law will make a dent on the gender wage gap isn’t clear. In fact, one eco­nom­ist of­fers an even bleak­er out­look: Obama­care will ac­tu­ally widen the in­come dis­par­ity between men and wo­men.

An­drew Biggs, a former So­cial Se­cur­ity Ad­min­is­tra­tion of­fi­cial and a cur­rent schol­ar at the Amer­ic­an En­ter­prise In­sti­tute, says the health law cre­ates an in­cent­ive for wo­men to work less be­cause they’ll be able to get health in­sur­ance else­where — and that will ex­pand the gender wage gap.

“The gender pay gap is driv­en al­most en­tirely by wo­men tak­ing time out of the work­force to have kids,” said Biggs. “To re­duce the gender pay gap, es­sen­tially wo­men have to work more. But wo­men’s labor sup­ply is more sens­it­ive than men’s is. You have some wo­men who are work­ing so they could get health in­sur­ance. If they could get it without work­ing, you may have less work­ing.”