CBS’s new show “Madam Secretary” may be inspired by some of the most polarizing and entrenched political figures in Washington D.C., but the showrunners and cast say they want to portray a less polarizing and negative D.C. on screen.

POLITICO’s Playbook Lunch on Friday featured show creator Barbara Hall, executive producers Morgan Freeman and Lori McCreary, and actors Téa Leoni and Tim Daly. The group outlined their hopes for the ideal D.C. where they want the show set.

Hall said they want to give people a behind-the-scenes look at what goes on at the State Department and “to invite people into the discussion of politics once again.”

“I think a lot of the time that the ways we consume politics is to take a stance and take a position and ignore the process,” Hall said. “If we let people in on the process, to show how difficult and strategic these issues then we can stop simplifying and talking about them in a polarizing way.”

Hall said there is always a “love-hate” relationship with Washington and the rest of the country, but people are always “fascinated” by it.

“There’s a lot more true believer-ism and a lot more true idealism in Washington than we give it credit for,” Hall said. “I’m always encouraged and inspired by talking to these people because they believe in what they’re doing and you can agree or disagree with their approach.”

Leoni added that she was “distressed” about the negative way most people view Washington.

“People are looking at our government with such cynicism and such a negative idea. I do think I see a lot of ‘We’re right and they’re crazy’ and I think if anything, we’re approaching this from a different perspective,” she said.

McCreary also told POLITICO that she hopes the show can help people view the government more positively.

“We can understand them from behind-the-scenes so that it doesn’t become this soundbite from one side or the other and that we, as the American public, can really start to understand them and start to make decisions to help them,” McCreary said. “I think our particular view is more aspirational, government running the way we’d love it to run.”

“Madam Secretary” premieres Sunday at 8 p.m. EST. The CBS show stars Téa Leoni as Elizabeth McCord, a former CIA analyst turned secretary of State. The show was inspired by former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Benghazi, but the character is more closely aligned with Sen. Kristen Gillibrand (D- N.Y.).