There no doubt will be countless stories of patients that will slip through the cracks as the nation gets used to Obamacare, but the story of one California woman bears noting.

In an op-ed piece for the Wall Street Journal, Edie Littlefield Sundby says she not only won’t get to keep her health coverage, she also will lose at least a portion of the medical team that has been treating her Stage 4 gallbladder cancer over the last seven years.

Sundby says the PPO that has insured her, offered by UnitedHealth Group Inc. /quotes/zigman/258846/delayed /quotes/nls/unh UNH , is pulling out of the state. As a result, she can’t find another insurer through the state’s exchange, Covered California, that is accepted by all members of the team of doctors that treat her — at the University of California, San Diego; Stanford University’s Cancer Institute, located hundreds of miles away in the San Francisco Bay Area; and the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston.

She points out that the plans offered in her San Diego home by Covered California aren’t the same as in other parts of the state, thus leaving her unable to retain her Stanford University doctor on the same plan as the UCSD team of physicians that treat her.

“So if I go with a health-exchange plan, I must choose between Stanford and UCSD,” Sundby writes. “Stanford has kept me alive — but UCSD has provided emergency and local treatment support during wretched periods of this disease, and it is where my primary-care doctors are.”

A writer on the web site Think Progress, Igor Volsky, says in a direct rebuttal to Sundby’s piece that the real reason she lost her insurance is UnitedHealth had to pull out of California along with Aetna Inc. /quotes/zigman/272706/delayed /quotes/nls/aet AET because of state tax breaks given to Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield.

Sundby maintains that buying insurance outside the exchange would cost 40% to 50% more, though insurers and online brokers say that policies will be priced the same either privately or on the exchange. It is unclear whether Sundby is ineligible for subsidies, which may explain the discrepancy.

Either way, Sundby ponders President Obama’s promise — which may say now has been broken — that consumers can keep their doctors and health plans.

“Thanks to the law, I have been forced to give up a world-class health plan. The exchange would force me to give up a world-class physician,” she writes.

Follow Russ Britt on Twitter@russbrittmktw

Follow Health Exchange on Twitter@MWHealthBlog