Kamala B.K. is tiny. She's barely 5 feet tall. A bright red ribbon sets off her dark hair.

As she walks past our guesthouse in the village of Thankot, we try to get her to come over and talk to us. But the 14-year-old won't come over to the porch.

"Because she's menstruating, she should not be entering another person's house. It's disrespectful," says Cecile Shrestha of Wateraid.

The nonprofit is working with girls and women in western Nepal to end a tradition called chaupadi — that's held them back for thousands of years: "When they are menstruating, no matter what, they stay outside, they eat outside and they sleep outside," Shrestha says.

Outside in sheds. In Kamala's village they consist of a raised platform, with no walls, some have thatched roofs.

Kamala tells us she'll sleep in one of those sheds tonight. We ask her to come closer to talk, but she covers her face with her hands and won't move.

"She's scared we are going to beat her," Shrestha says. Because stepping on to the porch would break a menstrual taboo.

Kamala believes that if she enters the house while she's menstruating, the people and animals will get sick. The gods will be angry and she'll bring a curse onto the house. She's also been told her hands will curl up and become deformed.

We try to reassure Kamala that no one will hurt her, but she's scared and runs away.

The Rebel

Three hundred miles away in the capital city of Kathmandu, we visit a completely different world.

Prakriti Kandel is 15. She's studying for her SATs. And with short hair and black-rimmed hipster glasses, Prakriti already looks like a college student.

Prakriti is very close to her parents. She sits next to her mom on the couch and often puts her head on her mom's shoulder. She says her dad has always supported her goal to go to college abroad — even though many girls in Nepal don't get to go to college at all.

"He was the one that said it was fine having one daughter, that he didn't need a son," she says. "He is always inspiring me in my life."

But Prakriti's family also puts restrictions on her when she's menstruating.

"When I'm having my period, I can't touch my grandmother, I can't eat while she's eating. I can't touch the table while she's eating. I can't touch my father, I can't touch my mother," she says.

She also can't go into the kitchen. But she forgets. "It's kind of confusing. You are just going into the kitchen one day, and the next day you're not allowed."

Prakriti fights with her mom and grandmother a lot about this. Sometimes she storms off to her room and cries.

Because she doesn't follow the rules, Prakriti gets blamed for awful things.

"There was a time when my father got sick, and he was hospitalized," she says. "The doctors couldn't diagnose him, and then one of the priests, he said, because I had touched him when I was having my period, it could have infuriated the clan gods."

I Am Untouchable

So the priest blamed Prakriti for her dad's illness because she had touched him while she was on period.

Where do these ideas come from?

Ancient Hindu scriptures say women are highly infectious during their periods, that "all her body is so weak that viruses come out of her mouth and her limbs," says Mukunda Aryal, who has studied Hindu culture for 40 years.

In Hinduism, there was once a king of the gods, who reigned above others. This god, called Indra, committed a horrible sin. And to atone for it, he created menstruation.

Now each month, women suffer for this god's sin. They're impure, dirty.

There's even an expression in Nepal that women say when they're on their periods: "I am now untouchable."

These taboos date back thousands of years and pervade nearly all cultures and religions, Aryal says. For example, in Christianity, women on their periods were once thought to be dangerous.

In some places, these taboos still hold on. For ultra-Orthodox Jews, the laws forbid any contact between men and women. Out in Nepal's western villages, these ancient rules are more than just a nuisance.

Red Shed

The next night, we find Kamala, and she agrees to take us to her shed.

It's about a ten minute walk. It's starting to get dark, and she doesn't have a flashlight. "I'm scared mostly of snakes and of men," she says through translator, Pragya Lamsal of WaterAid. Kamala has heard stories of girls being sexually assaulted when they're alone in their sheds.

Her shed is shocking. It looks more like a cage — with wooden bars crisscrossed over the top and sides. It's monsoon season and the rain is torrential. Kamala has a piece of plastic to drape across the top of her shed but she still got drenched.

Kamala was 11 when she first started her period and she remembers being terrified when she first slept outside. The shed is small, barely big enough for her to lie down and sometimes she shares it with 2 or 3 or more girls and so for most of the night they squat.

"I don't feel good about practicing this," Kamala says.

The Supreme Court of Nepal outlawed the practice in 2005 so it's illegal to force women into these sheds, but many villagers in the remote west continue to do it.

Menstruation Is A Power

Kamala says she can't break her community's rules. But in the capital Kathmandu, Prakriti is determined to change them.

After the priest blamed Prakriti for her father's illness, she went to work. She learned about the biology of menstruation. About how other cultures around the world treat it.

Then she had an epiphany: "Menstruation is not a taboo, but a power for women."

She felt so strongly about this issue that she wrote a novel, called Imposter. It's about a society where menstruation gives women superpowers. Men are afraid. "They ostracized women, so they couldn't unleash their power," Prakriti says.

Prakriti starts laughing while she reads her book because her mom makes fun of her ideas about menstruation. But Prakriti is serious. Her goal in life is to stop menstrual taboos — and all the discrimination and abuses that go with them.

"Because of this belief, because of this ritual, women are not equal to men," she says. "So this is just a way of discrimination, and discrimination always hurts," Prakriti says.

She's already got a plan to stop this discrimination: "After school, I want to pursue political science at a very good college. And my aim in life is to be the prime minister of Nepal and change things." And to get Kamala and all the girls in rural Nepal out of their sheds.



Share Your Story

Being a 15-year-old girl can be tough no matter where you live. Tell us: What was the hardest thing about being 15? Post a photo of yourself as a teen with your answer on Twitter or Instagram, and tag your post with #15Girls and @NPR. More details here.



Copyright 2016 NPR. To see more, visit http://www.npr.org/.

Transcript

SCOTT SIMON, HOST:

We're going to meet two teenage girls now, both born and raised in Nepal, both with loving families. Like many girls in southern Asia, each month when they get their periods, they say that something horrible happens. NPR's Michaeleen Doucleff and Jane Greenhalgh report on a tradition in Nepal that's held women back for thousands of years.

MICHAELEEN DOUCLEFF, BYLINE: Our first girl is Priakriti Kandel. She's 15, she's studying for her SATs and with short hair and black-rimmed hipster glasses, Priakriti already looks like a college student. Each month, though, she faces a tough situation.

PRIAKRITI KANDEL: When I am having my period, I can't touch my grandmother. I can't eat while she's eating. I can't touch the table while she's eating. I can't touch my father. I can't touch my mother.

JANE GREENHALGH, BYLINE: It's even worse for our second girl, Kamala B.K. She's 14 and lives out in the remote West. I met Kamala in a village called Tankut. I was sitting on the porch of my guest house when Kamala walked by. She's tiny, barely five feet, a bright red ribbon in her dark hair. We try to get her to talk to us, but she won't come over to the porch.

CECILE SHRESTHA: Because she's menstruating, she should not be entering another person's house.

GREENHALGH: I'm traveling with Cecile Shrestha of Wateraid, which is working with the girls and women in these villages to end a deeply rooted tradition.

SHRESTHA: When they're menstruating, no matter what, they stay outside. They eat outside and they sleep outside.

GREENHALGH: Outside in sheds, raised platforms, no walls. Some have thatched roofs. We ask Kamala if she's heading to one of these sheds.

SHRESTHA: Yeah, she'll sleep there tonight.

GREENHALGH: We ask her to come closer, but she covers her face with her hands and won't move.

Why is she hiding her face?

SHRESTHA: She's scared that we're going to beat her.

GREENHALGH: Because stepping on the porch would break a menstrual taboo, she runs away.

DOUCLEFF: Three hundred miles away in the capital Kathmandu, I visit a completely different world.

UNIDENTIFIED MAN: Hello, come, please.

DOUCLEFF: Namaste.

Priakriti is from an upper middle class family. She lives in a beautiful three-story home with a lush rose garden out front.

UNIDENTIFIED MAN: Tea or coffee?

DOUCLEFF: Tea?

UNIDENTIFIED MAN: Tea.

DOUCLEFF: Right away, it's clear Priakriti is very close to her parents. She sits next to her mom on the couch and often puts her head on her mom's shoulder. She says her dad has always supported her goal to go to college abroad, even though many girls in Nepal don't get to go to college at all.

PRIAKRITI: He was the one who said that it was fine having one daughter and that he didn't need a son. So he's always been inspiring me in my life.

DOUCLEFF: But Priakriti's family also puts restrictions on her when she's menstruating.

PRIAKRITI: I'm not supposed to go to the kitchen but I keep forgetting that I have my period. It's kind of confusing. Like, you're just going into the kitchen one day and the next day, you're suddenly not allowed to go.

DOUCLEFF: She fights with her mom and grandmother a lot about this. Sometimes she storms off to her room and cries. I ask her what will happen if she doesn't follow the rules. Awful things, she says.

PRIAKRITI: There was this time when my father got sick and he was hospitalized and then the doctors couldn't diagnose him. And then one of the priests, he said that because I had touched him when I was having my period, it could have infuriated the clan gods.

DOUCLEFF: So the priest blamed Priakriti for her dad's illness because she had touched him while she was on her period.

The must have made you feel bad.

PRIAKRITI: Yes, it did.

DOUCLEFF: How is this possible? Where do these ideas come from? Mukunda Aryal has studied Hinduism for 40 years. He says it's in the ancient Scriptures that women are highly infectious during their periods.

MUKUNDA ARYAL: All her body...

DOUCLEFF: He says her body is so weak that infections come out of her mouth.

And that's actually written in Hindu Scripture?

ARYAL: Yes, in many, many Scriptures.

DOUCLEFF: Aryal says that Hinduism has one god that reigns above all others. In Hindu Scripture, this king of gods commits a horrible sin. To atone for it, he created menstruation. Each month women suffer for this god's sin. They're impure, dirty. There's even an expression in Nepal that women say when they're on their periods.

ARYAL: I am now untouchable.

DOUCLEFF: I am now untouchable. Aryal says these taboos date back thousands of years and pervade nearly all cultures and religions. In Christianity, women on their periods were once thought to be dangerous. In some places, these taboos still hold on. For ultra-Orthodox Jews, the laws forbid any contact between men and women. Out in Nepal's western villages, these ancient rules are more than just a nuisance.

SHRESTHA: So we're walking to the shed.

GREENHALGH: We find Kamala and she agrees to take us to her shed. It's about a 10 minute walk. It's starting to get dark and she doesn't have a flashlight.

KAMALA B.K.: (Foreign language spoken.

UNIDENTIFIED WOMAN: She's scared mostly snakes and of men.

GREENHALGH: She's heard stories of girls being sexually assaulted when they're alone in their sheds. Kamala believes if she stays in the house, her family will be cursed, their animals will die and her hands will curl up and become deformed. And so Kamala sleeps here in this small shed. It's more like a cage with wooden bars crisscrossed over the top and sides.

It was raining really hard last night and it doesn't look as though there's any real cover on her shed.

KAMALA: (Foreign language spoken).

UNIDENTIFIED WOMAN: She got all drenched in the rain and she slept here the whole night.

GREENHALGH: It's actually illegal in Nepal to force women into these sheds. But many villagers in the remote West continue to do it.

UNIDENTIFIED WOMAN: I don't feel good about this, of practicing this.

GREENHALGH: Kamala says she can't break society's rules. But in the capital, Kathmandu, Priakriti is determined to change them.

PRIAKRITI: Because of this belief, because of this ritual, women are not equal to men. So I think this is just a way of discrimination, and discrimination always hurts.

DOUCLEFF: After the priest blamed Priakriti for her father's illness, she went to work. She learned about the biology of menstruation and about how other cultures around the world treat it. Then she had an epiphany.

PRIAKRITI: Menstruation is not a taboo but a power for women.

DOUCLEFF: A power for women. She felt so strongly about this issue that she wrote a book.

PRIAKRITI: I can show you the first draft of that book.

DOUCLEFF: Sure.

The book is a novel called "Imposter."

PRIAKRITI: I can read the prologue.

DOUCLEFF: OK, that would be great.

PRIAKRITI: (Reading) The world was created by divine powers that we know as gods and goddesses...

DOUCLEFF: It's about a society where menstruation gives women superpowers. Men are afraid.

PRIAKRITI: And so they decided to ostracize - (laughter) what? So they decided to ostracize women so that they couldn't unleash their power.

DOUCLEFF: Priakriti is laughing because her mom is beside her making fun of her book and her ideas about menstruation. But Priakriti is serious. Her goal in life is to stop menstrual taboos. Here's her plan.

PRIAKRITI: After school, I want to pursuit political science in a very good college. And my aim in life is to be the prime minister of Nepal and change things.

DOUCLEFF: Change things to get Kamala and all the girls in the countryside out of their sheds. Michaeleen Doucleff.

GREENHALGH: And Jane Greenhalgh, NPR News. Transcript provided by NPR, Copyright NPR.