Risk management: Health system CEOs split on prepaid contracts from employers, health insurers

Four leading health system CEOs in Southeast Michigan said they are preparing their organizations to accept a variety of financial risk contracts for patients under their care from health insurers or employers.



Most financial risk contracts reimburse providers under fee-for-service with the potential of receiving bonus payments for hitting quality targets. Another type of risk contract allows providers to share savings from cost reductions.



So far, however, few systems have been offered or signed prepaid, risk-based contracts, said Nancy Schlichting of Henry Ford Health System, Gene Michalski of Beaumont Health, Joe Mullany of the Detroit Medical Center and Rob Casalou of St. Joseph Mercy Ann Arbor and Livingston hospitals.



But at the sixth annual Crain's Health Care Leadership Summit this month, two of the four CEOs — Schlichting and Mullany — said during a panel discussion that they are ready to make or expand on those prepaid deals with insurers and employers.



Some payers, including Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan, are experimenting with performance-based contracts, which reimburse providers under fee-for-service but with bonus payments for improved quality.



Schlichting and Mullany say their systems are ready to move beyond shared-risk contracts to sign prepaid, full-risk contracts for specific populations of patients. Michalski and Casalou said their systems are looking to sign more pay-for-performance-type contracts that reward providers for improving quality and holding down unnecessary use of services.



Under prepaid reimbursement — also known as capitation or prepayment — hospitals and physicians take financial risk for a set number of health care services in exchange for a prepaid monthly rate per member.



Unlike fee-for-service reimbursement, in which providers make more money for more procedures, prepaid reimbursement requires hospitals and doctors to provide only appropriate care.



Experts think government payers — Medicare and Medicaid — and private payers ultimately will reimburse providers on a prepaid basis in the coming years.



"I hope we move quickly to a prepayment (flat payment per member per month) model," said Schlichting, who leads an integrated system with five hospitals, more than 40 outpatient centers, a 1,000-member employed medical group and two health plans. "It would help us sustain our system."



Like many hospital-based systems under health reform, Henry Ford is working to reduce unnecessary use and inpatient readmissions.



"We have reduced our (Medicare readmission) penalties but also lost about $28 million in revenue," Schlichting said. "We set goals to reduce ER visits, imaging and readmissions, but in the short run are not rewarded. I'd like to see a rapid cycle to a more sustainable reimbursement model."



Over the past two years, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services has been penalizing hospitals millions of dollars if they readmit certain patients within 30 days. Medicare estimates the 2 million readmitted patients cost the federal government about $17 billion each year.



Mullany said the DMC is treating patients on a prepaid basis and can expand that quickly.





Related Links