Topics: Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test, Pacific Standard, Placebo, placebo effect, Sleep, sleeping, Life News

This piece originally appeared on Pacific Standard.

How did you sleep last night? Did you get a sufficient amount of high-quality shut-eye?

Newly published research suggests that if you believe you did, you’re more likely to perform well at certain challenging tasks. It isn’t the actual amount of sleep that matters, but rather your conviction that you got the rest you needed.

That’s the conclusion of Colorado College psychologists Christina Draganich and Kristi Erdal. Writing in the Journal of Experimental Psychology, they provide further evidence of the remarkable strength of the placebo effect.

They describe two experiments in which they manipulated participants’ perceptions regarding the quality of their sleep. In the first, the participants—50 undergraduates—began by estimating (on a scale of one to 10) how deeply they had slept the night before.

They were then hooked up to a machine that supposedly uses certain biomarkers to determine how much REM sleep they had received. In fact, no such machine exists: The only thing that was measured was their brain activity.

The students were informed that people who spend one-quarter of their slumber in REM sleep tend to do well on learning and memory tests, while those who spend less than 20 percent of the time in that state tend to do worse. They were then presented with their (completely fictional) reading of either 16.2 or 28.7 percent REM sleep.

Afterward, each took the Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test, a tricky assignment that is “perceived as difficult and stressful,” the researchers write.

The results: “When participants were informed that they had experienced below-average sleep quality the night before, they tended to perform worse on the test, regardless of how well they felt they had slept,” the researchers write. “The observed pattern of cognitive functioning is consistent with what one might observe if participants had actually experienced a poor night’s sleep.”