Buy Photo Rai (Photo: File/Press-Gazette Media)Buy Photo

Hospital Sisters Health System (HSHS) and Prevea Health agreed to join Integrated Health Network of Wisconsin, a network of independent health care systems and the Medical College of Wisconsin.

“It’s probably one of the biggest strategic moves we’ve made,” said Dr. Ashok Rai, president and CEO of Prevea.

The network — called an accountable care organization (ACO) under the Affordable Care Act — with the addition of Prevea and HSHS will include 42 hospitals, 500 clinics and more than 5,000 physicians in northern, central and eastern Wisconsin. Accountable care organizations share data and try to figure out the most effective, least costly ways to provide health care.

“You are looking at an aggregate of hundreds of thousands of lives. You can look at truly where the best practices are,” Rai said. “The intent is to lower costs and improve quality.”

Rai emphasized they would be sharing aggregate data, not individual patient records.

The ACO also can contract with insurance providers as one entity, which means members of the individual networks can use physicians and hospitals throughout the network and the network can cut costs to members.

Integrated Health Network is based in Brookfield and its members include Agnesian Healthcare, Columbia St. Mary’s, Froedtert Health, Medical College of Wisconsin, Ministry Health Care and Wheaton St. Franciscan Healthcare. Medical College of Wisconsin has a campus at St. Norbert College in De Pere, which Rai said will provide opportunities for even better connections with the network.

“IHN has the infrastructure in place for its members to truly collaborate on improving quality and efficiency,” said Therese Pandl, president and CEO of HSHS’s Eastern Wisconsin Division. “Being part of an established alliance that is already working with health insurers will help us prepare for coming changes in health care delivery to the benefit of our patients and our communities.”

Hospital Sisters Health System’s headquarters is in Springfield, Ill. Its facilities in Wisconsin include St. Vincent Hospital and St. Mary’s Hospital Medical Center, both in Green Bay; St. Clare Memorial Hospital, Oconto Falls; St. Nicholas Hospital, Sheboygan; Sacred Heart Hospital, Eau Claire; and St. Joseph’s Hospital and HSHS Medical Group, both in Chippewa Falls. Hospital Sisters also is a partner in Prevea Health, the remainder of which is owned by its physicians.

Prevea include more than 300 primary- and specialty-care physicians, 20 health centers and 27 employer-based clinics in Northeastern Wisconsin, Prevea, Hospital Sisters and Dean Health Plan jointly own Prevea360 Health Plan.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1Djyvrn