Print Email Font Resize Font Resize Boulder hosts performing arts event designed for kids with disabilities

The rules for Sunday's family performing arts event in Boulder included no shushing, no explaining, no apologizing and no judging.



Kids were free to be as loud as they wanted and to participate, just watch or leave in the middle of a performance. A meltdown because of sensory overload — no big deal. Walking around or bouncing on an exercise ball instead of sitting still — not a problem.



“We only ask that the kids be their wonderful loud, joyous selves and enjoy the arts,” said organizer Julie Marshall, who has a daughter on the autism spectrum. “It's their day. Jazzy Marshall gets on top of Myla Rosser during some fun with an exercise ball. "Brainsong," a performing arts event for kids with disabilities and their families, was held Sunday at the East Boulder Recreation Center. For more photos and a video, go to www.dailycamera.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)



The interactive event, held at the East Boulder Recreation Center with about 130 families planning to attend, included a harpist, stories, a vibraphone, gymnastics, a flash mob of ballet dancers and a bubble fairy who created giant bubbles using nets.



“They just need a place to feel welcome and comfortable,” Marshall said. “They can really blossom. It's all about bringing joy.”



During the drum circle, led by Fort Collins special education teacher Nancy Brauhn-Curnes, kids and adults alike enthusiastically beat out simple rhythms on drums, shook noisemakers and danced.



“It's a wonderful way to integrate children,” Brauhn-Curnes said. “Drumming is a nice equalizer. Advertisement



Erie's Amy Vandermeer said taking her 10-year-old son John with autism to community events usually fills her with anxiety.



“We never know how he's going to react,” she said.



But at events like this, she said, she knows he can be himself and there won't be judgement.



“I'm so thrilled that they do things like this,” she said. “We don't get dirty looks here. I love it. Myla Rosser, 9, bounces on a ball to the music of harpist Pam Eldridge. "Brainsong," a performing arts event for kids with disabilities and their families, was held Sunday at the East Boulder Recreation Center. For more photos and a video, go to www.dailycamera.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)



K-Lee Stoltz, who has four children and lives in Thornton, said events usually fall into two categories. Some are designed specifically for her 14-year-old Noah, who has autism, but leave out her other three children. Others are good events for the rest of the family, but are more challenging for Noah.



This event, she said, was fun for everyone.



“Everyone was included,” she said.



Louisville's Rosario Maiocco brought 7-year-old son, Lucas, who's developmentally disabled. She said her son loves music, but doesn't like enclosed spaces or sitting in a group.



“He likes to be outdoors,” she said from the deck attached to the main room where performances were held. “He can go in and out. It's been fantastic.”



The event was free for families thanks to sponsorships and donations.



“It's a wonderful way to let children be children,” said Weslyn Austin, operations director at Boulder County's Association for Community Living.







The rules for Sunday's family performing arts event in Boulder included no shushing, no explaining, no apologizing and no judging.Kids were free to be as loud as they wanted and to participate, just watch or leave in the middle of a performance. A meltdown because of sensory overload — no big deal. Walking around or bouncing on an exercise ball instead of sitting still — not a problem.“We only ask that the kids be their wonderful loud, joyous selves and enjoy the arts,” said organizer Julie Marshall, who has a daughter on the autism spectrum. “It's their day.The interactive event, held at the East Boulder Recreation Center with about 130 families planning to attend, included a harpist, stories, a vibraphone, gymnastics, a flash mob of ballet dancers and a bubble fairy who created giant bubbles using nets.“They just need a place to feel welcome and comfortable,” Marshall said. “They can really blossom. It's all about bringing joy.”During the drum circle, led by Fort Collins special education teacher Nancy Brauhn-Curnes, kids and adults alike enthusiastically beat out simple rhythms on drums, shook noisemakers and danced.“It's a wonderful way to integrate children,” Brauhn-Curnes said. “Drumming is a nice equalizer.Everyone benefits.”Erie's Amy Vandermeer said taking her 10-year-old son John with autism to community events usually fills her with anxiety.“We never know how he's going to react,” she said.But at events like this, she said, she knows he can be himself and there won't be judgement.“I'm so thrilled that they do things like this,” she said. “We don't get dirty looks here. I love it.K-Lee Stoltz, who has four children and lives in Thornton, said events usually fall into two categories. Some are designed specifically for her 14-year-old Noah, who has autism, but leave out her other three children. Others are good events for the rest of the family, but are more challenging for Noah.This event, she said, was fun for everyone.“Everyone was included,” she said.Louisville's Rosario Maiocco brought 7-year-old son, Lucas, who's developmentally disabled. She said her son loves music, but doesn't like enclosed spaces or sitting in a group.“He likes to be outdoors,” she said from the deck attached to the main room where performances were held. “He can go in and out. It's been fantastic.”The event was free for families thanks to sponsorships and donations.“It's a wonderful way to let children be children,” said Weslyn Austin, operations director at Boulder County's Association for Community Living.