Locals line up for hours to get a taste of controversial McDonald’s in Tecoma

Tecoma McDonalds opens 1:05 Play video The Tecoma McDonalds has opened in the face of community protests. Courtesy Channel Ten

PROTESTERS say that the controversial McDonald’s outlet in Tecoma will fail - but locals have lined up for hours to be the first in the store on opening day.

Customers were let into the restaurant in small groups just after 11am, as angry protesters continued to chant their disapproval.

First customer Jake Pancutt, of Upwey, had been waiting outside the outlet for four hours, and ordered a large Quarter Pounder meal with extra meat and cheese.

“I’ve been waiting here since seven o’clock this morning. It’s awesome,” the 16-year-old said.

“We all live around here and the protesters have to understand we all want it.”

It wasn’t an ideal first meal for Jake though – he also became the first person to spill his drink in the store.

Owner James Currie – a Yarra Ranges resident who owns two other McDonald’s franchises in the area – said he would not take issue with the protesters as long as they stuck to “peaceful and legal” demonstration and did not harass customers.

Mr Currie, 53, told the Herald Sun he was confident Tecoma residents would embrace the controversial restaurant, which will employ 100 locals, despite sustained opposition from the Shire of Yarra Ranges and months of angry demonstrations at its construction site.

“I’m excited about giving those people (staff) the opportunity that I’ve had in McDonald’s,” Mr Currie said today.

“The protesters have the right to have their opinion; I respect that absolutely.

“They have committed to doing that peacefully and lawfully, and as long as they continue doing that I don’t have a problem with it.”

Mr Currie said security would remain on site until protests died down. The tab for the security bill will be picked up by McDonald’s.

Protesters say their bunfight against the “unwanted” Burwood Hwy outlet is not over.

But they insist action will not involve vandalising the store or physically preventing people from entering it.

A march is expected to be held outside the store today.

Leader understands protesters will be marching holding ladders to symbolise their protest against the proverbial corporate ladder in business.

Mr Currie, a Lilydale resident said protesters’ objection that the fast food store would disrupt the Yarra Ranges’ way of life was unfounded, as Tecoma was not the “sleepy little hollow” it had been painted as.

“(The outlet) is on a highway. There’s a chicken shop, a pizza shop, a fish and chip shop and even a bottle shop nearby,” Mr Currie said.

“Everybody we’ve spoken to is excited about us coming here.”

Mr Currie said he hoped the Yarra Ranges-flavoured store - which is dressed with local stone to ensure it fits with the Tecoma streetscape and features a Puffing Billy mural inside - would encourage passers-by to stop in the town and support other local businesses.

Mr Currie - who started working at McDonald’s 39 years ago and also runs stores in Boronia and Wantirna said protesters had picketed his Boronia franchise for months after he took on the Tecoma store and had not affected business.

‘No Maccas in Tecoma’ spokesman Garry Muratore said the group had not been disheartened by the store’s opening, and would continue fighting by working with local tourism operators and brandishing banners on the Burwood Hwy to encourage would-be customers to support local businesses instead.

Illegal action, such as blockading the store to prevent people going inside, would not be tolerated by the protest group, Mr Muratore said.

“It’s patently obvious McDonald’s will fail in Tecoma,” he said.

“We know we’ve struck a chord here. McDonald’s is going to have a hard time trying to turn that around.”

Mr Muratore said protesters were also hopeful of preventing fast food chains from expanding further into the Yarra Ranges by gaining State Government support for a planning amendment to outlaw drive-throughs in the area.

He said Yarra Ranges council had submitted the request, which was waiting for Matthew Guy’s ruling.

“It would mean this type of thing cannot happen again in the Dandenong Ranges,” he said.

“(McDonald’s) may have won this battle, but they haven’t won the war.”

The Yarra Ranges council rejected McDonald’s application for a Tecoma outlet in October 2011 after receiving hundreds of objections, largely sparked by noise, traffic, litter and health concerns.

McDonald’s appealed to the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal, which overturned the decision in October 2012.

samantha.landy@news.com.au