Swiss drugmaker Novartis and Google have teamed up to develop “smart” contact lenses to assist diabetics and people with corrective vision needs.

The lenses will be able to help diabetics track their blood glucose levels by measuring the glucose in their tear fluid and will then send the data wirelessly to a mobile device. The invention of these lenses would eliminate diabetics having to prick their fingers, which they do up to 10 times daily, to check their body’s production of the sugar.

The “smart” lenses will also help people with presbyopia. Presbyopia is the gradual loss of your eyes’ ability to focus on nearby objects. It is a common problem that comes with aging and usually affects people over 40 years old. Novartis hopes the lenses will help restore the eye’s ability to focus, similar to the autofocus on a camera, according to Reuters.

The technology embedded into the lenses would include non-invasive sensors, microchips, and other miniaturized electronics. “Our dream is to use the latest technology in the miniaturization of electronics to help improve the quality of life for millions of people,” said Google co-founder Sergey Brin. “We are very excited to work with Novartis to make this dream come true.”

Drugmakers across the country are exploring ways for technology to reshape health care, ultimately lowering the costs of managing chronic diseases. The development of “smart” lenses have been in development since at least 2009. Project co-founder Babak Parviz worked with Microsoft Research before going to Google.

“We are looking forward to working with Google to bring together their advanced technology and our extensive knowledge of biology to meet unmet medical needs,” said Novartis CEO Joseph Jimenez in a statement. “This is a key step for us to go beyond the confines of traditional disease management starting with the eye.”

Novartis' eyecare unit, Alcon, offers industry-leading products to transform treatment of eye diseases and conditions. Alcon is organized into three businesses: surgical, pharmaceutical, and vision care.