North Charleston, SC, where 1 in 9 people are victims of violent crime each year, is the home Eric Hamilton left behind.

"It's probably one of the worst cities in America as far as the crime rate and as far as education levels where blacks are concerned," Hamilton said.

But Hamilton's father, also Eric, saw an opportunity. He saw a chance to give his 10 year-old son a safer life so they moved to Atlanta, where Eric found basketball with the help of a college icon.

"I remember I ran up to my dad and said, 'Dad, Jerry Stackhouse just told me that he's trying to start an AAU team and he wants me to be one of the first players,'" Hamilton recalled, thinking back to an experience which led to his most educational years under the former third overall draft pick and 18 year NBA veteran.

Growing into a 6'8" top 100 high school player, Hamilton became another recruit enamored by the influential prowess of Wichita State assistant coach Greg Heiar. He signed with the Shockers in November of 2013.

But just weeks into his stay, the Shocker coaches asked him to leave the program for one year and attend a local prep school. They told him about Sunrise Christian Academy.

"I still made that choice to come here simply because of how much trust Coach (Greg) Heiar and Coach (Gregg) Marshall had in this organization," Hamilton said.

"Early he was really receptive and excited about but as time went on you could tell that he still wanted to be a Shocker and it took him a little bit to kind of accept where he was," said Hamilton's prep team coach at Sunrise Christian Academy, Luke Barnwell.

He was frustrated and, at times, kicked out of practice. The team would run sprints often to make up for Hamilton's shortfalls. As he woke up before the sun would rise in order to shoot in the gym, or run outside on the school's track, he failed to realize that his physical performance was not in question. He needed to change his mental approach.

"It was pretty tough for me at first. I'm not going to lie to you. It was tough for me for the first several week because I came from college and now I'm coming to where I've never been before," said Hamilton.

His coaches questioned not only if he would make it at Wichita State, but even at Sunrise.

"It got him to a point where he was really at his lowest point. That, honestly, is how we were able to build him back up. And I think that's what opened the door through his faith," said Barnwell.

Hamilton made a choice. He says he realized he was not sent to Sunrise Christian. He was led there.

"I actually got saved here. And I remember the moment that I got saved. It was in Dr. (Robert) Lindsted's office," he said.

"He helped me to recognize Jesus Christ as my Lord and Savior back in October and that's definitely a moment that I will never forget for the rest of my life because if I wasn't at Sunrise, that probably wouldn't have happened for me."

"That was a huge point in his life that changed who he was as a person," said Barnwell. "If you change who you are as a person, everything else follows. On the floor, in practice and in games he was much better after that."

He would still attend as many WSU home games as he could and he felt the difficulty in watching from the stands disappear.

As his faith and his game evolved, word traveled.

"They're very excited about him. He's just a tremendous kid from what we can tell and he's getting better learning how to play with more tenacity and discipline, if you will," said WSU head coach Gregg Marshall.

"I think Eric has the opportunity to be a multi-purpose guy, a little bit like Cleanthony (Early) was," said Sunrise Christian head coach Kyle Lindsted. "I'm not saying he's there yet. Obviously there's some development to go and Coach Marshall has some work ahead of him with Eric but Eric has some of those tools that would make you think he's got a chance to be a good player at that level."

In his home just outside Sunrise's campus, where he lives with his teammates and even Barnwell, Hamilton is once again saying goodbye. The basketball season is over.

But 10 years after leaving Charleston, he does not leave with fear, but with faith.

"God probably put me here for a reason. In order to get closer to him. In order for me to fully commit myself so maybe that's the reason. And once I realized that, it's just been smooth sailing for me."

On Wednesday, Hamilton returned from an invitational tournament in China where he represented his country for the Team USA All-Stars. He faced the best competition he's ever seen and averaged 13 points and 7 rebounds per game. Exactly what he averaged at Sunrise Christian.

Now his focus is on reporting to camp at Wichita State for the second time. This time, he can make Koch Arena his home.