By Melissa Bilecky and Michaelangelo Conte

Journal staff writers

The Jersey City Fire Department was on hand yesterday morning in Central Park when the "Good Morning America" team took on the ALS Ice Bucket Challenge.

With huge smiles on their faces, the Jersey City firefighters assisted in dumping the buckets on some of the ABC anchors and news correspondents’ heads, including Sara Haines, Ginger Zee, Lara Spencer, Tory Johnson and David Muir.

“We had five gallon buckets of ice and water and one by one we took turns dumping it on them,” said Jersey City Fire Department Capt. Loren Hart.

The ice bucket challenge, which raises money for ALS awareness, has swept across the country in recent weeks on social media. Facebook, Twitter and Instagram have all been flooded with videos of famous faces and thousands of people dumping ice cold buckets of water on themselves for a good cause, then nominating others to do the same.

“It was great,” Hart continued. “Firefighters generally like to help people and it felt good to represent the city and to help in this worthwhile cause.”

Pete Frates, a former Boston College baseball star who has ALS, helped inspire the ice bucket challenge with his wife, Julie, and fellow ALS patient, Pat Quinn.

If you don’t complete the challenge within 24 hours, you’re supposed to donate $100 to your choice of ALS charities.

The ALS Association has raised close to a whopping $4 million in donations compared to the $1.12 million it raised during the same time period last year, according to the organization’s website.

Michael Strahan challenged his GMA family to complete the challenge. And as part of the challenge’s guidelines, it had to be completed within 24 hours.

Meanwhile, Jersey City’s official Twitter account tweeted out yesterday that Firefighter Anthony DelFino was one of the locals to participate in the segment.

Others from the Jersey City Fire Department participating in the challenge were Battalion Chief Steven McGill, as well as firefighters Buddy Hayes, Greg Petillo, Frank Manzo, Gregg Allan, Andrew Delfino, Jason Grecco and Kevin Nally.