Health Care Legislative and Regulatory Update

From international law firm Arnold & Porter LLP comes a timely column that provides views on current regulatory and legislative topics that weigh on the minds of today’s physicians and health care executives.

On June 25, the U.S. Supreme Court issued a long-anticipated decision (previously previewed) in the latest legal challenge to the Affordable Care Act (ACA). The case, King v. Burwell, concerns the lawfulness of an IRS regulation allowing low-income enrollees in health plans offered on federally-facilitated health insurance exchanges (called Federal Exchanges) to receive tax credits to subsidize the cost of their health insurance premiums. The Court’s decision upholding the IRS rule is a major victory for proponents of the ACA. According to the nonpartisan Urban Institute in Washington, D.C., an estimated 8.2 million people in 34 states risked losing their health insurance coverage if the Court ruled to invalidate the IRS regulation. What does this decision mean for health care providers? In short, it depends on where you live, where you work and on the local politics in your state. Here’s a guide to help you break it down.

The issue

The ACA includes three key provisions that were designed to work together to enable the ACA’s expansion of health insurance coverage.

Lauren L. Haertlein



1. Insurance market reforms. The ACA established a number of health insurance reforms, such as prohibiting insurers from refusing to cover individuals based on their preexisting medical conditions. For these reforms to work, the ACA had to expand the number of people covered by health insurance to spread the risks and costs associated with sicker people who would now be guaranteed coverage across a larger pool of insured individuals.

2. Individual mandate. To expand the risk pool, the ACA mandated that everyone obtain health insurance. The ACA also required the establishment of marketplaces, called “Exchanges,” in each state, where individuals could purchase health insurance. The ACA envisioned state-run Exchanges but provided that if a state decided not to establish an Exchange, the federal government must establish and operate the Exchange in that state (ie, a Federal Exchange). In practice, fewer states were willing or able to run Exchanges. Moreover, it’s estimated that roughly 5.4 million people thus far have obtained health insurance through Federal Exchanges.

3. Low-income premium assistance. Recognizing that a mandate to purchase insurance is effective only if the prospective purchasers can afford it, Congress included in the ACA tax credits (also described as premium subsidies) to low-income purchasers. The ACA specifies that the amount of tax credit an enrollee receives is based on the cost of the insurance an enrollee purchases through “an Exchange established by the State.”

In May 2012, the IRS issued a regulation implementing the tax credit provision, which permitted financially eligible individuals who enrolled in health insurance through either a State or a Federal Exchange to receive them. In 2014, approximately 86% of Federal Exchange enrollees met the income qualification for tax credits.

The plaintiffs in King v. Burwell challenged the legitimacy of the IRS regulation allowing tax credits for enrollees in Federal Exchanges. As residents of Virginia (which has a Federal Exchange), the plaintiffs did not want to be eligible for the premium subsidies, because without them, they would satisfy an exemption to the individual mandate for individuals “who cannot afford coverage” or who would suffer hardship if forced to buy it. Plaintiffs argument was simple: The phrase “an Exchange established by the State” does not include an Exchange established by the federal government.