The Republic | azcentral.com Sat Nov 2, 2013 8:59 PM

Valley health-care leaders are crediting a Phoenix ordinance — one that taxes hospitals to draw federal matching dollars — with helping local hospitals bridge a year of potentially crippling costs to care for uninsured and underinsured patients.

The Phoenix Access to Care Ordinance has resulted in more than $272 million distributed to participating hospitals since the city passed it in December.

The funds help cover uncompensated care, which had soared in recent years because of unemployment and cuts to the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System, the state’s Medicaid program, officials said. Uncompensated care was expected to reach $540 million this year, officials said.

“Because of the recession, a lot of people lost their jobs, so there was a sharp spike in unemployment and people not covered by insurance,” Deputy City Manager Rick Naimark said. “There was a big increase in uninsured patients and this situation was putting our hospitals, the jobs they create and our health-care system at risk.”

Last December, the Phoenix City Council adopted an ordinance to tax local hospitals and pool the money, which generates federal matching funds for the hospitals.

The ordinance imposed a short-term tax — 6 percent of net inpatient revenue — on 11 local hospitals. The hospitals cannot pass the tax along to patients.

The money created a funding source for AHCCCS and triggered a roughly 2-to-1 federal match, which AHCCCS distributed back to participating hospitals based on their share of uncompensated-care costs.

Officials originally estimated Phoenix hospitals would receive about $200 million in federal match. That figure will be closer to between $310 million and $315 million once the year is over, according to Naimark.

The city received federal matching dollars for an unexpected extra quarter, he said. There also were more hospital visits than expected.

Either way, “it’s a significant infusion of federal dollars into the economy there,” Naimark said.

On Oct. 22, the council received the first update on the effect of the ordinance.

So far, Phoenix has collected more than $131 million in taxes and drawn about $250 million in federal matching dollars.

In addition to the $272 million paid out to Phoenix hospitals, AHCCCS received nearly $29 million to expand its coverage for about 33,000 more children and 13,000 more adults.

The ordinance had a far-reaching effect on hospitals that served Phoenix’s most impoverished communities, such as St. Joseph’s Hospital and Medical Center in central Phoenix.

“Dignity Health had over $81 million in charity care and bad debt last year alone, with St. Joe’s being the lion’s share of that,” said Suzanne Pfister, former vice president of external affairs for Dignity Health. “So this (ordinance) literally balanced our budget last year.”

In 2011, an effort to assess a similar tax on hospitals across Arizona failed in the Legislature. However, state lawmakers that year approved Senate Bill 1357, which allows cities to create their own pools of money to trigger federal matching dollars — effectively handing the issue over to local governments.

So far, Phoenix is the only city in Arizona to create such an ordinance.

“Who would have guessed that we could have pulled this off?” said Reg Ballantyne, senior strategy adviser for Tenet Healthcare. In June, Tenet bought Vanguard Health Systems, which operated several Arizona hospitals as Abrazo Health Care. “This is our tax money being returned to Phoenix. We’re a donor state.”

City officials said none of the money came from Phoenix taxpayers or city coffers.

“That money, if it didn’t go here, would have gone to support jobs and health care in another community, and we wanted to be sure we got our fair share,” Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton said.

Phoenix’s Access to Care Ordinance is set to expire on Dec. 31. Phoenix exempted certain hospitals, including government, specialty, small children’s and those that provide a significant percentage of care to out-of-state and Medicare patients.

The end of the Phoenix ordinance will coincide with the start of expanded AHCCCS coverage in Arizona.

Earlier this year, the state Legislature broadened Medicaid eligibility to those earning less than 133 percent of the federal poverty level, a move that will trigger a similar disbursement of federal dollars that will pay for most of Arizona’s health-care costs under the 2010 Affordable Care Act.