A federal appeals court today issued a ruling that, if upheld, would strike down a large component of the Affordable Care Act. A three-judge panel of the U.S. Appeals Court of D.C. ruled that those receiving health insurance in the 36 states where the federal health exchanges operate are not eligible for subsidies under the law.

This feature of the Affordable Care Act uses tax credits to help individuals pay for health insurance. The aid provided to low-income Americans is critical for the 2010 health care policy. The Washington Post reports that 87 percent of the 5.4 million who signed up for coverage in these 36 states received federal subsidies. Without those IRS-provided subsidies, the price of health care for those individuals could increase by up to 76 percent.

[MORE: Cartoons on Obamacare]

In his decision, Senior Circuit Judge Raymond Randolph wrote: "We reach this conclusion, frankly, with reluctance. At least until states that wish to can set up Exchanges, our ruling will likely have significant consequences both for the millions of individuals receiving tax credits through federal Exchanges and for health insurance markets more broadly. But, high as those stakes are, the principle of legislative supremacy that guides us is higher still." Judge Harry Edwards dissented, writing that, "This case is about Appellants’ not-so-veiled attempt to gut the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act."

Cary Gibson at U.S. News argued earlier this month that such a ruling would mean trouble for the those who cannot normally afford insurance. "The effect would be a serious weakening in the reform of the individual insurance market, one of the key problems the health care law sought to resolve," she wrote. And Dan Mangan at CNBC writes that, "the 72-page decision threatens to unleash a cascade of effects that could seriously compromise Obamacare's goals of compelling people to get health insurance, and helping them afford it." The subsidies play a critical role in the law in part because they determine whether employers and individuals must pay tax penalties – employers must pay for those workers who receive them and individuals must pay if they don't purchase health insurance when the subsidies would make them affordable.

The subsidies will not be stopped immediately; the court anticipates that the Obama administration will appeal. The full 11-member appeals court will be asked to make a ruling. And the outcome of the case is not certain – in a separate ruling the 4th Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the same federal subsidies on Tuesday.