Disney darlings aren't so squeaky-clean anymore





Photo: Disney Image 1 of / 2 Caption Close Image 1 of 2 Vanessa Hudgens, from "High School Musical" sweetheart to gritty "Gimme Shelter"street kid. Vanessa Hudgens, from "High School Musical" sweetheart to gritty "Gimme Shelter"street kid. Photo: Disney Image 2 of 2 Vanessa Hudgens stars in "Gimme Shelter." VANESSA HUDGENS "APPLE' IN CHURCH SCENE WITH OTHER ACTORS: _ VANESSA HUDGENS "APPLE' IN CHURCH SCENE GIM7524.tif Vanessa Hudgens stars in "Gimme Shelter." VANESSA HUDGENS "APPLE' IN CHURCH SCENE WITH OTHER ACTORS: _ VANESSA HUDGENS "APPLE' IN CHURCH SCENE GIM7524.tif Photo: Roadside Attractions Disney darlings aren't so squeaky-clean anymore 1 / 2 Back to Gallery

Your eyes do not deceive you. That battered waif in the homeless-teen redemption drama "Gimme Shelter" is none other than erstwhile Disney darling Vanessa Hudgens.

It's not the first out-of-the-Mouse role she has done, nor the most violent ("Sucker Punch," anyone?), but it is a clear step toward Adult Land. On its heels, Hudgens' "High School Musical" cast mate and former beau, Zac Efron, will soon bow in the R-rated romcom "That Awkward Moment."

Ah, they grow up so fast.

Which puts one in mind of performers who have received a key growth spurt from Disney, some of whom one might not immediately connect to the Empire of the Mouse.

There are the obvious current stars from that awesomely talent-scouted edition of the Mickey Mouse Club: Christina Aguilera, Keri Russell, Britney Spears, Justin Timberlake (who had last year's top-selling album) and Mr. Dreamy Oscar Bait himself, Ryan Gosling ("M-I-C ... see you real soon ... K-E-Y ... why? Because I have to go gain some weight and pluck my scalp to look like I've aged 10 or so rough years for this role").

There are former stars of Disney Channel movies and series still strongly associated with those roots, such as Hilary Duff, Selena Gomez, Demi Lovato, Raven-Symoné, Ashley Tisdale and, of course, Miley "twerking her way to your gag reflex" Cyrus.

Then there is that laundry list of Disney-ites who have made as much news for their indiscretions as their work. More than a dozen have been busted in the past several years, mostly for driving under the influence (Mischa Barton of "A Ring of Endless Light," Omar Gooding of "Smart Guy") or drug-related charges (including possession of meth in the case of Lalaine of "Lizzie Maguire"). Another "Smart Guy" cast member, Jason Weaver, was arrested for leaving what we shall call an unwanted gift on someone's lawn. There have also been charges of domestic violence and vehicular manslaughter, but not at what seems like a statistically significant rate. The Lohanesque serial offenders are few and far between.

Rather, the Mouse is less known for churning out perps than performers. For viewers of a certain age, that means old-school stars such as Annette Funicello and Dean Jones.

Some think of Kurt Russell hissing at people behind an eye patch, or slapping a dude and growling behind a sinister 'stache, "You gonna do somethin'? Or you just gonna stand there and bleed?" They might forget he was the Mouse's top star of the '70s, riding a 10-year Disney deal.

He reportedly met his eventual longtime companion, Goldie Hawn, on the set of her film debut - Disney's 1968 "The One and Only, Genuine, Original Family Band" (she played Giggly Girl. One of that film's stars, an ingenue in Disney's 1967 "The Happiest Millionaire," was Lesley Ann Warren, who became one of the purringest sex kittens of the '70s.

Jodie Foster, too

And kids, Jodie Foster is not just a multiple-Oscar-winning actress and respected director; she made several preteen Disney movies, including the first "Freaky Friday." Then she was a teen prostitute in Martin Scorsese's decidedly un-Disney-like "Taxi Driver." In an interview, Foster said, "I couldn't believe they were offering it to me. I was the Disney kid! ... I spent four hours with a shrink to prove I was normal enough to play a hooker."

How about James Bond with Mouse ears? The original big-screen (and for many, the One True) Bond, Sean Connery, got a major career boost from starring in "Darby O'Gill and the Little People" in 1959. The film continues to be well thought of, although many accounts have Bond creator Ian Fleming unimpressed by Connery's casting as 007. Fleming apparently came to appreciate it, as his later identification of the agent's ancestry as Scottish is thought to be a nod to the actor.

Many, many currently popular performers made early splashes in Disney theatrical movies, such as Joseph Gordon-Levitt ("Angels in the Outfield") and Anne Hathaway ("The Princess Diaries"), who went on to win an Oscar for "Les Miserables." Then there's Lindsay "Cautionary Tale" Lohan (the "Parent Trap" and "Freaky Friday" remakes, others).

Camilla Belle ("Rip Girls"), Kaley Cuoco ("Alley Cats Strike") and Katherine Heigl ("Wish Upon a Star") all got early legs up from Disney Channel fare.

Rossum and Pill

Emmy Rossum, dropping many a jaw on Showtime's "Shameless" and as a legit singer, appeared in "Genius" as a 13-year-old. As a 15-year-old, Alison Pill put Disney Channel movie "The Other Me" on her resume. Since then, she has had success in film, on Broadway and on HBO (on what may be Aaron Sorkin's best show, "The Newsroom").

Most might remember Shia LaBeouf first from "Transformers" or, before that, the Project Greenlight movie "The Battle of Shaker Heights." But he got his start as a noted goofball on the Disney Channel series "Even Stevens." Those adventurous enough to check out the very, ahem, adult "Nymphomaniac," his forthcoming dip into the waters of Lars von Trier (with whom one imagines every day on set to be a Freaky Friday), can brace themselves by checking out any of the NSFW advance clips online. Not you, kids!

Frankie Muniz ("Miracle in Lane 2") went on to be the genius son on "Malcolm in the Middle." He's now a drummer for indie-rock band Kingsfoil, a rising race-car driver who received a 2008 award for sportsmanship, and an anti-Obama tweeter who doesn't like Obamacare or Susan Rice and exhorts people to "wake up."

And then there's Christian Bale. Yep, one might forget, but Mr. "Machinist"/"Dark Knight"/"American Psycho" counts among his earliest major credits Disney's musical film "Newsies" and the animated "Pocahontas." So really, he's a total Disney dude. Round those Bat-ears, and you can see it. {sbox}

Gimme Shelter (PG-13) opens Friday in the Bay Area.

See a trailers at http://gimmeshelterthemovie.com.