Topics: Bill Clinton, Chelsea Clinton, Hillary Clinton, Twitter, Entertainment News

Over the weekend, Diana Nyad successfully completed her swim from Cuba to Florida — quite the feat! Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton took the opportunity to congratulate Nyad, and, in so doing, more heartily congratulate herself.

Flying to 112 countries is a lot until you consider swimming between 2. Feels like I swim with sharks - but you actually did it! Congrats! — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) September 2, 2013

Leaving aside the fact that Clinton, or whoever tweets for her, uses up so many characters praising herself that she doesn’t have room for a proper noun elucidating to whom she’s speaking, this is among the most tone-deaf moments yet for a political figure usually far more adept. Flying between countries is literally a baseline requirement for the Secretary of State job that has made Clinton a credible potential presidential candidate, not a terrible hardship on par with days of uninterrupted swimming.

Can a news event happen without Clinton reminding us of just how hard she worked until just before the crisis in Syria erupted? (That’s the sort of event on which Clinton’s take would be welcome — but, of course, it can’t be answered with a pithy joke about how hard she worked!)

Clinton isn’t very active on Twitter, but her tweet at Nyad wasn’t the first time she’s hijacked a news event to make a somewhat incoherent joke about her résumé.

Congratulations from across the pond to the Duke and Duchess! Wishing you the best of luck and a bit of advice: It Takes a (Royal) Village! — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) July 23, 2013

Get it, Kate and Will? Hillary Clinton is an extremely famous person who’s been famous since the 1990s, when she wrote a book called “It Takes a Village.” This is the only way this scans, as — of course — the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge will have plenty of childrearing support. As for how non-famous parents might manage to raise their children in less glamorous circumstances, @HillaryClinton has no time for that.

Bill Clinton is little better; using the occasion of Barack Obama’s birthday to remind his followers that he was also president once:

To 44: Happy birthday @BarackObama. From 42. — Bill Clinton (@billclinton) August 4, 2013

And making weird jokes directed at celebrity pals:

Everyone wants the moves like Jagger...but @MickJagger, you're one of a kind. Happy Birthday, friend! — Bill Clinton (@billclinton) July 26, 2013

Hey @McIlroyRory - I'm working on my short game. (Only a few strokes behind my niece Fiona and nephew Simon.) pic.twitter.com/8xUbkkYVKS — Bill Clinton (@billclinton) August 22, 2013

.@RealJasonKidd @realgranthill33 Congratulations on incredible careers. Let me know if you need any retirement advice. — Bill Clinton (@billclinton) June 5, 2013