Ann Smith, far right, with her husband Bill Smith, son Darden and daughters Ann Caton and Elizabeth in Washington state this summer. Ann Smith was diagnosed with breast cancer two years ago even though her mammograms found no cancer. (Photo: Special to the Citizen-Times)

Even though North Carolina was one of the earlier adopters of a law that helps women learn their breast cancer risk, it wasn't soon enough for Ann Smith.

The freelance writer from Biltmore Lake was diagnosed with invasive ductal carcinoma Jan. 3, 2013, a year before the law went into effect. She found the lump herself, after years of mammograms told her she didn't have cancer.

"I was diagnosed before the breast density law went into effect. I had extremely dense tissue and the mammograms missed it," said Smith, a mother of three.

The law, known as the breast density law, requires medical facilities to inform women in writing which of four types of breast tissue density they have. It went into effect in North Carolina Jan. 1. At the time, the state was the nation's 12th to enact such a law. There are now 19 states that have similar legislation.

For women with dense breasts, the letter includes the warning that the density "may make it more difficult to detect abnormalities in the breast and may be associated with an increased risk of breast cancer" and that they should discuss supplemental screenings with their doctor.

Understanding of the law is slowly starting to make its way across Western North Carolina to women, their doctors and health insurance companies. While some applaud the legislation, others say it needs modifications to have a real impact.

Smith said her fourth mammogram in as many years was deemed normal in October 2012, but she found the cancerous lump herself only two months later, a week before Christmas. After requesting all of her medical records from her doctor's office, she found her mammogram reports from previous years all said she had extremely dense tissue, which is the most difficult kind to read on mammograms, and found in 10 percent of women. Another 40 percent of women have heterogeneously dense tissue.

"One report said something to the effect of: 'this patient's breast tissue is so dense that it is difficult to detect whether there are any abnormalities.'

"So (the radiologist) erred on the side of everything is OK, based on previous mammograms. With this law in effect, legally they would have had to tell me that my breast tissue was so dense that I should seek additional diagnostic testing. I wasn't given that information, so I was really lucky that I found the lump myself just two months later."

Smith's cancer was diagnosed as triple negative — the most aggressive, fastest-growing kind — through an ultrasound, biopsy and subsequent breast MRI, which is more effective at detecting cancer in dense tissue. She underwent a bilateral mastectomy to remove the cancer.

"I would have still had cancer, but we would have found it even sooner," she said.

Breast cancer second highest cancer killer of women

According to the American Cancer Society, breast cancer is still the most deadly form of cancer among women in the United States, after lung cancer.

Women in the United States have a 12 percent, or one in eight, lifetime risk of being diagnosed with breast cancer. There were nearly 300,000 new cases of breast cancer diagnosed last year, including 7,580 cases in North Carolina. Nearly 40,000 people died from the disease, including 1,310 statewide.

There are about 500 new cases of breast cancer diagnosed in Asheville each year.

Dr. Helen Sandven, a radiologist and medical director of Asheville Breast Center, said breast density is determined solely by mammogram. It has nothing to do with breast size or weight. Dense tissue appears white on mammograms, and so does cancer, so density can mask cancer on a 2D image.

The four categories of breast density, from least to most dense, are: almost entirely fatty — found in 10 percent of women; scattered areas of fibroglandular density — 40 percent; heterogeneously dense — 40 percent; and extremely dense — 10 percent.

Sandven said the Asheville Breast Center is working to bring more cutting-edge screening technology to the mountains. They worked with Mission Hospital to acquire one of the newest screening tools — tomosynthesis, or 3D mammography. The screening tool has been proven in studies to detect more cancer at earlier stages, with fewer false positives, in women with dense tissue.

Mission has approved purchase of a machine manufactured by GE, and should have it installed at Hope Women's Cancer Center in the first quarter of 2015, hospital spokeswoman Jerri Jameson said.

Sandven said she hopes another machine will soon follow at Asheville Imaging, which performs more than 40,000 mammograms a year.

She is continuing to look at new technology and is excited about the emerging 3D breast ultrasound, which is more effective at detecting cancer in dense tissue than traditional ultrasound, but does not expose patients to radiation, as do 2D and 3D mammograms.

The issue will be funding, Sandven said.

"The state legislature mandated that we send these (mammogram) letters, but didn't mandate that insurance pay for the supplemental screenings," she said. "It's not wrong, it's just confusing. We're in the middle of an evolution so we don't have a good answer for what is going to be best for supplemental screening."

She said the mammogram is still the most effective tool for detecting breast cancer, but women with dense tissue, who have a greater than 20 percent lifetime risk of getting breast cancer, need additional screening, such as ultrasound, breast MRI, CESM or BSGI.

Getting women to know their risk is another hurdle, Sandven said.

This can be assessed by talking with a genetics counselor (which may or may not be covered by one's insurance), talking with a doctor knowledgeable in breast cancer, or taking an online risk assessment, such as the Gail Model, found on the American Cancer Society's website (cancer.org).

Dr. Michael Messino, an oncologist with Cancer Care of WNC, said that he is finding more women are becoming aware of the law and becoming more educated on breast density. But he feels women should be having conversations about their breast cancer risks with their family physicians or OB-GYNs.

"If a doctor orders a mammogram, they should follow up with patient," Messino said.

"Mammogram is the most common method for diagnosing breast cancer. Mammography shows other architectural changes you can't feel. Mammography picks up smaller calcifications that can't be seen on ultrasound, and not always on MRI."

He recommends all women get annual mammograms, and if they are found to have dense tissue, they should discuss with their doctor additional screening, such as ultrasound, breast MRI, contrast enhanced spectral mammography, and tomosynthesis, or 3D mammography.

"I think people should still consider mammography as an initial screening technique. If we can make mammogram a little better, to reduce false positives, that's where we really need to go. A screening test has got to be pretty good to pick up a disease, but it's also got to be affordable."

One of the criticisms of the new breast density law is that affordability piece. The law does not require insurance companies to pay for supplemental screening, which can range in the thousands of dollars, compared to a mammogram, which is about $200, but is required to be covered by health insurance under the Affordable Care Act.

While Smith's breast MRI (which can cost about $2,000) was covered, other women attempting to be proactive have encountered difficulties.

Lew Borman, spokesman for Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Carolina, the state's largest private health insurance company with 3.84 million customers, said screening and diagnostic mammograms are covered, and ultrasound in many cases.

"Our medical coverage is not affected by this law," Borman said. "If abnormal findings are noted on a mammogram, then the member would be eligible for more intensive diagnostic imaging. We would cover if additional imaging was warranted."

He also indicated there are some tests considered investigational by most insurers, such as BSGI, or breast specific gamma imaging (which is available in Asheville), so people should call their providers to check coverage before getting supplemental screening.

After her mammogram earlier this year, Leslie Ann Keller, an Asheville artist, learned she had extremely dense tissue. After decades of receiving normal mammograms, she decided to be proactive. Her mother battled both breast and ovarian cancer, and being older than age 50, Keller didn't want to take chances.

She asked her family doctor about her cancer risk, and he agreed she should have additional screening. He recommended a breast MRI. The procedure, which includes contrast by IV, showed Keller had no cancer. But her insurance company refused to pay for the procedure, which cost more than $2,000.

"Their argument was that a breast MRI is not considered preventative, but no one told me that," said Keller, who has BC/BS.

She filed an appeal, which was denied, and then filed a second-level appeal.

"They brought in someone from the outside and I was allowed to be on a phone conference with them," she said. "Finally that worked and they agreed to pay for it."

Dr. Beth Buys, an obstetrician-gynecologist at Mountain Area Health Education Center OB/GYN Specialists, said she is seeing these issues with her patients, having many say that breast MRIs are not covered by their health insurance. If Buys has a patient with a high risk for breast cancer, she typically will first order an ultrasound.

"If someone had a family history of breast cancer, I order an MRI. One woman decided she couldn't afford it. I think that's unfortunate," Buys said.

She said for now, MAHEC is leaving the decision to follow up on mammograms with the patients.

"As we're moving more toward patient-centered health care and prevention, and ensuring patients are engaged in their health care, I think patients will be more apt to follow up on results. It's such an important part of advocating for your own health to take this seriously."

"Once you find cancer, it's a race against the clock," said Ann Smith, who was diagnosed with the type of cancer that metastasizes quickly to other organs. "(If I had known about breast density), that would have given me two more months lead time to get treatment to ensure even more that it was early stage and had not metastasis. Time is critical when you are diagnosed."

Breast cancer risk factors

Some of the most common risk factors for breast cancer are:

•Gender: Simply being a woman.

•Age: Risk increases as women get older. About one out of eight invasive breast cancers are found in women younger than 45, while about two out of three invasive breast cancers are found in women age 55 or older.

•Genetics: Up to 10 percent of cases are hereditary, resulting from gene mutations; family history — having a mother, sister or daughter with breast cancer nearly doubles the risk;

•Race and ethnicity: Caucasian women are slightly more likely to develop breast cancer, though African-American women have a higher mortality rate from the disease.

•Dense breast tissue: Heterogenously dense or extremely dense breasts result in a higher risk than less dense breasts.

•Length of menstrual periods: Women who started menstruating before age 12 or who went through menopause after age 55 have a slightly higher risk.

•Previous chest radiation: Women who, as children or young adults, have had radiation therapy to the chest area as treatment for another cancer, such as Hodgkin lymphoma, have a significantly increased risk.

Lifestyle-related or changeable risk factors

•Alcohol consumption.

•Hormone replacement therapy.

•Smoking.

•No full-term pregnancies.

•Obesity.

•Physical activity: Women who get regular exercise have a 10-20 percent lower risk compared to women who are inactive.

Source: American Cancer Society/National Cancer Institute

Breast cancer support meeting

Bosom Buddies, a breast cancer support group for survivors and support members, will hold a special meeting Tuesday night in celebration of breast cancer awareness month.

The meeting starts at 5:30 p.m. Oct. 28 with snacks and socializing at First Baptist Church Fellowship Hall, 63 N. Main St. (Parking lot and entry is in the back of the church.) Starting at 6 p.m. those attending will be pampered with free facials and makeovers from Mary Kay independent beauty consultants. There will be drawings for free products. Come with or without your makeup.

For more information, email coordinator Colleen Austin at cbaustin@comcast.net.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1ww8Mpc