After the Avalanche’s 4-2 loss Saturday night to the bedraggled Winnipeg Jets, Colorado coach Patrick Roy seemed to be calling out his most prominent players.

He mentioned Erik Johnson, Tyson Barrie, Matt Duchene, Gabe Landeskog and Nathan MacKinnon, then added: “Obviously, they need to be the ones who push the pace night after night.”

But asked whether he was calling them out, Roy said no.

“You know me, I’m not going to play that game,” he said. “I’m just saying they are the leaders of this team. Also, I just answered your question. You’re trying to bring me into a trap maybe. It’s a good try.”

If it was a trap, it was a neutral-zone trap. Roy’s answer was civil, almost good-natured give-and-take.

But this is what he said a little earlier: “Let’s not kid ourselves — E.J., Tyson, they have to carry our defense. Nathan, Dutchy, Landy, they have to carry the offense. They are the heart of this team. These are the guys that are going to decide how far this team’s going to go. These are the guys, with Varly obviously, who are going to decide whether we make the playoffs or not. They’re the leaders of this team.

“Some are talking in the room, some it’s more on the ice, but they are the leaders of this team and they’re the ones who have to take charge and turn this thing around.”

Of course, his remarks also were notable because of those players he didn’t mention, since the Avalanche hasn’t been getting scoring beyond its high-profile young forwards. So it’s up to them, so to speak, especially if Jarome Iginla and Alex Tanguay continue to struggle and the lines beyond those centered by MacKinnon and Carl Soderberg don’t pitch in offensively.

The Avalanche is 0-2-1 on the homestand that began after the all-star break and concludes Tuesday against Vancouver.

The upside for Colorado is that is has managed to remain in a Western Conference wild-card playoff spot during the latest slide.

“We had a chance, three games at home coming back, to start where we left off,” Roy said. “We should be disappointed right now. We cannot be happy about the way we’ve been playing the last three games. Yeah, we scored the first goal (against Winnipeg), but after that, they took the play away from us.”

Mikhail Grigorenko, who had been installed on the top line with Duchene and MacKinnon at even strength, gave the Avalanche a 1-0 lead with a power-play goal and Duchene got his 24th of the season to close Colorado within 3-2 in the second.

But even with the Jets playing for the second time in 26 hours, the Central Division’s cellar-dwellers held on.

After Jack Skille’s concussion — suffered against Dallas on Thursday — the Avalanche was down to 12 available forwards, so all played against the Jets. Colorado didn’t practice Sunday, and it seems likely the team will recall a forward from San Antonio in advance of the Tuesday game against the Canucks.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or @TFrei