Warning that “we’ve lost some of our spirit,” Ohio Gov. John Kasich said Friday ever-intensifying partisanship and a lack of unifying leadership in Washington is having a divisive effect on the American society.

John Kasich John Kasich (R) is a candidate for president in 2016. More

After discussing fiscal, energy and regulatory policy at a business-oriented town hall-style discussion in the state’s largest city, Kasich waxed philosophical when asked how he would, as president, try to unify the nation.

Kasich said it is up to politicians to convince Americans that they have the public interest at heart, “and we are not there as Republicans or Democrats.” He said he has worked with Democrats in his home state and as chairman of the U.S. House Budget Committee in the mid-1990s.

“It’s really hard, but you have to convince people of the greater purpose,” Kasich told about 40 Granite Staters who crowded into a small room at the historic Franklin Pierce Carpenter House on Elm Street. “I’ve done it most of my lifetime. It will wear you out, but you have to do something when you’re on this earth.

“We are increasingly living in a society where the family has been weakened, where we’re increasingly isolated from one another,” Kasich said. “That’s not America. And as a president or even as a governor, it’s limited what I can do about it, but I can talk about it.

“I think we’ve lost some of our spirit, and a president can show, talk and be a role model.

“Isn’t that at the heart of some of our problems? That it’s all about my re-election and my golden parachute or the number of views that they get on TV? The sense that we’re all in this together has been somewhat lost,” he said.

“Show respect to people,” Kasich said. “You don’t have to agree with them, but you don’t have to hate them.”

Kasich has spent 32 days in New Hampshire since the beginning of the year, according to the WMUR Candidate Tracker, relying mostly on the traditional Granite State town hall format.

He opened the hour-long meeting by questioning President Barack Obama’s veto of the $612 billion defense authorization bill.

“My understanding is that he vetoed it because he wanted the other non-defense discretionary spending to rise,” Kasich said. “So, it appears he was kind of holding the military underneath his thumb, saying he’s not going to give a pay raise to the men and women of the military because he wants all this other spending.

“That’s just not right. And I think the Republicans and Democrats who voted for it should try to override the president.”

Kasich called for a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution and promoted a plan he released last week to balance the federal budget in eight years.

He supported the New Hampshire Legislature’s passage of a budget that lowered business taxes.

“Think about it like a restaurant,” he said. “If you have a restaurant and you have no customers, would you raise prices? No, we have to cut our prices, cut the overhead.”

Kasich also spoke with more than a hint of sarcasm about non-traditional politicians, such as Donald Trump and Ben Carson, dominating the race for the GOP presidential nomination.

“In politics today, if you have any experience in it, people question you,” he said. “If you have no experience in it, they believe you. That’s a really great way for a country to think about this.

“I’m going to a doctor, but I’m going to go to somebody who does not have a medical license,” he said. “People practice this alternative medicine for a while and then when it gets really serious, what do they do? They run to the doctor and say, ‘Why did I wait so long?’ We can’t make the same mistake when we’re picking a president.”

Kasich opposed a federal minimum wage hike, saying states should decide the issue individually. He called for a one-year freeze on federal regulations and proposed the appointment of “independent people” to help business owners navigate the regulatory morass through what he called “a court of common sense.”

Kasich was question about money in politics by a man who said he once worked for U.S. Sen. Warren Rudman.

Kasich responded, “Let me ask you something. Did money in politics affect Warren Rudman?"

“I knew Warren, and Warren could care less who gave him money,” Kasich said. “I don’t give a rip about who gives me anything.

“The way I look at it, when people give me money, it doesn’t matter to me. They have no influence on me. If, all of a sudden, they had influence, I wouldn’t balance the budget because I would have ceded the moral high ground. I’d be taking care of somebody.”

He said that ultimately, “It depends on how you do your job. You can’t legislate character.”

Questioned about climate change, Kasich said it exists and “I do believe that man impacts it. I’m just not certain how much.”

He said his energy policy is: “We need everything. We need oil, gas, clean coal. We need renewables.

“I believe we need to care about the environment,” he said. “The Lord gave it to us, and we have to care for it. Not worship it but take care of it. We should promote the renewables, but we should not ignore the other things that work because it’s all part of our economy.”

Kasich said he would keep the AmeriCorps program intact but would not increase its funding. He said he would double funding for the National Institutes of Health.

He proposed repealing the Affordable Care Act and replacing it with a program that rewards health care providers for acting on preventative measures.

Kasich took an interest in a dispute between the Londonderry School District and the U.S. Department of Agriculture over the town’s school lunch program. When the district decided to drop out of the federal program, the USDA reportedly classified the high school’s kitchens a “food processing facility,” subject to heavy regulations and requiring new equipment.

The dispute appears to have subsided, but Kasich directed his staff to pursue it, telling those at the meeting that the federal government should stay out of school lunch programs.