SAN JUAN MOUNTAINS — High above Silverton, at 10,800 feet and a dozen miles outside town at the Grouse Gulch aid station, slightly more than halfway through the 100.5-mile Hardrock Endurance Run, runners who even get to this point often face an excruciating decision about the future of their run.

It is the last outpost easily accessible to crew, support and officials without strenuous hiking, surrounded by the towering San Juan Mountains. There are two ways to go from here: several thousand feet up, eventually summiting the 14,048-foot Handies Peak, or several thousand feet down in one of the vehicles beckoning those too exhausted or medically unable to continue — a 30-minute drop into town where a warm bed and a hot shower await.

By nightfall here, heavy rain and brilliant flashes of lightning crack across the sky. Dale Garland, the run’s respected veteran director, radios down to Silverton to request a weather service forecast from NOAA, worried about having groups of runners and pacers — those who help weary and delirious competitors find their way along the course — stuck at high altitudes with little shelter. It will be several more hours until the storm blows over.

Some will forge ahead, but many will wait out the storm in two small tents, drinking hot soup, consuming food to restore energy, sleeping until it is safe to continue. Sit down, and you may not get up.

“Beware the chair,” hardened veterans of ultrarunning say.

But this is no worry for Kílian Jornet Burgada, the Spanish super endurance athlete who three weeks ago summited Alaska’s Denali in record time, and by the next checkpoint at Burrows will be leading one of the most difficult endurance runs in the world by 16 minutes. He is one of three who made it over Handies before the worst of the storm.

The course record set in 2008 by Kyle Skaggs stood at 23 hours, 23 minutes — and now it was in jeopardy. Sure enough, at 4:41 a.m., well before the sun rose, Jornet came trotting through Silverton with his pacer, Anna Frost, and knelt down to kiss “The Rock” — the stone that runners must peck to officially finish the run. A few dozen passionate spectators and media had gathered under the street lamps to witness history.

Final time: 22:41:35. Someone shouts out from the crowd, “Are you a mountain goat?” Laughter.

“The record is a thing you think about during the race,” Jornet said. “But I was mostly thinking about finishing the race. It’s difficult to finish a 100-mile race always.”

Jornet had just obliterated one of the most revered records in North American ultradistance running in the most competitive field in the run’s history, and now he appeared to have done it with ease. Had he started faster early on, it’s likely he would have gone under 22 hours. To conserve energy in the early parts of the race, he briskly walked the uphills and ran the flats and downhills, he said. In the late miles, his lead grew as he and his pacer ran the uphills.

“The altitude affects everybody,” Jornet said, sitting in a chair answering questions in front of the Hardrock. “You can’t run as fast as you do lower. But it didn’t affect me any more than normal.”

At 26, Jornet is the most accomplished endurance athlete of his generation, observers of this sport say, smashing long-held endurance records with such breathtaking aplomb that it’s a wonder he has much left to accomplish. He called Hardrock the last of the major ultramarathons on his list to complete and win.

He didn’t rule out a return next year — where he will be offered one of two automatic slots in the 140-person field — to run the course in the opposite direction (it switches each year).

“I need to do the other side now,” he said.

The run, now in its 21st year, began Friday at 6 a.m. with 140 people and has a cutoff time of 48 hours after the start. Its difficulty is due to altitude, steep climbs and remoteness. “Wild and Tough,” the race’s slogan declares.

Tales of courageous pursuit of the finish abounded. Runner Jason Koop was caught in chilling rain after Grouse Gulch and suffered hypothermia, Garland said. A group of campers near Handies Peak ushered him into their tent to warm him, and he continued, but he had to drop at the Sherman Aid Station at Mile 72. A night rescue via helicopter in bad weather would have been impossible.

Timothy Olson, one of the top athletes coming in, suffered an uneasy stomach throughout, unable to keep down any food for energy other than “Fritos and Sprite” for half the race. He willed himself to finish 12th, knelt before the Hardrock, bowed his head, took a deep breath, and kissed the rock face. He finished in 30:18:45.

“That was some work,” he said. “I did it. That was the goal coming in — to kiss The Rock. I just had a lot of things go wrong. I threw up everything — a lot.”

He was ready to quit after Ouray at Mile 44. It took him an hour and a half to do the next mile. When did he know he was going to finish? “Probably when they kicked me out of Grouse (aid station). The lightning scared the [expletive] out of me.”

Julien Chorier of France, who suffered back problems during the rain and lightning, limped to the finish in second in 25:07:56, missing his goal of finishing under 24 hours.

Many of the race’s top athletes pulled out for various medical issues. Sebastien Chaigneau of France, the defending champion, pulled out at Grouse Gulch aid station for stomach issues. At Mile 87.1, women’s leader Diana Finkel dropped out of the race for the third straight year for reasons that weren’t immediately known. It opened the door for Darcy Piceu Africa — her main rival — who finished in 29:49 as the top woman for the third year in a row.

“It’s bittersweet,” Africa said of her win. “I wish Diana could have kept going.”

“The lightning was close,” she said of the storms. “We didn’t stop, but we had to squat once. It’s par for the course in the mountains.”

After the impromptu news conference, Jornet hung around the finish waiting for others, talking with fans, media and other athletes. He retreated eventually to eat, get a hot shower and sleep (he said he might need only eight hours). After the awards ceremony Sunday, he’ll leave and — depending on how he recovers — be ready for a race in Italy by Thursday: a 1-kilometer vertical ascent.

Daniel Petty: dpetty@denverpost.com, 303-954-1081, twitter.com/danielpetty

Updated July 15 at 3:31 p.m.The following corrected information has been added to this article: Because of an error by a reporter, the name of Kilian Jornet’s pacer was originally misspelled. She is Anna Frost.