Vice President Joe Biden spoke at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace event on Oct. 8, 2015 in Washington, D.C. (CNSNews.com/Penny Starr)

(CNSNews.com) – Vice President Joe Biden said on Thursday that he and President Barack Obama made “tough and incredibly unpopular decisions” when they took office, including the Affordable Care Act, supporting the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) and the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.



“When the president and I took office, we knew we had to make some tough and incredibly unpopular decisions,” Biden said at a Carnegie Endowment for International Peace event in Washington, D.C. “I’m sure some of them were unpopular with you as well as Democrats and Republicans.”





Biden cited the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, or the Stimulus Act, which cost taxpayers more than $800 billion dollars, and TARP, which was signed into law by President George W. Bush in 2008, and Dodd Frank Wall Street Reform Act, legislation to regulate financial institutions.



“The Recovery Act, which was over $800 billion in spending in an 18-month period, TARP – voting to support TARP in the Congress was like … putting rattlesnakes in people’s kitchens,” Biden said. “I mean – because the very people they blamed for the problem were being bailed out.



“It’s hard to explain,” Biden said.

Biden also cited the Dodd Frank Wall Street Reform Act, the federal bailout of the U.S. auto industry and the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, as successful laws despite their unpopularity.



“But as a result of those things, in my humble opinion, and because primarily the grit of the American people, we’ve gone from economic crisis to recovery, and I think we’re on the cusp of a genuine resurgence in the U.S. economy and U.S. growth,” Biden said.



Later in his remarks at the event, which focused on job creation and infrastructure investment, Biden specifically praised the Recovery Act, which he administered.



“It was the most competently run program in the history of the United States for the amount of money involved,” Biden said, “and it mattered.”



Biden said the Recovery Act improved more than 6,000 miles of rail, more than 350,000 miles of road and 20,000 bridges.



However, a 2014 Wall Street Journal editorial, entitled “Obama’s Stimulus Five Years Later,” criticized the stimulus plan and Biden.



“Shortly after the passage of the Recovery Act in 2009, Vice President Joseph Biden urged local politicians not to spend the money on ‘stupid things.’ They ignored his advice, and so did Mr. Biden,” the editorial said.



“The federal government poured billions into the government and education sectors, where unemployment was low, but spent only about 10% on promised infrastructure, though the unemployment rate in construction was running in double digits,” it stated.



“And some of the individual projects funded by the law were truly appalling. $783,000 was spent on a study of why young people consume malt liquor and marijuana. $92,000 went to the Army Corps of Engineers for costumes for mascots like Bobber the Water Safety Dog. $219,000 funded a study of college ‘hookups,’” the editorial added.



“The failure of the stimulus was a failure of the neo-Keynesian belief that economies can be jolted into action by a wave of government spending,” the editorial said. “In fact, people are smart enough to realize that every dollar poured into the economy via government spending must eventually be taken out of the productive economy in the form of taxes. The way to jolt an economy to life and to sustain long-term growth is to create more incentives for people to work, save and invest.”