The traditional procession including from left to right, Steven Leigh, Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences, CWA Director John Griffin, Keynote Speaker Leonard Pitts, CWA Chair Jane Butcher, and CU Chancellor Phil DiStefano walk across the Norlin Quad to Macky Auditorium on the University of Colorado campus on the first day of the 67th Conference of World Affairs. ( Paul Aiken / Staff Photographer )

As the crisis at the venerable Conference on World Affairs deepens, CU administrators act blissfully unaware. If they want to preside over a mass exodus of staff and community volunteers, they should stay the current disruptive course. If, on the other hand, they would like to find a way to repair the damage done since the appointment of John Griffin as director 11 months ago, they should find a face-saving way for him to step down and launch a broader search for a new director.

"I feel like it's all winding down and I'm so sad about it," one community volunteer said last week.

Symptomatic of the earthquake that has shaken the 67-year-old CWA was an unhappy scene that unfolded at Macky Auditorium after the final panel of this year's conference April 10. Lynne Sanditen, a community editor for the international affairs panels, approached Griffin, who had just left the stage. Waving her arms and obviously upset, Sanditen demanded to know why he had lied during the panel, which was organized at the last minute to address the gathering storm Griffin precipitated. The first-year director denied he had lied and tried to lead her away from the crowd.

Sanditen was recalling a meeting at Cafe Aion nearly a year earlier, just before Griffin took the reins from Jim Palmer, who retired as director following the 2014 conference. He told her, as she remembers it, that the CWA was in need of repair and he was going to fix it. She remembers telling him it didn't need fixing and perhaps he should observe it for a year before rushing to judgment. At the panel, Griffin denied ever saying such a thing and challenged listeners to close their eyes and imagine where they were when they heard it. Sanditen knew exactly where she was, and it put her over the edge.

She was not alone. An interim advisory board, convened last year to help Griffin mend fences that were already crumbling, in effect threw up its hands with a report to CU Chancellor Phil DiStefano after this year's conference.

"We have sought for many months to share candidly the struggles under John's short tenure and it is evident that the mismatch between his style and that of the committee overall is an untenable situation," wrote board member Shannon Hayden, a veteran of 16 CWAs.

"John Griffin has shattered the trust of many stakeholders, including students, community members, and board members," wrote board chair Annika Erickson-Pearson, a CU senior.

"As a longtime attendee and volunteer to CWA and as a university employee, I found this year's conference to be the most disheartening and demotivating of any of the 16 previous years I attended," wrote board member George Deriso, a business executive and entrepreneur who teaches at CU's Leeds School of Business. "John represents the university administration and appears to be attempting to deliver a conference that fulfills primarily the university's interests."

Multiple sources report Griffin asked editors last year to enumerate the conservative panelists in areas not related to politics — international affairs, business, the human condition, science and technology. Although the conference has had a reputation for leaning left ever since its founder, Howard Higman, publicly challenged Joe McCarthy and J. Edgar Hoover in the 1950s, editors in the politics and media section are careful to invite roughly equal numbers of liberals and conservatives to keep their panels lively. This year, they were proud to have recruited two of the more charismatic young conservatives on television — Mary Katharine Ham of Fox News and Genevieve Wood of the Heritage Foundation. But editors in other areas were not in the habit of asking potential panelists about their politics and many of them thought it inappropriate. Griffin left the impression he needed to be able to report the political orientation of all panelists. But to whom?

Defending Griffin's performance as director, university spokesman Bronson Hilliard told the Camera last week that Griffin produced a record fundraising year, recording $256,000 in private commitments, exceeding last year's total of $220,800. Such contributions, in addition to an allocation from the CU general fund of about $300,000 annually, underwrite the costs of the week-long event. In an email to editors in March, Griffin said he had secured a $100,000 pledge from CU president Bruce Benson, the former oil man and Republican candidate for governor, for the CWA's rest-of-the-year sister program, Athenaeum. Hilliard confirmed that Griffin's record haul included this pledge, adding he should get full credit for selling Benson on the contribution. If, on the other hand, Griffin is the administration's agent of change at CWA, this would be more like stacking the deck in his favor.

The most sensitive issue is Griffin's treatment of Maura Clare, the CWA's able and charismatic staff director. Asked about this at the final panel, Griffin said he couldn't discuss personnel issues. This came just minutes after panelist Mary Rochelle, a former student volunteer and current community volunteer, declared from the stage that Griffin had volunteered to her, in violation of university personnel rules, that he'd given Clare a poor performance review. Despite this public declaration by Rochelle, Hilliard told the Camera that CU is "not aware of any improper sharing of personnel evaluations by John Griffin."

Many of those who work closely with the CWA were incredulous that this was how Griffin chose to introduce himself. Clare, they report, is a marvel — an indefatigable organizer who manages to teach a new crop of student volunteers every year how to pull together the logistics of 100 out-of-town guests, 200 separate events and a host of different venues. The young people with whom she works express a strong sense of loyalty and gratitude. Clare holds two titles — conference coordinator and director of public affairs. She has two deputies, one in each area, and that's it for the CWA staff. Or it was, until Griffin started unilaterally hiring new staff recently. Within months of taking over as director, Griffin offered one of Clare's titles — director of public affairs — to two different 20-something CWA workers, one on staff and one a volunteer. Puzzled and loyal to Clare, both declined.

CWA chair Jane Butcher, who withdrew her offer of a $1 million gift to launch an endowment for the conference after the university declined to commit to several conditions, including keeping it free and open to the public, is a longtime friend of DiStefano. No one within CWA seems to think the chancellor is behind the current assault. And yet it goes on. The only person above DiStefano in the Boulder campus hierarchy is Benson.

Whatever changes the CU administration intended to effect through Griffin, the execution has been inept. The town-gown partnership is breaking down. If the administration has any respect for the legacy of the CWA, it should admit its mistake and start over.

— Dave Krieger, for the editorial board. Email: kriegerd@dailycamera.com. Twitter: @DaveKrieger