Advocates for primary care were in Albany this week making the case that Governor Andrew Cuomo is cutting Medicaid reimbursements at the same time the state is trying to emphasize its importance.

A new round of cuts could take effect as soon as April 1, when the state plans to eliminate incentive payments for roughly 6,000 National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA)-recognized Patient-Centered Medical Home primary care doctors, who provide care to 2 million Medicaid recipients across New York. What Cuomo has proposed is tying these incentive payments to new, tougher standards.

That's fine, but doctors need more, said Daniel Lowenstein, senior director of public affairs for the Primary Care Development Corporation (PCDC), a non-profit that promotes primary care.

Currently, he said, no physicians have met the most recent NCQA standards, which place a greater emphasis on integrating health information technology and behavioral health care services into primary care. Physicians are unlikely to meet the new guidelines in the next two weeks, meaning they could lose out on as much as $30 million in incentive payments.

The state announced the change March 4 when it released its February Medicaid update, providing little time to comply.

Lowenstein said there is no objection to meeting higher standards, but doctors need up to a year to do so.

The state health department did not respond to a request for comment.

The cut would come on top of another hit Medicaid providers took at the beginning of the year.

Cuomo, like most governors, chose not to extend a provision in the Affordable Care Act which, for two years, paid Medicaid primary care doctors at the higher Medicare rate. When that provision expired in January, Medicaid reimbursement for primary care dropped 42 percent.

There are no studies that looked at how effective the program was in New York and it's not known whether it did improve access to patients.

But there are a few studies that examined the pay bump's effects in other states and those showed it became easier for Medicaid recipients to make an appointment when physicians were paid more for seeing patients.

PCDC is calling on the governor and State Legislature to increase Medicaid reimbursement, though that is unlikely to happen this year.

The group is also calling for a piece of the $1.4 billion in capital funds Cuomo wants to use to rebuild hospital infrastructure. PCDC wants at least 25 percent of healthcare capital for community based providers and $40 million for a Community Healthcare Revolving Capital Fund.

If the goal is to move people out of the hospital then there should be some infrastructure spending on primary care sites, Lowenstein argued.

The requests, which will most likely remain unheeded because of budget concerns, come at a time when the state is investing heavily in primary care.

The $8 billion Medicaid waiver program, the goal of which is to reduce hospitalizations by 25 percent over five years, focuses on integrating primary care as a way to reudce hospital use and lower health costs. At a minimum, that requires ensuring patients, particularly low-income patients, have access to care that represents a reasonable alternative to a hospital.