Having failed to repeal the Affordable Care Act outright, congressional Republicans are moving ahead with plans to dismantle it piece by piece.

Earlier this month, the House passed a bill that would undermine the so-called employer mandate, which requires certain employers to provide insurance or pay a penalty. In all, 240 Republicans and 12 Democrats voted for the bill while 172 Democrats voted against it. In the Senate, two Democrats recently joined dozens of Republicans to sponsor a similar measure.

Like other attempts to weaken health care reform, the bill, named the Save American Workers Act, is based on false premises and offers false promises. But its bipartisan patina makes it a threat, as do the catchy if misleading assertions of its supporters to win public support.

At issue is the threshold at which the employer mandate kicks in. The law requires employers with 50 or more employees to provide insurance to those who work more than 30 hours a week, or pay a penalty of $2,000 to $3,000 per worker. Most of the roughly 230,000 companies with 50 or more workers already provide health insurance, while about 11,500 of such companies do not.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The House bill, however, would encourage many companies that provide insurance to stop doing so. It would require coverage (or a penalty) only for employees who work at least 40 hours a week, on the ground that 40 hours is the standard in employment law for a full-time worker. That is true but misses the point of the health care law, which sets a 30-hour threshold to ensure the broadest possible coverage without unduly burdening companies or taxpayers. The law is not intended to address employment-law standards. Turning the issue into an argument over the definition of “full time” is specious.

Republicans have also argued that a higher, 40-hour-a-week threshold would protect employees from having their hours cut by employers seeking to evade the coverage requirement. That’s backward. A higher threshold would put more workers, not fewer, at risk of shortened workweeks. With a 30-hour threshold, the employees in danger of cutbacks are those who work around 30 to 34 hours a week, about 7 percent of the work force. With a 40-hour threshold, the employees in danger of cutbacks are those who work 40 hours or more a week, nearly half of the work force.

One thing Republicans don’t say is that raising the hourly threshold would worsen the deficit as more employees turn to publicly subsidized exchanges to find insurance.

President Obama has vowed to veto legislative attempts to weaken or undo the health reform law. But that could prove difficult if the measure were attached to other important legislation. The attacks on health reform are senseless, but the danger that they could weaken reform is real.