Arts stars: The Governor's Awards for Excellence in the Arts

This year, the awards go to eight recipients in two categories: Individual Artist and Major Contributor to the Arts. The first category’s winners include master weaver Irvin Trujillo, multimedia artist Virgil Ortiz, painter Vincent N. Figliola, papel picado (cut paper) artist Catalina Delgado-Trunk, and music educator William Clark. > FULL STORY

2015 Governor's Awards: Edgar Foster Daniels

You may not have seen Edgar Foster Daniels sing or act in many a year; he retired from the stage in 1983. But since that time, his private foundation, the Edgar Foster Daniels Foundation, has provided funding for Santa Fe Opera, the Royal Opera House in London, the Santa Fe Chamber Music Festival, and other performing arts organizations, many of them opera companies, across the nation and in Europe. > FULL STORY

2015 Governor's Awards: Irvin Trujillo

Irvin Trujillo’s father, master weaver Jacobo Ortega Trujillo, taught him to weave tapestries when he was ten years old. He’s been refining his techniques ever since, learning by trial and error. In 1982 he opened the Centinela Traditional Arts studio and shop in Chimayó with his father and his wife, Lisa, and has since striven to bring a modern aesthetic to the traditional practice. > FULL STORY

2015 Governor's Awards: Virgil Ortiz

Virgil Ortiz was born into a family of well-known Cochití Pueblo artists that includes potters Laurencita Herrera, his grandmother, and Seferina Ortiz, his mother. At age forty-six, Ortiz keeps Cochití ceramic traditions alive, but transforms them into a contemporary vision that embraces his Pueblo history and culture and merges it with apocalyptic themes, science fiction, and his own storytelling. > FULL STORY

2015 Governor's Awards: Catalina Delgado-Trunk

Before becoming one of the world’s leading practitioners of papel picado — the Mexican art of paper cutting — Catalina Delgado-Trunk taught ballet for 20 years and then went to college for a degree in French literature. > FULL STORY

2015 Governor's Awards: Vincent Figliola

The realist paintings of Vincent Figliola, an award-winning former art director and creative advertising director, are tinged with a touch of the surreal. His Tchaikovsky’s Sky, for instance, depicts a godlike conductor held aloft by clouds, and in one of his self-portraits, a ballerina in miniature dances gracefully on the tip of an upraised finger. > FULL STORY

2015 Governor's Awards: Eric Renner and Nancy Spencer

Nancy Spencer and Eric Renner started Pinhole Resource, Inc. in 1984. Now an online store, www.pinholeresource.com offers a complete array of pinhole products as well as books about the medium, which dates to the 5th century BC in China. > FULL STORY