PEORIA — With the opening of the Courtyard by Marriott, a chapter has closed in the saga of the Downtown Peoria hotel project.

Two chapters, actually.

The Downtown Courtyard debut Friday put into place the final major piece of a $100 million, six-year effort. Municipal money in various forms accounted for about $36 million.

“People are interested. People are intrigued,” Joe Jolliff, a front-desk clerk, said about a steady number of folks who checked out the new lodging at 533 Main St.

The facility’s unveiling coincided with a change in project managment.

At midnight Friday, First Hospitality Group of Rosemont took over from Marriott International Inc. That firm also was operating the refurbished Marriott Pere Marquette, which opened last June and is adjacent to the Courtyard.

Hours after the switch became official, the new hotel welcomed its first guests.

“It’s a unique situation,” said Joe LoMonaco, the properties’ new managing director. “To open a hotel and to take over a management contract that’s connected, that’s a very rare thing. And it’s exciting, very exciting.”

As of Friday afternoon, 16 rooms had been sold for that night at the 116-room Courtyard, according to LoMonaco. Next week, two nights are sold out.

“The first three days, we didn’t want to have too many (occupancies), because we’re still working out the kinks,” LoMonaco said. “We’re still a little bit rough around the edges. But by Monday, we’ll be perfect.”

LoMonaco, who once managed the Embassy Suites East Peoria, leads the new management contingent. Project developer Gary Matthews cited its local ties, among other things, as a reason for the switch. The City Council approved it July 1.

Also opened Friday was the skywalk that connects both hotels to the Peoria Civic Center. The link includes a 400-space parking garage that opened last March.

The Courtyard, which LoMonaco said is geared toward business travelers, is to receive a more formal christening within three or four weeks. The Pere Marquette is to be included in the festivities.

“The city is owed that,” LoMonaco said. “I think the people of the city should get a real, live ribbon-cutting.

“Not only will we be presenting this to the city, but we want them to be able to walk through both properties and enjoy what we really want to give back to them.”

This story was updated July 19 to say the City Council approved the management change July 1. The original date was incorrect.

Nick Vlahos can be reached at 686-3285 or nvlahos@pjstar.com. Follow him on Twitter @VlahosNick.