Federal civil rights investigations begin with early assessments by FBI agents before the agency launches full-fledged probes into law enforcement wrongdoing, FBI Director James Comey said.

Comey, who held a news conference Wednesday during a visit to Denver, spoke in general about federal civil rights investigations. But he avoided discussion about specific investigations, including whether his agents were looking into complaints about the Denver Sheriff Department.

“It’s a deliberate, careful process,” Comey said. “I want to stay away from talking about any potential investigations.”

There have been calls for federal intervention at the sheriff’s department, most notably from U.S. District Judge John Kane, who presided over the Jamal Hunter case.

Comey, who became FBI director in September, stopped in Denver as part of his plan to visit every field office during his first year. The Denver field office investigates crimes in Colorado and Wyoming.

Comey met with FBI employees and state and local law enforcement officials from both states, said Dave Joly, spokesman for the Denver field office.

During brief remarks with the media, Comey spoke about his priority: counterterrorism. The FBI fights terrorism overseas and at home. His growing concern is the extremists in Syria and Iraq.

“Syria, and into Iraq, has become a safe haven and a training ground for some of the world’s worst people,” he said.

Other topics Comey that addressed during a question-and-answer session included:

• Arvada teen Shannon Conley, who has been charged with material support to al-Qaeda and other groups, including the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.

Asked why the FBI waited to arrest the teen until she was about to board an airplane to leave the country, he said talking about committing a crime is not a crime.

“We don’t ever want to infringe on free speech, but we want to protect lives when someone crosses the line. We have no intention of taking a case to the U.S. attorney’s office when someone is simply talking.”

• The Aug. 9 fatal shooting of 18-year-old Michael Brown by a police officer in Ferguson, Mo.

The FBI sent a surge of agents into the St. Louis suburb to interview as many potential witnesses as possible.

Those agents are from the St. Louis field office and the Washington, D.C., civil rights division. They have interviewed dozens of witnesses. The investigation will be careful and thoughtful.

• Photojournalist James Foley, who was slain by Islamic State terrorists in Syria.

“I’m very sorry to say these savages have turned it into a homicide investigation,” Comey said.

Agents had been searching for Foley and investigating his kidnapping. Now, they will hunt for his killers.”We will never, ever forget,” Comey said.

Noelle Phillips: 303-954-1661, nphillips@denverpost.com or twitter.com/Noelle_Phillips