Restaurant owners facing the prospect of fines for not offering workers affordable health insurance are finding some creative ways to keep the number of eligible employees to a minimum.

While some companies are enrolling employees in Medicaid to avoid the penalties, which go into effect next year under the Affordable Care Act, others are considering changing their ownership structure. Franchisees who own more than one restaurant could use that tactic to keep their number of full-time employees below the threshold that activates the law, which is 100 full-timers as of next year and 50 as of 2016. Still other employers figure it’s cheaper to pay the penalty than offer insurance.

“One franchise partner said he’ll pay the fine and pay his workers more money so they can pay for insurance themselves,” said Andy Wiederhorn, chief executive of Fatburger North America Inc., which owns the Buffalo’s Café and Fatburger chains. “Some franchisees have already rearranged their ownership structure so that if there are two partners who own two restaurants, they each become owners of one.”

Paul Dalrymple wholly owns two Buffalo’s Cafes in Georgia and has a majority stake in three others. He’s considering either selling some of his restaurants or changing their ownership structure to reduce his number of full-time workers.

Half of his 200 employees are full-time, and he notified his managers earlier this month that he will stop providing them with health insurance starting on Oct. 31. Nor will he start offering hourly workers insurance next year. He’s cutting workers’ hours to reduce the number of eligible employees–the health law doesn’t require coverage for employees working less than 30 hours a week—but likely will face fines.

“The typical age range of my hourly employees is 17 to 21 and they don’t even want insurance. My turnover rate is 300% to 400%. I can’t afford to shoulder the burden of providing insurance for people who might not be with us in three months,” he said.

Panera Bread decided not to cut workers’ hours, but has been looking for other ways to contain costs, such as by joining a private health insurance exchange called RightOpt, which is run by Xerox Buck Consultants. The exchange includes other companies and therefore is supposed to keep prices down for the employer and employee.

If the Panera employee who contacts RightOpt appears to be eligible for Medicaid, RightOpt can help them enroll, according to Panera. Panera also is adding a high-deductible, preventive health plan for hourly employees starting next year.

“Part of the unknown is that you had a group of people who weren’t eligible before, so it’s hard to predict what the uptake will be,” said Liz Dunlap, Panera’s chief people officer. “They could be covered under their parent’s plan or spouse’s plan. If they do enroll with us, will they enroll as themselves or with others in their family and which plan will they select?”

Reducing employees’ hours or hiring part-timers in lieu of full-timers has created another conundrum for employers. To provide the same level of service, many have had to hire more part-time workers to cover the same number of shifts, increasing their labor costs at a time of rising minimum wages.

To address that, Buffalo Wild Wings is replacing outgoing employees who worked about 38 hours a week with new ones who will work 40, while departing employees who worked closer to 30 hours a week are being replaced with people who will work 28 or fewer. That will let the chain fill any lost hours without having to hire extra part-timers, said Chief Executive Sally Smith.

And then there’s the option to get customers to help cover increased costs related to the health care law, by increasing menu prices.

Fatburger’s Mr. Wiederhorn said his franchisees have already raised sandwich prices by 25 cents to 50 cents to overcome rising commodity costs, and he expects to see another 10% increase in sandwich prices in January, when the employer penalties in the health law are set to kick in.