: Why is there an open enrollment period? ↖ Back to top For people who don’t get health insurance from an employer, Medicare or Medicaid, the health law offers a three-month window to shop for health insurance. It is intended to encourage people to get insured and not wait until they’re sick to seek coverage. People who don’t enroll between Nov. 15 and Feb. 15 will have to wait a year to get coverage, unless they experience a major life change, like losing their job, having a child or divorcing.



People who qualify for Medicaid can sign up all year long. In states that have expanded Medicaid under the health law, anyone earning less than 138 percent of the federal poverty level — or about $16,000 for a single person — is eligible. In states that have not expanded, eligibility rules vary, but tend to include poor children and their mothers as well as people with disabilities.



If you want to look at your options, go to healthcare.gov.

: Did people lose the plans they have? ↖ Back to top Yes, some people who bought individual health insurance after the health law passed in 2010 will find those plans canceled by the end of the year. All individual plans are now required to cover a minimum package of benefits and a minimum percentage of expected health costs. Precise estimates are difficult, but as many as several hundred thousand people have received cancellation notices from their insurance companies. Those people will be able to switch to different plans that comply. Many will be eligible for subsidies if they go shop for new coverage on the exchange.



Some people with employer-based coverage are also losing their health insurance. The Affordable Care Act provides new options for people who lose workplace coverage, and it requires employer plans to cover certain benefits, but it didn’t require any employers to cancel their insurance. However, those people may have lost their coverage anyway. The percentage of employers who offer health plans to their workers has been slowly declining for years.

: Is the website working this time? ↖ Back to top Many of the major problems that caused the federal marketplace site, healthcare.gov, to crash last year have been addressed, and it has been running smoothly for the first few weeks of open enrollment. The site has also been redesigned to make it a little easier for customers to window-shop for plans before entering all their information. State exchanges with the biggest problems have also retooled for this year, or handed over responsibility to the federal government.



But there are still some reasons to worry that the process may not work seamlessly. "We will have outages," said the Health and Human Services secretary, Sylvia Mathews Burwell. Administration officials acknowledge that the back end of the marketplace, where the website verifies information and communicates with insurers, is still unfinished. There have been a few hiccups on state-run exchanges, particularly in Washington. No new tools have been added that might help customers compare the networks of doctors and hospitals covered by various plans. To find out which doctors, hospitals and drugs are covered, customers will still need to contact each insurance plan individually.

: How hard is it to pick the right plan? ↖ Back to top The marketplaces do a good job of sorting plans into categories based on what percentage of a typical patient’s medical bills will be paid by insurance. All plans in the “silver” category, the most popular plan type, must cover 70 percent of the average patient’s bills, for example.



But the details of what each plan in the category covers varies quite a lot. A recent study showed that silver plans had widely different systems of co-payments and deductibles. The plans also differ substantially in what doctors, hospitals and drugs they will pay for. For patients with specialized health needs or longstanding relationships with particular doctors, it’s important to research what’s included in an insurer’s network. The news organization ProPublica has developed a useful tool for comparing plan benefit designs.

: What happens to people who enrolled last year? ↖ Back to top People who signed up for marketplace plans on healthcare.gov will stay in the plan they chose for 2014 unless they go back to the website to shop again. The Obama administration set up this auto-renewal process to make it as easy as possible for people to remain insured. But auto-renewing without reviewing the options could mean big premium increases for some consumers, and hidden charges, too, that won’t become clear until tax time. Many markets will have cheaper options and new products on the marketplaces. And some plans are changing their deductibles and copayments. It pays for nearly everyone to go back to the website and update information, even if they end up staying with the same plan.



Some states didn’t go along with that auto-renew option, meaning everyone in those markets has to shop again. And everyone who signed up for Medicaid will need to reapply. The states require that everyone establish eligibility for the program annually.

: What happens to people who don’t get insurance? ↖ Back to top The health law contains a much-disliked provision requiring Americans to obtain health insurance or face a tax penalty. Those penalties will be higher for 2015 than they were in 2014: up to 2 percent of a household’s income or $325, whichever is higher. People who would struggle to pay for insurance, either because they earn so little that they do not file a tax return or because insurance would cost more than 8 percent of their household income, are exempt. The law also provides exceptions for certain groups that have experienced hardship, including people who are homeless, victims of domestic violence or those with religious objections to health care. But the vast majority of Americans will either need to find health insurance or pay the fine. The penalties won’t kick in until people file their taxes for 2015.

: Can people get insurance even if they’re already sick? ↖ Back to top Before this year, insurance companies were allowed to decide whom they wanted to sell insurance to. This meant that people who had a history of illness often paid very high rates or simply couldn’t find a plan on the individual insurance market. Now, insurers are barred from discriminating against people with a history of health problems. As long as they sign up during the enrollment period, all Americans can buy health insurance for a price based only on where they live, how old they are and whether they smoke.