A New York state probe of local Papa John’s pizza franchises underpaying workers is now looking at records at the corporate office, The Post has learned.

Investigators with Attorney General Eric Schneiderman recently sent subpoenas to the pizza chain’s Louisville, Ky., headquarters seeking point-of-sale records from some or all of New York state’s 127 Papa John’s for the last seven years, sources close to the situation said.

Local franchises are being eyed for possibly cheating workers out of overtime pay by masking a more than 40-hour-a-week schedule by having workers divide their time between two stores, sources said.

For example, a franchisee with two stores would have one employee work 20 hours at one store and 30 hours at another. Since each store is a separate company that reported the labor numbers to the state separately, it’s hard to tie them together.

But information automatically sent to corporate headquarters from the point-of-sales registers in every store — an action perhaps not known to the franchisees — uncovered the alleged scam, sources said.

“I don’t know half the stuff that is in the [point of sale] system,” said a source close to the situation, who noted that franchisees are “furious” at the corporate parent.

The AG could use the point-of-sale records as evidence proving franchisees committed fraud.

The Post reported exclusively in August that the AG sent several New York City Papa John’s pizza joints subpoenas as part of a probe into fast food restaurants underpaying workers.

Papa John’s International, the parent of 3,100 restaurants, is not the subject of the probe but could be brought into it if the subpoenas reveal a discrepancy between the corporate and store records.

The AG’s office is likely to ask if executives in Louisville were, or should have been, aware of it.

The practice of splitting employee work weeks between two stores to avoid paying overtime is known generally as “shuttling,” David Paris, franchisee lawyer for Paris, Ackerman & Schmierer who is not involved in the investigation, said.

Some employees may log in at the first store under a POS system using their correct ID number but then later at a second store under a generic title — such as “Register 1” or “Drive thru 2.”

The franchisees are also being looked at for cheating employees out of pay by having delivery workers — who rely on tips and are paid less than the minimum wage — perform more than the maximum two hours a shift at regular store chores like folding boxes or mopping floors, The Post previously reported.

A Papa John’s spokesman said, “As a company, Papa John’s believes that all of its team members should be fairly compensated with market competitive rates and in accordance with the law. All of our corporate employees are paid above minimum wage and we empower our franchisees to determine competitive compensation and benefits for each of their employees.”

Papa John’s declined to comment on receiving a subpoena or whether it tracks the labor statistics of its franchises’ workers.

Schneiderman’s office declined comment.