A Greenwood woman is facing an array of charges following outbursts at a local motel and hospital, according to a Greenwood police report.



Meagan Joyce Witt, 24, is charged with malicious damage to personal property, public drunk/intoxication, striking fixtures upon highway, driving too fast for conditions, disturbing schools or hospitals, assault and battery and resisting arrest in connection with the incident.



The report said officers were called to America’s Best Value Inn, located at 1215 Bypass 72 N.E., at about 8 a.m. Tuesday after receiving a report of a woman, later identified as Witt, behaving erratically.



When officers arrived, they found Witt in the parking lot of the motel.



The report said Witt told police she was driving a pickup truck and struck utility poles near Clendenin Lumber in Ware Shoals. Witt also told officers she punched the window on the passenger side of the vehicle before asking officers to give her a drink of antifreeze, the report said.



According to the report, Witt continued to behave erratically and was placed under arrest for public intoxication. Officers verified that there was a hit-and-run incident in that two utility poles were struck near the saw mill.



The report said Witt continually yelled “Off with your head!” at the officer and told the officer that he would die in a crash which she would cause if she were not released from custody.



According to the report, Witt refused to walk into the detention center on her own and had to be escorted. Once inside she screamed she was pregnant and would not tell jail personnel what types of narcotics she had taken, the report said.



Officers attempted to take her back outside to go to the hospital, but they said Witt flopped into the floor. Officers were able to get her into a patrol car and transport her to the hospital.



According to the report, Witt screamed and yelled obscenities for several hours while in the emergency room. Her shouts could be heard throughout the emergency room area and multiple attempts were made to get Witt to calm down, with each attempt being met with louder shouts of obscenities.



Test results, which were rushed in an attempt to get Witt out of the hospital, showed Witt was not pregnant and was under the influence of cocaine, methamphetamine and marijuana. Witt was then given medical clearance and taken back to the detention center.



Copyright: gwdtoday.com