Diane Meier

September 24, 2014

The new Institute of Medicine (IOM) report on care near the end of life in the United States was released last week. I had the privilege of serving on the Committee for the last two years, involved both in the writing of the report itself and in coming to consensus on its recommendations.

The name of the report and the charge to the Committee from the IOM was focused on “end of life.” However, the title, “Dying in America,” is something of a misnomer. The report itself focuses extensively on people with serious and chronic illness with indeterminate prognoses, why the current health care system fails so consistently to meet their needs, and what must change to improve the situation.

Hospice is the gold standard of care quality for those that are predictably dying and clearly at the end of life, and we are fortunate as a nation to have such a strong (mostly home) hospice infrastructure, but that’s not where most of the problems lie. The problems lie in the lack of options for people who are either not hospice-eligible (prognosis uncertain or continuing to want and benefit from disease treatment) or are referred to hospice much too late in their disease course to influence their experience and their families’.

The new report builds on the 1998 IOM report “Approaching Death” and goes well beyond the usual nostrums of calling for reimbursement for advance care planning and decrying all the “waste” in health care spending during the last year of life.

Why We Took A Broader Perspective Than Just End-Of-Life Care

The sickest most vulnerable (and logically, costliest) patients are those at highest risk of dying. Since we cannot know in prospect, but only in retrospect, who will die and who will respond well to treatment, we cannot use prognostication as a reliable or actionable basis for policy and practice until very late in the disease course, when our ability to predict remaining life span gains in accuracy. In addition, the attack on end of life spending as the main driver of runaway costs is not supported by data. In a commissioned paper from Amy Kelley and Melissa Aldridge, the Committee found that only 11 percent of the costliest 5 percent of patients in the U.S. are in their last 12 months of life. Nearly half of the costliest 5 percent have one-time only high costs — for example, a major surgical procedure — but then recover, and their costs drop down to baseline.

The remaining 40 percent of the costliest 5 percent have persistent high spending year after year because of chronic debilitating conditions such as dementia, frailty, functional dependency, multimorbidity, and mental illness. These people are seriously ill with ongoing acute and long-term care needs from the health care system, but they are not (predictably) dying. Using prognosis and the “end of life” label will therefore fail to identify and meet the needs of most of these people who now use the very costly and high-risk acute care system (911 calls, ED visits, hospitalizations) to manage their chronic illnesses because they have no meaningful alternatives.

Costliest 5 Percent of Patients

Two Potential Game Changers

Universal palliative care education. The new IOM report calls for two fundamental and profound changes in organized medicine, that, if we can implement them, will meaningfully improve quality of care for our patients — those who are living with serious chronic illness, as well as those who may die in the next year or two.

The first (see page 4, recommendation 3) is a call for universal health professional and clinician (physician, nurses, social workers, others) education and training in the core principles and practices of palliative care: pain and symptom management; safe and effective use of opioids; skilled communication about what matters most to patients and their families and how the health care system can help achieve those goals; and seamless, well-coordinated and well-communicated care across multiple settings of care over time.



The fact that the vast majority of today’s practitioners have had no meaningful training in these essential skills is surprising to the general public, but this educational deficit explains a lot of what happens to us when we are extremely sick. Without fundamental change in health professional training, it doesn’t matter how we change payment and system design; clinicians will continue to practice as they are trained — to diagnose and treat disease no matter what — even when such actions no longer help and may cause harm.

The challenge before us now is to work within our own teaching organizations to change how and what is taught. All meaningful change is local, and all meaningful change requires effective local leadership. A great example of our field’s readiness to support the IOM’s call for scaleable training of all practitioners in essential communication skills comes from colleagues Tony Back, Bob Arnold, James Tulsky, and the rest of the VitalTalk team (@vitaltalk).

Coverage of patients’ social needs. The second game-changing recommendation (see page 4, recommendation 4) in the IOM report calls for coverage of both social and medical needs among the sickest and most complex patients.

Estimates vary slightly, but roughly 40 percent of all medical spending is precipitated by unmet social support needs: low literacy; language barriers; poor nutrition; unsafe housing; family violence; mental illness; and, most important, the absence of support for exhausted and overwhelmed family caregivers. Why don’t we already pay for these services? It is prohibited by law under the Medicare statute, which covers only those services that are “medically necessary.”

Interestingly, as our payment system moves from the fee-for-service, pay-for-volume system of the past towards versions of global budgeting, bundling, and capitation where providers accept financial risk and become more focused on quality than quantity, recognition of the inextricable association of social determinants with health care utilization is leading to change. We are seeing medical center operating dollars spent on social supports.

One example of progress in this direction comes from my own hospital, which responded to the 30-day readmission penalties imposed by Medicare in the Affordable Care Act by hiring 80 social workers to go out into the community to identify and address the social determinants of frequent emergency room and hospital use. The problems these social workers identified involved unsafe housing, lack of family support, high levels of family violence and trauma, low literacy, language barriers, untreated mental illness, and overwhelmed family caregivers. When these issues were addressed, 30-day readmissions plummeted.

As access to palliative care moves beyond hospitals to home, long-term care and other community settings, the ability to integrate social and medical support services will be critical to the success and sustainability of these new delivery and payment models.

The IOM Report’s Call For Action Is Only The First Step

If this report is to translate into action, many entrenched interests and bureaucracies will have to change. This will only happen through advocacy and public demand for fundamental transformation of how we care for our sickest and most vulnerable citizens. Encouragingly, the American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network has prioritized palliative care in its advocacy agenda, and several broad national coalitions have formed to achieve these goals — the Patient Quality of Life Coalition and the Coalition to Transform Advanced Care, among others. I urge readers to add their voices to these efforts.