POLITICO Illinois Playbook: DURKIN says 2016 budget deal ‘unlikely’ -- RICH MILLER addresses critics -- KASICH in Chicago

By Natasha Korecki (nkorecki@politico.com; @natashakorecki)

IF IT’S ALMOST OCTOBER AND IF YOU’RE SAYING “wait ‘til next year,” you must be a Cubs fan. Wait. Cubs finally made the playoffs. So you must be an Illinois resident.

Story Continued Below

Achieving a budget deal before 2016 looks to be a near impossibility. “Highly unlikely,” Illinois House Republican Leader Jim Durkin tells POLITICO. The Illinois House only has two more session days scheduled for the remainder of 2015. Gov. Bruce Rauner and legislative leaders haven’t met since May. “At what point do they realize if they want to get through this they have to be willing to negotiate?”

SENATE DEMOCRATS AGREE ON TIMING: “There is zero sign that we’re moving toward a resolution by the end of the year,” said Rikeesha Phelon, spokeswoman to Senate President John Cullerton. “At this point there is no indication that that is possible.” State Rep. Jack Franks, Democrat of Marengo, has called on Rauner to call a special session. “There’s no chance of a budget unless the governor acts to bring a special session.” Rauner has repeatedly said he’s against it.

-- The speaker’s spox isn’t sold: “I hope that’s not the case,” says Speaker Mike Madigan spokesman Steve Brown on no budget until 2016.

-- When Madigan and Rauner met last week, it was the “first time in awhile” Brown acknowledged. That’s progress right? “The speaker told me there was no progress.” The two men remained steadfast in their positions; Rauner will only agree to a tax increase if Democrats agree to his turnaround agenda. Madigan doesn’t want to tie non-budget issues to a spending plan.

Welcome to the POLITICO Illinois Playbook. Send tips, events, announcements to nkorecki@politico.com or @natashakorecki

CHICAGO CAN’T COUNT ON SPRINGFIELD: Mayor Rahm Emanuel knew what he was doing even though he tied the city’s revenues to a healthy boost of cash from Springfield, Durkin says. “The mayor knows exactly what’s going on. The mayor’s also, look at his history, he knows the art of the deal. He’s going to engage the governor and all the Democratic leaders to move all the parties together,” Durkin tells POLITICO. “Anyone who’s relying on Springfield to solve their problems right now has to be aware of the toxic nature of the building.”

GOOD NEWS FOR STATE LAWMAKERS: You can finally take your summer break. Since May, Illinois House Speaker Mike Madigan said the House was in “continuous session” and called lawmakers down to Spring patch every week. Now the House has only scheduled two session days -- Oct. 20 and Nov. 10 for the remainder of the year. The Senate just moved its Oct. 6 session date to Oct. 20.

ILLINOIS LITERALLY CAN’T KEEP LIGHTS ON: “Illinois Secretary of State Jesse White has warned of ... the possibility that the electricity could be shut off at the Capitol … [W]arnings to suspend services already have come from computer and software contract vendors, a trash pickup entity and the armored truck company that picks up millions in cash each day from secretary of state facilities.” AP: http://bit.ly/1KOEWkO

...OR TRAIN COPS: “Hundreds of classes are being canceled at a time of heightened tension between police and the communities they serve, and as officers are increasingly the first to respond when a person with a mental illness is in crisis … ‘The situation is becoming desperate,’ said Eric Pingolt, who coordinates training in 11 counties for the Illinois Law Enforcement Training and Standards Board.” AP: http://bit.ly/1iFgqvc

HASTERT IN PLEA TALKS: Former U.S. House Speaker Denny Hastert’s lawyers tell judge they’re talking plea deal. No surprise Hastert would like to skip a public trial since that would be the best way to keep details of the case under wraps. He is, afterall, accused of paying $3.5 million to keep alleged sexual misconduct secret. “A plea deal could have benefits for both sides. It might allow the identity of ‘Individual A’ to remain secret. It could also allow Hastert to avoid a detailed courtroom discussion of his alleged past misconduct and to receive a more lenient sentence than he would if convicted after a trial.” By Josh Gerstein and Natasha Korecki, POLITICO http://politi.co/1KGma17

RICH MILLER TO CRITICS: ‘GO POUND SAND, FOR ALL I CARE’. Miller, the author of the CapitolFax blog, made national news last week when U.S. Senator Mark Kirk preemptively attacked a Chicago Tribune reporter over a story the newspaper had not yet published. The blog published a memo and correspondence between the reporter and the campaign. “And just in case you’re wondering, I decided to run the piece because I thought it was a truly unique move with some special circumstances and gave my readers a fascinating look behind the scenes at how stories like these can develop. In other words, it was most definitely newsworthy as the national coverage clearly shows. My responsibility isn’t to the Kirk campaign or to the Tribune. It’s to my subscribers and my readers. Everyone else can go pound sand, for all I care.” http://bit.ly/1KNVOaA

WHY RAUNER SKIPPED OUT EARLY ON HOLOCAUST EVENT … “Gov. BRUCE RAUNER’s early exit from a Holocaust remembrance at the Old State Capitol on April 16 was to go to his office to meet with legislative leaders, a spokeswoman now says. … Sometime after Rauner left that annual Holocaust observance in April, BRUCE RUSHTON, a reporter for Illinois Times, a Springfield weekly, asked for the governor’s appointment calendar. Rushton wrote on illinoistimes.com last week that after the newspaper’s request, “Rauner gave the newspaper a redacted version of his appointment calendar showing that he had attended a meeting in the governor’s office while the ceremony continued.” Names of those with whom he met were blacked out. The Illinois Times and Rushton filed a lawsuit against Rauner’s office last week, seeking calendars with names.” By Bernard Schoenburg, Springfield Journal-Register http://bit.ly/1iXvFjF

POLS BEHIND BARS: There’s apparently so many high-profile Illinois felons doing time, the Chicago Sun-Times plots them out on a map. “A sampling of where members of Illinois’ high-profile criminal diaspora are behind bars.” By Max Rust: http://bit.ly/1Rcj4Va

HYDE PARK TAUGHT BERNIE SANDERS TO BE A SOCIALIST … “LINES WERE AROUND THE BLOCK: for the sold-out event for the candidate seeking the Democratic presidential nomination as a self-identified socialist.” By Sam Cholke and Kelly Bauer, DNAinfo http://dnain.fo/1O50LCM

QUOTABLE: BERNIE SANDERS TELLS UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO STUDENTS: “Do better than I did.”

VIDEO: Senate leaders Christine Radogno (GOP) and John Cullerton talk to Carol Marin on WTTW’s Chicago Tonight: ‘STATE BUDGET STANDOFF REACHES 90 DAYS’ http://bit.ly/1KGnj8Z

NAVY PIER Starts Taking Down Ferris Wheel: “The new wheel will rise 50 feet higher than the existing Ferris wheel, fit more passengers, and include climate-controlled gondolas.” By David Matthews DNAinfo http://dnain.fo/1iFvrwT

HOLD THE KETCHUP: Ohio Governor and GOP presidential hopeful JOHN KASICH stumps in Chicago Tuesday... we’ll see if he follows Chicago code on hot dogs at noon at Portillo’s on Ontario.

CHICAGO CRIME: “‘Pregnant mother, grandmother killed — infant, two others wounded in South Side shooting’ --“You have an innocent family coming home from a family outing,” Deputy Chief Eugene Roy told reporters at the scene. “Somebody opens fire on two women, a child and two adults, killing the mother of the 11-month-old and the grandmother of the 11-month-old. “In a second, two generations of that child’s family were wiped out.” By Stefano Esposito, Alexandra Kukulka and Sam Charles, Chicago Sun-Times http://bit.ly/1MCsk31

** A message from Nuclear Matters: Some of America’s existing nuclear energy plants face early closure due to current economic and policy conditions. Providing more than 62% of America’s carbon-free electricity, existing, state-of-the-art nuclear energy plants play a vital role in achieving our clean-energy and carbon reduction goals.

In Illinois, our nuclear energy plants provide 48 percent of the state’s electricity and 90 percent of our carbon-free electricity. The existing nuclear energy plants also contribute nearly $9 billion to the economy and support approximately 28,000 direct and indirect jobs.

But today Illinois doesn’t properly value these plants for their carbon-free contributions, placing them in economic jeopardy. Without support from Illinois policymakers for the Next Generation Energy Plan to close this gap, two plants – Clinton and Quad Cities – could be forced to close, jeopardizing thousands of jobs along with many other economic and environmental benefits. Learn more at NuclearMatters.com **