MILLGROVE, Ont. — At 12 weeks old and already topping a very lively 300 pounds, Albert isn't the newest foal in the Hillsborough Farm stables. But he's definitely the most amazing.

"You would have fallen in love with him when he was born," says his owner, Dave Lumsden. "It was like he was saying, 'I could do all right here. I just need a chance. I just need some help'."

Six days into the year, Albert's mother, Illusionist, an elite pacing mare who won more than $1 million before retiring, was within two weeks of her due date. That January morning, however, Darlene Hayes, owner of the farm at which the horse boards and equine midwife to more than 1,000 foals, didn't like what she was seeing.

Lusi, as Illusionist is known, wasn't pawing, rolling, lip-curling or sweating, the sort of behaviour you might see in a sick horse. The stoic 13-year-old, who had delivered two previous foals, had eaten breakfast. But when Hayes tried to turn her outside, "she just flat out wouldn't move.

"Normally, you open that door and she wants out. But she just planted herself and I thought, 'Something's not right,' " Hayes recalls. In fact, things were far from right.

Lusi's heart rate was soaring. Hayes immediately called her vet and alerted Lumsden. And within an hour, the dramatic tale of two of the toughest — and luckiest — horses under heaven was underway.

Lusi was put on a trailer and taken to the Ontario Veterinary College at the University of Guelph. When Dr. Luis Arroyo, a large-animal internist, and the equine reproduction unit examined the mare, they saw that the unborn foal was unusually large and was tearing its mother up.

"Her body was just basically falling apart," Arroyo recalls.

Lusi had a partial rupture in the crucial tendon that supports the abdomen; she also had a hernia. A full rupture of that pre-pubic tendon usually means a decision to euthanize, Arroyo says.

The foal needed to come out by caesarean section. The trouble was, it wasn't ready, and a foal delivered prematurely usually doesn't survive.

Over the next few days, Lusi "was getting worse and worse," Arroyo says. By Jan. 10, he told Lumsden they had to act.

"He said, 'Can we wait a little bit longer?' I said, 'No, we need to go in right now'."

Lumsden and his wife, Renata, faced an appalling decision.

"That's kind of the dilemma," he recalled this week. "Who's most important? Is it Lusi? Or the unborn foal?"

Dave and Renata met at McMaster University, where he was studying economics and she was studying science. Dave had gone to racetracks with his dad as a kid and he and Renata started visiting them together as soon as they started dating. In 2003, Dave bought his first horse.

He purchased Lusi as a 3-year-old with a partner and owned her outright a year later. Over her career, she won 43 races and made more than $1 million. They shared lots of great moments, so Lumsden figured he owed her.

"I thought Lusi was the priority, and hopefully the baby could pull through as well. The only way to save Lusi was to do the emergency c-section. She would not have made it if we didn't."

On Jan. 10, the surgery was performed by Dr. Michael Archer and Albert was born. (Foals are named alphabetically, like hurricanes.) They are typically 90 to 100 pounds at birth; Albert weighed 130.

The c-section, uncommon in horses, went fairly smoothly. But mother and son weren't out of the woods.

"At one point we questioned whether either of them would survive," says Dr. Krista Mitchell, a 27-year-old veterinary intern from Manitoba.

When Lusi was opened up, the vets realized the extent of the internal damage. Muscles were shredded. Her intestines bulged through the hernia. After being repaired, she remained ill for several days, with a high fever.

Albert was in danger as well. Overnight, he began to deteriorate. His lungs hadn't fully matured and his blood wasn't being properly oxygenated. He was unable to urinate and had to be given regular enemas.

"This foal just about threw out every complication that a foal could get for us," says Mitchell. "Just when you thought you were winning with one thing something else would happen."

Albert was on a ventilator and at one point had more than a dozen lines running into his body. What kept everyone going was that he made steady, if gradual, improvement. Then, at two weeks, he developed an umbilical infection and required surgery.

"Once we removed that, he basically took off," says Arroyo.

Still, there was another worry. Albert had been separated from his mother at birth. She had had only a brief opportunity to smell him. A mare separated from her foal for as little as a day will often reject the newborn.

Lusi hadn't seen Albert for two weeks. One Sunday morning, the vets walked him down a breezeway. When he passed Lusi's stall, she perked up. She was brought out and sniffed him. Arroyo says that Lusi plainly knew that "this was her baby."

When she was put back in her stall, she was rearing, adds Mitchell. "She wanted him."

Albert, on the other hand, had spent all of his short life around people. He seemed to think he was one, says Mitchell. When he was put in the stall for the first time with his mother, with whom he was never able to nurse, he pinned himself against a wall in fright.

"It was great for Albert," she says, laughing. "Because he needed to find out he was a horse."

"When we put them together, there were people crying in the hallway," says Arroyo.

Bringing mother and son back to good health was a huge team effort for the vets at Guelph, and this week they were thrilled to visit Hillsborough Farm and see their patients again — snapping photos at the picturesque farm in southern Ontario horse country to add to the many they took while Lusi and Albert were under their care.

"When they're with you for a month, Albert was like our child," Mitchell says.

"Almost every single event from the get-go, from what happened to Lusi and what needed to be done to her, and from the minute Albert was born, I guess it was uphill on every single front," said Arroyo.

Albert and Lusi are alive today, he said, chiefly because of the commitment of their owners.

"Mr. Lumsden said, 'She was a really good mare to me, she means a lot to my family, so I'm going to invest whatever I can give back to her. That gave us a green light to do whatever we needed to do'."

As for Dave Lumsden, he says the medical care, at almost $40,000, was "obviously not cheap. But it was the right thing to do."

Besides, he says, Lusi's offspring have had the word "magic" in their racing names and her latest offspring just might warrant it most of all.

Magical Albert does have a winner's-circle ring to it.