The two greatest threats facing the United States are the “external” threat of radical Islam and the “internal” threat of an assault on religious liberties, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal said during a breakfast with the Story County GOP on Saturday.

Jindal has not announced his plans for 2016, but is considered likely to join the field of Republican presidential candidates.

Jindal started his talk by listing the “worst” things President Obama has done to the country, saying that even worse in his view than the growing national debt, Obamacare, Environmental Protection Agency regulations and foreign policy, is Obama’s “attempt to redefine the very idea of America and the idea of the American dream.”

Speaking to about 50 people at Oakwood Road Church, in Ames, Jindal also said the “threat of radical Islamic terrorists” is no longer theoretical, and is not a threat in other parts of the country, but a threat here in the U.S.

“We’ve got a president who refuses to identify the threat we face,” he said. “If he won’t even call them the radical Islamic terrorists they are, how do we beat them?”

Jindal said “we must insist that Muslim leaders, Muslim clerics, acknowledge that Islam has got a problem, and that problem is radicalism.”

Perhaps even more dangerous, Jindal said, is the “internal threat” of an “assault we see on religious liberty across our country.”

Jindal said there is an “all-out assault” from the left, and said he’s tired of the party’s hypocrisy.

“They tell you that they’re for tolerance and respect, and they are, unless you disagree with them,” he said. “What you see right now is they’re trying to discriminate against Christian-owned businesses and other individuals who don’t want to violate their conscience or beliefs, don’t want to participate in weddings that offend their beliefs.”

Asked for a response, Iowa Democratic Party spokesman Sam Lau said “what’s hypocritical is for Bobby Jindal to refer to himself as an ideas guy when all of his ideas have failed the working people of Louisiana.”

“It’s no surprise that his approval ratings in Louisiana are at an all-time low when his state ranks close to the bottom on education, health care and overall quality of life,” Lau said. “Like the rest of the Republican field, Bobby Jindal puts his own political ambition and the needs of the wealthy few over what is best for middle class families.”

Talking with reporters after the breakfast, Jindal said he believes Religious Freedom Restoration Acts such as the one in Indiana that drew controversy from people who believed it allowed businesses to discriminate against gays and lesbians, gives people a shield to protect their religious beliefs.

“It simply allows you your day in court, it allows you to go to court and make your argument,” he said. “It shouldn’t be okay for the state and it shouldn’t be okay for folks to go in there and simply override their religious beliefs.”

Jindal said while he believes the definition of marriage is between a man and a woman, “you can have religious liberty without discrimination.”

U.S. Rep. Steve King, R-Iowa, was also at the event, and said he wants to do as many events as he can with potential candidates as Iowa moves forward in the nomination selection process.

King said the Iowa Straw Poll, which will be held at the Central Iowa Expo in Boone in August, has “never been more important than it is now.”

“We’ve never had such a long and broad field of great candidates as we have now,” he said. “The early selection process is going to help slowly winnow this field down so that the final decision made out of Iowa is made far more incrementally than we’ve seen before.”

King said we need a president who can inspire the country, listing Franklin Roosevelt during World War II and Ronald Reagan as examples.

“We need a president who will restore the soul of America,” he said.