Buy Photo Director Vicki Beaver aims to educate mothers through Nurses for Newborns of Tennessee. (Photo: John Partipilo / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Love it or shake your fist at it, the Affordable Care Act has forced a deeper examination of how people are treated by the health care system.

One of the areas getting a closer look is women's health care.

Despite the fact that women are responsible for 80 percent of the health care decisions in most households, according to the National Partnership for Women & Families, there are some fundamental issues with women's health care in the U.S., experts say.

"Women are the gatekeepers of health care," said Vicki Beaver, the director of Nurses for Newborns of Tennessee, a program that aims to educate mothers on family health and parenting skills. "As you educate women, you're impacting not only her health, but also that of the entire family."

Beaver's program is one example of efforts underway by Nashville leaders to try and solve some of the inequities that exist in the health care system.

The consequences of poor prenatal care, for example, disproportionately affect women, Beaver said.

Tennessee ranks in the top 10 nationally in terms of the proportion of teen births, according to the Department of Health & Human Services. The state also ranks in the top three, according to the Tennessee Department of Health, in terms of infant mortality rates — an issue that affects everyone, for sure, but hits young potential mothers particularly hard.

Many low-income women in the state don't have insurance until they become pregnant, at which point they are eligible for Medicaid, which ends its coverage six weeks after delivery.

"If there's one thing Nurses for Newborns has learned, it's that piece," Beaver said. "We were so focused for a while on just the babies and realized that mom's nutrition, mom's access to health care, mom's mental health status, depression or exposure to domestic violence impacts baby and other children in the household as well."

Nurses for Newborns exists to provide those services to women who often don't have other options for help.

Gaps in care

Other organizations have found themselves filling in gaps of care, too.

"People just assume that the only thing that we do is to provide abortion services, which is not true. The vast majority of the work that we do is preventive care," said Jeff Teague, president and CEO of Planned Parenthood of Middle and East Tennessee.

"We know that for a lot of women who come to us, the only health care that they are accessing is their reproductive and sexual health care. We are the source of all the health care they get."

And education regarding birth control also is limited in Tennessee.

Two years ago, Gov. Bill Haslam signed Senate Bill 3310 into law, solidifying the state's abstinence-only sex education in the public school system by prohibiting educators from talking about any activity that might be a "gateway" to sexual activity.

While a Tennessee law supporting abstinence-only sex-ed programs is only a couple of years old, evidence suggests that it may not adequately address teen behavior.

A 2007 paper from the Guttmacher Institute suggests that from 1995 to 2002, the proportion of teens receiving information about birth control declined sharply, while the proportion of teens getting abstinence-only sex-ed nearly doubled. Still, the research suggested that the 24 percent decline in teen pregnancy during that time period was attributable, exclusively, to better contraceptive use.

The 'Mad Men' era

Another vexing issue is related to medical research.

Interestingly, the vast majority of research on drugs and medical treatments is overwhelmingly tested on men, male test animals or male cell lines.

Last month, U.S. Rep. Jim Cooper, D-Nashville, introduced legislation calling for equity in medical research, in line with the National Institutes of Health's call to action.

An article from the NIH addressing the research equity problem cited "convention" as one of the reasons for the imbalance.

"It almost takes your breath away that people in authority still think like we're in the 'Mad Men' era," Cooper said.

His new act, called "Research for All," requests equality in medical research, citing several examples, including that the original recommended dosage for the sleep aid Ambien was nearly double the therapeutic amount recommended for women.

Part of the problem is that aspects of women's health have left the arena of objective research and entered the political sphere.

"Reproductive health has been needlessly politicized since the '60s and '70s," Cooper said. "I just learned this the other day: You'll not believe who the national co-chairs for Planned Parenthood were — Dwight Eisenhower (a Republican) and Harry Truman (a Democrat)."

Amid rancorous debates over the Supreme Court's recent decision on contraceptive coverage and other public debate, the days of cross-party consensus on women's health seem far away.

Reach Shelley DuBois at 615-259-8241 and on Twitter @shelleydubois.

Read or Share this story: http://www.tennessean.com/story/money/industries/health-care/2014/07/29/nashville-programs-aim-turn-tide-womens-health/13344055/