Topics: Comedy, Editor's Picks, jim miller, kate mckinnon, live from new york, Lorne Michaels, Saturday Night Live, SNL, Television, TV, Entertainment News

This story has been corrected since it was originally published.

When James Andrew Miller and Tom Shales’ book “Live From New York: An Uncensored History of Saturday Night Live” came out in 2002, it was heralded as the definitive behind-the-scenes look at the legendary late-night institution. Containing interviews with hundreds of writers, cast members, hosts and NBC execs, spanning from the hedonistic heyday of the Not Ready for Primetime Players through the troubled “Saturday Night Dead” years into the new golden age of Ferrell and Fey, the book is a rich, densely-populated tribute to the show’s legacy and its enduring impact on entertainment, politics and American culture at large.

On Oct. 6, Miller and Shales are releasing the paperback version of the updated edition, with its 200 new pages covering the last 10 years of “SNL.” While the show has always gone through ups and downs, this past decade has been a particularly tumultuous one, as the show has fought to forge a path for itself in the rapidly changing digital world and to remain relevant in an increasingly competitive and fragmented viewing landscape.

In the new pages, we hear the show’s recent history described by the people who were there in the trenches: Andy Samberg discusses the rise of “SNL’s” now-omnipresent digital shorts; Tina Fey and Sarah Palin reflect on the political impression that defined the 2008 election; while Kenan Thompson, Sasheer Zamata and other cast members weigh in on the diversity casting crisis that engulfed the show last season.

But, as ever, the most important figure is producer Lorne Michaels, the enigmatic visionary who reshaped the entire entertainment industry in his own image, and to whom the book serves as testament and tribute.

Ahead of the show’s 41st season premiere this Saturday, we sat down with Miller to talk about the show’s evolving history, its current challenges, and his hopes for the future of an American institution.

This interview has been lightly edited and condensed.

I was really impressed by how candid the cast members and writers were, and how open everyone was about their dislikes and their grudges. How did you get people to open up?

I don’t mean to be pretentious about this, but the goal is to make a book of record. In terms of how certain things really happened, you want it to be in that book. So I think that people understand that this is their chance to really speak the truth, and speak honestly about what they did and what they felt, and who was problematic.

Was there anyone who particularly surprised or impressed you during the interview process?

Well, it’s funny because you see these people on TV, and you always wonder going into an interview: Are they going to be like their persona on TV or not? Take somebody like Chris Rock, for instance, who’s incredibly funny – but he winds up being so smart too. I mean, the guy was so smart. I remember leaving that first interview with him and thinking: Whoa, yes, his stand-up is great, and he’s fun in the show, but there’s so much more going on.

There were some amazing anecdotes that came out, like when Bill Murray talks about carrying Gilda Radner around a party just before her death, the sort of amazing little moments that you were able to elicit.

When you hear something like that you just realize how special that is, how really incredible. At that moment, you almost stop being an interviewer and you’re just a fan of the show. Gilda, Belushi, Phil Hartman: These are people that you wish you could have interviewed. But it was so incredible to hear [Murray] talk about that moment, and to hear people talk about her. Because the truth is that there were other people that were part of “SNL,” and then people would say, “I couldn’t wait for him to leave” or “I couldn’t wait for her to leave.” So when somebody like Gilda comes along, you realize how deep-seated the love is.

When people in the book talk about it, it really does seem that there was sort of a magic happening in those legendary first five years of the show.

Absolutely. Look, there were a couple of things. One, it was new. So just the fact that it was new and it was breaking down so many barriers, and we’d never seen anything like that. And there was no expectation that it was going to work. I think Lorne understood it, but certainly a lot of the members of the cast didn’t. So there was just so much new about the first five years. And then the incredible talent, and the fact that they were, week after week, still messing around with convention, and being really disruptive in the most delicious way. So I think I totally understand when cast members after those first five years looked back with envy or intimidation. It was just inevitable given the weight and the import, the magnitude of those first five years.

Can “SNL” still do that sort of risky, ground-breaking comedy, given how long it has been around and all the new competition it faces?

I think it can still push boundaries. But the problem is that our world has changed, so some of the stuff that they do Jon Stewart was doing, and now John Oliver is doing, and Stephen Colbert was doing, so they’re not the only game in town. [These other shows] may not be doing sketch comedy, but just in terms of sensibilities and being really satirical about what’s going on, the landscape is a little cluttered, frankly.

Do you think that “SNL” can stay relevant in the current political landscape when pitted against John Oliver, and Colbert, and all those guys?

This is what I was trying to say at in my recent Vanity Fair piece. They’ve always had a special place and this year they need to keep that place. They need to not be conflated with other shows that are doing satirical, political humor. That means the sketches have to be very distinctive and noteworthy and the writing has to be as sharp as ever. I think it’s going to be an exciting year for them, because there’s a lot of material.

[Longtime writer] Jim Downey was a very prominent figure in the book, and he is pretty harsh when speaking about the show’s politics in recent years. He says that the show hasn’t done anything surprising in recent years and that “SNL” has become “an arm of the Hollywood Democratic establishment.”

The thing I love about Jim is that he’s so genuine. He doesn’t pander, and he’s just one of my favorite people to interview because you really get to understand how he feels.

The 40 years of “SNL” kind of run like an EKG. There are triumphant times, there are downtimes, and there are transition years. And I think that some of that is mirrored also in terms of political years. 2008 was incredible, with Tina playing Sarah Palin. But I think Jim was trying to say that they’d become a victim of their own success – boy, they don’t take as many chances as they used to. And I think that’s what he was really speaking to, and I think that kind of frustrated him.

Whereas Horatio Sanz, in the book, refers to Downey as “the Karl Rove of SNL,” and he expresses the concern that Lorne leans too much on Downey instead of relying on more liberal writers like Seth Meyers. And that the show hasn’t been tough enough on the GOP in recent years.

One of my favorite indoor sports is at a dinner party or when you’re just sitting around with friends, and people will say, “Oh, you know, ‘Saturday Night Live’ is a really a Democratic show.” And then somebody will say, “Oh no, no, no. Its a really conservative show. Jim Downey’s a really big conservative, and you should see the way he skewered Hillary.”

In a way, the show’s been incredibly successful in the sense that you don’t think it’s an arm of MSNBC or Fox News, or something like that. I think that they’re an equal opportunity offender. They like messing around with everybody who’s on the stage. And I think that’s really important because if there was a de facto branding of their political philosophies, that would be really detrimental.

Do you think that Lorne has become more afraid to go after the left, or to do humor without thinking about the political consequences?

Somebody once tweeted to me: “I just saw Lorne at a restaurant with the Clintons. And you have to write about this, because how can he make fun of them now if he’s hanging out with them socially?” And I wrote back, “You don’t know Lorne.” Lorne’s got a big world, and there’s lots of interesting, famous people in there, but that doesn’t necessarily mean that you’re out of bounds.

There has always been this debate about the extent to which “SNL” actually influences politics on the ground. There are people who say that because Will Ferrell’s Bush was so lovable, that it turned the tide of the 2000 election. And there’s also the viewpoint that Tina Fey’s Sarah Palin impression is really what ruined her. How strong do you think “SNL’s” political impact is, ultimately?

I’m not sure if there’s somebody who goes into a voting booth and votes a certain way because of an “SNL” sketch. But I will say this. The Will Ferrell-George Bush thing was really interesting for me because my Republican friends said, “I can’t believe how ‘SNL’ is killing Bush. They’re making him out to be this idiot, and he’s so stupid, and he’s under Cheney’s control.” And my Democratic friends were saying, “I can’t believe how ‘SNL’ is helping Bush, because at the end of the day, they make him out to be the kind of guy you’d like to go out and have a beer with.” And studies show that that’s partly how [people] calculate who they’re going to vote for.

So I don’t think it’s directly linked to how somebody votes, but I think there’s a kind of subconscious branding you have in the back of your mind. I think that there were things with Sarah Palin that may have been more deleterious to her than Tina, like the Katie Couric thing.

Let’s talk a bit about the coming election: In your recent Vanity Fair piece, you point out that the Donald Trump impression is quite difficult because he’s already such a larger-than-life character, and someone in the book described Obama as an impression with a “10.10” degree of difficulty.

I think the Trump thing is like, when the Lord wants to punish you, he answers your prayers. Because there’s this unbelievable character in the race, right? So just to jump into the writers’ room: Everybody is throwing out ideas like, “What if Trump says something about Carly Fiorina’s face. Y’know, ’look at that face! You can’t be president with that face!’” And someone else will say, “No, he actually said that!” Or “What if he gets on a riff about John McCain, and just says like, ‘I don’t even think he’s a hero.’” “No, no, he already said that.” So it’s like, where do you get stuff? It’s a little tricky.

And Jay Pharaoh is back doing Obama. Can you talk a little about the notoriously difficult Obama impression?



This has been the case since 2007. Obama is, without a doubt, the most difficult president in the history of “Saturday Night Live,” in part because he doesn’t have tics. He doesn’t have — Jim Downey calls them ‘handles’ — almost like this port of entry where you get in there and mess around with his mind or his affectations.