The two war veterans running in the 8th Congressional District take markedly different views on the prospect of using U.S. ground troops against Islamic State militants

Political newcomer Larry Kaifesh, 47, of Carpentersville, said the U.S. must lead the effort if there is to be "true success."

"I would have rather put in troops and taken care of it personally," said Kaifesh, who is in the Marine Corps Reserves after serving more than 20 years in the Marines, including deployments to Iraq and Afghanistan.

Incumbent U.S. Rep. Tammy Duckworth, 46, of Hoffman Estates, said careful consideration is needed before the country enters the "on ramp" to ground combat. Duckworth, who is retiring from the Illinois National Guard, is a disabled veteran who lost her legs and partial use of her right arm in 2004 after the Black Hawk helicopter she was piloting was hit by a rocket-propelled grenade in Iraq.

"I believe it can be done without boots on the ground, but I think that if we're going to commit to that, then we should have a discussion," Duckworth said.

In the race to represent parts of Chicago's northwest and western suburbs, the differences between the two candidates also include fame and fundraising.

Duckworth is an incumbent whose war sacrifices are well-known and whose campaign is well-financed. Kaifesh, a first-time candidate, is facing limited resources.

"It's not even close," Kaifesh said of his fundraising and name recognition compared to hers.

The challenger grew up in the district and has primarily lived in California and Virginia, where he was stationed with the Marines. Kaifesh has also spent time on Capitol Hill as a legislative fellow to Rep. John Kline of Minnesota.

Fundraising totals have Duckworth far ahead with about $2.4 million and Kaifesh netting $257,794 in total contributions for the election cycle, as of Sept. 30.

A majority of the money raised by the challenger so far comes from individual contributions. Kaifesh has contributed $2,204 of his own money and lent his campaign another $21,000. The candidate, who does not have a civilian job, said he's been living off of his savings during the campaign season, as well as on rental property income from his condo in Virginia.

The incumbent's war chest is nearly equally funded by individual contributions and money from political action committees. A majority of Duckworth's individual contributions are from out of state, including dozens from those associated with the orthotics and prostheses industry. Duckworth — who wears prosthetic limbs — has boasted of crossing the party line as one of the few House Democrats to support a repeal of the medical devices tax last year.

Duckworth voted against funding for Syrian rebels in September, contending that Congress hadn't considered all the implications of such a commitment. She also said allied troops must be in the mix if U.S. combat troops are deployed.

"It can't just be U.S. forces, and if we're going to do this, my commitment is to those young men and women in uniform there," she told the Tribune Editorial Board.

But her opponent slammed her for the vote.

"It's not a problem that you can try to balance things out and be politically attractive and soft-spoken and kind of wait for the polls to come out before you make some decisions," he said in an interview.

Kaifesh has been critical of Islam and called for reform in the religion.

"I think if you follow Islam the way Muhammad wanted you to, you will be intolerant of nonbelievers, you will support aggression and you will believe that there will only be peace in the world if the world is Islam," he told the Tribune Editorial Board.

On the Affordable Care Act, Kaifesh said he would "replace or repeal" the landmark law, calling it a job killer that will make the health care system mediocre.

Duckworth, while acknowledging the rollout was troubled, said the law ultimately benefits her constituents.

Kaifesh, who has made the national deficit a key issue, is pressing for a 10 percent across-the-board cut in the entire federal budget. Duckworth has pushed for more nuanced cuts, including reducing waste in military spending.

"Anybody could call for a 10 percent, across-the-board cut, but that's not the responsible way to finance an entire nation," she said. "It's lazy, and it's irresponsible."

Kaifesh said he moved back to Illinois in October 2013 after separating from his second wife, and targeted Duckworth's seat because he sees her as supportive of the president's agenda.

But during her first term, Duckworth has noted her votes across party lines, including on Affordable Care Act amendments.

Kaifesh described himself as single before the primary in March, though his divorce was not finalized until May, according to Arlington County, Va., Circuit Court records. He said he didn't know he was still married, as the couple separated in July 2013 and signed off on the property settlement in September 2013.

Last month, Duckworth announced her pregnancy on NBC's "Today" show. On the campaign trail, she unabashedly asks for baby name ideas. Her baby girl with husband Army Maj. Bryan Bowlsbey is due Dec. 5.

Tribune reporter Katherine Skiba contributed.

saho@tribune.com