Fifty-three percent of Americans rate healthcare quality in the U.S. positively, but only about 33 percent rate coverage positively and only 21 percent are satisfied with the cost of healthcare, according to a new Gallup poll.

From 2005-2007, a slim majority of Americans rated healthcare in the U.S. as "good" or "excellent," but after President Barack Obama was elected in 2008, the satisfaction rating increased, according to the poll. By November 2010, it reached a high of 62 percent, and then again just after he was elected to his second term in 2012. Gallup speculates that this is probably due to Obama's health reform promises and the passing of Affordable Care Act.

However, the poll says, since November 2013, no more than 54 percent of Americans have rated the quality of healthcare in the U.S. as excellent or good. That share is currently at 53 percent, which is the lowest it has been since 2005.

Americans rate their satisfaction with health coverage and costs lower than they rate healthcare quality, according to Gallup. Still, satisfaction with coverage has been steadily increasing--going from 26 percent in 2008 to 38 percent in 2009. It is currently at 33 percent, but that is higher than it was before Obama took office. The poll also says that the low satisfaction with costs may also have to do with the promises related to healthcare reform in 2012, since it has been declining since then.

The healthcare industry is increasingly focused on customer service, evidenced by some hospitals offering a Yelp-like rating system for patients to give their feedback. What's more, studies have shown that most patients don't really understand their benefits, making some consumers' experience worse than it should be with their health plans. However, Medicare Advantage patients are generally more satisfied with their care than those enrolled in private plans.

To learn more:

- here's the Gallup poll results

Related Articles:

UnitedHealth seeks 'human potential' in providing customer service

Study: Consumers more satisfied with Medicare Advantage than commercial plans

'Yelp for hospitals': New site offers healthcare ratings