By Rob Nikolewski │ New Mexico Watchdog

SANTA FE — The advertising blitz to tout the New Mexico Health Insurance Exchange to individuals looking to sign up for policies under the Affordable Care Act is on hold due to technical problems with the federal government’s website.

“We’re holding back on paid media until we know when the glitches at the federal exchange can get worked out,” NMIX spokeswoman Robin Hunn told the Albuquerque Journal.

The marketing and public relations campaign that includes television commercials and billboards has already launched to promote the statewide exchange, which signs up small businesses and their employees. The ad campaign is estimated to cost between $6 million and $7 million.

But the federal website for individual policies, www.healthcare.gov, has been unable to allow many in New Mexico to obtain information on what coverage options they have since the ACA rolled out Oct. 1.

“That’s my understanding,” NMIX interim CEO Mike Nuñez told New Mexico Watchdog earlier this week. “I know we’ve tried, but (customers) haven’t been able to get through.”

A reporter from New Mexico Watchdog has tried six times since Oct. 1 to compare individual coverage prices on the federal government’s site, to no avail.

Other states directing consumers to www.healthcare.gov have reported similar problems in the last 18 days. On Thursday, White House Press Secretary Jay Carney said President Obama has instructed his team to “work 24/7” to address the website problems.

New Mexico is one of 36 states that sends customers interested in individual Obamacare policies to the federal site. Next year, NMIX will start handling enrollment for individual policies. NMIX consumer advocate Dr. Deane Waldman said earlier this month he’s “very hopeful and confident that a year from now — at least for New Mexicans — when (the NMIX runs things) that problem will no longer exist.”

While the www.healthcare.gov site sputters, NMIX officials say they’re very happy with the roll out of the Small Business Health Options Program. Hunn told the Albuquerque Journal that as of Thursday, 672 small businesses have set up accounts on the exchange.

Contact Rob Nikolewski at rnikolewski@watchdog.org and follow him on Twitter @robnikolewski