Topics: abscam, American Hustle, christian bale, church committee, Corruption, David O. Russell, Editor's Picks, frank church, intelligence, Movies, National Security Agency, NSA, Political corruption, Politics, Select Committee on Intelligence, Senate Intelligence Committee, Surveillance, surveillance state, U.S. Intelligence, Entertainment News, News, Politics News

Those who did not personally live through the 1970s may have inherited the notion that the decade was a decadent, nonstop party: Disco, cocaine, flamboyant fashions for people of all genders and the first flowering of gay culture, with punk rock sneaking into the club late to inject a discordant note of nihilism. Some of those hedonistic stereotypes get a lot of play in David O. Russell’s highly enjoyable awards-season favorite “American Hustle,” but beneath the surface other aspects of the ‘70s are visible too. Especially in the wake of the United States’ ignominious retreat from Vietnam, the Watergate scandal and the resignation of Richard Nixon, American life felt like a combination of unmanageable chaos and cultural stagnation.

Inflation and crime rates soared to unprecedented levels — record-high interest rates provide a crucial background to the con-artist career of Christian Bale’s character in the movie — while the nation’s big cities appeared bankrupt, decrepit and ungovernable. (“Ford to City: Drop Dead” howled the New York Daily News, in one of the most famous headlines in tabloid history.) The South Bronx burned on national TV, during a World Series broadcast from Yankee Stadium, and to this day many Americans have the impression that New York City is dirty and dangerous, even with the city’s crime rate near historic lows. For those of us who grew up during that decade, a lot of waiting was involved: Waiting for the man (if you were cool), waiting for hours in a gas line (for me, the OPEC crisis of 1973 will always be associated with my mom’s lemon-yellow ’72 Super Beetle), waiting for years for the Rolling Stones to emerge from their drug haze and make a decent album, waiting for a “Star Trek” rerun you’ve already seen a half-dozen times.

But chaos and stagnation unmistakably have their benefits. For one thing, the suburban boredom of the ‘70s attracted young dissidents into the hollowed-out cities, and produced an artistic, musical and literary revolution with long-lasting and ambiguous effects. That subject has produced its own sociological discipline (e.g., Richard Lloyd’s outstanding “Neo-Bohemia: Art and Commerce in the Post-Industrial City”), but as “American Hustle” should remind us, the political chaos of the ‘70s also drew back the curtain, for a moment or two, on the hidden machineries of American life. Coming shortly after Watergate and the reports of the Church Committee, the Abscam scandal fictionalized in Russell’s movie completed the disillusioning portrait of a government and system that seemed to have become entirely corrupt and cynical. We paid attention, for a little while, and then we didn’t want to anymore. One of the most important lessons to draw from that decade is that we were warned about the corrosive force of money in politics, and about the creation of a national-security state that would be turned against its own citizens, and we actively decided to ignore it.

Watergate showed us a president and his inner circle brought down by their bathetic attempts to cover up what was, in fact, a minor, amateurish and nearly routine act of political subterfuge. Abscam began as a small-scale FBI investigation into white-collar crime on Long Island and then accidentally metastasized into an elaborate undercover sting operation that brought down six congressmen, a U.S. senator and a dozen or so local elected officials in New Jersey and Pennsylvania. (I’ve found no better summary of the whole arcane Abscam saga than Matt Birkbeck’s marvelously detailed article for al-Jazeera America.) No doubt it’s hyperbolic to suggest that Abscam threatened to expose the entire legislative process as a corrupt con, but it kind of felt that way at the time. Most people who go see “American Hustle” will probably never have heard of the scandal before, but it marked the beginning of the widespread contempt for Congress that plays such a big role in public life today.

It was New York con artist Mel Weinberg (the basis for Bale’s Irving Rosenfeld in the movie) who cooked up the idiot-genius notion of using a phony Arab sheik, purportedly from one of the newly rich Gulf states, as a method of funneling briefcases full of cash to politicians, in videotaped meetings, in exchange for various favors: U.S. residency or citizenship, Atlantic City gaming licenses and so on. (In the movie, the FBI dresses up a Mexican-American man as the sheik — which leads to a tense standoff when a mobster questions his authenticity — but in real life it wasn’t quite that bad. They found an agent of Lebanese ancestry who spoke some Arabic.) Almost every politician they approached, from the Philadelphia City Council up to the U.S. Senate, took the bribes. As Rep. Ozzie Myers, a legendary South Philadelphia machine Democrat, put it while he was stuffing $50,000 into his blazer, “In this town, money talks and bullshit walks.”

One of the few who declined the money, Sen. Larry Pressler, R-S.D., was described by Walter Cronkite as a hero and observed, “What have we come to if turning down a bribe is heroic?” To this day, right-wing partisans often characterize Abscam as exclusively a Northeastern and/or Democratic scandal (only one of the seven convicted members of Congress, Florida’s Richard Kelly, was a Republican), and cite Pressler as an avatar of GOP rectitude. But given how avidly the entire congressional hierarchy of both parties tried to limit the Abscam damage and portray the FBI as an agency out of control that had hired a convicted swindler to entrap hardworking lawmakers, it seems likelier that most Capitol Hill insiders saw Pressler as a prairie rube who didn’t know when to keep his mouth shut and failed to appreciate the deep wisdom of the Ozzie Myers koan. Birkbeck quotes former FBI assistant director Bud Mullen, explaining that he was new to the world of Washington politics at the time: “I naively thought Congress wanted to get rid of the bad apples. Boy, was I wrong.”