MARTINSBURG, W.Va. — Martinsburg business owner Marc Savitt aims to limit Rep. Alex Mooney's service in West Virginia's 2nd Congressional District to one term.

Mooney said he hopes voters will send him back to Washington this fall to continue to fight for his constituents' values in the 17-county district.

Savitt, 61, and Mooney, 44, who both live in the Eastern Panhandle, are vying to be the Republican nominee for Congress in the state's May 10 primary election.

The winner will face a Democratic opponent from a field of five candidates — Mark Hunt, Tom Payne, Harvey D. Peyton, Cory Simpson and Robert "Robin" Wilson Jr. — in the November general election.

Members of Congress are paid $174,000 per year.

"It hasn't been easy," Mooney said of his bid to stand for his constituents' views in Congress. "Some folks are not happy that I don't go along to get along with some liberal agenda items."

Savitt, who has owned The Mortgage Center for 30 years, said he too is a conservative, but also would be able to rely on his experience as a job creator in the private sector to advocate for other small business owners, as well as consumers.

"I know exactly how (government) rules and regulations affect all of us because I've felt the brunt of them for many, many years," Savitt said. "That's why I first got involved in advocacy by going to Washington and going to Charleston."

In regard to small business concerns, Mooney said if re-elected he would advocate for Congress "to just simply provide oversight of every department and all these rules and regulations."

"These regulations can be very costly."

Aside from the Environmental Protection Agency's regulatory impact on coal in West Virginia, Savitt pointed to an "onslaught" of regulations from the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, which he said are causing "major players" in the mortgage and housing industry to go out of business.

When asked about reducing health care costs, both Savitt and Mooney said they would push to abolish the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, which critics have dubbed "Obamacare." They also both signaled support for changing the law to allow competition and for individuals to purchase health care plans across state lines.

"What we need to do is put that choice back into the consumer's hand and right now we don't have that," Savitt said.

Mooney added that Obamacare failed to contain costs, which he said have instead gone up "dramatically" and patients have not been able to keep their doctor as was promised.

In regard to the problem of drug abuse, especially heroin, Savitt said drug traffickers should go to jail "for a very long time" and drug users should receive job training while in full-time rehabilitation programs.

Mooney pointed to the introduction of his Promoting Responsible Opioid Prescribing Act in March, which he said would remove pressure on doctors to prescribe narcotic pain medication via a patient survey process.

"Tackling the drug epidemic is not a partisan issue, it's a human issue," said Mooney, who touted the legislative measure's bipartisan support.

When asked why he is running for re-election, Mooney said he wants to "continue to work on the issues I've been working on the last couple years. Again, that comes to asserting the power of Congress to oversee the spending of taxpayer dollars carefully."

"I have done what I have promised to do when I've campaigned," Mooney said. "I've fought back against big government. I have fought for balanced budgets in this country, which we definitely need."

If elected, Savitt said he would actively meet with constituents across the district to find out what their problems may be.

"I will be the type of person that works diligently seven days a week. It's a full-time job," said Savitt, who added he wouldn't use the office as a political "stepping stone."

"If you're not in your office, you need to be in your district, you need to be accessible," he said.