N.Y. to offer no-cost health insurance for those just over Medicaid limit Program open to those with incomes just above Medicaid eligibility cap

Albany

New Yorkers whose incomes are just above the eligibility level for Medicaid will have a new option for low-cost or no-cost insurance coverage in 2016.

The state is one of two across the country — the other is Minnesota — approved to implement a so-called Basic Health Program for residents who earn up to 200 percent of the federal poverty level. The program is an option under the federal Affordable Care Act, with funding provided by the federal government.

NY State of Health, the state's online insurance market, sent invitations Friday to private insurers to participate in BHP. Consumers with income at or below 150 percent of the federal poverty level ($17,655 for a household of one, or $36,375 for a household of four) will pay no monthly premium. Those with slightly higher incomes at 200 percent of the federal poverty level ($23,540 for a household of one, or $48,500 for a household of four) will pay $20 a month.

More Information

All health policies offered through the program must offer the same minimum set of benefits as other plans on the online exchange.

The state will administer BHP and pay premiums to participating insurance companies. The federal government will reimburse the state at 95 percent of the value of the subsidies that individuals would have received if they had purchased insurance on NY State of Health without the new program, according to Donna Frescatore, executive director of the exchange.

The BHP is intended to make coverage available to people who find the cost of health insurance challenging, even with the subsidies provided through NY State of Health. It is also intended to address the problem of "churning," the term given for people who disqualify for their insurance coverage when their income changes.

Frescatore said she hopes insurers that already offer policies on the exchange will also choose to participate in BHP.

"It gives consumers the ability to stay with the same health plan should they experience changes in income," she said.

chughes@timesunion.com • 518-454-5417 • @hughesclaire