Doctors aim to cross lines among faiths

Photo: Eric Kayne Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 ﻿The Ibn Sina Community Medical Center hosted a health fair Sunday in which Muslim and Jewish doctors collaborated to provide free medical screenings. ﻿The Ibn Sina Community Medical Center hosted a health fair Sunday in which Muslim and Jewish doctors collaborated to provide free medical screenings. Photo: Eric Kayne Doctors aim to cross lines among faiths 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

In a collaboration that's being called the first of its kind in the country, Muslim and Jewish doctors joined forces Sunday to provide free medical screenings to low-income and uninsured Houstonians at a community health fair.

The health fair was part of the international "Weekend of Twinning," meant to strengthen ties between the two faith groups by co-hosting programs. The New York-based nonprofit Foundation for Ethnic Understanding hopes the fair can serve as a national model.

"We share a common moral imperative to heal the sick," said Walter Ruby, the director for the foundation's Muslim-Jewish program. "With all the bad news out there, it's inspiring seeing Jewish and Muslim doctors serve the community in which we live side by side."

Sunday's efforts were led by Dr. Aijaz Ali Khowaja, CEO of the Ibn Sina Foundation that operates five clinics in the Houston area, and Dr. Harvey Rosenstock, a Jewish psychiatrist who works with the Bellaire synagogue he attends, Congregation Brith Shalom, to engage Jewish physicians to volunteer with Ibn Sina.

Ibn Sina was founded in 2001 and now provides low-cost health care to more than 80,000 Houston residents a year, and tries to treat women and children who can show they live in poverty for free. It takes its name from the Persian philosopher known to many as Avicenna who wrote influential theories on medicine and Islamic theology. Rosenstock recalled studying Ibn Sina's work in medical school.

"I saw Ibn Sina as doing these things bridging all communities," Rosenstock said. "There are only two kinds of people, those who need healing and those who heal."

Volunteer care

The clinics all have primary care providers, Khowaja said, but lack specialists, so Rosenstock recruits specialists from his network to volunteer their time. This way, patients can receive the care they need in the same building instead of chasing referrals at different locations. The groups came together to plan the health fair, but also to build a long-term partnership. Many of the specialists who gave their time Sunday have committed to becoming regular volunteers at Ibn Sina, Khowaja said.

"This platform can really bring access to the people who don't have access to health care or don't know where to go," said Nasruddin Rupani, Ibn Sina's chairman.

Under tents in the sunny parking lot of Ibn Sina Community Clinic on Wilcrest Drive, patients received free flu shots and blood pressure screenings, children were offered free dental sealants inside the clinic and adults were invited to register for free dental examinations.

Specialists in fields including gynecology, urology, cardiology and allergy were on hand to consult with patients. Volunteers helped patients learn about diabetes and the detriments of smoking, two issues particularly prevalent in the community, Khowaja said. Poverty and stress can cause people to smoke, he said, and diabetes in the South Asian population is seven times higher compared to the white population.

'We are all human'

Ibn Sina serves a diverse group of patients, Khowaja said, with the majority identifying as part of a minority: 35 percent as Asian, 23 percent as Hispanic and 22 as African-American.

Yasmin Bhaidani, 60, sat in the waiting room with her granddaughter in her lap, waiting to see a dental health worker.

"It's good to be together because we are all human beings, " she said. "That is enough."

Bhaidani said she heard about the event at the Ismaili Muslim Center in Sugar Land. Salim Sunesara, 36, said it was the first time he had seen a dentist in several years, and that he had been a frequent visitor of Ibn Sina's clinics in the past because their discounted costs made it possible for his family to afford before they were covered by the Affordable Care Act. Sunesara said it didn't make any difference whether his physician was Jewish, Muslim or Christian, and together they provided better health care to more people.

"This project reminds us of the very essence of what it means to be a religious person ... the spirit of compassion," said Ranon Teller, the rabbi of Congregation Brith Shalom.