THE Baseball Hall of Fame will announce its new inductees on Wednesday — a burst of warmth in the cold, diamond-less winter — and the crop of potential inductees includes, for the second straight year, Barry Bonds and Roger Clemens.

Mr. Bonds, baseball’s career home run leader, is arguably the game’s most dominant hitter since Babe Ruth. Mr. Clemens won 354 games and received the Cy Young Award a record seven times. By those measures they are as clear-cut Hall of Famers as ever lived.

That neither came close to being chosen for induction by the requisite 75 percent of voters last year (Mr. Clemens was named on 37.6 percent of the 569 ballots, Mr. Bonds on 36.2 percent) is tied to the fact that they, along with other superstars of their era, have been directly linked to using performance-enhancing drugs. While that may cost them a place in the Hall of Fame, at least they are getting the chance to be considered. Assuming they receive at least 5 percent of the vote each year, they’ll remain on the ballot until their eligibility expires in 2027.

That’s an opportunity never afforded another tainted player in the Bonds-Clemens stratosphere of accomplishment: Pete Rose, baseball’s career hits leader, who is entering the 25th year of his gambling-related banishment from the game. Still a figure of great interest, who causes a stir each summer by signing autographs near the Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, N.Y., Mr. Rose remains the only player in the Hall’s 78-year history to be explicitly denied a chance to appear on the ballot.

In January 1991, less than a year before he was to be eligible for induction for the first time, the Hall of Fame’s board of directors convened a special 10-member committee. Mr. Rose was already on Major League Baseball’s permanently ineligible list, a fate he accepted in 1989 after an investigation revealed that while managing the Cincinnati Reds he had bet frequently on baseball, and on his own team. He was also fresh off serving five months at a federal prison for tax fraud. The possibility that he might be elected into Cooperstown did not sit well in the corridors of baseball power. At that meeting, the committee recommended that anyone banned from baseball should also be barred from eligibility for the Hall. A month later, the rules change was approved by the full board.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

While it seems like a rule with the breadth to ensnare any number of miscreants, it is, in practice, quite narrow. Consider, after all, the players who might have appeared on Hall of Fame ballots cast by baseball writers but did not because baseball had named them permanently ineligible. The list is printed here in its entirety: Pete Rose.

This is not to debate whether he actually deserves to be in the Hall of Fame — his marvelous, outsize contributions as a player say yes, his persistent, game-endangering gambling says no. But this is to argue that Mr. Rose, just like modern steroid users, deserves his day of judgment. It’s not too late. Just as the Hall abruptly concocted a rule to keep him out in 1991, it could pass an amendment that would make him eligible immediately. Mr. Rose might not be voted in, but we would know where he stands.

Baseball, permanently stung by the Black Sox scandal of 1919, clearly views gambling as a far more serious sin than steroid use. The league mandates a permanent ban for any player or manager betting on a game in which he is involved, while first-time steroid users essentially get an extended vacation: a 50-game suspension. Yet those disparate standards needn’t have any bearing on the Hall.

From its inception in the 1930s, the Hall’s creators delegated the decision of who got into the shrine to a large and independent body of baseball writers — a process devised as a way to represent the feelings of the public. The system has generally worked. In the case of Mr. Bonds and Mr. Clemens, the arguments in their favor (“They may have done steroids, but they still had to hit and pitch”) and the arguments against them (“They cheated the game and the fans”) have been distilled in the writers’ vote: They do not deserve to be in the Hall.

The banished Mr. Rose received 41 write-in votes in 1991, far short of the 323 he would have needed for induction, but also more write-in votes, by an order of magnitude, than anyone else has ever received. Although write-in votes are not officially counted, and so represent a “wasted” vote, Mr. Rose has continued to receive them each year. Maybe, had he been on that ballot in ’91, he would have drawn the votes he needed to get in. Maybe he would have received fewer than even those 41 write-ins. Maybe he would have received somewhere in between. We’ll never know. How he would fare today, however, could easily be found out.