NEW HAVEN >> Almost one year ago, the 1,200 practitioners in the Yale Medical Group, were kicked out of United Healthcare’s Medicare Advantage network, which was later followed by elimination of Yale-New Haven Hospital as an option for the insurer’s clients.

The medical personnel were among an estimated 2,200 physicians in Connecticut eliminated from the network that impacted more than 30,000 patients.

Dr. Steven Wolfson, formerly of Cardiology Associates of New Haven, which was bought by the Yale Medical Group 18 months ago, was one of the physicians affected.

Last year, he recalled the tearful goodbyes with longtime patients who had to look for care elsewhere if they continued to stay with the United Healthcare plan or if they had not switched out in time during open enrollment.

Advertisement

The decision to eliminate Y-NHH caused even greater confusion, since there was only a short window for patients to opt for regular coverage through Medicare. Missing that meant they would not be covered at Y-NNH as part of the in-patient network.

That decision on Y-NHH came after patients had already enrolled, when talks between the hospital and United Healthcare over Medicaid Advantage payments had failed to reach an agreement.

To his surprise, Wolfson this month found his name and five of his colleagues listed in the 2015 directory of practicioners published by United Healthcare for persons looking to join in the open enrollment period which extends until Dec. 7 next month.

Neither Wolfson, nor Drs. Eric Grubman, Nathan Kruger, Christopher Loscalzo, Stephen Possick and Daniel Price, are in the network as part of the Yale Medical Group, essentially faculty members at Y-NNH, but they continue to be listed in the 830-page directory.

Wolfson said another physician retired a year ago and is also incorrectly listed.

The Connecticut Medical Society expects to notify its members to check on the accurary of the listings for insurance coverage as bad information can hurt their patients as they enroll in plans in the next few weeks.

Wolfson said all the addresses and phone numbers for the six doctors incorrectly listed are also wrong.

“One is listed for his former address more than three years ago in Waterbury. One is listed for an office in Hamden that we closed more than a year ago. They would have done better downloading the current phone book. ... it does not serve patients well,” Wolfson said.

United Healthcare trimmed its Medicare Advantage networks in at least 10 states with notification going out in October 2013 and effective Feb. 1, 2014. The physicians were told it had nothing to do with quality.

The Affordable Care Act made cuts to Medicare Advantage plans of about $156 billion to bring its costs in line with traditional Medicare.

Intervention on behalf of the Connecticut patients by the state’s congressional delegation last year failed to change the situation with Yale-New Haven Hospital, the termination of the physicians and confusing information to patients, Wolfson said

Yale-New Haven Hospital continues to be not be included in the Medicare Advantage plans offered by United Healthcare.

Matthew C. Katz, CEO of the Connecticut State Medical Society, said “there is no excuse for having incorrect information about the group, wrong sites of care and the fact that they are in the network when they are not.”

“It raises a lot of questions about the transparency of their networks and the veracity of updating and maintaining their networks. If this is not an issue of bait and switch, it is defintely an issue of lack of monitoring and just basic principles of updating a directory that patients rely on every day,” Katz said.

The medical society director said bad information is also a problem on a daily basis for physicians who need to refer patients to other specialists.

The Medicare Advantage plans continue to be offered through AARP.

Katz said Wolfson’s group is one of the largest cardiac care practices in Greater New Haven. Given that cardiac issues are one of the biggest areas of care for seniors, incorrect information on providers for plans tied to AARP is worrisome.

He said the provider networks are also not readily available on multiple websites that sell United Healthcare Medicare Advantage.

Maria Gordon Shydlo, public relations director for United Healthcare, said they were looking into the issue.

“We do remain committed to working with health care providers, hospitals and other facilities to improve the accuracy of care provider directories and to help ensure individuals have the most up-to-date information possible,” she wrote in an email.

In a voice mail, Gordon Shydlo said two of the physicians in question appeared to also be part of a group that was covered by a Medicaid Advantage plan and they were going to check further on that.

“We are looking into the broader issue of how the doctors are showing themselves online so that we can just make sure we have all the up-to-date information,” she said.

Possick is listed on one website as belonging to the Northeast Medical Group, which is covered by Medicaid Advantage.

Wolfson said Possick did stress tests and echocardiograms for one of the NEMG groups in the past, but not now.

The doctors in question all appear to take United Healthcare insurance, among others, that is offered in the commercial network outside of Medicare Advantage.