Topics: Andy Grove, Editor's Picks, Gordon Moore, Intel, Michael Malone, Robert Noyce, Silicon Valley, The Intel Trinity, Technology News, Business News

Here are some reasons why I didn’t think I needed to read Michael Malone’s “The Intel Trinity: How Robert Noyce, Gordon Moore, and Andy Grove Built the World’s Most Important Company.” I did not need to read, one more time, about the legendary departure of the “Traitorous Eight” from Nobel Prize winner William Shockley’s pioneering Silicon Valley transistor firm — the inspiration for generations of Silicon Valley engineers to jump ship and start up their own shop. I also didn’t need to be told, once more, about how Gordon Moore came up with “Moore’s Law” — his famous prediction that computer chip performance would double every 18 months. And I certainly didn’t need to reacquaint myself with how Andy Grove’s childhood in Hungary during World War II and under the Soviet thumb contributed to the kind of hard-charging relentless paranoia necessary to “build the world’s most important company.”

Those are all good and fascinating stories, and nobody knows the history of the chip industry better than longtime tech journalist Michael Malone. So if you don’t know them, then “The Intel Trinity” is a fine introduction to the founding myths legends of Silicon Valley. But these tales have been told many times before. I decided to read “The Intel Trinity” because I was looking for something a little different. Love it or hate it, Silicon Valley, right now, has never enjoyed more political, cultural or economic influence. From whence did this power spring? The case can easily be made that Noyce, Moore and Grove were as responsible as anyone for how the Valley currently conducts itself. Their DNA lives on, in the venture capital companies that line Sand Hill Road, in the board rooms of Facebook and Google. So it seemed not just worthwhile to get a refresher course in how it all happened — it also seemed crucially important. Silicon Valley’s success today is fraught with complexities that few people, outside of science fiction writers, imagined when the first microprocessor chips started rolling out of fabrication plants. Myths and legends take on a different hue when their inheritors transform from canny geeks to masters of the universe. It’s more pressing than ever to figure out how we got here, from there.

In a Valley swamped by self-importance, it would also be easy to accuse Michael Malone of his own over-reaching hubris when you realize that his title, “The Intel Trinity,” is a direct play on the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. Really? Are we actually supposed to get down on our knees and worship these guys? But then again, there’s no getting around it: the silicon chip has drastically changed our world. John Lennon overstepped when he boasted the Beatles were bigger than Jesus. But if Robert Noyce, the founder of both Fairchild Semiconductor and Intel, had said the same thing about the first microprocessor, he wouldn’t have been wrong. Silicon Valley arrogance does not come from nowhere. It is embedded, like millions of miniaturized transistors, in the holy silicon wafer.

But this is not necessarily a permanent state of affairs. If there is one great lesson from “The Intel Trinity,” it is that nothing about the Valley is set in stone. Even Moore’s Law! As Malone stresses at numerous points, Moore’s Law is not actually a law. There are no physical or economic realities that mandate that chips will keep getting smaller and cheaper. Moore’s Law, Malone explains, was also a promise: “a unique cultural contract made between the semiconductor industry and the rest of the world to double chip performance every couple of years and thus usher in an era of continuous, rapid technological innovation and the life-changing products that innovation produced.”

More than any other single company, Intel delivered on that promise. Intel catalyzed the modern era. The trinity of Noyce, Moore and Grove are responsible for the pervading psychological tenor of our times, in which change is the only constant.

That’s a pretty big deal — and well worth revisiting.

***

The opening paragraph of “Cramming More Components onto Integrated Circuits” by Gordon Moore, published on April 19, 1965, is one of the better technology forecasting documents ever printed.