Is there anyone who doesn’t have to deal with issues associated with work-life balance?

It could be as simple as having a doctor’s appointment during the workday, getting your car serviced, leaving early to pick up your child at school or having to stay home to wait for someone to fix your roof.

Some factors that increase the stress include working longer hours, having limited support from bosses or coworkers, facing increased ambiguity or uncertainty at work, or overall job dissatisfaction. In fact, some research has shown that the workplace has become the greatest single source of stress.

In the United States, the standard workweek is often cited as 70 hours, not 40. This means that with more time spent on work, less time will be spent with family, friends and engaging in enjoyable personal pursuits. Unlike Europe, the United States does not have a maximum workweek length. We also have significantly fewer paid holidays.

With technological advancements leading to our 24/7 work day, it seems that work bleeds into the rest of our lives quite often. It also seems that personal time also bleeds into our work lives.

Researchers report that both men and women experience guilt when their family lives intrude onto their work lives (rather than the other way around). This can lead to negative moods, anxiety and other behaviors that can impact job performance.

In response, an increasing number of workers are demanding that employers do more to reduce the stress of work/nonwork conflicts. Some companies offer wellness programs with fitness trainers, yoga instructors and stretching classes. Other companies offer healthier food options, on-site counseling, longer vacations and flexible schedules.

Flexible work arrangements have been shown to be a very powerful tool for reducing stress and increasing employees’ job and life satisfaction, job engagement, job retention and health.

Most people feel that management has a responsibility to help employees achieve work/life balance. This means that employers will have to continue to find creative options to limit the amount of work/nonwork spillover that occurs to reduce employees’ stress and to ensure that work settings are set up so that employees can fully contribute while at the same time enjoying good physical and mental health.

As Tony Schwartz notes in his book, “The Way We’re Working Isn’t Working,” individuals need four sources of energy to operate at their best.

These include physical, emotional, mental and spiritual energy. As it stands today, our workplaces and jobs are really not designed to allow us to enhance these sources of energy, and in fact often deplete them. So something must change.

Joyce E. A. Russell is the vice dean and the director of the Executive Coaching and Leadership Development Program at the University of Maryland’s Robert H. Smith School of Business.