Indiana is in the presidential campaign spotlight. Here's what hopefuls Donald Trump, Hillary Clinton, Ted Cruz and Bernie Sanders have been saying here.

Buy Photo Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump speaks to a crowd at teh Indiana State Fairgrounds on April 27, 2016. (Photo: Robert Scheer/IndyStar)Buy Photo

Indiana has been the center of the political universe lately.

Republican 2016 presidential candidates Donald Trump and Ted Cruz made repeated visits to the Hoosier state, as have their Democratic counterparts, Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders.

As the clock winds down to Indiana's May 3 primary, here's a quick look at what they've said here on a variety of issues.

Donald Trump

Buy Photo Donald Trump thanks legendary basketball coach Bob Knight (right) for his endorsement. Trump and Knight spoke at a rally in Indianapolis on Wednesday, April 27, 2016. (Photo: Robert Scheer/IndyStar)

Immigration: Trump said the U.S. must crack down on illegal immigration. One way he proposes doing that — building a wall along the border and requiring Mexico to pony up $5 billion to $10 billion to pay for it. As leverage, Trump said he would potentially hold up the $24 billion that he says undocumented workers in America send each year to relatives in Mexico.

"“We’re going to win on the border,” Trump said. “We’re going to win, and we’re going to build a wall and, believe me — believe me — Mexico’s going to pay for the wall.”

Terrorism: He promised to “knock the hell out of ISIS.”

Health insurance: He would do away with the Affordable Care Act, also called Obamacare.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share GOP front-runner Donald Trump joined forces with Indiana basketball coaching legend Bobby Knight during a rally at the Indiana State Fairgrounds, Wednesday, April 27, 2016. (Robert Scheer/IndyStar)

Trade: We must stop other countries from taking advantage of America with unfair trade deals, Trump says. "We’re going to win with great, great trade deals.” He also would "tax the hell" out of Carrier Corp. and an affiliate for preparing to move 2,100 jobs out of Indiana to Mexico.

Celebrity support: Trump trumpeted endorsements he received this week from former Indiana University basketball coach Bob Knight and former world champion boxer Mike Tyson. "When I get endorsed by the tough ones, I like it, because we need toughness," he said.

His opponents: Trump railed against Ted Cruz and John Kasich, calling their shaky alliance "collusion" and also criticized national GOP officials, who he said are trying to block his nomination. And he pledged to defeat Hillary Clinton in Arkansas, where she was once first lady.

Himself: "You're going to look back … and you're going to say that was the greatest single vote that I cast, for Donald Trump as president."

Hillary Clinton

Buy Photo Democratic presidential front-runner Hillary Clinton spoke to employees at Munster Steel in Hammond, Ind., on April 26, 2016. (Photo: Jenna Watson/IndyStar)

Jobs: Clinton said she would support workers and unions and seek "a renaissance in manufacturing” in her visits to plants in northern Indiana. She also said trade agreements can cause the loss of jobs, but so do CEOs who put their bonuses ahead of their workers' well-being.

"We have challenges from our own country from businesses and political leaders, who don’t seem to understand that we still have to make it in America … and we have unfair competition coming from outside,” she said.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Democratic presidential front-runner Hillary Clinton speaks to employees at Munster Steel in Hammond, Ind., Tuesday, April 26, 2016. (Jenna Watson/IndyStar)

Fair pay: She also criticized the Indiana General Assembly, which passed right-to-work legislation and repealed the common construction wage. She said their "relentless assault on workers’ rights” needs to stop. "How do you grow an economy if people aren’t being paid what they deserve to be paid for the jobs that they do?” she said.

Ted Cruz

Buy Photo Republican presidential candidate Ted Cruz speaks at a rally at the Hoosier Gym in Knightstown, Ind., on Tuesday, April 26, 2016. (Photo: Michelle Pemberton/IndyStar)

Religious freedom: Cruz said Indiana's lawmakers and businesses were intimidated into modifying the state's controversial Religious Freedom Restoration Act. "Far too often the business community has given in to bullying at the expense of Christians and at the expense of people of faith," he told the IndyStar. He said Indiana Republicans should vote for him, "if you care about religious liberty."

Transgender bathrooms: Cruz said he's opposed to transgender people using public bathrooms based on their gender identity, saying predatory men could dress as women in order to enter public bathrooms and attack women and children. “If Donald Trump dresses up as Hillary Clinton, he still can’t use the little girls’ restroom,” Cruz said.

Economy: More tax cuts and lifting regulations on small businesses would result in "millions of new high-paying jobs here in America," Cruz said.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Ted Cruz introduces Carly Fiorina as his running mate for the Republician presidential nomination. Matt Kryger/IndyStar

Running mate Carly Fiorina: "We must unite. And Carly, as a vice presidential nominee, is superbly gifted to unite this party so we stand together as one." Cruz also noted that Fiorina is a cancer survivor and "isn't intimated by bullies."

His opponents: Cruz criticized Trump for thinking that "government is the solution to every problem." "Big-government liberals — like Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump — all try to use the power of government to bully and abuse and punish those who don't do what they want," Cruz said in an interview with IndyStar.

Endorsements: Of Indiana Gov. Mike Pence, Cruz said he would welcome his endorsement, adding "He is someone I respect and admire." He got his wish: Pence gave his support to Cruz.

Bernie Sanders

Buy Photo Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders speaks at a rally at Purdue University on April 27, 2016. (Photo: Mykal McEldowney/IndyStar)

Social change: Sanders blamed Congress, the media and the establishment for standing in the way. "Real change never takes place from the top on down. It is the people at the grass-roots level, by the millions, who demand real change. That is what history always teaches us," he said.

Universal health care: Sanders said health care should be a right for everyone. "If we were a poor country, we would have a certain kind of debate. … We are not a poor country. We are the richest country in the history of the world."

Prisons: He ripped mass incarceration in America. "Let us put our young people to work rebuilding the inner cities of our county rather than putting them in jail cells," Sanders said.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont speaks during a presidential campaign stop at the France A. Córdova Recreation Sports Center on the Purdue campus in West Lafayette on April 27, 2016. Mykal McEldowney/IndyStar

Education: He repeated his call for free public college education.

Income disparity: Sanders, a U.S. senator from Vermont, criticized the Walton family, wealthy owners of the Wal-Mart chain, urging them to pay their workers "a living wage." "You know why people in Indiana are angry? You know why people in Vermont are angry? They're working longer hours for lower wages and going nowhere in a hurry," he said.

Democracy: America is in danger of becoming an oligarchy, he said. "Our job is to make it easier for people to participate in the democratic system, not harder."

Star reporters Tony Cook, Chelsea Schneider, Stephanie Wang, Mark Alesia and Jill Disis and Thomas B. Langhorne of the Evansville Courier & Press contributed to this story.

Call IndyStar digital producer Dwight Adams at (317) 444-6532. Follow him on Twitter: @hdwightadams.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1TAVMKj