After failing to make the cutoff for the main Republican presidential debate, seven candidates — former Hewlett-Packard chief executive Carly Fiorina, former Virginia Gov. Jim Gilmore, U.S. Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, former New York Gov. George Pataki, former Texas Gov. Rick Perry and former U.S. Sen. Rick Santorum of Pennsylvania — had their own forum earlier in the evening. Here are five takeaways from the other candidates who participated:

1. Here are the lines of attack that other Republicans will use against Donald Trump.

Former Texas Gov. Rick Perry said that former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani and former Tennessee Sen. Fred Thompson also were early front-runners, until the campaign started in earnest.

"I talked about Donald Trump from the standpoint of being an individual who was using his celebrity rather than his conservatism," Perry said. "How can you run for the Republican nomination and be for single-payer health care? I mean, I ask that with all due respect."

Former Hewlett-Packard chief executive Carly Fiorina questioned what Trump stood for.

"Since he has changed his mind on amnesty, on health care and on abortion, I would just ask, what are the principles by which he will govern?" she said.

RELATED: Scouting the prospective nominees

2. Sept. 11 still resonates.

Vice President Joe Biden once said of Giuliani, "There's only three things he mentions in a sentence — a noun and a verb and 9/11."

The 2001 terrorist attacks were cited by two candidates as evidence of their foreign policy experience.

I was governor of New York on Sept 11. I know that we are at greater risk today than at any time since then of another attack," former New York Gov. George Pataki said. "I've been tested in a way no one else has."

Former Virginia Gov. Jim Gilmore was chief executive of that state when terrorists flew a plane into the Pentagon, was an Army intelligence agent and chairman of the National Commission on Homeland Security and Terrorism.

He said that gave him "a long experience in foreign-policy issues, which is different from many of the other governors and prospective governors who are running."

3. A return to Iraq.

U.S. Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) called for U.S. troops to be sent to Iraq and Syria to fight the Islamic State.

"If you're running for president of the United States and you don't understand that we need more American ground forces in Iraq and that America has to be part of a regional ground force that will go into Syria and destroy ISIL in Syria, then you're not ready to be commander in chief," Graham said, using another name for the Islamic State. "And you're not serious about destroying ISIL."

Pataki also endorsed the use of troops to fight the Islamic State.

"What we need to do is destroy their ability to attack us here over there, and then get out," Pataki said. "I would not place one American life at risk unless it was absolutely necessary. But to destroy ISIS, it is necessary."

4. Don't deviate from the party line.

When asked by the Fox News moderators, both Pataki and Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal said Ohio Gov. John Kasich, a rival for the Republican presidential nomination, was wrong to extend Medicaid to his state's poorest residents under the Affordable Care Act.

"I don't think anybody should be expanding Medicaid," Jindal said. "I think it's a mistake to create new and more expensive entitlement programs when we can't afford the ones we've got today. We've got to stop this culture of government dependence."

"I think he is right," Pataki said of Jindal. "I don't think you expand entitlements when so many people are dependent on government and when the money the federal government is offering is going to be taken away from you after just a couple of years."

The only unprompted Republican-on-Republican attack was Jindal's shot at former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, who was leading in opinion polls until Trump's surge.

"Jeb Bush says we've got to be willing to lose the primary in order to win the general," Jindal said "Let me translate that for you. That's the establishment telling us to hide our conservative principles to get the left and the media to like us. That never works. If we do that again, we will lose again, we will deserve to lose again.

5. Fiorina nailed it.

The headline in the online magazine Slate said, "Carly Fiorina Won the Preliminary Debate. It Wasn't Even Close."

The Washington Post headline: "Carly Fiorina won the 'Happy Hour' debate. By a lot."

Politico put it this way: "The former tech exec steals the show at the undercard."

And according to a Fox News viewers' poll after the debate, 83 percent thought Fiorina was the winner.

MORE POLITICS

Jonathan D. Salant may be reached at jsalant@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JDSalant. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.