READ MORE More stories and a breakdown of the tiers of coverage at Special Section: Affordable Care Act More info: CoveredCA.com

QUESTION: What is Covered California?

ANSWER: Covered California is a state-designed program to make it simple and affordable for you to purchase high-quality health insurance and access financial assistance to pay for coverage. You can shop online, over the phone or in person to find the right health care insurance option for you.

Through Covered California, both individuals and small businesses can compare different health insurance plans.

Individuals can learn if they qualify for federal financial assistance that can lower the cost of health insurance. Individuals also will be able to find out if they are eligible for health programs like Medi-Cal.

In addition, employers with fewer than 25 full-time workers will be able to find out if they qualify for a small business tax credit that can help cover the cost of providing employee health care.

To learn more about the organization that runs Covered California, please visit www.hbex.ca.gov.

Q: Who can use Covered California to purchase insurance?

A: Legal residents of California without access to affordable health insurance through their employer or another government program will be eligible to purchase health coverage through Covered California.

Small employers with 50 or fewer full-time equivalent employees also will be able to purchase insurance through Covered California.

Q: When can I purchase coverage through Covered California?

A: Enrollment in health plans through Covered California will begin later this year and continue until March 31, 2014.

You must purchase health insurance during this open-enrollment period in order to obtain coverage in 2014. If you do not enroll during this period, you will not be assured a health plan will cover you — either through Covered California or in the private market.

If you have a life-changing event such as the loss of a job, death of a spouse or birth of a child, you are eligible for special enrollment within 60 days of the event. The next open-enrollment period begins in October 2014 for coverage in 2015.

Q: What kind of health insurance will be offered through Covered California?

A: Covered California will offer Qualified Health Plans that are the same high-quality health plans available on the private market today.

These Qualified Health Plans are guaranteed to provide essential levels of coverage and consumer protections required by the Affordable Care Act. These plans will be offered in categories based on the percentage of covered expenses paid by the health plan.

Advertisement

The health plan choices offered by Covered California will be as good as you can get anywhere ­— even if you are not eligible for a subsidy. Health insurance companies must offer the same products at an identified price whether they are offered through Covered California or in the open market.

In addition to these traditional health plans, Covered California will offer what is called “catastrophic coverage,” which helps protect a person from financial disaster in the event of a serious and expensive medical emergency.

Catastrophic coverage is not designed for day-to-day medical expenses such as doctor visits, prescription medicines or even emergency room visits. It is designed to cover excessive medical bills that occur above the limit that you would be able to manage financially.

Covered California will provide catastrophic coverage those up to age 30, or those individuals who can provide a certification that they are without affordable coverage or are experiencing hardship.

Q: How will Covered California make it easier for me to compare different plans?

A: There will be four basic levels of coverage: Platinum, Gold, Silver and Bronze. This ranking system will make it easy to compare different health plans.

As the metal category increases in value, so does the percent of medical expenses that a health plan will cover. These expenses are usually incurred at the time of health care services – when you visit the doctor or the emergency room, for example.

The health plans that cover more of your medical expenses usually have a higher monthly payment but you will pay less whenever you receive medical care.

You can choose to pay a higher monthly cost so that when you need medical care, you pay less. Or you can choose to pay a lower monthly cost so that when you need medical care, you pay more. You can choose the level of coverage that best meets your health needs and budget.

For more information about levels of coverage, visit the CoveredCA.com page on individual and family plans, bit.ly/14SqOCs.

Q: How much will it cost to purchase health insurance through Covered California?

A: The cost of health insurance depends on how much coverage you choose to purchase and whether you qualify for financial assistance like tax credits that can be paid to the private health plan you choose through Covered California to lower your monthly payment.

Covered California is the only place where you can use these tax credits to make insurance more affordable. Many Californians who have lower incomes will also benefit from lower costs in whatever plan they choose.

Our cost calculator can help you determine about how much you will pay for insurance coverage, including any subsidies you might qualify for.

Q: What kind of help is available to help lower the cost of insurance?

A: Starting in 2014, individuals seeking health coverage will be helped to afford coverage in three ways:

• Tax credits: Tax credits are available to lower the cost of health coverage for individuals and families who meet certain income requirements and do not have health insurance from an employer or a government program.

When you enroll in a health plan through Covered California, tax credits can be immediately applied to the insurance premium, which reduces the amount you pay each month.

• Cost-sharing subsidies: Cost-sharing subsidies reduce the amount of out-of-pocket health care expenses an individual or family has to pay. These expenses might include the copayments for health care services or other costs.

• Medi-Cal assistance: Starting in 2014, the state of California is planning to expand the Medicaid program (called Medi-Cal in California) to cover people under age 65, including people with disabilities, with income of less than $15,000 for a single individual and $31,180 for a family of four. The coverage is free for those who qualify and part of the provisions of the Affordable Care Act.

To find out more about tax credits and cost-sharing subsidies, visit bit.ly/110uf6D.

Q: Am I eligible for tax credits?

A: Tax credits are available for individuals and families who meet certain income requirements and do not have access to affordable health insurance through their employer that also meets minimum coverage requirements.

Eligibility for tax credits is based on a standard, called the federal poverty level, that looks at the family income and the number of people in the family.

The size of the tax credit is based on a sliding scale, with those who make less money getting a larger financial assistance to lower the cost of their insurance coverage.

Individuals and families who make between 138 percent and 400 percent of the federal poverty level may be eligible for a tax credit. This means that an individual making up to $44,680 and a family of four earning up to $92,200 may be eligible for a tax credit.