In a crowded field of Republican presidential candidates, is there room for agreement on the Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act?

The legislation would prohibit abortion after five months—more than halfway through a pregnancy—except in cases where rape or incest were reported.

A recent Quinnipiac poll shows 60 percent of Americans support pain-capable legislation.

Do the Republican presidential candidates support the legislation?

Susan B. Anthony List, an organization which works to elect pro-life leaders, compiled a list detailing where each candidate stands. Here’s where they stand (listed in alphabetical order).

Jeb Bush

“Substantial research evidences that at five months, unborn babies are capable of feeling pain, just as they are able to hear sounds or stretch their bodies,” former Gov. Jeb Bush, R-Fla., wrote in a letter in 2014. “It is right and just for a humane and compassionate society to act in the interests of these individuals to protect them from pain and suffering.”

Ben Carson

“Extending, preserving and maintaining the quality of life of all individuals has never been more important than it is now. Children are our most precious resource and our efforts to protect them should know no bounds. I urge our legislators in Congress to swiftly vote on the legislation known as the Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act,” former neurosurgeon Dr. Ben Carson recently wrote on Facebook.

Chris Christie

In a recent statement to the Susan B. Anthony List, Gov. Chris Christie, R-N.J., said he encourages Congress to “take swift action” on the legislation.

“I am proud to be a pro-life Republican. I believe that every life is an individual gift from God, and that no life is disposable. When I was preparing to run for governor of New Jersey there were those who told me there was no way I would be elected as a pro-life candidate. I told them that they were wrong, that the voters would accept the sincerity of my beliefs even if they felt differently. Today, I am a living example that being pro-life is not a political liability anywhere in America,” Christie said.

Ted Cruz

Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, the only Republican to officially declare his candidacy so far, supports the legislation.

“No one can doubt the reasonableness of this legislation,” Cruz wrote in a letter to Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., in 2014:

“We are a nation that models itself on a code of natural and human rights, which we believe are not the inheritance of a privileged few but the birthright of people everywhere. Yet today we are one of just seven countries worldwide to allow elective abortions after 20 weeks.”

Carly Fiorina

Carly Fiorina, former CEO of Hewlett-Packard, wrote in a blog post for SBA List that “science supports those of us that believe in the sanctity of life.”

“At 20 weeks, or five months into a pregnancy, an unborn child feels pain. At 20 weeks of life, an unborn child can suck his thumb, yawn, stretch, and make faces. An unborn child at 20 weeks IS a human life. The Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act (S.1670) protects the unborn in limiting abortions after 20 weeks of pregnancy. It is legislation that is vital in protecting the dignity of life,” she wrote.

Lindsey Graham

Graham introduced the Pain Capable Unborn Child Protection Act in the Senate in 2013.

“We now know that an unborn child at the 20th week of pregnancy can feel pain. … Given these facts and my continued strong support for life, I believe there is a compelling interest in protecting these unborn children who are among the most vulnerable in our society,” he said in a statement at the time.

Mike Huckabee

“This isn’t about politics; it is about life. Life that is precious and valuable. It is about the value of life in our country,” former Gov. Mike Huckabee, R-Ark., wrote in a letter regarding the federal legislation in 2014.

Bobby Jindal

Gov. Bobby Jindal, R-La., signed pain-capable legislation into law in Louisiana in 2012.

“It is incumbent upon us to protect the weakest and most vulnerable among us, and these new laws will protect innocent human life,” he said in a statement at the time.

Rand Paul

Sens. Rand Paul, R-Ky., who will announce his candidacy April 7, wrote in a letter to Graham in 2014 that he supported the Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act.

“I support your efforts to raise awareness of this bill and join your call for consideration in the U.S. Senate,” he wrote. “Please let me know how I can be of assistance.”

Rick Perry

Former Gov. Rick Perry, R-Texas, also signed pain-capable legislation into law during his time in office.

“This is an important day for those who support life and for those who support the health of Texas women. In signing House Bill 2, we celebrate and further cement the foundation on which a culture of life in Texas is built,” Perry said in a statement in 2013 after the law’s passage.

Marco Rubio

Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., wrote in recent op-ed that pain-capable legislation “is sound policy and widely supported by the public.” Rubio is expected to announce his 2016 intentions April 13.

“The dignity of each and every human life is fundamental. And [although] deep disagreements exist among our people about abortion, surely we should aspire to be a nation where we protect unborn babies who can feel pain, respond to touch, and recognize their mothers’ voices.”

Rick Santorum

“As a committed pro-life American, I believe this legislation is an important step towards protecting our nation’s unborn children,” former Sen. Rick Santorum, R-Pa., wrote in a letter in 2014.

Scott Walker

“Life is a value I learned from my parents, and it’s a value I have cherished every day, predating my time in politics,” Gov. Scott Walker, R-Wis., wrote in an open letter last month.

He continues to say that he supports pain-capable legislation both in Wisconsin and at the federal level.