It is common knowledge that the United States spends more on health care per capita than any other industrialized country in the world.

Passed in 2010, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act was part of an effort by Congress to address, among other things, the pattern of steadily increasing health care costs in the United States.

Although, on average, increases in health care costs have remained relatively low over the past few years, several cost-limiting provisions of the Affordable Care Act are set to expire within the next two years.

As a result, estimates have premiums increasing anywhere from 5 percent to 40 percent, and even the federal Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services is estimating a 10-percent-to-15-percent increase in premiums in 2016.

To limit some of these increasingly burdensome costs, many individuals are switching their insurance from conventional health plans to high-deductible health plans.

Similar to conventional plans, high-deductible plans are obligated to meet the minimum essential coverage requirements under the ACA (e.g., free preventive care and coverage cannot be denied based on pre-existing conditions) as well as any state-specific regulations. High-deductible plans, however, are primarily characterized by lower premiums, higher deductibles and minimal coinsurance/copays until the deductible is met. If qualified, they can be linked to a health savings account.

So, what is it that gives these plans the ability to reduce costs? How are high-deductible plans different from conventional plans and who would benefit the most from a high-deductible plan?

The nominal reimbursements offered by high-deductible plans until that high deductible is met make plan enrollees more likely to consider the cost of treatment prior to receiving a procedure or taking a medication. The seemingly simple action of considering the cost of health care by the consumer could have a noticeable impact on health care spending.

By design, the costs associated with high-deductible plans are front-loaded, with the patient paying 100 percent of most doctor visits, procedures, and prescription medications, all of which count towards the annual deductible. Once the deductible is met, the insurance company will cover a large portion of any further expenses (often 80 percent to 100 percent).

Healthy individuals (i.e. those who do not plan on meeting the annual deductible) typically choose high-deductible plans due to the cost-saving aspect of the reduced premium.

Because these individuals are required to pay for the full cost of any health care, they are likely to attempt to minimize their spending by shopping for the best provider or by forgoing unnecessary and potentially wasteful treatment. These two actions have the effect of creating competition among providers and reducing unnecessary spending. In addition, the act of consumers shopping for providers could assist in the ongoing effort to promote price transparency as it relates to health care costs.

Increased competition will ideally result in lower prices for consumers, which is much needed in the heavily monopolized health care sector. With more responsibility given to the consumer, high-deductible plans are often referred to as a type of consumer-driven health plan.

On top of the above market forces -- which could reduce overall health care costs -- are the cost-saving benefits for the individual from the use of a health savings account. HSAs are best described as 401(k)s which can be used to pay for qualified health expenses. With 100 percent tax-deductible contributions ($3,300 for individuals and $6,550 for families, annually), tax-deferred interest earnings, the lack of a use-it-or-lose-it clause (different from flexible spending accounts), and the option to invest contributions (e.g. savings for retirement or future medical expenses), HSAs can be a valuable financial tool for many households.

With health care costs on the rise, many Americans are looking for ways to reduce the cost of health care. By taking some of the spending responsibility into their own hands via HSA-qualified high-deductible health plans and other types of consumer-driven health plans, many consumers can have the effect of reducing both the individual and overall cost of health care.

Peter Dorski, a microbiologist for a Solon firm, originally wrote this as part of an online course toward his Master's of Science in Health Sciences degree at the George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences.