Thousands of uninsured people receive free healthcare from medical and dental clinics in Lake County, thanks to volunteer doctors, dentists and other health professionals whose donated services have exceeded millions of dollars in the past year.

But while some of these clinics are raking in accolades for their charitable work, medical professionals say the fact that these clinics are still bustling midway through 2015 illustrates the weaknesses in the Affordable Care Act.

The Community Medical Care Center, 1210 W. Main St., Leesburg, estimates $1.5 million of medical services has been provided by its center alone to 6,500 people in the past year. These are patients who cannot afford insurance premiums or their incomes are too low to qualify for medical coverage through the Affordable Care Act, and they remain uninsured because Florida was one of the states that did not expand its Medicaid program.

“We are seeing people at 150 percent poverty level. It’s basically all those who can’t get the Affordable Care (coverage). They’re excluded out,” said Tamara Halsey, director of the center. “We’re helping the ones where there wouldn’t be any help for them if we weren’t here.”

The Well Florida Council calculates that 20.5 percent of Lake County residents were uninsured in 2014, while the U.S. Census Bureau said Florida had the second-highest uninsured rate in the country in 2013, with 24.3 percent of residents lacking health coverage.

The Community Medical Care Center is operated as a partnership of Leesburg Regional Medical Center and First Baptist Church Leesburg and serves patients whose income is 150 percent of poverty level: $17,655 for one person, $23,895 for two people or $36,375 for a family of four.

“Their income levels aren’t enough to survive on, let alone take care of their medical needs,” Halsey said.

She was touched by the recent testimonies of five patients in unrehearsed candid interviews for a promotional video.

“They all said the same thing, that if it weren’t for us, they don’t know what they would be doing. A couple of them actually thought they might have died.”

Halsey said the Community Medical Care Center has contracted more than 65 medical and dental professionals who volunteer with the center.

“What sets us apart from traditional care or other clinics is that we care so much about the patients and we will go the extra mile and do whatever we have to do to find an answer for them and to help them,” she said.

Halsey said each hospital in Lake County operates a free clinic. In addition to the Community Medical Care Center, Florida Waterman Hospital has a clinic at the hospital called Community Primary Health Clinic. And South Lake Free Hospital Clinic is supported by South Lake Hospital. In addition, St. Luke’s Free Medical and Dental Clinic in Eustis is operated by Catholic Charities of Central Florida and the parishioners of St. Mary of the Lakes in Eustis and St. Patrick Catholic Church in Mount Dora.

More than $400,000 in dental and medical services have been donated in the past year at St. Luke’s, and the Florida Dental Association recently singled out Dr. Don Ilkka, 59, with a Special Recognition Award during the 2015 Florida Dental Convention in Orlando.

Ilkka was praised by the association for being instrumental in opening the Eustis clinic at 722 S. Grove St. five years ago with a team of six other doctors.

“We don’t do the things that we do for the accolades. We just do them because they have to be done. Participating in St. Luke’s has been a passion,” said Ilka, one of 15 dentists, 25 physicians and other health professionals who volunteer at the clinic.

He has operated his own general dental practice in Leesburg for the past 33 years, yet on most Monday and Wednesday nights the dentist can be found at St. Luke’s, where he treats low-income patients who meet the 200 percent poverty guideline without health insurance.

A single person meeting the 200 percent criteria must not gross more than $23,540 a year. For two people, the maximum is $31,860; for three people it’s $40,180 or $48,500 for a family of four.

“The people that I see at St. Luke’s are not the people that I would see in my private practice. We are the last stop and the end of the railroad for these people. They don’t have any other options,” Ilkka said. “They don’t have anywhere to go and they have been in pain, and in some cases in pain day after day. I feel a great reward in that I can give back and bring them some relief. The best part is when they come back and say thank you.”

Ilkka takes care of patients’ worst dental problems, which may call for extractions.

“And there are people who never have had their teeth cleaned and the amount the calculus and plaque on their teeth is horrendous,” he said. These dental issues are taken care of by the periodontists and hygienists who also volunteer at St. Luke’s.

“We have such dedicated volunteers who give so much of their time,” said the clinic’s manager, Erin Burley. “I love the fact that we are able to impact so many lives. I love working with the patients. They are so grateful and say, ‘Thank God you are here. I don’t know what I would do if you weren’t here.’”

Tina Miller of Eustis is among the grateful patients. She has been using the clinic for two years.

“The people who work here are very, very attentive to each individual,” Miller said. “They have been tremendous.”

Dr. Ralph Zwolinski, a retired clinical neurologist from New Smyrna Beach, was preparing to see 14 patients on Monday at St. Luke’s. Many of them suffer from epilepsy, the ravages of strokes, Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease.

He relishes the opportunity to stay involved in the medical field.

“It allows me to practice my skill set and the science of neurology, which I love,” Zwolinski said. “It’s very enjoyable and it’s an opportunity to give back to the community for everything it has given me over my career.”