PRESCOTT AZ - 04 May, 2016 - Obama's Administration has funneled $3.5 billion from taxpayers to cover the losses of major insurance companies that helped write Obamacare. This is a classic case of corporate welfare in Washington, an illegal move that most Americans disdain.

Obamacare forced Americans to pay more for their healthcare with higher premiums and deductibles, and now they’re paying for it twice. It bothers those who saw this coming and now the program is riddled with cost overruns and unworkable mandates.

It’s bad enough to have limited choice, the loss of trusted doctors, and higher costs. Now Obamacare is collapsing and taxpayers are hit with the bill. Americans don’t want to bailout giant insurance companies as a result of a law that those companies helped to write.

Americans for Prosperity is the source of this information and they have made it easy to contact our congressman at Action Center.

And it's not just a problem of paying double for a broken plan. America doesn't realize that Big Pharma was also a major contributer to the 20,000 page monstrosity of a law that makes prescription drugs available at tax-payers expense.

Adverse Drug Reactions have made medical care the leading cause of illness and death, says Dr. Richard Ruhling, an MD who was board-certified in Internal Medicine and taught Health Science at Loma Linda University, now retired.

Ruhling says he visited US Senate offices with medical literature to show Rx drugs are #1 risk until one senator said, “You are wasting your time—they own us,” speaking of drug company donations to their re-election campaign.

Ruhling is 74 and has only taken one prescription in the past 50 years. He wonders why he should pay taxes for healthcare of people who choose to eat, drink, smoke and sex as they please. He says true health care is 90% wise choices in what we put in our mouths and getting some exercise.

As an aid, he recommends the DVD, “Eating” that has Bill Clinton's cardiologist, Dr. Esselstyn from the Cleveland Clinic. Five minutes of it may be seen on his website, http://RichardRuhling.com

Dr. Richard Ruhling is author of Why You Shouldn't Ask Your Doctor. And other ebooks with mostly 4-5 star reviews available cheap on Amazon at http://amzn.to/1JTMjY9 that are free on Saturdays in May.



Full News Story: http://pressreleasejet.com/news/35-billion-to-bailout-insurers-hide-losses-in-obamacare-as-its-healthcare-plan-fails.html



Distributed by Press Release Jet







Media Contact

Company Name: Total Health

Contact Person: Dr. Richard Ruhling

Email: ruhling7@juno.com

Country: United States

Website: http://LeadingCauseOfDeathPrescriptionDrugs.com