Sanjaya Rajaram (Photo: Special to the Register )

For decades, Sanjaya Rajaram has tirelessly toiled in labs and fields to carry on Iowa native Norman Borlaug's Green Revolution, increasing wheat production and alleviating hunger around the world.

The connection between the two plant breeders grew stronger Wednesday when Rajaram was honored as the 2014 recipient of the prestigious World Food Prize.

The Register's Editorial: World Food Prize honors a worthy recipient

In naming Rajaram, 71, as this year's recipient, the selection committee overseeing the World Food Prize was not only carrying out the mission of the award — honoring an individual who worked to increase the quantity, qualityand availability of food — but also paying homage to Borlaug, the creator of the award who would have celebrated his 100th birthday in 2014. It also marks the first time in its 28-year history that the World Food Prize has given the honor to a wheat breeder, the same cropon which Borlaug focused his research.

"In his own right, with no connection to Dr. Borlaug, this is an individual who is very worthy to receive the World Food Prize and has met the specific requirements of doing something innovative in these new wheat varieties and with a huge impact," Ambassador Kenneth Quinn, president of the World Food Prize,said in an interview.

"Here is someone who worked with Dr. Borlaug, who can be seen in a sense of carrying Dr. Borlaug's legacy forward. There are some people who say not only did he extend it, but maybe in some ways Dr. Rajaram exceeded Dr. Borlaug's work just in terms of" the wheat varieties he created, Quinn said.

The World Food Prize will be presented to Rajaram on Oct. 16 in Des Moines. Iowa Sen. Tom Harkin, Sen. Chuck Grassley's wife, Barbara, and Borlaug's granddaughter, Julie Borlaug, were among those who were at the announcement Wednesday at the State Department in Washington. Rajaram did not attend the ceremony.

During the event, Secretary of State John Kerry stressed the role food security plays in preventing violence and ensuring that investments in schools, roads and other infrastructure take place. The United Nations has estimated that by 2050, there will be 9 billion people on the planet and food production may have to double to meet demand. Currently, an estimated 842 million people — roughly one in eight around the world — suffer from chronic hunger. Kerry highlighted agriculture as the most effective way to get people out of poverty.

"The struggle for food is truly a struggle for life itself," Kerry said. "It's not hard to figure out that this is the time for a second Green Revolution. That's why Dr. Sanjaya Rajaram is being honored."

Rajaram was born in northeast India in 1943, and from the beginning, agriculture was part of his life. His family, including his parents and two siblings, made a meager living on a 12-acre farm growing wheat, rice and corn. The time he spent growing up in an area where people were poor fostered an interest in plant research through which he could make a difference in production.

He began working in 1969 at the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center in Mexico with Borlaug, who would go on to receive the Nobel Peace Prize a year later for developing wheat varieties with higher yields that could adapt to a diverse range of growing conditions. In 1972, with Borlaug facing increased demands on his time from speeches, meetings and other responsibilities, he handpicked Rajaram to lead his wheat-breeding team at the center.

"It was scary, frankly speaking," Rajaram said in an interview. "It wasn't easy coming in after Dr. Borlaug and start making the right kind of decisions in his breeding program. I took it very much as a challenge."

The wheat research team at the center was in the midst of expanding the program from beyond Mexico to India, Argentina, Brazil, Africa and other countries where Borlaug had already established a presence. Rajaram and his colleagues were focused on helping researchers and growers develop and then use new wheat varieties that could prosper in those areas based on climate and soil while being resistant to diseases and pests.

For the first three years, Borlaug worked closely with Rajaram to help the young scientist establish an international presence. The pair, who remained close until Borlaug's death in 2009, would regularly talk strategy in the evenings over steak and tequila.

"It was such a successful program," Rajaram said. "We could not have risked making any wrong decisions, especially in those earlier years."

Rajaram, now a Mexican citizen, conducted most of his research at the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center, where he developed 480 different wheat varieties that can be grown in 51 countries, discoveries that allowed the crop to be grown in marginal areas such as mountains in Pakistan and remote areas of China. Today, an estimated 143 million acres grow wheat varieties discovered by Rajaram.

Rajaram successfully managed to cross winter and spring wheat varieties, leading to the development of plants that had higher yields and were able to better tolerate a wide range of environments around the world. Andhe was able to take multiple genes to help make the wheat more resistant to diseases known as rusts, slowing down the spread of the fungus and allowing for a maximum yield in the grain.

"I don't take any credit for the Green Revolution, that's purely Dr. Borlaug, but that could have ended very fast if I had not expanded the diversity of the program" by helping to increase the wheat varieties available globally, he said.

"I feel very good about the prize because that's associated ... with Dr. Borlaug.However, nobody can take credit for working as close with Dr. Borlaug. Beside his family, I know him the best."

Winners of the Food Prize, which include former presidents, lawmakers and researchers, are awarded $250,000 for their work. Rajaram said he will use most of the prize money to update machinery he uses to breed plants at his lab in Toluca, Mexico, and help the poor in his native India get an education.

"Most of it will go to other people," he said. "I feel I should continue to help."

Sanjaya Rajaram

AGE: 71.

BORN: Near a small farming village in the state of Uttar Pradesh in northeastern India.

FAMILY: Grew up on a 12-acre farm with his parents, an older brother and a younger sister. His wife of 45 years died in 2012. They have four children.

EDUCATION: Went to the College of Jaunpur at the University of Gorakhpur, earning a B.S. in agriculture in 1962. Studied genetics and plant breeding at the Indian Agricultural Research Institute in New Delhi, graduating with a master's degree in 1964. A year later he went to Australia where he studied for his Ph.D. in plant breeding at the University of Sydney.

CAREER HIGHLIGHTS:

• Began working in 1969 at the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center in Mexico with Norman Borlaug. Succeeded Borlaug as head of wheat breeding team at the center in 1972.

• Developed 480 different wheat varieties that can be grown in 51 countries. Today, an estimated 143 million acres grow wheat varieties discovered by Rajaram.

• Crossed winter and spring wheat varieties, leading to the development of plants that had higher yields and were able to better tolerate a wide range of environments.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1indWAm