AUSTIN, TX -- Under a solemn grey sky, with cold, skinny raindrops pelting the sidewalks, Joy Alvarado trudged downtown streets last week, spreading the word that time is running out to sign up for federally mandated health insurance.

At a taco shop during the bustling lunch hour, Alvarado smiled warmly as she approached young Latino workers who are building the gleaming skyscrapers that are becoming common in the Texas capital. They seemed genuinely interested as Alvarado told them about an event at City Hall where they could learn about the Affordable Care Act and how to enroll in the health insurance marketplace.

Later, Alvarado, a 27-year-old with a master's from Johns Hopkins School of Public Health and a background in what she called culturally competent health care, mused that she had played on cultural connections to make her pitch.

"I emphasized more the community aspect of us getting together rather than my expertise in the field," Alvarado told NBC News Latino, explaining that she had spoken in Spanish, approached the workers in the manner of a family member or friend and stressed that the event would be fun and professionals would be there to help them.

Latinos represent about a third of the nation's uninsured and are the most uninsured racial or ethnic group in the U.S. Texas has the highest rate of uninsured residents in the country with 24 percent, according to the Texas Medical Association.

In Texas, roughly 740,000 people enrolled in the federal insurance marketplace during the first go-round. And in Travis County, which encompasses the booming Texas capital, about 40,000 people enrolled. But Latinos didn't benefit to the extent others did; only about 10,000 were Latino, according to Frank Rodriguez, director of the Latino HealthCare Forum, where Alvarado also works.

So with the Feb. 15 deadline for the second open-enrollment period of the Affordable Care Act fast approaching, cultural connections are important, say those who are leading a concerted national push to increase enrollment among Latinos.

But mining those cultural ties to sign up the Latino uninsured is not a simple task. Outreach workers must navigate a web of complex circumstances, from low health literacy to the mixed legal status of some Latino families. Age, employment and income are also factors. Follow NBC News Latino on Facebook and Twitter Despite the national effort to increase Latino enrollment, as of mid-January just 10 percent of those who had enrolled in the 37 states served by healthcare.gov are Latino, Kaiser Health News reported Monday. That's up slightly from 7 percent during the first few months of last year's enrollment.

With the deadline looming, officials and health law advocates are bracing for a last-minute surge in enrollment. In Central Texas, two enrollment groups, Lone Star Circle of Care and Insure Central Texas, announced Monday they were teaming up and extending hours to meet in person with applicants as an alternative to calling for help.

"It's verbal, it's face to face, being out in the field, being where they work, where they play and they pray. You got to have boots on the ground to achieve that," said Latino HealthCare Forum's Frank Rodriguez. But mining those cultural ties is not a simple task.

Over the weekend at the Latino HealthCare Forum, a nonprofit in Austin's predominantly Latino Montopolis neighborhood, a "Last Chance 3 Day Enroll-a-Thon" drew a mix of mostly Mexican American and Spanish-speaking immigrant families who filled every corner of the small center's space. Workers offered coffee and refreshments. Outside, a Spanish-language radio station set up a remote broadcast, regularly alerting listeners to the enrollment deadline.