At a Mexican border crossing feeding into Southern California, an immigration agent scrutinized a passport. He questioned whether the face in the picture matched that of the woman standing before him. Two days after getting a chemical peel in Tijuana, she was almost unrecognizable.

“My face was red and raw and coated in what felt like Vaseline; my eyes were swollen shut,” says the 45-year-old Brooklyn-based bartender who declined to give her name due to privacy reasons. “I went to Mexico since it was way cheaper than in the US — $3,000 there compared to $6,000 here — and I wound up having the work done inside a tiny office in the middle of Tijuana.”

While the incident happened only five years ago, it hearkens back to the bad old days of medical tourism — when the desperately ill (or the desperate to look beautiful) took their chances with sketchy doctors using questionable equipment. Currently, however, with medical tourism booming, options have increased and conditions have improved.

An international wing of the Joint Commission, a 65-year-old nonprofit organization that monitors the quality of health-care facilities, has, as of Feb. 29, accredited 561 international hospitals. Ten years ago, only 27 had the seal of approval.

According to Josef Woodman, CEO of the international medical and health travel Web site Patients Beyond Borders, increasing numbers of people are going abroad for health care. Judging by data from ministries of health and hospitals around the world, he says, 1.2 million to 1.4 million Americans are now heading overseas for surgery annually. And that number has been increasing by an average of 23 percent per year for the last 10 years. He attributes recent rises, in part, to Obamacare making Americans increasingly comfortable with shopping for physicians and insurance plans.

“You are not going to a mud hut where they use rusty scalpels,” says Woodman.

But you will be saving money. Doctors are often paid less overseas, where costs of living are lower and overheads are more modest.

Jessica Cooper, a 22-year-old school teacher from New Jersey, experienced that when she visited Colombia to enhance her nose, which had gotten banged-up during a childhood fall.

“It never healed correctly and I had been completely self-conscious about it,” she says. An aunt of hers had successfully gotten a tummy tuck in Medellín, Colombia, plus several relatives live there.

“Surgery is so much cheaper in Colombia — like half the price,” Cooper enthuses. “I had no pain and a great doctor — he was from New Jersey and spoke perfect English. Plus, the office was gorgeous.”

And she couldn’t be happier with the result. “I love my new nose,” Cooper says. “There’s no bump!”

But before seeking medical care overseas, it’s imperative to do your homework. Make sure your doctor speaks English, has practiced in America (or is US-board certified) and graduated from a reputable medical school, says Woodman.

Here’s a Woodman-approved guide to popular medical tourism destinations.