Drummer dies to bring Romanian club fire death toll to 45

hello

People raise their hands shouting slogans against politicians during the fifth day of protests in Bucharest, Romania, Saturday, Nov. 7, 2015, calling for better governance and an end to corruption, in Bucharest, Romania, Nine more people died Saturday, bringing the death toll to 41 victims, a week after the Oct. 30 blaze that erupted at the Colectiv nightclub during a heavy-metal concert. Associated Press

A man wears a pig mask holding a banner that reads "The Romanian political class - Some pigs" during the fifth day of protests in Bucharest, Romania, Saturday, Nov. 7, 2015, calling for better governance and an end to corruption, in Bucharest, Romania, Nine more people died Saturday, bringing the death toll to 41 victims, a week after the Oct. 30 blaze that erupted at the Colectiv nightclub during a heavy-metal concert. Associated Press

BUCHAREST, Romania -- The drummer of a heavy metal band playing when a fire broke out at a nightclub has died, bringing the death toll from last week's tragedy to 45.

Bogdan Enache, drummer in the Goodbye to Gravity band that was playing in Colectiv on Oct. 30, died on Sunday evening, said the medical director of the state burns hospital, Cristian Nitescu.

The Interior Ministry said Enache was being transported on a military plane to Zurich, Switzerland, on Sunday afternoon for treatment for his burns, when he went into cardiorespiratory failure. The plane headed back to Bucharest, while medics tried to resuscitate him for 70 minutes. He died after he landed in Romania.

Dozens of people injured in the blaze remain hospitalized with serious burns as authorities warn that the death toll could continue to rise.

Romania continued to send the injured to other countries for treatment. A plane from NATO arrived in Bucharest late Sunday and will take a number of the injured for treatment overnight to Britain and Norway, emergency situations official Raed Arafat said.

In recent days, a total of 21 injured people have been transported to hospitals in Belgium, the Netherlands, Austria, Israel and Germany, the health ministry said.

A fire broke out at the Colectiv nightclub during a concert by the heavy metal group, after a spark from a pyrotechnics show ignited foam decor. The band's two guitarists died last week from their injuries.

In another development Sunday, President Klaus Iohannis appeared at protest staged by a few hundred people in University Square, now in its sixth consecutive day. Iohannis, who was surrounded by security staff, was booed by demonstrators who shouted "Resign!" He spoke to a few protesters and left after less than half an hour. Iohannis has called on Romania's civil society to take part in consultations for a new government.

Prime Minister Victor Ponta and his Cabinet resigned Wednesday after mass protests, which have continued this week.

Enache's death was the fourth reported on Sunday. Nitescu earlier reported that a man had succumbed to his injuries at the state burns hospital late Saturday.

Mediafax news agency reported two other patients died early Sunday at the Floreasca Emergency Hospital, including a Turkish man studying in Romania, and a woman who worked at the club's bar.

Nine deaths were announced Saturday, the highest number for a single day.