First she asked us to lean in. Now Sheryl Sandberg wants us to “Ban Bossy.” It’s a word that undermines the ability of confident girls to reach their full potential as leaders.

The Facebook COO has launched a campaign with the help of Beyoncé, Jane Lynch, Condoleezza Rice, and Girls Scouts CEO Anna Maria Chávez to help us think twice about the “other b-word” and the biases beneath it.

“Bossy” is used to describe females four times more often than males, Sandberg explains, and has been in our language for over a century. Usage peaked when more women entered the workforce during the Depression era, and again during the 1970s. In short, it’s a word used a lot when society feels threatened by women’s progress.

We can debate whether we should rush to delete the word “bossy” from our dictionaries — and what word might take its place if we did. Or whether it’s better to overcome the label than to banish it.

But we’d be missing the point.

That’s because the real takeaway from Sandberg’s campaign is that labels matter. The subtext of “bossy,” “pushy,” and a host of other unflattering words for female leaders is often a deep-rooted gender bias that can inhibit the aspirations and achievements of girls and women.

By the time they reach middle school, for example, girls are less interested in leadership than boys are. Girls ages 8 to 17 say they avoid leadership roles because they’re afraid of being labeled “bossy” or disliked by their peers, according to a survey by the Girl Scouts.

And consider a study published recently in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences that revealed clear gender discrimination in hiring for math- and science-related jobs. Three business school professors set up an experiment in which “managers” hired “job applicants” to perform math-related tasks. In the first test, based solely on appearances, managers were twice as likely to hire a man over a woman. In a subsequent test, managers were shown hard evidence that the male and female applicants were equally skilled. They were still 1.5 times more likely to choose men. And here’s an even more unsettling result: In a test where managers knowingly chose a lower performing candidate, two-thirds of the time they chose a male.

“Most leadership positions are held by men, so society continues to expect leadership to look and act male and to react negatively when women lead,” Sandberg and Chávez wrote in a recent essay in the Wall Street Journal.

Perhaps that’s why, despite earning a greater number of college degrees, women make up just 5 percent of Fortune 500 CEOs, 10 percent of heads of state, and 19 percent of the U.S. Congress, they add. What’s more, at a time when the technology industry desperately lacks highly skilled workers, a recent survey reports that just 12 percent of the engineers hired by tech companies are women.

Male-dominated industries — those with less than 25 percent female employees — face particular challenges when it comes to women’s advancement, reports Catalyst. They are more vulnerable to pro-male biases when setting criteria for hiring and advancement, which can result in a less diverse workforce.

In contrast, companies with more female employees have distinct business advantages over their competitors, including improved performance, increased innovation, a healthier bottom line, and decreased turnover, according to a recent report from the Anita Borg Institute for Women and Technology.

So while an all-out ban on “bossy” may not be practical, rethinking the labels we use for confident girls and women is definitely worth our time. As Sandberg and Chávez point out: “How are we supposed to level the playing field for girls and women if we discourage the very traits that get them there?”

Perhaps we can take a cue from Beyoncé, who simply states: “I’m not Bossy. I’m the Boss.”

Lisa Wirthman of Highlands Ranch is a frequent contributor to The Denver Post. You can follow her on Twitter: @Lisa Wirthman.