The Georgia House Judiciary Committee recently passed two highly visible bills related to the Affordable Care Act.

One would require legislative approval of any expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.

The second would prohibit employees of any state unit from spending state funds to advocate for Medicaid expansion. It would also bar the University of Georgia from operating its current navigator program that assists people trying to get coverage under the ACA.

The Obamacare-related legislation drew some sharp questioning this week from Democrats on the committee.

Yet House Bill 990, which would require that Medicaid expansion get legislative approval, appears to be on a fast track in the Republican-led General Assembly.

Gov. Nathan Deal, also a Republican, is firmly against such expansion, but an added requirement for legislative approval would give it an even more difficult path.

Sponsor Jan Jones, R-Milton, speaker pro tempore of the House, told the Judiciary Committee that only eight states, including Georgia, do not currently require a vote of the state Legislature for approving expansion. She noted that in Florida, for instance, lawmakers were able to block expansion even though the governor supported it.

A state decision on Medicaid expansion has huge budgetary implications, and the Legislature should be involved in it, she emphasized.

Rep. Roger Bruce, D-Atlanta, citing the hundreds of thousands of Georgians who would be covered under expansion, asked Jones what the state should do for those people in the absence of expansion.

Jones replied that expansion would add $400 million to the current $3 billion state appropriation for Medicaid and would force tough decisions on spending elsewhere. “What do you want to cut?” she asked. “What tax do you want to increase?”

Expansion “will further strain the system,” Jones said.

The committee narrowly passed HB 707, sponsored by Rep. Jason Spencer, R-Woodbine. Along with barring state employees from advocating expansion, the proposal would also prohibit the state from operating a health insurance exchange. The federal government now operates the exchange in Georgia, as it does in a number of other states.

An amended version of the bill would prevent the office of the state insurance commissioner from enforcing any provision of the ACA, Spencer told the panel.

Oliver asked Spencer whether the commissioner could get involved if an insurer turned an applicant down due to a pre-existing health condition, which is prohibited by the ACA.

The commissioner would not be able to assist people who have specific problems related to ACA provisions, Spencer replied.

The version of HB 707 with the insurance commissioner provision passed by a 7-6 vote when the chairman of the committee, Rep. Wendell Willard, R-Sandy Springs, voted for it.