Irony, meet Max Baucus

Baucus, chair of the powerful Senate Finance Committee and a key architect of President Barack Obama’s health care reform law, announced last spring that he was hanging ‘em up after six terms as a senator from Montana.

Before he left, though, he famously offered the quote that would launch a thousand dire warnings about the Affordable Care Act: “I just see a huge train wreck coming down. You and I have discussed this many times, and I don’t see any results yet.”

That was at an April committee hearing on Obamacare implementation. Here are two bits of irony:

In September, Baucus had himself a little chuckle as he conceded that he no longer predicted trains flying off the tracks. He said what he said for effect, out of genuine concern that the rollout was in jeopardy. Less than a month before the Oct. 1 launch, he was satisfied.

“We’ll see Oct. 1, but I think they are doing a pretty good job,” Baucus said in an interview with Fox Business Network. “I think the train is going to keep running, maybe not totally on time, but it’s going to be pretty efficient.”

As we know in the clarity of hindsight, Baucus was right the first time. Or, at least, if this rollout isn’t a train wreck, it’s a 16-car pileup at the entrance to the train station.

The other irony is from Baucus’ original quote. The someone he was addressing — “You and I have discussed this many times …” — was Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius, the Obama administration official whose primary responsibility for the last three-plus years has been on display since Oct. 1.

Today, Sebelius is dodging further congressional scrutiny, although her office says she fully intends to testify “next week,” after she clears more important items from her calendar. So a House Energy and Commerce Committee hearing into her No. 1 project apparently will go forward Thursday without her perspective and expertise.

Her boss, meanwhile, was left to tout a 1-800 number in the White House Rose Garden yesterday like some cleaned-up but angry Vince Offer, while she sat quietly in the audience.

Follow @MikeHashimoto