Whether your breasts are big or small, they have become one of your focal points since you’ve hit puberty. Breasts get so much attention, but yet they remain a mystery to many — including those who own them. The folks over at BuzzFeed have put common breast questions to rest by answering the most embarrassing ones you’re probably too afraid to ask your doctor, in the new video “Are Your Boobs Normal?” Chances are they are normal.

1. One of my boobs is bigger than the other. Is that normal?

Yes: Most women's boobs aren't identical in size. However, if finding bras is a struggle, it’s best to find a bra that fits your bigger boob and find a silicone insert for the other.

2. I have hair around my nipple. Is that normal?

Yes: It's normal to have a few hairs on the dark skin around your nipple. If they bother you, it’s recommended you cut them. Avoid plucking or shaving them to prevent ingrown hairs from forming.

3. Can I make my boobs bigger?

No: Doing exercises that engage your pectoral muscles can give your boobs a bit of a lift. They won’t actually make the girls bigger, though.

4. My nipples are leaking. Should I be worried?

Maybe: If your nipples are leaking while you’re pregnant or after recently giving birth, that is normal. Any other time you experience leakage you should consult your doctor to ensure you don't have a thyroid or hormone problem.

5. Are my areolas too big? Too dark?

No: Aerolas, just like breast size and shape, vary. They also come in different colors.

6. I have stretch marks on my boobs. Will they ever go away?

Yes: Stretch marks form on your boobs during development. They vary from person to person depending on your genes and your skin's stretchiness. These marks are totally normal and often fade over time.

7. Is it normal if my nipples point in?

Maybe: It is estimated between 10 and 20 percent of women have at least one nipple that's inverted. As long as it has always been this way and your nipples don't point out, it's just fine.

8. My boobs are lumpy. Should I be worried?

Maybe: Breast tissue is naturally bumpy and therefore, some women have lumpy breasts. If the lumpiness feels consistent throughout the breast and both of them feel the same, it's probably nothing to worry about. You should definitely check in with your doctor if you notice any new lumps that feel hard or different from the rest of your breast.

An ABC News poll found when it comes to breast cancer screening, confusion is rampant, as 86 percent of women say mammograms should start at age 30 or 40, and 65 percent say they should be done annually. This differs from the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force's recommendation to screen every two years starting at age 50. BreastCancer.org and the American Cancer Society recommends annual mammograms for al lwomen 40 and older regardless of their risk factors. Therefore, women should not forget to schedule a breast exam once a year and regularly perform breast exams at home.