Four Roman Catholic nonprofits in New York must allow employees access to contraception, a federal appeals court panel ruled on Friday, reversing a decision by a lower court that allowed the organizations to get around a requirement in the Affordable Care Act.

Six other circuit courts around the country deciding on similar arguments involving religious groups have come to similar conclusions, the unanimous three-judge panel noted in its decision, which was written by Judge Rosemary S. Pooler for the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in New York. Other cases are still pending.

Under the Affordable Care Act, religious nonprofits that object on religious grounds to providing contraception can opt out by completing a one-page form. Then, a third party, either an insurance company or a health insurance administrator, takes over providing and coordinating payments for the employees’ contraceptives.

The four New York groups — a Catholic high school in the Bronx and another on Staten Island, as well as two Catholic health care systems — argued that the opt-out sheet imposed a “substantial burden” on their religious freedom. Either they had to offer “access to products and services they find objectionable,” as Judge Pooler summarized it, or they faced high fines.

Judge Brian M. Cogan of Federal District Court in Brooklyn upheld that argument in 2013, agreeing that the opt-out provision itself violated the employers’ religious freedom. Judge Cogan granted an injunction requiring the to employees pay for their contraceptives.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

However, Judge Pooler wrote that the opt-out form was, in fact, “a modicum of paperwork” that “relieves, rather than imposes, any substantial burden” on the plaintiffs’ religious freedom.

“Eligible organizations are provided the opportunity to freely express their religious objection to such coverage as well as to extricate themselves from its provision,” she wrote. “At the same time, insured individuals are not deprived of the benefits of contraceptive coverage.”

The health care law requires employers to cover contraceptives for female employees.

Religious groups, though, can “opt out of paying for objectionable medical services without denying these services to employees who may or may not share the religious beliefs of their employer,” Judge Pooler wrote.

The four groups are affiliated with the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York.

As an alternative to the opt-out form, which is sent to the federal Labor Department, religious groups may send a letter to the federal Department of Health and Human Services “detailing their religious objections in their own words,” and the government would then notify insurance administrators.

If an organization is self-insured, as the four groups are, the administrator may get payments for contraceptives directly from the government, leaving the organization out of the process. Even when the administrator contacts employees who want contraceptives, it has to “make clear that the eligible organization is neither administering nor funding the contraceptive benefits,” Judge Pooler wrote.

“Viewed objectively, completing a form stating that one has a religious objection is not a substantial burden,” she wrote.

Judge Pooler compared the completion of the form to a conscientious objector’s alerting the military to his position. “There must be some method by which the government can be notified of the objection,” she wrote. “Otherwise there is no way that the government can know which organizations it needs to accommodate. Here, the government has provided flexible, largely effortless and essentially cost-free options for notification.”

Because the contraceptive coverage was provided under federal law, she wrote, the groups’ argument that their completion of the form triggered contraception coverage was incorrect.

Brigitte Amiri, a lawyer for the American Civil Liberties Union, which filed an amicus brief in the case, said: “It’s a huge victory for all the female employees who work at the organizations. The scorecard is really 7-0 in the Courts of Appeals on this issue.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

A spokesman for the archdiocese, Joseph Zwilling, said its lawyers were reviewing the decision. They also represent the religious organizations: Catholic Health Care System, Catholic Health Services of Long Island, Cardinal Spellman High School and Monsignor Farrell High School.