Lower Brule, SD

The Lower Brule Indian Reservation is going through a transition. A new tribal chairman is taking the reins after Michael Jandreau passed away Friday.

Michael Jandreau was chairman of the tribe for at least 30 years. Now change is underway, as Vice Chairperson Kevin Wright will serve as the Acting Chairman of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe until the Tribal Council appoints a new one.

"I really do want to say that I respect him and all that he has done for the tribe but also want to say that we have to move forward," Wright said.

Jandreau was known for helping build a substantial farm economy on the reservation along the Missouri River. Wright says he appreciated how Jandreau handled the laws of the tribe.

"Right now I admire that. He left that legacy for us that we should honor our constitution," Wright said.

Wright does say he didn't always agree with Jandreau. He says the former leader wasn't transparent enough, and it caused issues on the reservation.

"I think that was their biggest problem that caused a lot of friction between people and families and one thing we need to do is open things up," Wright said.

Jandreau was also accused by the nonprofit advocacy group Human Rights Watch for the mismanagement of millions of dollars in federal funding. He denied those claims.

In February, a tribal judge ordered the Lower Brule Sioux tribal council to hold a meeting after it hadn't met in months. Wright vows to make choices based on group decisions.

"Everybody relied on one man, but we have a council. That's the whole reason we have a council and I'm not going to make decisions on my own. I'm definitely going to get advice from wherever I can and however I can," Wright said.

Wright says he has a lot to learn, but feels confident in filling the shoes of a man that held the position for decades.

Jandreau was 71 years-old. His wife preceded him in death and he had 10 children.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.