Please enable Javascript to watch this video

HUNTSVILLE, Ala. (WHNT) - Open enrollment is underway for the Affordable Care Act (ACA).

Americans have until December 15th to go to the online Marketplace and sign up for coverage to begin January 1, 2015.

Meanwhile, tax preparers say they are hearing from their clients who have questions about how the ACA will affect everyone in the future.

"We've already had a lot of questions about this," said Mark Rogers of Thompson Tax and Accounting Service in Huntsville. He recalled the most common questions he has heard. "Am I going to owe a penalty? Can I get out of the penalty?"

Rogers said he saw this coming months ago.

The ACA will affect all taxpayers in some way or another when it comes time to file taxes for 2014.

If you didn't need it, you'll have to check a box to reflect that.

If you did sign up for it, you'll need a new form when you do your taxes.

"You're going to get a form called a 1095A from the Federal Marketplace," said Rogers. "You'll have to have that when you file your tax return. There will be a reconciliation on the tax return that could mean a refundable credit for you or it could mean you might have to pay a little more in if you did not estimate your income correctly."

And that's where the surprises may come, good and bad.

If you underestimated what you made in 2014, you'll have to pay because you got a bigger subsidy than you should have.

But if you overestimated your income, then you may get money back.

And if you ignored the issue altogether, you may have to pay for that.

"If you did not have health insurance in 2014, qualifying health insurance, you will owe a penalty on the tax return, for every person on the return who does not have insurance," said Rogers.

That penalty can range from $95 to nearly $2,500.

Rogers said there are ways to get out of it, if you qualify for an exemption.

That includes if insurance would have cost you more than 8% of your family income or an un-due hardship.

Rogers added that this year if there is an error on your tax return, the Internal Revenue Service will not reject it electronically.

Instead, it will go to the Errors Department of the IRS.

They will correspond through the mail with the taxpayer, which could mean a serious delay in any refund.

If you have any questions about the ACA and how it may impact you, you can call Mark Rogers at 256-533-2951.