Topics: bill hader, Comedy, craig johnson, Drama, dramedy, Film, kristen wiig, luke wilson, Movies, SNL, Sundance, sundance 2014, the skeleton twins, Entertainment News

When it’s released in theaters, audiences will be stunned by the emotional power of “The Skeleton Twins,” director Craig Johnson’s sophomore film that stars “SNL” alumn Bill Hader in his most serious, emotionally complex role yet.

Milo and Maggie, played by Hader and fellow “SNL” alumn Kristen Wiig, are estranged adult siblings brought together when Milo attempts suicide. When the sensitive, cynical Milo moves in with his uptight, volatile sister and her sweet, uncomplicated husband, Lance (Luke Wilson), the siblings are forced to confront the personal traumas that have kept them apart for so long.

Despite its darkness, “The Skeleton Twins” is funny and honest and bittersweet. Hader and Wiig transform from comics to full dramatic actors with a wide range and depth, building on their on-screen chemistry from “SNL.” In an interview with Salon, director Craig Johnson discussed his vision for the film, the role that comedy and improv played in it and how Hader and Wiig joined the cast.

You mentioned that your family didn’t have the same types of issues as Maggie and Milo. So then — where did you get the idea and source material? (Warning: spoiler alert ahead!)

Well, you know, we all have– every family is weird, you know, on some level. And I think that, you know, I like my family a lot but it doesn’t mean we don’t have our own quirks and idiosyncrasies and struggles and all of that but you know, the idea just came…My co-writer Mark Heyman and I were in film school actually and a lot of these Sundance movies were coming out at the time — “The Squid and the Whale,” “Me, You, and Everyone We Know,” — that were really inspiring us and we just sat down one day and we want to write a movie and we want it to be funny, we want it to be a little sad, sometimes at the same time, like these movies we love. But what do we want to write about? We just sort of threw around ideas and subject matter, and one of the things that Mark talked about was a student-teacher relationship that went down at his high school that he went to, and he knew the teacher who was very beloved, and he knew the student, and it was a real kind of complex sort of issue. That sort of a student-teacher relationship is very black-and-white, not cool, everyone knows that– but we were very interested in exploring that idea of a student-teacher relationship that had some nuance and complexity to it. Then we kind of built it out from there and the character of the student just kind of– we gave him a sister, and then we made that whole thing backstory, basically, and we became more interested in the sibling relationship.

In this movie, there are so many traumatic things that happen to these people that it could have easily become manufactured or melodramatic. Instead, the tragedies felt real. How did you keep that from happening?

Yeah, totally. Well, there’s two things: I think these tragic events create a domino-effect and one thing leads to another, and I think it doesn’t feel like too much or feel like it’s overwhelming you with melodrama because it just sort of parsed out incrementally, what happened and what went on.

I feel like the whole theme of the movie is dealing with dark shit with a sense of humor. That’s how I get through dark stuff…I laugh at things that scare me. My sister does, too. I have a sister who is two years younger than me and we’re very very close and we connect with this weird off-beat sense of humor, and when we’re going through dark times, that still can kind of connect us. And that was a major element to the movie, to explore the relationship between siblings who go through really dark stuff.

Comedy is often used as a way to talk about tragedy — something that comedians like Louis C.K. and Tig Notaro do so well, for example, and what made them so popular.

That’s kind of what the movie’s about, honestly. I think it works so well because people relate to it. Everyone deals with dark stuff in their lives. And I think that if you don’t laugh in the face of darkness, you’re just done for. To talk more just about the tone of the movie — the tightrope between the funny and the sad — I think that’s just how life is. I wanted the movie to feel like real life and real life is never split into genres. It’s never a tragedy and it’s never a comedy; it’s often both, sometimes in the same day, sometimes within the same argument with people. I love that. You bring up Louis C.K. and Tig Notaro, and I think that they’re so effective because they give you a release mechanism. It’s like, “It’s okay now.” It makes you able to deal with the darkness and the sadness because I’m going to talk about it in this funny way that rings true to people.