CHRIS DORST | Gazette-Mail photos Pillar Sturkey, a teacher for St. John’s Heart and Hand Daycare in South Charleston, puts shoes on 2-year-old Layton Davis, grandson of center director Nancy Davis.

When Nancy Davis was told the day before Thanksgiving that St. John’s Heart and Hand Daycare in South Charleston was closing, she was shocked.

She figured it would happen eventually. She knew the daycare had been struggling with its finances, but she never expected that it would happen so soon.

Davis then had the unfortunate task of sharing the news with her staff and the 35 to 40 families who drop their kids off at Heart and Hand every morning. The parents were told on Monday, with four days to try and find someone new to look after their kids.

“I’ve had a very, very hard week,” said Davis, whose swollen eyes affirmed the fact. “My heart’s broken. My babies and my staff ...” she trailed off, in tears.

For Heart and Hand, the closure came down to finances. The day care had been running at a deficit for some time, and it simply couldn’t afford to remain open anymore.

“We were having to borrow money from people in the church to meet the payroll,” said William Becher, a board member of the daycare.

Heart and Hand was operating at a near $10,000 deficit. Parents were two to three months late on payments, and, starting Jan. 1, center officials said they were looking at a 50-cent increase in the minimum wage that would only push them further into debt.

They’re not the only child care workers struggling.

“This is a hugely difficult time for child care facilities,” said Debby Weinstein, executive director of the YWCA Charleston.

The YWCA is looking at having to pay around $40,000 more in salary expenses when the minimum wage rises again in January and $70,000 in health care expenses when the Affordable Care Act provision that any employee who works more than 30 hours a week should be offered health insurance begins this summer.

“It is so painfully expensive,” Weinstein said. “These two things kicking in simultaneously have sent many nonprofit organizations to the edge.”

At the same time, state subsidies for child care organizations haven’t been raised since 2009, despite the rise in child care costs. Those subsidies hurt the agencies that provide support for low income families, like Heart and Hand.

“We’ll go for years without an increase, and then we’ll get an increase that’s not significant,” said Weinstein. The YWCA also has many kids who are supported by subsidies.

Child care agencies have been hit hard by the minimum wage increase partly because of their high number of staff members. In order to be certified by the West Virginia Department of Health and Human Resources, there must be one staff member for every four children under 2 years old for a group larger than six children.

That makes caring for the youngest children in child care unprofitable for many child care facilities.

That made the financial cost hurt more when the state law requiring schools to offer pre-K to 4-year-olds kicked into full effect in 2013, since 4-year-olds were one of the age groups that allowed daycares to turn a profit.

“It’s the unintended consequences of what I think are well intended and very important policy changes,” said Weinstein.

While these new policies affected Heart and Hand’s budget, the missed payments from parents coupled with the fact that around 50 percent of their children were on subsidies, were what killed them.

The church’s need to be paid was part of the reason they gave the parents such short notice about the closure.

“If you give them longer notice, there’s a chance you wouldn’t get a collection back for the fees,” said Mary Lane, a board member of Heart and Hand.

It has been cloudy every day since the employees at Heart and Hand found out they were closing, matching their mood.

“I’ve cried every single day,” said Debra Cook, the van driver for the daycare.

Cook and the staffers have only had a week to line up new jobs. There’s no severance pay from the church.

Inside the building constructed in 1975, the decoration on the walls look down on the children with happy faces. Even the staff manages an occasional smile through their otherwise long faces. But the cribs and small chairs will soon be empty, the colorful artwork removed from the walls and repinned on fridges at home, and a building once awake and vibrant will be put down for a long nap.

Reach Daniel Desrochers at

dan.desrochers@wvgazettemail.com,

304-348-4886 or follow

@drdesrochers on Twitter.