PEKIN — Regina Robards recently told her landlord one of the two dogs she’d kept in her Pekin home was being boarded and the other had died of cancer, the landlord said Wednesday.

Loretta Joachim found both pets long dead, apparently of starvation, in her rental home last week. Robards was charged Wednesday in Tazewell County court with two misdemeanor animal cruelty counts that had been filed Monday.

That wasn’t good enough for Joachim, of Mapleton, and eight people who joined her to attend Robards’ court appearance and call for felony charges against the woman they believe deliberately let her dogs die.

“Everyone knows you need food and water to survive,” Joachim said outside the Tazewell County Courthouse.

The group, however, wasn’t aware that the case against Robards, 43, remains under a review that could produce felony charges punishable by prison.

While Robards is accused of failing to supply her dogs with adequate food and water, the misdemeanor counts do not allege she caused or intended their deaths.

“We’ll continue to investigate to determine whether felony charges are appropriate,” State’s Attorney Stewart Umholtz said after Joachim and the group had left without meeting with him. Umholtz said he was out of his office when they arrived.

“We’ll review whether (the dogs’ deaths) was an intentional or neglectful act,” Umholtz said. “We can all agree this was a horrible result.”

“There’s no doubt in my mind,” Joachim said, that her former tenant deserves to be charged with felonies for the deaths of the dogs, who she said were named Walker and Sparky.

Joachim said Robards “was keeping up with her rent. I thought she was still living there” in the home at 1509 Howard Court.

But when a neighbor reported no lights had been on in the house for weeks, Joachim discovered one dog dead there Nov. 24 and the second, hidden under a baby crib, last Friday. The small one-story house was filled with animal waste.

Robards, who told the court’s judge she plans to hire an attorney, was ordered to return to court Jan. 7.