Medicaid expansion backers in Ohio get green light to circulate petitions by Marc Kovac | Capital Bureau Chief Published: September 20, 2013 11:46 AM

1 of 1 Photos | View More Photos

Columbus — A group hoping to force state lawmakers to expand Medicaid eligibility has been given the green light to begin collecting signatures to place the issue before the legislature.

The Ohio Ballot Board’s certification of Healthy Ohioans Work’s proposed law came less than a week after Attorney General Mike DeWine’s OK and sets the stage for a petition drive that backers hope to complete before the end of the year.

Healthy Ohioans Work plans to collect 115,000-plus petition signatures, via a combination of volunteer and paid circulators. If they’re successful, their proposed initiated statute would be placed before the general assembly, with lawmakers given about four months to act.

The initiated statute has a one-sentence summary, calling for the expansion of Ohio’s Medicaid program “to the fullest extent permitted by the [federal] Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.”

Lawmakers could pass it as-is, adopt a different version or ignore the issue outright. In the case of the latter two, the petitioners could gather another 115,000-plus signatures to place the proposed law before voters in November 2014.

Matt Koppitch, legislative liaison for the Service Employees International Union, District 1199, who spoke on behalf of the campaign, called the effort “Plan B,” with hopes that lawmakers will act before the end of the year.

“We’re still going to be engaging the legislature as well,” he said.

During the Sept. 19 Ballot Board meeting, Sen. Bill Coley, a Republican from southwestern Ohio, questioned whether the petition summary fairly represented the issues involved and whether the proposed law change would be in conflict with other sections of Ohio Revised Code.

But in the end, the Ballot Board vote to certify was unanimous.

Marc Kovac is the Dix Capital Bureau Chief. Email him at mkovac@dixcom.com or on Twitter at OhioCapitalBlog.

Rate this article

Do you want to leave a comment? Please Log In or Register to comment.