My wife and I had the opportunity to move to Pensacola one year ago after living all over the world through a long career in the Marine Corps. It was the best decision we ever made.

This is a wonderful community filled with hard-working, welcoming people. We are honored to be here in Pensacola with all of you. We live in a destination community that is fun to visit, rich in opportunity, and wonderful to live in. Our beaches, our downtown, our tourism industry, and our museums are all world class. Our seasonal events, our special events, our history, and our local culture are exciting. Our university, colleges, and health care industry are centers of excellence. Pensacola is “punching above its weight class” with points of strength, opportunity and quality of life for a city of slightly over 50,000 in a county of just over 300,000. In my opinion, you would have to go to a city several times our size to approach what we have in Pensacola.

Ironically, there are elements of innovation and strength in our community that are still widely unknown even to those who have lived here for extended periods of time. Two readily come to mind, the Institute for Human and Machine Cognition and the National Flight Academy. In a world where science, technology, engineering and math – STEM – are becoming more and more the basis for national strength and competitiveness, we have two very dramatic examples of innovation and excellence here in Pensacola.

Today our children nationwide are falling behind other developed nations in science and math testing, yet in the midst of this crisis, our community has nurtured two distinct and world-class examples of STEM excellence right here at home.

I encourage you to visit IHMC.us and nationalflightacademy.com for introductory information on these organizations; but in doing so you will have just that … introductory information. You almost have to see these institutions to understand the full impact they are making, and you are welcome to do so.

Let me briefly address the National Flight Academy since that is my passion. If you want to stimulate imagination and challenge young people in math and science, don’t underestimate the power of a high-impact, positive learning experience where math and science are NOT the obstacle that has to be overcome, but rather they become the facilitator of the goal they want to accomplish. Located next to the National Naval Aviation Museum, the NFA offers one of the most exciting learning experiences in the world – inspiring seventh through 12th-graders to take an interest in STEM in an aviation-themed adventure aboard a massive virtual aircraft carrier. The four-story NFA complex provides an immersive environment that encourages learning and ignites imagination. The students love it! The program is proven to improve student comprehension in STEM skills and 21st century workforce skills. I see the positive impact with every class that graduates the National Flight Academy. I invite you to come see for yourself, we have hundreds of students attending the NFA program all summer long.

My primary point here is not the programs we offer at the National Flight Academy; it is that this world-class, one-of-a-kind experience and facility is here in Pensacola. You can’t find this anywhere else. It should also be stated here that the NFA is a 100 percent privately funded nonprofit organization, not a government program, and only exists because of the incredibly generous support of individuals in our community and corporate sponsors who wish to inspire the next generation.

There is no easy cure for complicated challenges like low national math and science test scores, but our community has the opportunity to truly ascend to national leadership and make a difference. We have tremendous assets and impact, we have the innovation, and Pensacola is in position to lead a national conversation about addressing STEM as a community. I encourage you to join with us to put Pensacola on the map as a national leader in STEM education.

Duane Thiessen is a retired Marine lieutenant general. He is president and CEO of the Naval Aviation Museum Foundation and National Flight Academy.

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1lotdMr