Justice halts religious groups' birth control opt-out role

Potential penalties The dioceses of Pittsburgh, Greensburg and Erie and Geneva College, like many religious groups nationwide, are fighting the Affordable Care Act's mandate related to contraceptive or abortion-related coverage. If they lose the legal battle, they have three options: • Sign a so-called “accommodation” form certifying they morally object to the coverage. This would enable the federal government to work with third parties to provide that coverage — a plan the dioceses argue would make them “complicit” actors against their beliefs. • Provide health plans without contraceptive coverage and pay $100 per beneficiary per day. In the Pittsburgh Diocese, which has 108 employees, the fee would amount to $10,800 per day, or $3.942 million a year. • Drop all health plans and pay $2,000 per employee per year after the first 30 employees. Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Two Western Pennsylvania dioceses won a minor legal victory over their refusal to notify insurers they will not provide coverage for birth control as mandated under the Affordable Care Act.

U.S. Supreme Court Justice Samuel Alito issued an order late Tuesday granting the dioceses of Pittsburgh and Erie temporary relief from a lower court's decision that they must fill out a one-page “accommodation” form stating they morally object to the coverage, or face hefty financial penalties.

Bishop David Zubik of the Pittsburgh Diocese said the earlier 3rd U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ruling “would have jeopardized the future of Catholic Charities of Pittsburgh with heavy fines for refusing to facilitate certain government mandates which the Catholic Church deems immoral.

“This stay is a welcome but interim step in pursuit of the religious freedom that our laws and Constitution have guaranteed to all Americans,” Zubik said.

The Erie Diocese is “very pleased Justice Alito entered an order responding to our emergency request to the Supreme Court to recall and stay the mandate,” said spokeswoman Anne-Marie Welsh, noting the Jones Day law firm took on the case free of charge.

“We now await the government's response, which must be submitted by Monday.”

The dioceses, which fund their own health insurance plans and contract administration of the plans to insurers such as Highmark and UPMC, refuse to sign the accommodation, which would set in motion a plan by which an insurer or third-party administrator would be able to offer what could amount to a rider to coverage.

Bishop Lawrence E. Brandt of the Diocese of Greensburg, which is pursuing its own case against the federal health care mandate, said the so-called accommodation would “require the Catholic Church to be complicit in paying for contraceptive services, abortifacient drugs and sterilization procedures that are morally unacceptable under the tenants of our faith.”

Separately, attorneys planned to file Friday a request for a similar reprieve for Geneva College, a private university in Beaver Falls affiliated with the Reformed Presbyterian Church.

“We're cautiously optimistic that Justice Alito will grant one to us as well,” said Gregory Baylor of Alliance Defending Freedom, the Washington-based law firm representing Geneva College.

The religious groups will have until July to petition the Supreme Court to take up the case and issue a final ruling.

Natasha Lindstrom is a staff writer for Trib Total Media.