The Fort Myers Police Department is investigating a shooting that sent one man to the hospital Saturday.

It happened near the intersection of Ford Street and Thomas Street at around 8:48 p.m.

"A call came out that shots were fired and there was a victim, someone was hit," said Officer Ralph Louissaint.

When he and Officer Curtis Cates got to Ford and Thomas Streets Saturday evening things didn't look good.

They found the victim being pulled out of a canal by another man. The victim has now been identified as 35-year-old Timothy Brown, of Fort Myers.

He was unconscious and not breathing. Officers were able to revive him while waiting for EMS. He was taken to Lee Memorial Hospital and is in stable condition.

"We saw he was unresponsive, not breathing; so it was time to do CPR, start chest compressions," Louissaint said.

Instincts took over for him and Cates. Minutes later Brown was alive and breathing again.

"As soon as he started breathing again, I gave a sigh of relief and was like, ‘Ok, now I can start assessing other things, how bad are the wounds.'" Cates said.

Brown is in the hospital now in stable condition. A friend tells us he is a good guy who grew up in Fort Myers.

We discovered the 35-year-old has spent a lot of time in the Lee County Jail. He's been booked 28 times from 1998 to 2013 for things like trespassing, cocaine possession and grand theft.

"They just don't care; don't care about nothing these days, nothing. I care, I care. I pray for a better life," said neighbor Georgia Thomas.

Saturday's shooting happened just beyond her front porch and behind Franklin Park Elementary School.

Police aren't telling us a motive. Thomas says she sees people doing drugs in the area. Now the shooting has her on edge.

"You could be walking out and you don't know where the bullet's going to go," Thomas explains. "I could be sitting outside late at night, people are walking all behind the bushes and you don't know what's going on around you now."

This case is still open and under investigation. No arrests have been made.

Police say the public isn't in any danger, although the gunman is still on the loose.

"From here, the most important thing is to get a statement from the victim when he is released from the doctor's care. Get a statement from him and find out exactly what transpired. And find out who did this and put them in jail," said Detective Sgt. Brian O'Reilly with the Fort Myers Police Department.

Anyone with information is asked to call Detective Matt Sellers at (239) 321-7700, Crime Stoppers at 1-800-780-TIPS or text message C-R-I-M-E-S (274637) Keyword FMPD. Tipsters can remain anonymous. No further information is available at this time.