Goodtimes Dance Club members Red Busse, left, and his wife, Bonnie, dance at one of the social club's dances during the 2014-15 season at the Fort Collins Senior Center. ( Special to the Reporter-Herald )

If you go What: Goodtimes Dance Club. When: 2015-2016 dance season, 8-11 p.m. Friday, Sept. 11; Saturday, Oct. 3; Friday, Nov. 6; Saturday, Dec. 12, in 2015. Where: Fort Collins Senior Center, 1200 Raintree Drive. Cost: $130 per couple; nonmembers may attend as guests of a sponsoring member for $16 per couple. More info: Visit www.goodtimesdanceclub.com or call Red Busse at 667-9398.

Loveland couple Jon and Ellen Thomerson don't like to miss the dances put on by the Goodtimes Dance Club — particularly for the big band music and the ballroom atmosphere.

So, the Thomersons are eagerly awaiting the start of the 2015-2016 dance season on Friday after two months off from dancing at the Fort Collins Senior Center.

"There are people there that are extremely good dancers, and there's people who just like to dance," Ellen said.

Jon added, "If you don't do it like it's supposed to be done, do it your way."

The Thomersons are among the 77 couples who are members of Loveland-based Goodtimes Dance Club, which just finished its 25th season in June before taking off the months of July and August, as is usual for the club's dance season.

The nonprofit social dance club aims to keep traditional big band and ballroom dancing alive and is one of the only dance clubs in Northern Colorado that dances to a live big band.

Couples do the waltz, fox trot, tango, polka, Latin, swing, quickstep and country-western two-step.

"Come make it your monthly date night and come have a date with your spouse," said Red Busse, president of the Goodtimes Dance Club. "The name of our club is Goodtimes Dance Club, and that's what we're about. We want to encourage people to come out and have a good time, socialize and not worry about their level of experience."

The dance club holds 10 dances a year on Fridays and Saturdays, all at the senior center, rotating among five big bands. The bands include Bob Harris & the Bringers of Swing, Harris & Harris, Kings of Swing, The Matt Pack Band and Swing City-Boulder.

"We don't necessarily need lessons. We just need a place to dance," said Lisa Boesen, publicity and marketing manager of the Goodtimes Dance Club. "It's a good place to dance to live music. ... If you're taking dance lessons, getting out dancing is the only way to get better."

Norm Rehme of Loveland and his wife, Carol, have been going to the dance club since 2001.

"When you learn and take lessons, you want to practice and do it," Rehme said. "You can use those new skills that you've learned."

Rehme also likes the fact that he can get exercise and do it in a social environment.

"It's a social type of event, so you visit with people, you share stories and you go dance," Rehme said.

The dance club had its start after a nightclub in Fort Collins closed in the late 1980s, leaving a few of the dance patrons wanting another place to dance. Those early organizers distributed fliers, ran ads and contacted a mailing list from a local band to drum up interest.

The club modeled its bylaws after another dance club in Estes Park, worked with six bands in its first 12 years and met at several locations, including the Associated Veterans Club of Loveland and other clubs and event centers.

Over the years, the club had as many as 125 couples participate with an age range from 30s to 90s, with most of the members being on the older end. The club is seeking new membership, particularly younger members.

The venue works for all ages, not just seniors, even if it is a senior center, Boesen said.

"It's a lovely venue. The floors have been redone. There's an elevated stage," she said.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.