WASHINGTON, D.C. – U.S. Rep. Richard Hanna, the only House Republican to consistently support Planned Parenthood, on Wednesday joined those calling for Congress and the Justice Department to investigate the group.

Hanna, R-Barneveld, said he is alarmed by undercover videos from abortion opponents that claim to show a Planned Parenthood official discussing the potential sale of fetal tissue from abortions.

The edited videos were part of a sting operation involving actors hired by the Center for Medical Progress, a California-based group opposed to abortion.

"I strongly support women's health care, however, the videos released regarding Planned Parenthood are extremely disturbing and alarming," Hanna said in a statement Wednesday. "I do not support or in any way condone the callous tone and detached emotional nature of these videos."

The third-term congressman from Oneida County stopped short of withdrawing his support for Planned Parenthood, a group that has given him financial support and awards for his defense of abortion rights.

"I fully support a congressional investigation to determine if any laws were broken or standards of medical care were violated," Hanna said of the videos. "It is my hope that such an investigation will be fair, thorough and deliberate. Congress should act in accordance with the findings of such an investigation."

Hanna's comments come one day after dozens of people protested in front of Planned Parenthood in Syracuse, demanding that Congress investigate whether the videos show a violation of federal law against selling fetal tissue for profit.

Planned Parenthood officials have acknowledged they sold tissue from aborted fetuses to research laboratories, but say Planned Parenthood only collected a small fee to cover its storage and transportation expenses.

Hanna was the only Republican in Congress to receive campaign donations from Planned Parenthood for the 2014 election, according to the Center for Responsive Politics, a watchdog group that tracks the influence of money in politics.

In 2012, Hanna received Planned Parenthood's Barry Goldwater Award, presented each year to a Republican who fights to protect women's reproductive rights.

In 2011, he was among only seven House Republicans who voted against a bill that would have cut off federal funding to Planned Parenthood.

Hanna stood out again in January 2014 when he was the only House Republican to break from his party and vote against a GOP bill to ban federal payments for abortion.

The bill authored by Rep. Chris Smith, R-N.J., would ban any use of federal subsidies through the Affordable Care Act to purchase health insurance plans that cover abortion services.

Hanna said Smith's bill was unnecessary since the Hyde Amendment already prohibits federal tax dollars to be spent on abortion services.

Contact Mark Weiner anytime: Email | Twitter | Facebook | 571-970-3751