George Balteria, CEO of Quote Selection Insurance Services, speaks during an informational seminar about the Affordable Care Act and health insurance coverage on Saturday at Community Hospital of San Bernardino. Micah Escamilla — Correspondent

SAN BERNARDINO >> Health insurance agents were available Saturday at Community Hospital of San Bernardino to answer questions about the Affordable Care Act and assist people with selecting coverage plans available to them under the new law.

Roughly two dozen people attended Saturday’s information seminar, one of two hosted last week by Community Hospital and St. Bernardine Medical Center. St. Bernardine held its seminar from 6:30 to 7:30 p.m. Wednesday.

“The reason why we’re here is to provide information to the community on all the health and insurance changes going on right now under the Affordable Care Act,” said George Balteria, CEO of Quote Selection Insurance Services, a Corona-based insurance brokerage firm with brokers certified by Covered California, the state’s new health insurance exchange.

Implemented under provisions of the Affordable Care Act, or ACA, Covered California is where individuals and businesses can shop for health coverage plans named after precious metals: bronze, silver, gold and platinum.

Balteria conducted a PowerPoint presentation on the health care plans available to individuals of various family sizes and income brackets.

Insurance brokers sat at tables going over 35-page applications with visitors and discussing their options.

“We just lost our coverage, so I’m here seeing what the options are,” said Nicole, a San Bernardino resident who attended Saturday’s seminar but declined to give her last name.

She said her employer, a nonprofit ministry and school, took a major hit due to the soured economy and could no longer afford to provide its employees with health insurance.

Balteria said he’ll be hosting other seminars throughout Southern California through March.

The deadline to sign up for coverage under the ACA is March 31. Those who are not signed up by then face fines, Balteria said.

For more information, call: 888-247-7696