David Gardner For the Camera

When Congress voted to raise the debt ceiling two weeks ago, there was widespread relief that we would be spared a government shutdown. While largely lauded, this legislation did include obscure provisions that impact Medicare and Social Security. For some boomers these changes could cut Social Security benefits by over $50,000 over four years.

Let's start off with the news that will affect most retirees. Social Security will not have a cost of living adjustment for 2016. Your benefit for 2015 will remain the same for 2016, as a result of inflation figures being essentially nil for the last year. Workers may rejoice as the annual salary subject to Social Security tax will remain the same at $118,500.

The loss of the cost of living increase for Social Security wasn't a surprise. But there was a nasty side effect that would have dramatically increased Medicare premiums by about 50 percent on about 30 percent of retirees. There are so-called "hold harmless" provisions in Social Security that prevent your payment from ever decreasing. These rules include Medicare Part B premiums, which are often deducted from Social Security payments.

But if you pay for Medicare Part B directly because you're not yet collecting Social Security, then you were not protected by these provisions. The problem is that this select group was on target to foot the higher costs for all Medicare recipients with their premiums expected to increase by 50 percent or more. The debt ceiling legislation applied a temporary fix to this injustice. Now the maximum Medicare premium increase will be 15 percent for those paying for Medicare Part B directly.

Advertisement

The changes with Social Security are less obvious, but could affect many thousands counting on so-called "file and suspend" and restricted application strategies. File and suspend allows you to file for Social Security benefits, immediately suspend those benefits, and then continue to build up delayed retirement credits until age 70. Why would you do this? If you file and suspend your benefit, then your spouse who has reached full retirement age (66 for most near retirees) could collect spousal benefits without decreasing his or her own Social Security benefit or yours.

Let's take Martin and Susan, a married couple both aged 66. Susan is entitled to $2,200 a month in Social Security at age 66 while Martin has a $2,000 benefit. Susan could file and suspend her benefit at age 66, while Martin could file a restricted application for spousal benefits and collect $1,100 a month on Susan's record for the next four years. Then when Martin and Susan both turn 70, they could then collect their full age 70 benefits from their own records of about $2,640 and $2,904 a month adjusted for inflation. Plus if Martin survives Susan, he gets her full higher benefit for the rest of his days.

Now all of this has changed by two key rules. Starting April 30, 2016, you will no longer be able to file and suspend your Social Security benefit. Second, you cannot file a restricted application for spousal benefits unless you turn age 62 by the end of 2015. If you're younger than this, then these advanced Social Security options are no longer an option for you.

Let's go through a quick recap of your options. If you're on Medicare, your premiums may go up next year but not by much. With Social Security, if you are age 65 ½ or older you can still file and suspend your benefit but you only have until next April 29th to do so. You should consider your options now because six months from now they will evaporate. If you are age 70 or older, there's no advantage in suspending your benefit as you won't earn delayed retirement credits. Finally, if you turn age 62 by the end of this year, you will be able to file a restricted application for spousal (or unmarried ex-spouse) benefits once you turn age 66. This would enable you to collect on your spouse's record (if they have filed), without diminishing your own benefit.

For more information contact your local Social Security office. Another good resource is the financial planner blog at kitces.com.

David Gardner is a certified financial planner with a practice in Boulder County and can be reached with questions at dave@yellowstonefinancial.com and on Twitter @Dave_CFP