A large number of people who've signed up for private health insurers through the Cover Oregon health insurance exchange have not paid their first month's premiums, meaning they are at risk of going without coverage through November.

"I've already had clients not pay and lose their coverage," says Lisa Lettenmaier, who owns the health insurance brokerage Health Source NW in Tigard. "It's imperative for people to pay their premiums on time."

This year, for the first time, most people who don't have health coverage risk a federal tax penalty that runs as much as 1 percent of household income.

If consumers selected a private plan but didn't pay their first month's premium, their enrollment won't go into effect -- meaning they may be out of luck until the next open enrollment in November.

That applies not only to Cover Oregon policies, but policies purchased directly from carriers as well. But Cover Oregon offers a microcosm of the market in general, brokers and agents say.

More than 81,000 people went through through Cover Oregon – either through paper or electronic applications—to select a private health plan. Of those, 5,000 have already cancelled policies or been terminated for lack of payment. Thousands more have not yet paid their first-month's premiums, meaning their have not completed their enrollment, according to carriers.

Cover Oregon allowed consumers with qualifying incomes to access tax credits and other subsidies. Moda Health dominated sales through the exchange, with 40,000 policies sold covering about 55,000 people, including dependents.

Moda spokesman Jonathan Nicholas said "more than 80 percent" of people who used Cover Oregon have paid their first premium, but declined to be more specific.

Other insurers gave ratios ranging between 66 percent to 80 percent of consumers who followed through with payments.

For instance, people used Cover Oregon to buy 1,500 PacificSource policies but of those only 992 have so far paid their first month's premiums.

Some carriers give consumers until the day before their effective date to pay. Others consider them nominally enrolled, but don't pay claims until the first premium is received.

Lettenmaier said consumers need to check their billings, or call their carrier immediately to find out how long a grace period they have to pay their first month's premium. She recently had a customer respond one day late-- and now his family has to resort to short-term insurance, which does not prevent a federal tax penalty or cover pre-existing conditions.

Once the first month's premium is paid and the policy is in place, under the Affordable Care Act consumers will have a much longer grace period – 90 days—to reinstate insurance after failing to pay.

But if consumers don't pay that first month's premiums, they have a problem. Aside from certain exceptions, under the new federal law "there are no second chances" until the open enrollment begins again, Lettenmaier said.

--Nick Budnick