PJ Smith for The Wall Street Journal SDelicia Kearny leads the Marching Cobras of New York with a southern style marching band at the African American Day Parade.

By Rebecca Fowler

Greater New York begins the new week with cooler weather and clouds, but more pleasant days are ahead during this final week of summer.

A cold front approaching from the west brings a sprinkling of showers to the region prior to daybreak on Monday. As the cold front enters the mid-Atlantic late morning and passes through Monday afternoon, there’s a 40% chance of additional scattered showers falling behind the front. Any precipitation should remain light and will taper off in time for the evening commute. There will be significant dry parts of the day, but an umbrella may be a practical accessory for those traveling about the region on foot.

Periods of clouds and sun will help the day’s high temperature rise into the upper 60s along the coast and the lower 70s in northeast New Jersey and New York City. By evening, skies will start to clear and overnight lows will fall to around 40 in the Hudson River Valley and into the lower 50s most other places. A northwest wind at around 10 mph will serve as a chilly reminder that we’ve begun our final descent into autumn.

Monday’s temperatures will be a few degrees below normal, making the day feel more like early October than mid-September. The good news is that we’ll soon return to near normal temperatures, once a large area of Canadian high pressure moves into Greater New York on Tuesday. This will ensure a string of sunny days that should last until Thursday, with highs in the mid to upper 70s during the day and in lower 60s at night.

Monday’s Greater New York forecast roundup:

WSJ Headquarters in Manhattan:

Actual High: 74; RealFeel High: 74

Actual Low: 54; RealFeel Low: 49

Weather: Partly sunny, a few light showers

Brooklyn: 73/51

Queens: 73/54

Bronx: 72/52

Staten Island: 72/54

Poughkeepsie, N.Y.: 68/39

Trenton, N.J.: 70/48

Islip, Long Island: 71/50

New Haven, Conn.: 70/47

Rebecca Fowler is a science writer at Columbia University’s Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory.