Dorchester and Leesburg now are sleepy towns, with unoccupied old buildings along the Maurice River. (Photo: Photo courtesy of NJ Maritime Museum)

It’s a long drive from the New Jersey Maritime Museum on Dock Road in Beach Haven to the sleepy towns of Dorchester and Leesburg on the Maurice River. But well worth the trip. Maritime heritage in New Jersey is evident wherever there is water.

Ship building, and even repairs, have fallen off drastically in these Cumberland County towns. The busy times were sporadic: late 1700s, mid-to-late 1800s, and World War II.

Today “For Rent” and “For Sale” signs line the waterfront while grass grows between the rails of old marine railways. Old uprights and supports along the railways look as if a stiff wind could blow them down.

Yank Marine, with facilities located in Tuckahoe and Dorchester, is one of the few still active full service boat building facilities on the Maurice.

Commercial vessels along this stretch of the Maurice are almost non-existent; pleasure craft, mainly fishermen, travel this quiet river leading to Delaware Bay.

Both Dorchester and Leesburg are better known for “what was” than “what is.”

The area was originally called Wahatquenak by the Lenni Lenape Indians. Perhaps unpronounceable by the early Swedish settlers, Maurice Township and River were named after a Dutch ship, “Prince Maurice,” which was sunk by the Native Americans in the vicinity of Dorchester in 1657. Incorporation took place in 1798.

Land was purchased from the West Jersey Proprietors in 1799, and settlement began. Who settled Leesburg first has been debated: it was either the Lee brothers from Egg Harbor or a George Heisler. A group of Methodists followed, founding the Leesburg Methodist Church.

While most settlers were farmers, a growing number were ship builders, ship carpenters, and seamen. From the earliest times of the Lenni Lenape, when dugout canoes were the only method of water transportation, the Maurice River towns flourished. Sloops and schooners were the first boats to be built.

According to information on the New Jersey Coastal Heritage Trail Route:

“Trade ships carried lumber, hoops, coal, coal oil, vitriol, salt cake, brick, stone, fertilizers, railroad ties, tobacco, sugar, farm products, furs and ice as far north as Newfoundland and as far south as South America.”

Ship owners from Philadelphia and New York soon became aware of the high quality of the Maurice River shipwrights. Ship building became the big industry. Large buildings were built along the waterfront.

The schooner Calvin S. Edwards was built for Mr. J. Gandy in Dorchester in 1860, 109 feet long, 28 feet wide, centerboard, and drew more than 9 feet. Her first captain was J. Garwood. In the 1880s the schooner was sold to F. Smith Company in Philadelphia.

Sadly, the Calvin S. Edwards met her demise off Atlantic City/Absecon,in 1891. All the details are available on the maritime museum shipwreck database, except for the human side of the story, which we will never fully know ...

The Calvin S. Edwards was left with nothing but an anchor line holding her off the beach, her cargo hold full. An appraisal on behalf of those salvaging the schooner claimed the following:

“The schooner Calvin S. Edwards, laden with lumber, was discovered by the schooner Eleanora below Absecom, abandoned, with four or five feet of water in her; the gaff, foregaff, and forebeam broken; no boats, no water barrels on board; all sails gone but the topmast staysail; held to an anchor by a single hawser.

“The Eleanora, finding her abandoned, made a line to her, put three men on board of her, and commenced to tow her to New York. The tug boat Idelwild, coming in sight, was signaled, and asked to assist the Eleanora to get the derelict into port. This she agreed to do upon an understanding that any salvage that might be realized would be divided equally between the tug and the schooner.”

Under U.S. marine law, a salvor of imperiled maritime property on navigable waters is entitled to a monetary award from the owner. If there is no contract between the salvage ship (s) and the ship’s owner, as was the case of the Calvin S. Edwards, a court determines the value given to the salvors. What happened to those aboard the schooner? Was the ship really abandoned as stated? Why did the owners not try to save the schooner, nor appear in court?

The value of the schooner was determined to be $2,000; the cargo $1,800. Both the Calvin S. Edwards and her cargo were sold by the salvors. Was this salvage marine award fair?

Only those well versed in maritime law in the late 1800’s can answer the question.

Has the story of the schooner built in Dorchester in 1860 been forgotten?

The New Jersey Maritime Museum shipwreck database opens a world of knowledge for those fascinated with maritime history, has all the important facts, and is a big enticement for those who wish to explore further.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1pjsWgy