CHICAGO — Nolan Arenado is back in the zone.

He hit two home runs Sunday in the Rockies’ 2-0 victory over the Chicago Cubs, the seventh multihomer game of his career and the second within the last five games. His 16 RBIs lead the majors.

His first home run Sunday came off Cubs lefty Jon Lester. Arenado drove Lester’s first-pitch 89 mph fastball into left field. With the wind blowing in at Wrigley Field, Arenado’s homer barely got out, but there was enough power to lift it into the basket above the dormant ivy.

“When I first hit it, I thought it was gone,” said Arenado, who now has six homers. “But then the wind got it, and I saw that (left fielder Jorge Soler) was camped, so I was like, ‘Oh, no!’ But thank God it went into the basket.

Rockies Mailbag: Pose a question for Patrick Saunders

“The next one (off reliever Justin Grimm), I thought I hit pretty good. I felt like I’ve been jumping at the ball a little bit too much. Today I was really focused on staying back and staying on my back leg, and it really worked out.”

Story’s story. Rookie shortstop Trevor Story continues to strike out a lot. He whiffed twice Sunday, bringing his season total to 22, most in the National League. But he also also hit seven homers and has a .294 average, and he ripped a first-inning single to left field off Lester.

Manager Walt Weiss said he’s not worried about Story’s mounting strikeout totals. And while Weiss might give the rookie a day off soon, he doesn’t think Story has hit the wall.

“Typically with young players, I’m going to look for spots to protect them, and I will do that with Trevor,” Weiss said. “I still think Trevor is competing really well, and he’s still a dangerous bat at the top of our lineup. That’s why I’ve continued to run him out there.

“He’s been pitched tough by a couple of guys here lately, but I still think he’s competing well in the (batter’s) box.”

Weiss said he “doesn’t want to make too much” of the strikeouts.

“I think he still has a plan and he’s still sticking to it,” Weiss said. “I think that showed up in his last at-bat (a double Saturday).”

Gray watch. Weiss said the team has not decided when right-hander Jon Gray will rejoin the rotation. After pitching two rehab games for high Single-A Modesto, Gray is expected to rejoin the team in Cincinnati on Monday, but he’s not yet on the Rockies’ pitching schedule.

“We need to get him here in front of us, and then we will make a decision in the next couple of days,” Weiss said.

Footnotes. The Cubs lost their first series of the 2016 season. … Tyler Chatwood became just the second Rockies starter to pitch at least seven innings while allowing only two hits against the Cubs. The other was Pedro Astacio on Aug. 1, 2000.

Looking Ahead

Rockies RHP Jordan Lyles (0-1, 11.25 ERA) at Reds RHP Dan Straily (0-0, 3.24), 5:10 p.m. Monday, ROOT; 850 AM

It’s up to Lyles to keep the momentum going. The Rockies took two of three over the weekend against the Cubs when Colorado’s three starters combined for a 1.00 ERA. Lyles’ fastball has been reaching 96 mph in the early going, but his inability to command it and his penchant for falling behind in counts have gotten him into trouble early. In two starts, he has yet to get through five innings before getting the hook. Straily, who has made three appearances out of the bullpen, will make his first start of the season. In 8 innings, he has given up three runs, struck out eight and walked four.

Tuesday: Rockies LHP Jorge De La Rosa (1-1, 8.80 ERA) at Reds RHP Alfredo Simon (0-1, 12.15), 5:10 p.m., ROOT

Wednesday: RHP Chad Bettis (2-0, 2.95) at Reds RHP Raisel Iglesias (1-1, 3.24), 10:35 a.m., no TV; 850 AM

Thursday: Off