CHICAGO — At frost-biting, forbidding Soldier Field, there were only two “Osweiler” jerseys — one on the field of green and another in the sea of blue.

Brock Osweiler did the No. 17 proud in a 17 — yes — to 15 victory over the Bears.

So did the Broncos’ fan in the stadium who believed in Brock. Osweiler jerseys weren’t available in the Broncos’ store last week and certainly not anywhere in Chicago.

The young man behind the end zone had taken an old orange jersey, cut white strips of tape in the shape of “1’s’ and applied them in front of the “7”s and covered “Elway” on the back with a magic-marked, home-made name: “OSWEILER”.

Osweiler and his lonely loyalist were ahead of the curve.

And nobody really cares about the No. 6 jersey worn before in Denver or in Chicago now. Jay Cutler’s number is deep-sixed.

The raw Osweiler completely outplayed the experienced Cutler. In his first NFL start, Brock finished with two touchdown passes, zero interceptions and a 127.1 passer rating. In his 130th start Cutler had an interception, zero touchdowns and a 70.4 rating.

Same old Jay. Brand new Brock.

“It’s not deflating,” Cutler said. “We just need to do better.”

Cutler was giving lame excuses in 2008 when he was 25 and the Broncos’ staring quarterback.

Happy birthday, Brock. He turned 25 Sunday. “I could not be more proud of the entire football team,” Osweiler said.

The fan in the stands was not the only Osweiler advocate. Linebacker Von Miller sits on the charter next to Osweiler on every road trip. “He was the same Brock as always. No different. He’s confident, calm, cool. I knew he could go out there and play well. We see him play every day.”

Miller helped clinch the victory. With 2:30 remaining, the Bears were down 17-9 and at the Broncos’ 23-yard line. Miller switched from the left to the right rushing side, stunted, then flew after Cutler, grabbed his arm and forced a fumble. The mid-air ball was recovered by Malik Jackson.

Soldier Field emptied, but the Bears would have one more try in the final two minutes. They scored on a 2-yard run late, but a rather ridiculous run for the two-point conversion was stuffed by safety T.J. Ward.

Broncos win! They celebrated like Little League champions in the locker room minutes later.

The Broncos had been going backward of late, losing two in a row, and Osweiler replaced the wounded Peyton Manning, who stayed home.

And, on Saturday afternoon, the Broncos were going in circles. Because of a snowstorm in Chicago, the Broncos’ plane circled in the sky six times before a seriously late arrival.

According to Broncos coach Gary Kubiak, “this may sound crazy,” but the travails “might have been kind of a nice icebreaker for the team. We sat on the plane for 4 ½ hours; everyone was fidgety . . . We had a great end to (Saturday night), and we played with the same energy. Maybe we need to take a look at that and get the plane to do it again.”

Osweiler’s beginning in his inaugural start was imposing. The Broncos went 74 yards in four plays, with Brock discovering Demaryius Thomas over the middle on a 48-yard connection. (It recalled another young quarterback tossing a short pass to Thomas for a quick scoring strike.)

Shortly afterward, Cutler should have been intercepted, then was sacked.

Two quarterbacks, heading in opposite directions, literally.

It was pleasant to know Bears coach John Fox hasn’t mellowed. He said of the Osweiler-Thomas play coverage: “You guys always want to hear the blame game.” On playing his former team: “There are more guys to say hi to after the game.”

Bye, John. Bye, Jay.

Hello, Brock.

More No. 17 jerseys might be worn in the stadium on Sunday. Who’s coming to town?

Oh, them!

Brady & Brock. Methinks it could be a big game.