This story originally ran May 25, 2014.

Buy Photo Neil Katz of Barnegat must find new doctors, now that Meridian Health and his insurer, UnitedHealthcare, have broken ties in a contract dispute. (Photo: PETER ACKERMAN/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER )Buy Photo

Battling both Parkinson's disease and diabetes, Neil Katz last fall thought he found a health insurance plan that offered both no monthly premiums and a network of doctors that included his own.

He signed up for UnitedHealthcare's Medicare Advantage plan. It went into effect in January. And then he received letters from the insurance company saying that as a result of a contract dispute with Meridian Health, two of his doctors would be dropped from its network beginning May 15.

"We can't change until Jan. 1 of next year," said Katz, 65, of Barnegat. "It's nothing you would expect to happen. Once you sign your name to the document you figure you're OK until the end of the year."

Thousands of Shore-area seniors are scrambling to find new doctors after UnitedHealthcare and Meridian Health failed to come to terms on a new contract.

The dispute is an old-fashioned fight between an insurance company and a hospital network that, despite the common perception, had nothing to do with the Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare. But it has angered consumers such as Katz, who say they were never told during the open enrollment period that the two sides were on shaky ground. Had he known, Katz said, he could have chosen another insurer.

'Real agita'

"I've encountered a number of people since this happened that didn't know it, and they wanted to see their doctor and that doctor didn't participate (in the network)," said Scott Hartung, president of Shore Benefits Brokerage in Allenhurst. "There's some real agita over this."

Wall-based Meridian owns Jersey Shore University Medical Center in Neptune, Riverview Medical Center in Red Bank, Ocean Medical Center in Brick, Southern Ocean Medical Center in Stafford and Bayshore Community Hospital in Holmdel, making it the Shore's biggest hospital network.

At issue is a contract with UnitedHealthcare that determined how much the insurance company would reimburse the hospitals for services provided to about 8,000 Medicare Advantage consumers.

Medicare Advantage is a government-funded plan that is administered by private insurance companies and covers both hospital and doctor visits. About 30 percent of Medicare beneficiaries nationwide and 15 percent in New Jersey are enrolled in Advantage plans, according to a report by Kaiser Family Foundation, a health care research group.

Unlike Medicare, which allows consumers to see any doctor, Medicare Advantage is a managed care plan with a network of providers. But the Advantage plans have grown rapidly the past decade, Kaiser found, in part because they have an out-of-pocket limit and prescription drug benefits.

The agreement between UnitedHealthcare and Meridian was muddied beginning last year, after Congress enacted a sequester, cutting government programs, including Medicare by 2 percent.

Meridian executives in an interview said UnitedHealthcare in turn cut its reimbursement to the hospitals by 2 percent, exacerbating a deal that already was unprofitable and prompting them to cry foul. They said the insurer shouldn't have changed reimbursement rates that already were negotiated. And they said it amounted to a breach of contract. Meridian last fall decided to terminate the deal.

"We told them we felt they were taking the (sequestration) reduction inappropriately," said Tim Nolan, Meridian's executive vice president.

The move gave the two sides six months to negotiate a new contract. But they never reached an agreement. It meant UnitedHealthcare customers beginning May 15 no longer had access to Meridian's hospitals or physicians who have admitting privileges only to Meridian hospitals. Customers with other United Health Care plans are not affected.

"Our Medicare Advantage customers continue to have broad access to hospitals and physicians across New Jersey to meet their health-care needs, and we will work with them to ensure access to those providers," Mary McElrath-Jones, a UnitedHealthcare spokeswoman, said.

Pointing fingers

With the nation eyeing ways to reduce the escalating cost of health care, battles between providers and insurers aren't a surprise. And, in this case, both sides pointed the finger at the other. Meridian noted that UnitedHealthcare has cut its network of doctors nationwide. UnitedHealthcare noted that Meridian also recently terminated a contract with Amerigroup Health Plan of New Jersey's Medicaid plan.

Some customers, however, said they were caught by surprise and now are stranded – without their longtime doctors.

Meridian said it notified thousands of patients last fall through letters and advertisements about the change, giving existing patients a chance to find a new insurer.

But federal rules require only that the insurance company provide them with written notice 30 days before a contract is terminated. UnitedHealthcare said it sent letters to customers in January and April, notifying them of changes.

Why didn't UnitedHealthcare let consumers know the status of talks with a network as big as Meridian's? "In most instances we reach agreement for a new contract," McElrath-Jones said. "Meridian Hospital was in our network during the open enrollment period."

That did little for new customers like Katz, who, when Medicare's open enrollment began last October, compared plans, saw that their doctors were still a part of UnitedHealthcare's network and signed up – only to learn too late that changes were in store.

He said he called the insurance company, which suggested he wait and see how negotiations turned out. But now he is in a bind, forced to leave doctors he had trusted.

"We're looking for new doctors," Katz said.

Michael L. Diamond; 732-643-4038; mdiamond@app.com

WHAT SHOULD YOU DO?

Customers with UnitedHealthcare's Medicare Advantage plan who had previously scheduled or ongoing medical treatments at Merdian or with affiliated physicians may be able to continue receiving care at in-network benefit levels for a limited time based on their plans' continuity of care requirements. Medicare customers can change their plans during open enrollment period, which begins Oct. 15.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1CcaLnb