We are about high-touch and we want the pharmacist to be a pivotal part of our communities."

WADSWORTH, Ohio – If a Ritzman Pharmacy location doesn't have a drive-through, an employee will run the prescription out to a customer's car.

That's just one example of how Wadsworth-based Ritzman Pharmacies Inc., is reinvesting in the personal touch while at the same time heavily investing in technology.

Among this reinvestment effort is the design for a new store layout, which gets pharmacists out from behind the counter.

In this new plan, pharmacists interact with customers during store events, while talking up the virtues of such things as essential oils and preventive health.

Ritzman recently started marketing to the masses a new monthly pre-packaged daily pill system - initially created for people who couldn't afford to live at long-term care facilities.

In all, Ritzman Pharmacies is a 65-year-old local company on a mission to find new ways to compete and grow. In the last five years, the company has doubled in size with 25 stores and about 300 employees.

"The healthcare industry is under tremendous pressure with Obamacare to give health care to our newly insured constituents, so the system is getting overwhelmed," said George Glatcz, chief operating officer at Ritzman Pharmacies.

"Meanwhile big box pharmacies have really commoditized the practice of pharmacy in a community setting. So the pharmacist in their role in health care has been minimized. The experience one expects to get now is to just get a prescription dispensed."

Glatcz was hired a year ago to lead the company's five-year-plan. He started out in pharmacy school before gaining significant national and international experience in the health-care industry.

From playing a role in developing pharmaceutical drugs, Glatcz moved on to clinical sales, training physicians and nuclear medicine technologists on how to use imaging products. His career includes working in market research, product management and business development. He's run divisions for global healthcare companies and worked for an Ohio start-up, before working in private equity.

Most recently he ran a healthcare practice for WPP, the world's largest communications company, a $17 billion company with offices in London and Manhattan.

"I moved from Madison Avenue in New York to Hartman Road (in Wadsworth near Medina)," he said jokingly, before disclosing some plans he has to help build Ritzman.

Ritzman wants to make a more-concerted effort to support local artists with products and services. The company is actively trying to find new relationships while building on others, re-branding and seeking new e-commerce opportunities.

For instance, Ritzman is partnering with celebrity brand Monica Potter Home to bring a unique line of all-natural products to local retail stores. They plan to sell three all-organic bath and body products offered by the Northeast Ohio native and Golden Globe-nominated actress.

Last year, Ritzman launched a specialty medicine program aimed at tapping into high-dollar prescriptions for complex diseases such as hepatitis and rheumatoid arthritis. The specialty pharmacy industry has been booming in recent years as drug makers increasingly focus on medications that are complex. Some require injections to treat rare or serious chronic diseases with small patient populations.

"Other institutions typically offer these through mail-order. So if you're at a Walgreens or CVS, you'll be able to get your specialty medicines, but you're going to get it through the mail and you're going to be talking to a pharmacist or clinician on the phone rather than in person," Glatcz said.

"Our system that we launched - to make our pharmacist the pillar in the community - involves dispensing the medication at every location and have a live counseling session or one-on-one conversation to talk about side effects. We've seen a huge growth in this business in the last year, serving about 600 patients so far, and we're finding ways to reduce patients out-of-pocket costs.

"We are about high-touch and we want the pharmacist to be a pivotal part of our communities," he said.

What's the future look like?

We continue to look for more brick and mortar locations. In fact, we're looking to add one more location this year. We want to try to build our brand nationally in the next three to five years by expanding our services and product lines on e-commerce. Secondly, we're developing other business lines beyond prescriptions and they could be done nationally.

What do you really want people to know when they consider shopping at Ritzman?

We really want to improve the health and outcomes of our patients. And we're doing that through adherence and compliance. Secondly, we are a locally owned organization and we really want to support our local communities and artisans, so we are bringing in more products and services from locals. We're doing it to bring in new customers into our practices. We've always tried to support locals, but now we're making a more-concerted effort.

Q: What is the best part of your job?

Working with our employees to find new ways to improve the health of our community.

Q: How do you relax?

I like to work-out and play tennis.

Q: Where does your positive energy come from?

Just knowing that there's great opportunity for transformation and having a great team to go get it.

Q. What's been the biggest adjustment in moving from New York to working in Wadsworth Ohio?

For me it's the pace change. In New York the workflow and the energy is just at a faster pace, and it's more chaotic. In Wadsworth, the pace is more people-friendly, and I'm very much enjoying the change.

Do you have one piece of advice for someone considering reinventing?

If you're going to reinvent and make change, the first thing that you should always think about with anyone in your organization is that if the hair on the back of their neck is not standing up, you're not changing enough or reinventing enough.