Five Questions with Jodi Tervo Roberts

Jodi Tervo Roberts is an educator and entrepreneur. She is developing a business called E3 Twin Ports (Energy and Empowerment through Exercise) to provide opportunities to participate in active living programs, with an emphasis getting outdoors year round. She has a master’s degree in exercise science and teaches courses at Lake Superior College. She also volunteers with Courage Kenny Rehabilitation Institute of the Northland in creating and running activity programs for people with disabilities.

Q: Can you give a brief summary of what E3 Twin Ports, is and how people can take part?

A: It empowers people to improve their energy, create healthy lifestyle habits and improve their holistic wellness through movement and exercise. It’s for people of all ages and abilities. We do this through personal training, wellness coaching, providing group and individual opportunities using science-based practice and education, both indoors and without walls. We pride ourselves in meeting people wherever they are at.

Come and join us for our classes and programs or schedule a wellness coaching or personal training session. As long as we get some more snow and the ski trails open, we will offer ski lessons Monday evenings and family snowshoeing on the second and fourth Saturdays of January through March. Please contact us at info@e3twinports.com and tell us what you are interested in doing.

Q: This is the time of year when people pledge to get more active. What kind of advice do you have for sticking with the program?

A: I have been a part of many conversations related to New Year’s resolutions in the past few weeks, and many people have told me that they stopped making them because they always fail. My question then is: Was that goal truly meaningful to you, or was it a goal that you thought you should make for some other reason or person?

There is a lot of research on the psychology of goal-setting, and the best advice I can give is to create a meaningful goal or resolution, and then make a thought-out plan. In my experience, that seems to be the biggest challenge that people have. After you create your goal, and make a realistic plan, find support and go for it. This sounds so easy, but it is not simple.

I believe that everyone has the power to accomplish their life goals. We just need to make our personal maps realistic. Lifestyle change is a journey, and every journey requires a map and support.

Q: What has influenced you toward your passion for an active lifestyle? Did you know early on that this was the path you would take?

A: I grew up in Michigan farm country in the Upper Peninsula with many acres to run around. Ever since I can remember I have been the happiest when I am outside and active, whether it is playing on the monkey bars, doing gymnastics, playing in the snow, skiing or playing sports.

As I grew older, my need for movement only grew, and I realized how important this active lifestyle was for me personally. My family encouraged my passion for fitness, and my parents helped to guide me into a career that I could help people to move. For the past 18 years, I have been helping people of all ages and abilities with physical movement — from physical therapy and working in the school systems, to personal training and outdoor education and guiding.

My areas of interest have expanded and evolved over the years, and I am so grateful that I can use this passion to help others learn an appreciation for the outdoors, an active lifestyle, and the power of movement in holistic health.

Q: What’s your favorite outdoor activity and why?

A: This weekend I woke up with a stiff neck and shoulders, but wasn’t going to alter my plans for an all-day excursion in the Boundary Waters for fishing. It was a gorgeous day and a wonderful hike through snow-filled trees. I just smiled and loved every minute of it. On our drive back to Duluth, my husband pointed out my ability to turn my head. With a big smile I said, “I know, it was our time outside that did it.”

Maybe it is my Yooper upbringing, maybe it is my Finnish blood, but whatever it is, it doesn’t matter. My very favorite outdoor activity is anything that lasts from sunup to sundown and takes place among snow-filled trees.

Q: You are having a dinner party for four and can invite any three people — alive or dead, famous or not. Who would they be and why?

A: My Grandpa Larson would be there. He was a man of few words, but taught me the power of support and leading by doing. He shared his passion for cross-country skiing with all of his grandkids, shared his stories of the Birkie (American Birkebeiner race) and stories about his ski excursion across the entire Upper Peninsula with a couple of his buddies. He certainly had a significant influence on who I am today.

My husband Randy and I are still newlyweds. He is a student at Lake Superior College and has been my rock in supporting my decision to open E3 Twin Ports. He has encouraged me to take the leap of faith, to jump in and follow my passions and dreams.

I would also invite (book character) Amelia Bedelia. She has an incredible ability to be perfectly proud of who she is, she spreads an amazing amount of belly laughter, and, since this is a dinner party, I really want to taste her lemon meringue pie.

Compiled and edited by Mike Creger. Do you have a good candidate for Five Questions, let us know by emailing features@duluthnews.com or calling (218) 723-5218.