The migration of lawyers continued last week, in smaller firms as well as the largest. The moves occurred in many practice groups, from labor and employment to trusts and estates.

DLA Piper Hires Four Employment Lawyers From Kasowitz Benson

DLA Piper LLP has added Eric Wallach, Brian Kaplan, Joseph Piesco and Daniel Turinsky as partners in the firm’s employment practice in the New York office. The four lawyers previously practiced at Kasowitz Benson Torres & Friedman LLP.

The group has defended cases in federal and state courts and in arbitration proceedings. The lawyers’ practices include litigation prevention, internal compliance audits and anti-harassment training, and negotiation and drafting of employment, consulting and severance agreements. They represent employers, corporate boards and special committees in internal investigations of suspected misconduct, and they represent executives before law enforcement and regulatory agencies.

Baker Donelson Adds Seven Attorneys to Its Office in New Orleans

Seven attorneys are joining the New Orleans office of Baker, Donelson, Bearman, Caldwell & Berkowitz PC. Four of the attorneys -- Kerry Miller, Paul Thibodeaux, Daniel Dysart and James Parish -- previously practiced with Frilot LLC and will join Baker Donelson’s business litigation department.

Miller joins as a shareholder and specializes in mass tort and class action litigation. Thibodeaux, who also joins as a shareholder, focuses on energy, environmental and construction law, as well as mass tort and class action litigation and intellectual property.

Matthew Chester joins the firm’s business litigation and white-collar crime and government-investigations practice as of counsel. He previously worked as an assistant U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of Louisiana. Anne Raymond, also of counsel, joins the firm’s real estate and finance group. She previously chaired the real estate foreclosure and default servicing department at Jackson & McPherson LLC.

Skadden Hires Trusts and Estates Attorney in New York

Ivan Taback, a trusts and estates attorney, has joined Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP as a partner in the firm’s trusts and estates group in the New York. Taback previously was a partner at Proskauer Rose LLP.

Taback’s practice focuses on high-net-worth clients in the areas of federal estate, gift and generation-skipping taxes, charitable trusts, estate and trust administration, and fiduciary litigation.

Hogan Lovells Adds Health and Human Services Lawyer

Hogan Lovells has added Ken Choe, formerly a top-ranking lawyer at the Department of Health and Human Services, as a partner.

Choe was a member of the President Barack Obama’s health-care reform team. At HHS, he was involved in enacting, implementing and defending the Affordable Care Act. He also served as lead counsel on matters involving Medicare, Medicaid and health plans offered on newly created insurance exchanges.

Manatt Adds Real Estate Lawyer and Regulatory Attorney

Andrew Schultz has joined Manatt, Phelps & Phillips LLP as a partner in the firm’s real estate and land use practice as a partner in New York. He previously was a partner at Debevoise & Plimpton LLP in New York and has experience in sales, acquisitions, financings, leasing, joint ventures and real estate investment funds.

Katherine Winfree has joined the Washington office as a partner in the state attorneys general practice group. Winfree previously served as chief of staff for the Federal Communications Commission’s enforcement bureau. At the FCC, she was a policy adviser to the bureau chief and provided oversight and guidance on projects relating to communications and technology law and regulation.

Tax Attorney Returns to Steptoe & Johnson From Treasury

Lisa Zarlenga is returning to Steptoe & Johnson LLP as co-chair of the firm’s tax group and a member of the government affairs and public policy group, based in Washington.

For the past three years, she has served as tax legislative counsel in the Office of Tax Policy in the U.S. Treasury Department. She advised on a range of tax policy issues and supervised a staff of 16 lawyers. Zarlenga previously practiced at Steptoe for 15 years and originally became a partner in 2003.

Holland & Knight Hires Consumer Protection Attorney

Governmental consumer protection investigations attorney Anthony DiResta has joined Holland & Knight LLP as a partner in the firm’s Washington office. DiResta, who is a former Federal Trade Commission regional director, was previously a partner at Winston & Strawn LLP.

DiResta focuses on investigations involving allegations of deceptive, unfair or abusive business practices and charges of false advertising, and on privacy and data security matters. He has represented companies and individuals in investigations and litigations pursued by federal and state agencies.

WilmerHale Hires Privacy and Cybersecurity Lawyer

Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Door LLP has hired D. Reed Freeman, who specializes in privacy and cybersecurity, as well as in mobile, online and social media advertising law issues, as a partner and co-chair of the firm’s cybersecurity, privacy and communications practice in Washington.

Freeman, who also defends clients in Federal Trade Commission consumer protection investigations, was previously a partner at Morrison & Foerster LLP.