Sen. Bernie Sanders made a campaign stop in Vado, New Mexico, Saturday to rally his supporters. Before his speech though, Sanders sat down with KFOX14 to talk about immigration reform.

"What I want to see is an immigration reform policy that unites families and does not divide families," Sanders told KFOX14's Meghan Lopez during a one-on-one interview.

Sanders' reform plan includes a path to citizenship for the millions of undocumented immigrants already living in the U.S., an end to detention centers, a modernized visa system and a secure border.

"I am against the president's deportation policies," Sanders said.

He also wants to offer health care to undocumented immigrants already living in the U.S. through the Affordable Care Act.

In order to pay for all of these changes, he said he wants to tax big banks and America's most wealthy.

"Many of the wealthiest people and the largest corporations are not by any means paying their fair share of taxes. When you have the 20 wealthiest people in this country with more wealth than the bottom 150 million, in my view it is appropriate to ask the wealthy to start paying their fair share," Sanders said.

But, Sanders has come under fire by Democratic rival Hilary Clinton in the past for his stance on immigration. Sanders voted against a reform bill in 2007 that had widespread support from Democrats. At the time, Sanders said he was worried the bill would expand guest workers in the U.S., lower wages and push American workers out of some jobs.

Then in 2013, he voted for a reform bill but opposed a section of it that would allow for more low-skill guest workers to stay in the country. On his website, Sanders argued that guest workers are often exploited, subjected to inhumane conditions and not given the medical treatment they need.

These days, Sanders says he will do whatever it takes to get immigration reform moving.

"I will use whatever powers I have, executive powers with the office of the president, to make the situation better," he said.

Sanders said he knows the thought of using executive action immediately while in the White House sounds controversial, but it might be the only way to get things done.

"We have Republicans not only refusing to take up the issue but who are being incredibly obstructionist in so many ways the Americans are clear that we need immigration reform and if Congress does not do it, the only alternative is that the president uses the legal powers that he has in order to do the best he can," Sanders said.

The Vermont senator also wants to do away with the North American Free Trade Agreement as part of his reform plan.

"I happen to believe that NAFTA has done a lot of harm to workers in United States it is harming for people in Mexico and I think it is an agreement that needs to be renegotiated and, in a very significant way, re-created. I have voted against every one of these trade agreements because they have given corporations the opportunity to shut down in America and move to low-wage countries all over the world," he said.

Sanders' immigration policy is gaining support among Latino voters, but it isn't the only policy of his that's appealing to this voting bloc.

"Beyond immigration reform, we are fighting to raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour. We are fighting to make public colleges and universities tuition free and paying for that by taxing Wall Street speculation. We are fighting to have the United States join the rest of the industrialized world and guarantee healthcare to all people as a right and we're fighting to rebuild our infrastructure and our roads and bridges and creating 13 million decent paying jobs," he said.

Sanders believes a combination of his economic and immigration policies are what speak the most to Latino voters.

In the end, Sanders said during his speech, he won't be able to accomplish all of the changes he wants by acting alone. Instead, he's going to need the support of the masses to institute true change.

"These are tough times in United States for working families and if you want to candidate who is prepared to stand up to Wall Street and to the greed of corporate America then I think Bernie Sanders is the candidate," he said.