In recent years, the number of kids being put in the foster care system has gone up. Now there is an extraordinary need for foster and adoptive parents.

"There has always been a need, but I've been with the department for 24 years and I honestly have never seen the need be as significant as it is right now," explains Allen Hunter who is a regional homefinding specialist out of the Department of Health and Humane Services office in Lewisburg.

He says more than 4,400 children in West Virginia are in placement and over 1,200 of them are in the southern part of the state.

"It is a crisis because the need has been so great," he explains. "There have been so many children in foster care at this point that the providers that we do have, almost all of them are at capacity or close to capacity."

The Reyes family is one of the homes at capacity. They have five foster kids and an adopted son named Randy.

They were asked to take in Randy when he was 18 months old. He is the son of a distant relative. Both parents had drug problems and there were even allegations that his mother tried to sell him.

"A couple days turns into a couple weeks, and we ended up adopting him," explained Inez Reyes. She says they couldn't love him more if they had given birth to him.

But she says taking him in changed their lives forever. They were planning for retirement and waiting for grandchildren. But while taking the foster care classes to get Randy, they realized just how bad the need is. Over the past three years, they've taken in more than a dozen foster children.

"They give me love, just as I give them love," she explains. "Yes it's hard when they come in and then they leave your home, it's heart wrenching for you at times, but I feel like I'm the one that's blessed."

Reyes says she now wishes she would have been helping foster kids her whole life.

She does admit, however, that this job isn't for everyone. She says it requires a big heart, a lot of patience and understanding, especially because of the background many of the kids come from.

But she says giving these kids a chance at a stable home can help not only change their lives, but change the whole community.

"The cycle of abuse, drug abuse and domestic violence can be broken, because if you're raised in that, you know nothing more than that. And that's how you're going to act. So help us. Help us to help these children."

If you would like to help, there are foster care classes that go on at many of the local DHHR offices, including Beckley, Princeton and Lewisburg.

Lewisburg has one beginning April 9th at 6 p.m. and they are free to anyone interested between ages 21 and 65.

You can learn more through Mission WV and you can reach them by calling (866)-CALL-MWV.

Or you can contact Allen Hunter to answer any questions by calling (304)-647-7476.