The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) announced Friday $94 million of Affordable Care Act funding for substance abuse addiction. The funding is part of a push to address rising opioid abuse, of drugs like heroin and prescription pain medications, and deaths from overdoses.

“The opioid epidemic is one of the most pressing public health issues in the United States,” says HHS Regional Director Pamela Roshell. “Drug overdose deaths are the leading cause of injury deaths in the U.S., more than car crashes.”

But only $731,250 of the funding announced Friday is going to clinics in Georgia, and none of that money is allocated for metro Atlanta.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) considers Georgia a state with a significant increase in deaths from drug overdose, with a 10.2 percent increase in deaths from 2013 to 2014. Georgia saw 1,206 deaths due to drug overdose in 2014.

HHS did not provide information on which Georgia clinics applied for funding. Two Georgia health centers that will receive funds are Albany Area Primary Health Care, Inc. in Albany and Neighborhood Improvement Project, Inc. in Augusta.

In HSS Region IV, which includes Georgia, Alabama, Florida, Kentucky, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina and Tennessee, there were 9,000 deaths attributed to drug overdoses in 2014.

Opioids contribute to the majority of drug overdoses, according to the CDC. The organization says deaths due to opioids have quadrupled from 2000-2014, leading to a rising concern about specifically targeting opioid abuse and services that aim to treat those addicted to opioids.

The money allocated by HHS and the Health Resources Services Administration will go toward health centers around the nation that provide services for those suffering from drug addiction. The funding will increase screenings for substance use disorders, increase medication-assisted treatment (MAT) for patients and fund training and educational resources at clinics.

Providing health centers with money to use MAT in treatment for substance addiction is an opportunity to give services that many areas previously could not afford.