The Washington Post via Getty Images

Rep. Trey Radel, the Florida Republican congressman arrested for cocaine possession in October, plans to return to work next week after a brief stint in rehab. But Republicans in his home state aren't exactly rooting for his comeback on Capitol Hill, with a super PAC raising more than $1 million for a potential primary challenge to Radel in 2014.

Values are Vital PAC hauled in $1,010,000 in December from two donors, according to a campaign finance report submitted to the Federal Election Commission, first reported by Bloomberg News. Ronald Firman, the group's treasurer, donated $525,000, while Las Vegas lawyer Martin Burns contributed $485,000.

Values are Vital was created shortly after Radel pleaded guilty in late November to possessing cocaine. The freshman lawmaker was busted Oct. 29 after purchasing cocaine from an undercover officer at a restaurant in Washington.

Radel confirmed Thursday that he would resume work in Washington next Tuesday, after spending less than a month in a rehab facility in Naples, Fla.

"I look forward to getting back to work next week representing my neighbors in Southwest Florida as they face the burdens of Obamacare, a jobless recovery, and a federal government that continues to spend more than it takes in," Radel said in a statement.

Values are Vital chairman Anthony Farhat told the Tampa Bay Times he remained unconvinced Radel could fulfill his role in Congress.

"He created his own demise," Farhat told the paper in an interview published on Wednesday. “I’m not trying to scare or intimate anybody. I’m just trying to do what I can as a business owner in this district. … I’m trying to say, 'Hey, I don’t want to see our district continue to make mistakes.'"

Farhat donated to former state Rep. Paige Kreegel in the 2012 GOP congressional primary that Radel won. He has declined to endorse any candidate on behalf of the super PAC. Kreegal has not said whether he intends to run. Former Republican Rep. Connie Mack hasn't ruled out running for Radel's seat.

Other Florida officials have called for Radel's resignation, including Gov. Rick Scott R and the Republican Party of Florida. Radel also remains under House Ethics Committee investigation for his drug possession.

Also on HuffPost: Rick Scott Controversies Rick Scott Controversies

1 of 19 Doctored Newspaper Front Page Florida Governor Rick Scott's Facebook managers posted an image containing a doctored Miami Herald headline , prompting the paper's managing editor to demand it be removed. The post, since deleted from the Governor's social media page, swapped in the headline "New Law Helps Put Floridians Back To Work" in place of the paper's original headline from 2007, "Murders Highlight Rise In Crime In Guatemala" -- making it appear an editorial from the governor had run above the fold on the Herald's front page. Share this slide:

AP