Editor's note: This is the seventeenth entry in the writer's year-long project to read one book about each of the U.S. Presidents by Election Day 2016. You can also follow Marcus' progress at the @44in52 Twitter account and with this 44 in 52 Spreadsheet.

I really have a way of getting ahead of myself.

Case in point: Just two books ago, I implied that James Buchanan was the worst president ever. That was before I read about Andrew Johnson.

"Hi, I'm Andrew Johnson, 17th president of the United States and a virulent racist!" — 44 in 52 (@44in52) March 26, 2016

Case in point number two: In my last entry, on Abraham Lincoln, I waxed lyrical about change. But the change Lincoln brought was a gentle breeze compared to Hurricane Andrew Johnson, who had all the grace of a drunken spider monkey in taking over the White House after Lincoln's assassination.

At least in choosing David O. Stewart's Impeached, I got something of a reprieve. The book focuses on Johnson's trial rather than his entire term in the White House, which would undoubtedly have been even more of a grim read.

Of course, any book about the impeachment of a president will bring to mind Bill Clinton, the only other U.S. president besides Johnson to ever be impeached. But that isn't the only thing that might remind you of presidents in the modern era — there's also a lot of contentious fighting with an intransigent Congress.

That's not to say Johnson was a noble guy. He was pretty terrible on a lot of things, even from the get-go.

The first story about Johnson in both the Lincoln and the Johnson bios is how he got drunk and tanked his inaugural speech. Ominous. — 44 in 52 (@44in52) March 26, 2016

Johnson, a Democrat, was added to the Republican ticket as Lincoln's running mate in 1864; it was an attempt at national unity. Johnson had been appointed military governor of Tennessee by Lincoln after the Union took the state back from the Confederacy.

But the ploy blew up in the Republicans' faces quicker than they could have thought.

After Lincoln's assassination, Johnson got right to work mucking up Republican plans for reconstruction. He allowed former Confederate leaders to return to power by saying it was a state matter, not a federal matter.

Johnson basically handing Southern states back to former Confederates and then saying, basically, "What can ya do?" — 44 in 52 (@44in52) March 27, 2016

While slavery was outlawed across the nation, many of those southern states enacted new "Black Codes" which, while not slavery, sure as hell didn't push the South towards black suffrage, which Lincoln had called for before his death.

TL;DR Andrew Johnson Reconstruction Plan: ¯\_(ツ)_/¯ — 44 in 52 (@44in52) March 27, 2016

The icing on the cake? Johnson made a breathtakingly belligerent speech on George Washington's birthday in 1866, in which he accused some of the radical Republicans in Congress, including influential Pennsylvania representative Thaddeus Stevens, of plotting against him.

There followed a fascinating back-and-forth battle between the chief executive and a baffled Congress — the kind that makes the standoffs of the Obama administration feel like Little League games.

Bills were followed by vetoes which were followed by veto overrides, with particularly contentious wrangling over bills protecting newly-freed slaves (and blacks across the country in general).

Stevens, growing ill, found the energy from all of his rage to lead a spirited campaign to impeach Johnson.

Pretty good overview of Johnson. I'll give him this over Buchanan: if he was gonna be terrible, he was hell-bent. pic.twitter.com/2qa7hzmvZh — 44 in 52 (@44in52) March 28, 2016

Despite all that political warfare, I found Stewart's book a let-down in the end. Not that this is necessarily his fault; he does a pretty good job capturing the multiple figures at play here, especially Johnson and Stevens.

But while the inspiration to impeach Johnson came from white hot political hatred, the means used to actually impeach Johnson were technicalities surrounding the Tenure of Office Act.

When you've lived through a presidential impeachment spurred by an office sex scandal, the bar is set pretty high. I know how horrible I am for admitting that.

But for anyone who lived through the salacious Clinton impeachment, it's really hard to get worked up about protocol surrounding the appointment of a Secretary of War. Compare that to this:

Sure, Andrew Johnson was a terrible president whose decisions were terrible for the country. But depending on your political leanings, you probably think that of any number of presidents.

But Congress's attempts to twist the definition of "high crimes and misdemeanors" in their attempt to impeach Johnson is nowhere near as surreal as Clinton calling into question the definition of "is."

Johnson, like Clinton, was ultimately acquitted — though for Johnson, it was by the skin of his teeth as the Senate was just one vote shy of the necessary number for a guilty verdict. And Republicans were so vehemently set on impeaching Johnson that investigations were made into accusations of bribery for seven Republican Senators who voted for Johnson's acquittal.

The Tenure of Office Act was enacted by Congress specifically to hog-tie Johnson's cabinet appointments. It was repealed just 20 years later. Regardless of his policies, it's hard to see his impeachment as anything more than political revenge (more akin to the recent, numerous — and pointless — attempts by the GOP to repeal Obamacare).

After Lincoln, after the Civil War, at a particularly vulnerable time for the U.S., the wrong-headedness of Johnson is jarring. But the idea that a president could be impeached because Congress is upset at him is one I hope we all now reject.

Something to keep in mind during this era of partisan rhetoric: Being a jerk isn't an impeachable offense.

One final note on Johnson: an example of how you can't remove someone from office for being an asshole. — 44 in 52 (@44in52) April 3, 2016

Scorecard:

Days to read Washington: 16

Days to read Adams: 11

Days to read Jefferson: 10

Days to read Madison: 13

Days to read Monroe: 6

Days to read J. Q. Adams: 10

Days to read Jackson: 11

Days to read Van Buren: 9

Days to read Harrison: 6

Days to read Tyler: 3

Days to read Polk: 8

Days to read Taylor: 8

Days to read Fillmore: 14

Days to read Pierce: 1

Days to read Buchanan: 1

Days to read Lincoln: 12

Days to read Johnson: 8

Days behind schedule: 11