Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas), and his wife Heidi watch as daughter Caroline, 6, center, high-fives members of the crowd after Cruz announced his campaign for president, Monday, March 23, 2015, at Liberty University, founded by the late Rev. Jerry Falwell, in Lynchburg, Va. Cruz, who announced his candidacy on twitter in the early morning hours, is the first major candidate in the 2016 race for president. Also pictured is Catherine Cruz, 4, left. (AP Photo/Andrew Harnik)

In American politics today, the Republican Party is the party of infighting. From primary challenges for incumbents to battles over tactics in Congress (see: the 2013 shutdown), Republicans love to fight with themselves. And the conservative wing of the party often gets its way.

Ipso facto, the Republican Party is more extreme than the Democratic Party -- or at least more polarized. Right?

Not necessarily. As John Sides wrote on the Monkey Cage blog Sunday, the religious freedom fight is a good example of this phenomenon. While Republicans are surely conflicted on laws like the one in Indiana, so in fact are Democrats -- and in very similar numbers.

From Sides:

Yes, Republicans are more divided than Democrats on basic support of same-sex marriage. ... But Democrats are actually slightly more divided than Republicans on the religious freedom measures. In this Pew survey, Republicans split 68 percent to 28 percent in favor of allowing businesses to refuse services for same-sex couples, while Democrats split 64 percent to 33 percent in favor of requiring business to provide services to all customers.

Yet only one party had its internecine battle on display for the nation to see: the GOP. And it was just the latest example of Republicans having it out in a very public manner. While Democrats used to be the party of infighting, that's no longer the case.

And it's not just religious freedom. In fact, the new Washington Post-ABC poll tested a number of issues to see just how polarized the bases of either party were.

The chart below shows what percentage of the two parties' bases feels "extremely" or "very" strongly that they would like to have a candidate who has a given position on a given issue. So on Obamacare, it would be the percentage of Democrats who feel "extremely" or "very" strongly that the law should be kept, while it would be the percentage of Republicans who feel that strongly that the law should be repealed. Ditto when it comes to climate change (Democrats favoring government action, Republicans opposing government action), the Iran agreement (Democrats for, Republicans against), a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants (you get the idea) and the no-new tax pledge (which we addressed last week).

As you can see, there isn't a whole lot of difference when it comes to how strongly the bases of the two parties feel on these issues. And Democrats are significantly more forceful when it comes to the no-new-tax pledge and climate change.

[Guess who doesn’t much care for that no-new-tax pledge: Republicans]

And yet, despite just 21 percent of Republicans being strongly opposed to government action on climate change, that's the GOP's modus operandi -- which is a pretty good microcosm of the party at large. There is a huge premium in the GOP on purity and not letting anyone (a primary challenger, for instance) out-conservative you -- even when the base's position isn't one shared or emphasized by huge swaths of the party. The no-new-tax pledge is similar; just 19 percent of Republicans say it's at least very important that candidates sign it, and yet just about every Republican does so.

And it's in large part because conservatives and the tea party (and Grover Norquist on the tax pledge) have instilled the fear of God in Republican members of Congress by defeating just a handful of them in primaries over the last few elections. On the Democratic side, there simply isn't the same kind of fear and intraparty activism.

[Climate change is more of a priority for voters than you might think]

Which is a big reason why the GOP today is so torn between pragmatism/the establishment and purity/the conservative base. It's not necessarily because the Republican base is that much more right-wing than the Democrats are left-wing -- though reasonable people can disagree on that point -- it's more because the right wing has found a way to be much more dominant within its party than its counterpart on the left.

To borrow a basketball metaphor, the conservative base is like a small forward who grabs lots of rebounds and blocks shots -- it plays bigger than it is.