Would you believe me if I said the Koch brothers were trying to do something altruistic for the Latino community, a demographic on the rise that tends to vote overwhelmingly blue?

What conclusions would you reach if I told you the Koch brothers were funding a “grassroots” organization founded to “empower Hispanics” and advance “freedom and prosperity?”

If it sounds suspicious, keep reading.

Perhaps there are some who could look at the LIBRE Initiative, a group backed by Koch bucks, and take it at face value. After all, the group has, according to BuzzFeed, distributed food to Hispanic parishioners in need at a San Antonio church.

But for all the LIBRE Initiative gives, there is also a price and they call that “loyalty.”

[moko_youtube src=”wuQnKoSayoQ”]

Before Obama’s executive action on immigration, savvy conservatives identified a gap they could exploit. They could build goodwill with Latinos frustrated with the Obama administration, assisting them with smaller issues such as driver’s licenses and tax preparation, while promoting the Koch agenda.

Make no mistake. The end goal of the LIBRE Initiative is to disenfranchise Latino voters and to turn them against other Latinos on the issues that matter to them.

The LIBRE Initiative bills itself as bipartisan, but in fact they support conservative policies that hurt Latinos. They oppose the Affordable Care Act, which offers guaranteed access to HPV testing and mammograms for Latinas.

They also claim to be for immigration reform, but LIBRE Initiative director Daniel Garza called Obama’s executive action “pandering” and “dangerous,” and he opposes DAPA, a program that extends protections to the families of DREAMers.

The Associated Press sums up the LIBRE Initiative thusly:

“Its organizers pitch conservative ideals while offering tutorials on U.S. immigration law, support for overhauling the broken immigration system that stops short of campaigning for the Senate’s bipartisan bill and collecting donations for the unaccompanied children crossing the United States-Mexico border illegally. In effect, it is a shadow GOP — one with a gentle emphasis on social services and assimilation.”

Here’s the long and short of it: The LIBRE Initiative’s strategy is to provide short-term solutions for the problems conservative policies created in the first place so that they might win over Latino voters.

And to that we Latinos must say, “No gracias.”

H/T: Associated Press, The Washington Post, BuzzFeed, Media Matters