Buy Photo . (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

The issue of nutrients (especially nitrate) in Iowa's waters has two distinct, opposing viewpoints, which have been well articulated and do not need repeating. Both viewpoints appear to accept, without debate, the benchmarks that define nutrient problems. Those benchmarks are the 10 milligrams per liter nitrate drinking-water standard and the 45 percent nutrient-reduction goal established by EPA. Discussion herein will be limited to the nitrate drinking-water standard, which is arguably the major nutrient issue in Iowa's waters.

Nitrate is naturally occurring and is food for plants, which in turn become food for humans. The human body even produces nitrate from nitrogen in the air. A person on a vegetarian diet with no nitrate in their drinking water consumes more nitrate than a person on a normal diet with 10 mg/L of nitrate in their drinking water. Unlike so many synthetic chemicals we hear about, nitrate is naturally occurring and well known to the human body.

Dermal contact with water (e.g., swimming, bathing) containing even extremely high nitrate levels is no more harmful than swimming in the ocean.

Buy Photo Bob Drustrup (Photo: Register file)

The federal (EPA) drinking-water standard for nitrate is based solely on prevention of blue-baby syndrome. Blue-baby syndrome can be fatal if untreated, but can also be easily cured if treated in a timely manner, i.e., after an infant starts to turn blue. Blue-baby syndrome affects only infants until their digestive systems have matured, usually by the age of 6 months. It is a much greater threat when in conjunction with bacterial infection. The incidence of blue-baby syndrome is rare.

Blue-baby syndrome is a greater threat to infants who drink water from private water supplies that do not disinfect and are not required to monitor for nitrate or bacteria. Public water supplies are required to disinfect and routinely monitor for bacteria and nitrate. Fortunately, local health officials have worked with private water supplies to identify and prevent nitrate problems. It is not a major expense to use bottled water for infant formula. Public water supplies do not have this flexibility and are required to provide every drop of water in compliance with the nitrate drinking-water standard.

Nitrate has also been suggested to cause cancer. However, the 2011 report on nitrate and nitrite in drinking water by the World Health Organization found no such association. The repeated, unsupported inference that nitrate causes cancer does not make it true.

A plethora of other details regarding the nature of nitrate contamination have not been addressed in the media's portrayal of the issue. Examples include:

•Many drinking-water supplies are affected by nitrate from localized sources of contamination (e.g., fertilizer dealerships, waste lagoons, septic tanks, fertilizer spills, feedlots). Resolving nitrate problems in surface water will do almost nothing to help such water supplies.

•The per capita cost to deal with nitrate in drinking water is a far greater financial burden on a small public water supply than it is to a large supply such as Des Moines.

•Nitrate problems in public water supplies are not all that commonplace. In 2013, only 10 of the 1,899 public-water supplies in Iowa had a violation of the nitrate standard. (Note: 16 public water supplies have treatment systems to prevent nitrate violations, including Des Moines, and others have installed new wells or have connected to a rural water system due to high nitrate.)

•The amount of nitrate returned to the Raccoon River from the treatment facilities of the Des Moines Water Works in 2013 accounted for only about 1/4 of 1 percent of the total nitrate load in the river at that time.

•A 1 percent fee on all nitrogen fertilizer would generate about $10 million per year, which would go a long way in resolving nitrate problems in public-water supplies in Iowa.

Attempting to resolve a problem that has not been well characterized is a recipe for failure. We need to recognize that nitrate is not very toxic. Let's not treat the nitrate issue like other political issues where only the opposing viewpoints are considered. Let's not let nitrate in drinking water be a decisive issue when a reasonable resolution to the problem may actually exist.

BOB DRUSTRUP of Des Moines is a retired environmental engineer. Contact: bob.igwa@mediacombb.net

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1CB1ZOV