While it was unknown if the feathered fowl in the annual Great Topeka Duck Race had undergone testing for performance enhancers this year, it was clear Saturday afternoon that none of the participants would be strong enough to break free of the large flock.

Aboard the floating dock that the ducks were slowly pushing toward as they struggled with a cross wind on Lake Shawnee, volunteers discussed how in most years there are one or two swimmers that definitively leave behind their 12,000 cohorts in a dash to the finish.

Not so Saturday afternoon at the 18th annual event, which saw all but 40 of the 12,000 ducks adopted out for the benefit race.

Organizers say the turnout wasn’t as good as in years past — a few hundred people sweated through 100-degree temperatures — but the shoreline south of the lake’s swim beach was covered by families cheering on the ducks.

“I’m glad that people came out to enjoy the heat with us,” said Katie Beach, marketing director of the duck race, which benefits the programs of Big Brothers & Big Sisters of Topeka and the Sertoma Clubs of Topeka. “It’s a great cause and it all goes back to the community.”

Beach thought the crowd was “pretty good” given the scorching temperatures.

The ducks chugged toward the dock as Shawnee County District Court Judge Mark Braun laid flat on his stomach to eyeball the tight finish among a grouping of several of the waterfowl.

He plucked them out of Lake Shawnee one by one in order, commenting that a fighter ended up on its side but still forged a spot in the top 35 he had pulled out before nets swooped in to retrieve the rest of the field.

Top prize this year was a 2004 Ford Mustang convertible — the 40th anniversary edition — with less than 60,000 miles on it and a retail value of around $20,000.

Laird Noller Ford annually donates a vehicle as the event’s crown jewel.

Other prizes included:

■ Second place — 52 movie passes at Hollywood Theaters, Topeka.

■ Third place — $500 shopping spree at Hy-Vee.

■ Fourth place — Four season tickets to the Kansas Koyotes arena football team for the 2013-14 season.

■ Fifth place — Flat screen TV donated by One Way Custom Paint and Collision.

And, as always, there was a shot at a $1 million prize.

Families were able to enjoy inflatable bounce houses with slides, a petting zoo, pony rides, various games, crafts, and food and drink.

Kellie Stokes stood next to the railing of a ride where kids were seated in swings that spun in a circle. Her two sons Tommy, 9, and Alex, 4, were laughing side-by-side going around as Tommy successfully grabbed Alex’s hand.

Kellie said it was their second year attending the event, which ran from noon to 5 p.m. with the duck drop at 4. She brought her kids out to watch the duck race and to play on the rides.

“I love it,” Kellie said. “We have a lot of fun.”

Tommy said his favorite attractions were the bounce houses because “you get to slide and bounce.”

In the event’s past 17 years, the fundraiser has generated more than $600,000.

Previous beneficiaries have included Easter Seals/Capper Foundation, Children’s Miracle Network, The Villages, the Marian Clinic, Meals on Wheels and Head Start programs.