Topics: 2016 Elections, 2016 GOP primary, abortion rights, aol_on, Conservatives, Kelly Ayotte, Planned Parenthood, Reproductive choice, Republicans, Ted Cruz, Elections News, Politics News

We’re now just a few short days from yet another government shutdown and, once again, Sen. Ted Cruz is helping to nudge the Republican Party over the political cliff. The GOP and the conservative movement are grinding through an internecine war over what to do in response to a series of “sting” videos claiming (without evidence) that Planned Parenthood engages in the illegal trafficking of tissues obtained from aborted fetuses. Hard-line conservatives like Cruz are pushing for Republicans in Congress to strip Planned Parenthood of its federal funding by any means necessary, including a government shutdown. Other Republicans are not willing to go that far, recognizing the futility and political peril of a shutdown.

One of those anti-shutdown Republicans is Sen. Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire, who is up for reelection in her blue state this cycle. She’s written a letter to Cruz, asking her Senate colleague, a 2016 White House hopeful, to explain why, exactly, he thinks a shutdown over Planned Parenthood will work when the Democrats retain filibuster power, President Obama’s veto looms beyond that, and the 2013 shutdown over Obamacare failed so spectacularly:

Given the challenges we face at home and abroad, I oppose risking a government shutdown, particularly when it appears there is no chance of achieving a successful result. Nevertheless, as I understand it, you have been circulating a letter to our colleagues asking them to oppose any government funding bill that continues to authorize funding for Planned Parenthood. Since we only received 53 votes on the previous vote to redirect money away from Planned Parenthood, what is your strategy to succeed in actually defunding Planned Parenthood? How do we get 60 votes? And if for some reason there were 60 votes, how do we get 67 votes in the Senate to overcome a Presidential veto?

The point Ayotte is making is that there is no strategy. Her blunt assessment of the insurmountable obstacles standing between the Republican Congress and a defunded Planned Parenthood make that inescapably clear. But that doesn’t mean Cruz isn’t going to emerge victorious from this fight. In fact, in his own mind he’s already won.

There is no actual substantive ideological difference among the Republicans fighting over Planned Parenthood and government funding. They all oppose abortion rights and they would all prefer to see the women’s health organization stripped of its federal funding. Where they differ is a question of tactics. Republican leaders like Mitch McConnell want to put the Planned Parenthood question off to another time because they understand that fighting this battle now only jeopardizes the GOP’s chances of taking the White House and holding the Senate, which are necessary conditions to effectively attacking the group’s funding stream. Hardcore conservatives like the House Freedom Caucus want to fight now because they’re angry, and when you’re angry the only proper thing to do is to punch something over and over, even if it’s your own face.