Praising Gov. Dannel Malloy's "progressive priorities," President Obama has invited the Connecticut Democrat to sit in the guest box of First Lady Michelle Obama at the State of the Union address on Tuesday.

The White House, in announcing the selection of Malloy and others Saturday evening, was effusive: "The guests personify President Obama's time in office and, most importantly, they represent who we are as Americans: inclusive and compassionate, innovative and courageous.''

Malloy, who has been dogged by low approval ratings and mired in a state budget controversy in Connecticut, said he was honored to be picked by the president for this once-in-a-lifetime experience. "Connecticut has an amazing story to tell over the past few years — and we're proud to tell it,'' he said.

During his two terms in office, Malloy has embraced several of Obama's priorities, including stricter gun control laws, an overhaul of the criminal justice system, a higher minimum wage and paid sick leave. And as chairman of the Democratic Governors Association, he has emerged as a national spokesman for his party — even as his popularity in Connecticut has diminished. Last week, in a prominent editorial, the New York Times praised Malloy for his "reformist philosophy."

Obama will deliver the address to a joint session of Congress on Tuesday evening at 9 p.m.

"We're doing big things in Connecticut,'' Malloy said. "We've passed the smartest gun law in the nation, and we've helped drive a national conversation to help prevent gun violence. The President is taking action on this important issue just as we have in Connecticut — it is common sense to keep guns out of the hands of those who shouldn't have them. We're proud of that record, just as we are proud of the myriad other initiatives Connecticut has led on, from Second Chance to being the first state in the nation to raise the minimum wage to $10.10, to the first state to pass paid sick days, to launching a first-in-the-nation green bank to tackle global warming, to the best implementation of the Affordable Care Act in America."

The annual State of the Union address has evolved from a low-profile speech by the president into a political pageant with guests who serve as symbols to underscore key policy points.

Ever since Ronald Reagan, presidents have invited guests who exemplify their political priorities — and they often reference those guests during the speech. Obama administration officials declined to release the names of the other guests invited to sit with Michelle Obama. One seat in the box will be left empty to symbolize the toll gun violence has taken in the U.S., a White House spokesman said.

Members of Congress are each also permitted to bring one guest. Among the invitees of the Connecticut delegation are New Britain's police chief, a man who spent more than 16 years in prison for a crime he did not commit and the father of a child killed in the Sandy Hook school shootings.

2015 State Of The Union Olivier Douliery / TNS First lady Michelle Obama reacts as President Barack Obama delivers the State of The Union address on Tuesday, Jan. 20, 2015, in the House Chamber of the U.S. Capitol in Washington, D.C. First lady Michelle Obama reacts as President Barack Obama delivers the State of The Union address on Tuesday, Jan. 20, 2015, in the House Chamber of the U.S. Capitol in Washington, D.C. (Olivier Douliery / TNS) (Olivier Douliery / TNS)

Sen. Chris Murphy is bringing Mark Barden, whose son, Daniel, was among the 20 first-graders killed in the December 2012 shootings. Barden is the co-founder of Sandy Hook Promise, which is dedicated to preventing gun violence.

"Mark's resolve and resilience in the face of unthinkable horror inspires me each and every day. He turned anger and crushing grief into action and empowerment," said Murphy. "At President Obama's final State of the Union, where I hope he will challenge each and every member of Congress to finally stand up to the gun lobby and take action on the issue of gun violence, I'm proud that Mark will be by my side."

Rep. Elizabeth Esty is also bringing a guest related to the cause of gun control: She will be accompanied by New Britain police Chief James Wardwell.

"He has been a real leader on gun-violence prevention,'' Esty said. Wardwell's work in other areas of law enforcement, including heroin addiction and cyber crimes.

"He's a humble guy who is doing a great job,'' Esty said of Wardwell, a 22-year veteran of the department.

Rep. John Larson has invited James Tillman, who was released from prison in 2006 after serving 18 years for a rape he did not commit.

"He has been an inspiration and mentor to many in our community—including me,'' Larson said.

Democratic leaders in the House have called upon their members to bring a person of the Muslim faith to the State of the Union speech, as a rebuke of Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump, who has called for a ban on Muslims entering the U.S.

Rep. Joe Courtney invited Dr. Mohammed Qureshi of Marlborough, a Norwich primary care physician and the president of a mosque that was the target of an anti-Islamic attack, to be his guest.

Esty said she is "fully supportive" of the idea put forth by Democratic leaders but had already invited Chief Wardwell. "I had made my decision earlier,'' she said.

Sen. Richard Blumenthal, the ranking member on the Senate veterans affairs committee, generally invites a guest with military ties to join him at the State of the Union address and this year is no exception.

Blumenthal will be joined by retired Marine Lt. Col. Michael Zacchea of Brookfield. Zacchea, who received two Bronze Stars and a Purple Heart, now heads up the entrepreneurship boot camp for veterans with disabilities at the University of Connecticut.