In this world nothing can be said to be certain, except death and taxes.

— Benjamin Franklin

If you visit the ColoradoCare.org website in hopes of learning something about Amendment 69 — a proposed amendment to the Colorado constitution that will appear on your November 2016 ballot — you might come across this paragraph at the top of one of the informational pages:

ColoradoCare is a resident-owned, non-governmental health care financing system designed to ensure comprehensive, quality, accessible, lifetime health care for every Colorado resident. The benefit package would enhance the comprehensive health care services required by Medicaid and the Affordable Care Act. Premiums would be collected from Coloradans based on income, securing health care regardless of financial circumstance. This efficient, universal system would operate in the interests of Coloradans. By eliminating layers of bureaucracy and reducing administrative and other nonmedical costs, ColoradoCare would cover all residents and cost less than the current system.

I suspect most of my fellow Americans realize that our nation’s health care system is, at the moment, in a state of crisis. Health care in America is outrageously expensive, notoriously inefficient, and largely inaccessible to the poorest Americans. Many factors have helped create this crisis — including pharmaceutical and medical technology industries based almost entirely, it seems, on the acquisition of obscene corporate profits. Another factor is the structure of the American insurance industry.

If you visit the website hosted by the Independence Institute — a “non-partisan” Denver-based think tank that claims to “fight for freedom on the streets, in the statehouse, in the media, on the ballot, and in the courts” — you will read a somewhat different take on Amendment 69:

The ColoradoCare Amendment imposes the highest state income taxes in the nation. It creates a centrally run, monopoly health program. It does not guarantee health care or replace health insurance. Decades of evaluations of existing centrally planned monopoly health care programs show their costs are poorly controlled, they have long waiting lists for even basic care, limit access to new drugs, have miserable quality, and discourage new discoveries.

Both websites are in agreement on certain facts about Amendment 69. The proposed amendment would increase Colorado’s income tax rate from 4.63 percent to 14.63 percent — higher than any other state’s income tax — for self-employed individuals, farmers, landlords and others with “non-payroll” income. Employers would pay a new “payroll tax” of 6.67 percent, and employees would pay an additional 3.33 percent tax on their income. Employees would thus see their Colorado income taxes increase from 4.63 percent to almost 10 percent, one of the highest state income tax rates in the nation. Certain types of Social Security and pension income would also be impacted by the 14.63 percent Colorado income tax rate.

The amendment would supposedly exempt Colorado residents and employers from certain Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) provisions — assuming that the federal government agrees to waive those requirements. Section 1332 of the Affordable Care Act allows states to receive a waiver from certain Obamacare requirements — if their own state-run plan provides residents with “access to high quality, affordable health insurance while retaining the basic protections of” the health care law.

No state has yet attempted to do this, and the waivers are not available until 2017.

According to the language of Amendment 69, the new agency running Colorado’s “healthcare monopoly” would operate independently of the Colorado state legislature and administration, under its own elected 21-member board. (Exactly what state laws would apply to the agency, I am unable to say at this point, except to note that the agency would be exempt from TABOR provisions, specifically.)

I had not followed the unfolding of this citizen-driven initiative until I heard, from a friend, that the issue had been discussed at a recent Archuleta County Republican Women’s luncheon. My friend had been impressed with the presentation, and recommended that I sit down with the presenter, Mary Ann Smith, to get her take on the controversy. Ms. Smith and I met at Higher Grounds, and discussed the statewide impacts of the proposed amendment — but more specifically, the possible impacts on a rural “retirement community” like Pagosa Springs.

“The proponents’ argument is that this makes sense, economically,” Ms. Smith explained. “But it doesn’t make sense, because of the impact on small business. I mean, why would you start a small business, with this — with a 14.63 percent income tax? That doesn’t include the cost of sales tax, it doesn’t count property tax, that doesn’t count federal income tax.

“To me, this has the potential — just that one facet of it — of causing us to have a major implosion. You look at our community; our community is heavily fixed income. None of us, in this community, have seen a 10 percent increase in income in the last few years. None of us. Some of us have had a decrease in income.”

(We might note, in passing, the recent decision by the Archuleta Board of County Commissioners to give all elected County officials a 20 percent pay increase.)

Many of the Pagosa women Ms. Smith has been polling — casually — have expressed concerns about losing their existing private healthcare coverage, and about an inability to make ends meet, if this new tax were to be imposed. Some have mentioned moving out of Colorado, as a likely result. Would such a potential exodus have an impact on the real estate market in Pagosa Springs?

And on the flip side, what about an influx of people — perhaps those suffering from serious health issues — looking for free health care in Colorado?

At this point, there are more questions about Amendment 69 than there are answers.

Ms. Smith noted that she’s not accustomed to speaking publicly about contentious political issues, but feels compelled, in this case, to lend her voice to the conversation.

“I try to keep my presentations concise. I can pretty much depress a whole room full of people in about seven minutes. I like to keep it short and sweet. But it’s not sweet; it’s depressing. If this is what’s coming, then you better be ready, and you better be talking to your neighbor. Because everybody says to me, ‘There’s no way this can pass.’

“When someone tells me, ‘There’s no way this will pass,’ it concerns me greatly. You know, we fought Amendment 66, a few years ago, and it was nothing but a tax increase under the guise of ‘education for the children.’ We fought that, because there was nothing that mandated that the fund go to the classroom or to teacher salaries. It was all a guise to fund the retirement system, PERA. And we fought that, and people paid attention.

“And I hope they are going to pay attention on this, because this has a much greater impact. People are going to leave the state. And we’re going to have an influx of people looking to get on the system, and those people who move in, don’t have to live in Colorado on a permanent basis.”

Amendment 69 defines a “Beneficiary” very simply: as “an individual whose primary residence is in Colorado.” No citizenship requirement. No length of residency requirement.

“I’m not unsympathetic,” Ms. Smith assured me. “But we can only do so much with what we have.”

Ms. Smith provided me with several printed documents that she’d found online, issued by conservative think tanks. The general conclusion of these conservative researchers is that Amendment 69 would be a disaster for Colorado.

Read Part Two…