This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

... new Health Care challenge for the Obama administration the Department of Health and Human Services is underwrite the pressure to allow ... I will share going into a role in health care coverage ... through federal exchanges if they find out they're pregnant ... right now which way the federal exchanges that three-month open enrollment period to do at ... this over the weekend pickup insurance when ... they find out about their pregnancy ... the WSJ's Louise Radnofsky joins us now with the D tells we think famous for being here ... think you so who is behind this change pushing for this change in what their argument ... the initial press ... Matic group called an invincible has been a key ally of the bomb administration SSDI enrollment the Affordable Care Act ... at this point it's a momentum ... thirty seventh Senate Democrats are on board more than fifty House Democrats is well ... the latest issue said it's not getting this they issued regulations in February saying it's hit me was anything they are planning to do for the forseeable future but the pressure has continued inside that ... sell ... out why they think they should be different right now you can change your health insurance plan if you move there a couple of their life events ... basically that pregnancy just like the that's us to be treated the same way ... pretty much in one of the specific like that that does qualify to buy coverage outside the normal enrollment we get is having a baby so what the advocates are saying is that ... becoming pregnant should be more akin to having a baby ... ah then that another kind of pre existing ... medical condition that you discover about you discover when you're uninsured use of new ones get insurance midyear because of or because you have a tax and spray the only thing that if you have insurance is just how much it costs to have a baby ... were talking more than thirty thousand dollars if you give birth ... I'm actually were talking more than fifty thousand dollars if you have that C section ... so what the agreement would benefit from having this property and maybe win and turn before ... the agreement anybody and that's how the secretary cuts both ways advocates who say it's pretty expensive to have a baby if you're uninsured and insurance companies to say it's really expensive to have a baby if you're uninsured ... and say he should be allowed to buy covered suddenly when you haven't been willing to purchase it before you get the sense that your gaming the system under the circumstances I and there's no sign yet that the Obama administration is ready to rethink their oppression ... not right now ... I resent nasty really interesting Terry things very much for joining us ... or ...