CONWAY — Gov. Asa Hutchinson took his pitch for continuing Medicaid expansion in Arkansas directly to the public Tuesday by holding a town hall meeting on the topic.

Speaking in the auditorium of Central Baptist College in Conway, Hutchinson said he did not support the federal Affordable Care Act and was not involved in creating the program known as the private option, Arkansas’ alternative to the expansion of Medicaid rolls that was envisioned in the law.

“I inherited it,” Hutchinson said of the program that uses federal Medicaid money to subsidize private health insurance for Arkansans earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level.

The governor said ending Medicaid expansion at this point would create “turmoil” in the health care marketplace, leave “a huge hole” in the state budget and create a fairness issue because federal subsidies for health insurance would remain available to people earning 100 percent of the federal poverty level but would cease to be available to people earning below that level.

Hutchinson outlined his plan to replace the private option with a similar program that would be called Arkansas Works. The plan, which he will ask legislators to approve next month, would add features including:

• Mandatory referral to work or work training for unemployed, able-bodied recipients.

• Premiums of $19 per month and 2 percent co-pays for recipients earning more than 100 percent of the federal poverty level.

• A requirement that recipients enroll in employer-based insurance, where available, with premium assistance provided.

• Coverage that would be effective upon enrollment instead of being retroactive for the 90 days preceding enrollment, as it is now.

• An option for the state to end the program with 30 days’ notice.

“Ultimately, if you’re able-bodied and you’re able to work, you ought to be working, and if you’re not working, you ought to be in job training, and if you’re unemployed, you ought to be helping somewhere,” he said.

An audience member asked if Arkansas would be able to get federal waivers to allow all of the changes Hutchinson is seeking. Hutchinson said he was confident it would and said the only thing he is seeking that no other state has done is the mandatory referral to work or work training.

Hutchinson said he would like to propose a work requirement for recipients, but that would not be allowed because it is not consistent with the philosophy of President Barack Obama’s administration.

Asked if Arkansas can afford the program, Hutchinson said a consultant has advised that the program will save the state money over the next five years.

The Stephen Group has estimated that the program will save the state $757 million between 2017 and 2021.

By 2021 the state will be paying 10 percent of the cost of the program, which now is fully funded by the federal government. Hutchinson said he believes the state can find enough savings in Medicaid to cover that cost.

Some audience members asked about the governor’s plan to let private companies manage parts of the Medicaid program for high-cost populations. Hutchinson said managed-care companies can save health-care costs by, among other things, giving patients incentives to make better use of services.

Hutchinson and state Surgeon General Greg Bledsoe also said any managed care plan would begin with a patients’ bill of rights and a providers’ bill of rights.

Audience members had differing perspectives on the issue of work-training referrals. One person asked how the state would ensure that people follow through with work training.

State Department of Workforce Services Director Daryl Bassett said every person to receive such a referral would have a caseworker who would track the person through the system.

Another audience member said many recipients may not have cars and may not be able to get to the training, especially if they live in a town with no bus system.

“We’re putting up all kinds of roadblocks for them to continue to get health care because we think they’re lazy. They’re not,” she said.

Hutchinson is expected to call a special session on Medicaid expansion starting April 6.