Video

Image We won't let you down, says new PM New PM Tony Abbott has said he looks forward to forming a government that's 'trustworthy' and 'competent'.

IT is with a deep sense of responsibility that the Liberal National Coalition begins its work for you - the Australian people.

Elections by their nature are tough contests and I honour everyone, from every political party, who stood or participated in yesterday's election. I respect the conviction that makes men and women stand up for the things they believe in and I pay tribute to it.

It is our differences that prove we are free and it is our willingness to come together after the contest that makes our country strong.

We are a great country and a great people. My colleagues and I are determined to deliver the strong, stable and accountable government that you deserve.

My team will hit the ground running and deliver the stronger Australia and better future that you voted for.

We will be a 'no surprises, no excuses' government and we will deliver on our commitments. We won't be perfect; no government ever is, but when we get it wrong, we'll admit it and when we make a mistake, we will learn from it.

We will be an adult government - and as importantly we will treat the Australian people like adults. We will govern in your interest and not our interest - because that's the best way to ensure we deliver a better government for you in the long term.

From this morning, confidence can return to the Australian car industry with the certainty that Labor's proposed FBT changes will not apply.

Later today, I will meet with senior public servants and indicate that the first legislative priority of the Coalition will be to scrap the carbon tax - so we can make a difference to household power bills as well as jobs.

On day one of a sworn in government, I will authorise the commencement of Operation Sovereign Borders and begin implementing our plan to stop the boats.

Our policies have worked before and they will work again.

In the near future, I will visit Indonesia and strengthen Australia's relationship with our most important neighbour.

The Productivity Commission will be tasked with undertaking a major review into child care. We need a child care system that is more responsive to parents and more affordable as well. Improving access to child care is both a social and economic imperative.

Indigenous Affairs will be brought into the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet. In effect, Australia will have a prime minister for indigenous affairs as well as a dedicated indigenous affairs minister. We need to achieve more to ensure that children go to schools, adults go to work and the ordinary rule of the land operates in Aboriginal communities.

We will deliver a new business plan for the NBN so that we can deliver faster broadband sooner and at less cost. I want our NBN rolled out within three years and Malcolm Turnbull is the right person to make this happen.

We will work with the states so that we will see the bulldozers on the ground and construction underway for WestConnex in Sydney, the East West Link in Melbourne, the Gateway Upgrade in Brisbane, the North South Road in Adelaide and the Midland Highway upgrade. In addition, we will see major work on the Pacific Highway, the Bruce Highway, the Toowoomba Range crossing and the Swan Bypass in Perth.

Work on the development of the National Disability Insurance Scheme will continue. People with disabilities and their families can be confident that the work will continue without interruption. The NDIS is now owned by the nation and I hope, remains forever above politics.

There will also be changes to the way our government works that Australians won't notice as they go about their lives but will notice by seeing the delivery of better government. I am committed to restoring and living by the proven processes of responsible government. We will be a careful, collegial, consultative, straight-forward government that says what it means and does what it says and that does not waste your money.

There is much to do and my colleagues and I are grateful for the trust that the people have placed in us. We have our Plan. From today we will move decisively on our commitments and deliver the stronger Australia that all of us want.