Deductibles are so high on so many health plans that many people try to avoid doctors altogether. But there is another way.

One company entering the Dallas market, Oscar Insurance Corp., offers unlimited doctor visits with no co-pays or deductible. Some employers are doing the same, betting they can cut their health bill by letting employees talk with doctors anytime, including nights and weekends, and face no out-of-pocket costs.

The catch? These doctor visits are over the phone, not face-to-face.

Telemedicine has been around for over a decade and has put down deep roots in Dallas. The practice is getting serious traction nationwide, as more people get health insurance and try to cope with deductibles that often top $4,000 a year.

If you don’t have a telehealth option yet, it won’t be long. Almost three-quarters of large employers are expected to add telemedicine to their benefits by next year, according to a recent survey. And Oscar, a tech-friendly startup that’s been called the Uber of post-Obamacare insurers, has put free telemedicine at the center of its business.

Oscar’s individual plans are sold on the exchange created by the Affordable Care Act (and off-exchange, too). People must sign up for ACA exchange plans by Tuesday to have next year’s coverage take effect on Jan. 1.

More doctors are embracing telemedicine, including Dr. Christopher Crow, co-founder of Village Health Partners in Plano.

“Every primary care physician will tell you that a high majority of those visits they see every day do not need to come to their office,” Crow told about 200 people at a Dallas Regional Chamber breakfast last week. “Telehealth is a huge solution.”

The industry leader is Teladoc, which started in Dallas in 2002, created its first telehealth product in 2005 and raised $180 million in an initial public offering in July. This year, Teladoc expects to provide 570,000 phone visits with doctors, a nearly 10-fold increase in just three years.

Teladoc has 12.6 million members in the U.S., twice as many as two years ago. Texas is its largest market, with 2.5 million members, and they helped generate almost a quarter of company revenue last year. At an operations center in Lewisville, Teladoc has 350 employees.

It’s natural that Texas would be a hot market for telemedicine. Access to care is a crucial problem here, with Texas ranking near the bottom in doctors per capita and leading the nation in uninsured residents. High poverty rates and skimpy coverage from some employers also put the cost of care beyond reach for many.

Yet Texas regulators have been among the most hostile to telemedicine. They’ve raised concerns about patient safety, banned most video consults and adopted rules that limit the practice. They also asserted that Teladoc’s doctors do not form “proper professional relationships” with members.

The actions prompted Teladoc to file three lawsuits against the Texas Medical Board.

“It’s unfortunate,” CEO Jason Gorevic said, “but we’re not afraid to stand up for our patients.”

Teladoc has prevailed each time, he said, including with appeals and significant motions. In May, Teladoc was granted a temporary injunction so Texas patients would not be required to see a doctor in person before a televisit.

The case has been set for trial in February 2017, when the Texas Legislature will be in session, and Crow said lawmakers should address any state restriction.

“It needs to go away,” Crow said.

Teladoc operates in 49 states and has signed up 160 Fortune 1000 companies, including Accenture, Bank of America, Pepsi and Shell. It also provides televisits for large health systems, such as Memorial Hermann in Houston and Mount Sinai in New York.

The Texas Association of Business has been a staunch defender, too. Large employers, which typically pay about two-thirds of the premiums for their workers, want to see more innovation and competition – any advances that might slow the growth in costs.

Combine telemedicine and a tech startup like Oscar, and you can see some of the promise of health reform. Oscar has raised over $350 million from Google and other venture capital investors, and was recently valued at $1.75 billion. It began offering insurance in New York two years ago and is now expanding into Dallas, San Antonio, Los Angeles and Orange County, Calif.

In Dallas, Oscar has the only product on the exchange with free, unlimited televisits, said Vijay Kedar, general manager for Texas.

“It’s one of the things that drives people to choose Oscar,” Kedar said.

Oscar has other consumer-friendly features, including a step tracker that lets member earn up to $100 in annual fitness rewards. But its technology sets it apart.

Sign in with a computer or smartphone, and the website asks, “How can I help you find care?”

Write, “I have a rash,” and you have three choices: Call a doctor on the phone, make an appointment with a dermatologist or make an appointment with a primary care physician. The estimated prices are zero, $100 and $60, respectively.

The note under the call-doctor option says doctors typically respond within nine minutes and resolve rash symptoms 99 percent of the time.

That’s not far off the standard response. At Teladoc, 92 percent of cases are resolved on the first visit, Gorevic said. Most others are referred to physician offices or an emergency room.

Oscar uses Teladoc as its provider, but most companies that contract with Teladoc don’t offer free unlimited calls. The price of the service is $40 per visit (rising to $45 next year), and clients decide how much to subsidize the program.

Employers that offer free Teladoc consults have four times more utilization than unsubsidized plans, Gorevic said. And Oscar, which puts the call-doctor option front and center, “has a tremendously higher utilization rate,” he said.

That sounds like an expensive proposition. But Teladoc visits can save hundreds compared with treatment in other medical settings.

So who nets the savings? On a high-deductible plan, it’s you.

Twitter: @mitchschnurman