The number of people without health insurance in the

U-S has dropped by one third since the passage of

the Affordable Care Act three years ago.

But, there are still millions who aren't covered .

including some in our area.

A clinic in La Crosse is trying to help .

by providing healthcare for the uninsured.

News 8's Keely Arthur has the story.

NAT- I'm going to just have you give me your right

leg.

Onalaska resident Tom Koster has health insurance

but is coverage isn't the best.

NAT- We are going to bring this guy up, good.

Hold it there like that.

That's why he's so thankful to have Neighborhood Family

Clinics one town away in La Crosse.

I can rest assured that I'm not going to be turned

away because I don't have the right policy or that

I don't have any insurance at all.

From antibiotics to physicals, and x-rays patients

can get low cost care from seasoned doctors without

the complications of insurance.

The same visit that you would get at one of the other

clinics might be 200 dollars we're 39.

That low cost business model was ingrained in Thompson

early on.

He grew up poor and when he visited the doctor his

mom would only be able to spare a few dollars.

She paid what we had, and that was very important

to us, so we never got denied care, and that doctor

was always affordable and always accessible and that's

our goal.

Now Thomposon and his team provide that kind of care

to more than 4,000 people every year.

And the goodwill is rubbing off on his patients.

My front desk person came running back to me and she

said 'The guy just paid for his visit and he gave

you 50 dollars more for the next person,' well now

we've had that happen over 40 times here.

NAT- Sensation is here, up that far? Okay.

Koster says regardless of his fancial situation he

would choose Neighborhood Family Clinics

If you don't have the insurance coverage that doesn't

mean you can't get quality care.

Because the envorinoment that that Thompson provides

is truly the best medicine.

You're more than just a patient you're an actual person.

Dr.

Ted Thompson says Family Clinics is expanding.

He hopes to have a clinic up on La Crosse's south

side early next year.