ASHEBORO — Randolph Hospital has received a three-year federal grant of $795,108 for its insurance navigator program.

The specially trained navigators help uninsured consumers sign up for marketplace insurance under the Affordable Care Act.

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services awarded $67 million in navigator grants to 100 organizations in the nation. Randolph Hospital was one of four recipients — and the only hospital — in North Carolina.

The grant will be used to hire two full-time navigators and an administrative assistant to join Jo Ellen Needham, supervisor of the hospital’s navigator program, which is housed in an office on Foust Street in Asheboro.

Navigators will spread the word in the community, too, meeting people wherever they are — at churches, through civic groups and via organizations such as Christians United Outreach Center.

In years past, the program has covered Randolph, Montgomery and Moore counties. It will be expanded to include Chatham County. One navigator will focus on the Latino/Hispanic community.

What is it?

“We’re very excited about this,” said Devin Griffith, the hospital’s vice president of care continuum and support services. “It’s going to have a significant impact.”

The navigator program is designed to help consumers understand new coverage options and find the most affordable coverage that meets their health care needs.

“It does take a lot of time and personal attention to help our community and citizens understand the options that are available under the health insurance exchange,” Griffith said.

Consumers do not have to speak with a navigator to purchase insurance on the exchange. They can sign up online.

“I think, for many individuals, they could benefit from some guidance — and some unbiased guidance — as to what their options are,” Griffith said.

Currently, three insurers offer 30 plans in the state marketplace; that number is likely to change, along with the plans themselves, and premiums, for 2016.

Why is it important?

The open enrollment period begins Nov. 1 and ends on Jan. 31, 2016, although individuals who experience certain life-changing events, such as losing a job, may sign up anytime. Those already enrolled need re-enroll to continue coverage.

Penalties for not having insurance have gone up each year since ACA implementation. In 2016, the penalty will increase to $695 per uninsured adult in a household (and half of that for each uninsured child) — or 2.5 percent of family income — whichever is greater.

Education and enrollment are simply the first steps in a process, Griffith said. Navigators help those who need help find a primary care physician. Individuals with a primary care home usually take better advantage of healthcare screenings, and, if they are on medications, a doctor can help them manage their drugs.

“Overall, they will have better healthcare outcomes,” Griffith said.

Anyone who does not have healthcare insurance through an employer is eligible for ACA marketplace plans, but eligibility for subsidies — to make the coverage affordable — is based on household income. Some do not make enough money to qualify for the subsidies.

Nearly 14,000 individuals in Randolph (just over 8,000), Montgomery (about 1,080) and Moore (just under 4,800) counties are receiving some type of health insurance coverage via the North Carolina marketplace; more than 2,750 Asheboro residents are enrolled.

About 93 percent of those enrolled receive a subsidy.

A central goal of the Affordable Care is to significantly reduce the number of uninsured by providing affordable options through health insurance marketplaces and Medicaid.

The ACA cut Medicare reimbursements to hospitals, and that money was intended to help fund Medicaid expansion. North Carolina is one of 20 states that have not expanded Medicaid; state lawmakers say the program needs to be reformed before there is talk of expanding it.

Expansion would have created a new Medicaid category for adults, ages 22-64.

“We estimate that there are 9,000 people in our county that are not eligible for the subsidies,” Griffith said, “and those people will stay uninsured.”

* * *

For information about Randolph Hospital’s navigator program, call (336) 633-7800.