Amarillo, TX

AMARILLO, Texas – Sioux Falls pitching has been unable to keep teams from scoring a large portion of their runs in the middle innings. On Sunday afternoon, the Amarillo Thunderheads scored five runs in the bottom of the fifth inning, taking the final game of the series from Sioux Falls by a final of 12-7 at Potter County Memorial Stadium.



The Canaries scored first in the top of the second when Jason Repko scurried home on a wild pitch. Amarillo picked up two runs in the bottom of the third after Dexter Kjerstad hit a towering two-run homerun over the left field wall. The Birds’ answered with a run in the top half of the fourth after veteran Jason Repko hit a solo shot deep into the Amarillo sky.

Amarillo did most of their damage in the bottom of the fifth thanks to a three-run homerun by Kjerstad, picking up his second homer of the contest. Stefan Gartrell followed with a two-run blast over the right field wall. Both teams picked up a run in the sixth inning, bringing the score to 8-3 in favor of Amarillo.



The final run for the Birds’ came in the top of the seventh after Chris Grayson singled in newcomer Brett Balkin. Amarillo did pick up four runs late in the game off an error by third baseman RJ Perucki, a wild pitch from Mike Watt and a double from Rene Leveret.



Sioux Falls made things interesting after Brett Balkin doubled in a run followed by an RBI single from Chris Grayson. The Canaries picked up their final run of the ballgame after Balkin scored on a wild pitch.



Brian Humphries and Jason Repko each paced the Canaries offense, going 2-for-4 with a homerun and an RBI.

Sioux Falls starting pitcher Stephen Bougher was knocked out of the game early after going four innings, allowing six earned runs on ten hits.



The Canaries head back to Sioux Falls for two much needed days off before returning to action on July 29. Sioux Falls will welcome the Kansas City T-Bones to the Birdcage for a three game series. First pitch is scheduled for 7:05 PM on Wednesday as the Canaries try to break the attendance record of 5,482.



Fans can catch all the action home and away on AM 1230 and FM 98.1 Sioux Falls Sports Network KWSN, as the “Voice of the Canaries” JJ Hartigan will bring all the latest news related to Canaries baseball.

- Jerrett Mills

News

Non-Homepage {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.