GRAND RAPIDS, Mich., Dec. 7, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Greatland Corporation, one of the country's leading providers of W-2 and 1099 products for businesses, and an expert resource for Affordable Care Act (ACA) information, announced today that its Yearli products are now available for the 2015 reporting season.

Yearli is a comprehensive W-2, 1099 and 1095 reporting software and online filing platform. New this year, the software can also help businesses fulfill the new 2015 ACA filing requirements. As businesses prepare to file 1095 forms for the first time, Yearli provides easy data entry and filing for all ACA information, allowing businesses to rest assured they are in full compliance.

Yearli serves as the most complete federal, state and recipient W-2, 1099 and 1095 reporting platform on the market for small to mid-size businesses and professional accountants, and is designed to help businesses generate, file, and deliver all related forms. With Yearli, organizations can choose the product that most closely meets their W-2, 1099 and 1095 filing and support needs.

The Yearli reporting platform has three options (Core, Performance, and Desktop) designed to fit any budget or business need. It is important for businesses to note that ACA reporting is only available through Performance and Desktop.

Forms 1095-B and 1095-C are now able to be filled out and filed immediately, allowing businesses to get a jump start on reporting this year. Yearli Performance and Desktop helps employers meet the ACA IRS requirements in five easy steps:

Create Yearli Performance account or Purchase Yearli Desktop software Import or enter 1095 data Complete transmittal (if applicable) Edit and / or review data Submit E-File to IRS and mail copies to employees

While navigating the ACA reporting process using Yearli, businesses have access to Greatland experts who can help guide employers through new rules and regulations. This experienced support team helps ensure complete compliance and a smooth, efficient and worry-free experience.

"We are excited to introduce Yearli's easy-to use data entry and filing features for ACA reporting on our Performance and Desktop platforms. Our team has received positive feedback on Yearli since it launched last year, and we look forward to offering its full capabilities to our customers," said Bob Nault, Greatland's CEO. "The three Yearli platforms provide the complete package for businesses looking for a fast, efficient and comprehensive platform to handle their federal, state and recipient reporting needs."

In addition to helping businesses with their ACA needs, Yearli products offer full-service solutions for W-2 and 1099 reporting:

Core

A simple and easy W-2 & 1099 online reporting program designed to meet all filing requirements in a matter of minutes.

Yearli Core includes:

W-2 & 1099 Forms

Quarterly Filing

Online Chat & Email

Data Entry or Import

Performance

The premier online W-2, 1099 and 1095 filing solution with everything a business needs for fast and easy reporting.

Includes everything in Core plus:

ACA Reporting

TIN Matching

Phone Support

Volume Price Discounts

Desktop

This robust software package was designed to help simplify the entire W-2, 1099 and 1095 reporting process.

Get everything in Performance plus:

Full 94X Library

NYS-45, CA DE-9/C Forms

80 State Forms

Extensive Printing Options

Yearli is a complete filing program. All three options include Federal Filing, State Reporting and Recipient Delivery.

With the secure and easy-to-use Yearli e-file system, businesses can now avoid the hassle of mailing out paper forms. Once a business e-files, its data is sent from Yearli directly to the appropriate federal (SSA or IRS) and state agency (SSA or IRS) – a process that on average, takes less than 15 minutes.

Greatland also takes the stress and hassle out of recipient delivery by providing users with print and mail services, an online delivery system and PDF copies to meet all of your business needs. This means customers will not have to worry about printing your W-2 and 1099 forms or stuffing envelopes and mail recipient copies this January. After submitting the data through Yearli, all copies are printed and mailed directly to recipients. Yearli can even reprint and mail W-2 and 1099 forms to recipients.

Available in Yearli's Core and Performance platforms, Greatland also offers an online retrieval system where forms are posted in a secure online portal for recipients to download. Recipients will receive an email with a secure link to login and download their form – making resending forms easier than ever.

About Greatland

Greatland (www.greatland.com) is the W-2 and 1099 specialist, focused on providing information, products, and solutions for small to mid-size businesses and accountants. Greatland helps customers navigate annual reporting changes, including extensive expertise about ACA reporting. Through Greatland's subsidiaries – Greatland, Nelco, and Broker Forms – the company offers an extensive array of specialized products for businesses: W-2 forms, 1099 forms, 1095 forms, , business checks, presentation materials, income tax preparation supplies, and mortgage forms. Greatland also offers Yearli, a comprehensive W-2, 1099, and 1095 reporting software and online filing platform. Greatland is an employee-owned company with locations in Grand Rapids, Mich. and Green Bay, Wis. Greatland has an extensive W-2 & 1099 fact center located on its website with answers to many of the top filing questions. Follow us on Facebook or Twitter: @GreatlandCorp

SOURCE Greatland Corporation