HONOLULU (AP) - The traditional Polynesian voyaging canoe Hokulea arrived in Bali Thursday after the latest leg of its around-the-world journey.

The canoe’s crew said it faced new weather challenges during the 11-day trip from Darwin, Australia, to the small Indonesian island, the Honolulu Star-Advertiser reported (http://bit.ly/1hdoMcP).

The boat was towed by its escort vessel, Gershon II, during part of its voyage across the Indian Ocean, said apprentice navigator Jenna Ishii in a video transmitted from Hokulea’s deck.

Ishii said winds were extremely light and the boat had to stay on schedule for a welcome ceremony in Bali.

“We promised the Bali community that we would be there for a big arrival ceremony - and they have been putting a lot of time and effort making this very first interaction between Hawaii and Bali with Hokulea happen,” said Ishii in a video posted July 23.

But several days later, Ishii said strong winds were propelling the Polynesian canoe along the Indian Ocean at 8 knots or 9.2 mph. She was also facing big waves that challenged her traditional navigation skills.

On the way to Bali, the crew stopped at Ashmore Reef, an uninhabited atoll in the Timor Sea.

Crew member Kaniela Lyman-Mersereau said in a video that the reef was pristine and teeming with marine life, but also littered with marine debris.

“It reminds us that we’re not doing quite enough to malama honua (care for the earth) when we see stuff like this,” Lyman-Mersereau said, holding some of the degraded debris in his fist.

Hokulea was welcome at Bali with an event at the island’s Sanur Beach that featured traditional local dance and Hawaiian Hula. State Rep. Gene Ward was there to help welcome the canoe, and Hokulea captain Nainoa Thompson thanked the supporters in Hawaii who helped make the journey possible.

The crew is scheduled to stay in Bali for two weeks. They plan to visit the ancient temples, fishing villages and farms.

The next step of Hokulea’s journey is to travel to the Cocos (Keeling) Islands, according to the Polynesia Voyaging Society.

___

Information from: Honolulu Star-Advertiser, http://www.staradvertiser.com