Pay to play? Tracking NFL donations ahead of concussion hearings

CBO wants to hire staff to analyze Obamacare repeal, and AARP throws its support behind a controversial Medicare plan. But first: Following the money as the NFL tries to navigate a major threat to its survival.

NFL HAS DONATED NEARLY $300,000 TO HOUSE E&C MEMBERS — That's according to new data from Maplight, which found that 17 percent of the league's PACdonations have gone to House E&C members since 2008. The committee is currently conducting a review of NFL concussions and could propose new guidelines for concussion management this year.

Story Continued Below

Notably, the NFL's PAC, known as the Gridiron PAC, has given $25,000 to Chairman Fred Upton and $8,500 to ranking member Frank Pallone.

— Who's taken the NFL's dollars, according to Open Secrets: http://bit.ly/1RlQiSS

— One person who hasn't: Rep. Jan Schakowsky, who pinned the NFL last week on the connection between playing football and suffering brain damage.

AARP THINKS PART B DEMO HAS REAL POSSIBILITIES — The organization on Wednesday announced that it supports Medicare's controversial plan to test new ways of paying for drugs administered in doctors' offices. More than 300 groups have come out against CMS's proposed Part B demo, but AARP says changes are necessary to lower the rising cost of prescription drugs.

“This project is a thoughtful, measured approach to modernizing the way that Medicare pays for what are often incredibly expensive drugs,” said AARP's Nancy LeaMond in a statement. “Many of the changes that CMS is considering in this demonstration project are already being used in the private sector.” More from AARP: http://bit.ly/1UNtaiz

THANK GOODNESS IT'S THURSDAY PULSE — Where we missed The Who frontman Roger Daltrey talk cancer cures on the Hill yesterday because your author jotted down the wrong time — but we won't get fooled again. Tips to ddiamond@politico.com or @ddiamond on Twitter.

With help today from Brianna Ehley (@BriannaEhley), Sarah Karlin-Smith (@SarahKarlin) and Erin Mershon (@eemershon).

ICYMI: WHAT THE SUPREME COURT SAID ABOUT BIRTH CONTROL — POLITICO's Jennifer Haberkorn and Josh Gerstein broke down yesterday's oral arguments in Zubik v. Burwell, with Justice Anthony Kennedy signaling his skepticism of the White House's contraception accommodation. http://politi.co/1RlVWEu

— Do the justices understand how the ACA works? Despite four years of Obamacare cases, it's an open question. Justice Sonia Sotomayor corrected Chief Justice John Roberts yesterday when he seemed to imply that ACA exchange shoppers could pick between limited-service health plans.

"That's a falsehood," Sotomayor interrupted to say. "The exchanges require full-service health insurance policies with minimum coverages … that are very comprehensive."

WONKS, RESEARCHERS BATTLE OVER SURGEON SCORECARD — A panel of experts spent 90 minutes on Wednesday morning squaring off over ProPublica's controversial scorecard, which has been accessed more than 2 million times since it launched last summer and has become a proxy in a bigger war over data transparency and quality in medicine.

Critics like RAND's Mark Friedberg suggested that the scorecard's ratings are incomplete and misleading; defenders countered that even partial data is better than none, with Harvard's Ashish Jha arguing "this is an important step forward … it pushes all of us to up our game."

— Changes are coming: ProPublica's authors said that they're working to improve the scorecard's risk-adjustment and tone down how the scorecard portrays surgeons who appear to be outliers. "This is an iterative process," reporter Marshall Allen said. "We feel like we're at the starting point, not the end point."

LAWMAKERS PUSH BILL TO DELAY HIPS AND KNEES DEMO — House Budget Committee Chairman Tom Price and Rep. David Scott offered up legislation Wednesday that would delay the start of the mandatory CMS model to bundle payments for hip and knee surgeries until Jan. 1, 2018, Pro's Erin Mershon reports.

The proposed delay would come in the nick of time — the model is set to start next week, after CMS gave providers an extra four months to get ready for the new payment system. We have a feeling most hospitals aren't holding out much hope for this bill, though, given the current congressional calendar and the total absence of a Senate companion. Still, just the intro was enough to get some applause from the American Association of Orthopedic Surgeons. Their statement: http://bit.ly/1T6RHix

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Expand seniors’ access to prescription drugs. Right now Medicare drug plans force patients to make long trips for medication or to pay more to use their longtime pharmacy. Let Medicare beneficiaries choose the pharmacy that’s best for them. Visit www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **

REPUBLICAN LEADERS CALL ON CMS TO ABANDON 'EGG-WHIP' CHANGES — House Speaker Paul Ryan and five other leading Republicans are asking CMS acting administrator Andy Slavitt to scrap planned cuts to Medicare Advantage's retiree plans. Those plans, which served 3.1 million seniors last year, are facing an average cut of 2.5 percent under CMS's payment proposal for 2017.

"Due to some of the particular characteristics of EGWPs, we are concerned that CMS’s proposal could unintentionally undermine the high quality, coordinated health care that retirees in these plans enjoy," the Republicans wrote. "In the interest of protecting retirees and avoiding seniors losing coverage that coordinates their care, we encourage CMS to scrap the proposed changes to MA EGWPs when finalizing the CY 2017 MA policies."

— See their letter: http://1.usa.gov/1S7i9Uk

DEMS WANT ZIKA FUNDING — Seven Democratic senators and Independent Sen. Angus King are out this morning with a letter calling on the Republican-led Senate Appropriations Committee to boost funding to fight the spread of mosquitoes in order to curb the risk of Zika virus.

Beyond the supplemental Zika request, the senators "respectfully request at least a doubling of the vector-borne diseases line to at least $55 million" for the CDC's National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, they write. It's the latest move in the increasingly politicized Zika funding fight, after Republicans suggested that leftover Ebola funds can be repurposed, and Democrats saying that those dollars are already earmarked for other initiatives.

— See their letter: http://1.usa.gov/1o7t9Jk

CBO WANTS MORE MONEY TO ANALYZE OBAMACARE REPEAL — The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office is asking Congress to appropriate about $48 million for the number-crunching agency this year, a $1.1 million boost. The CBO stated its desire to boost analysis of proposals involving the Affordable Care Act, Medicare and Medicaid, Pro's Ben Weyl and Matthew Nussbaum report.

The CBO hopes to hire three new staffers who will focus in part on the controversial "dynamic analysis" now required of it by Republicans. Dynamic scoring, which most Democrats criticize, factors in the projected economic growth of proposals on the budget baseline. In its request, the CBO noted that "[i]nterest in modifying or replacing the Affordable Care Act and considering changes to Medicare and Medicaid remains high, and CBO expects to devote considerable attention to further developing its capacity to conduct dynamic analysis in the coming year."

MICROSOFT CO-FOUNDER MAKES $100M INVESTMENT IN BIOSCIENCE RESEARCH — Paul Allen announced on Wednesday that his goal is to fund high-risk projects that would have a hard time obtaining traditional funding. The “mission is to uncover and make visible the emerging frontiers of science and produce important solutions that make the world better,” said Tom Skalak, who will lead the new project.

— How it will work: The Paul G. Allen Frontiers Group will fund a pair of "discovery centers" at Stanford University and Tufts University and will also provide project funding to individual scientists around the country.

— How they're starting: The initial set of projects will include using synthetic biology to discover new ways of fighting deadly drug-resistant bacteria and developing methods to read and write the code for tissue and organ regeneration.

— What's next: Allen plans to establish more discovery centers and assist other investigators in the future.

FLAGSHIP HEALTH SURVEY WILL CHANGE — AND SOME RESEARCHERS ARE GETTING WORRIED. That's according to Maggie Koerth-Baker, who writes in FiveThirtyEight about the plan to shorten the CDC's National Health Interview Survey, which has been the gold standard in measuring Americans' health outcomes, insurance coverage and more.

Why shorten the survey? It now takes 30 minutes longer to complete than in the 1990s — as researchers have crammed it full of additional questions — and the response rate has fallen by 20 percentage points.

But according to Koerth-Baker, some researchers are worried that changing the methodology "will impair their ability to learn about things like how stepmothers can subtly disadvantage children — investigations that end up shaping everything from the way your money gets spent to the policies your legislators vote on." http://53eig.ht/1T6N2xh

MAKING MOVES: INZEO TO HHS — Matt Inzeo, communications director for Colorado Rep. Diana DeGette, is heading to HHS where he will serve as a senior adviser for public affairs. Inzeo's last day in DeGette's office is today. He starts his new gig Monday.

ON TAP TODAY — Labor Secretary Thomas Perez and OSHA Assistant Secretary David Michaels at 10 a.m. kick off events to discuss ongoing Labor Department intiatives to improve worker safety.

AVOID McALLEN, TEXAS, IF YOU'VE GOT ALLERGIES — That's according to the Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America, which named the city — infamous in health policy circles for being the focus of Atul Gawande's investigation of high Medicare costs — as its fifth-worst for allergy sufferers this spring. Rounding out the list of the top five worst cities: Jackson, Miss; Memphis, Tenn.; Syracuse, N.Y.; and Louisville, Ky. http://bit.ly/1RlXvm3

WHAT WE'RE READING, by Erin Mershon

The Economist takes a look at the practice of "outcome switching" in clinical trials, and a team of Oxford researchers hoping to curb the practice: http://econ.st/1T72fOE

The conservative backlash over a medical malpractice bill this week caught the bill's sponsor, Rep. Trent Franks, completely off guard, he admitted to The Hill: http://bit.ly/1T725H9

Med schools are starting to "flip the classroom," offering more online lectures so teachers are accessible during classtime, U.S. News and World Report finds: http://bit.ly/1T726Le

Like alcohol, heavy marijuana use is linked to economic and social problems, Lisa Aliferis reports: http://bit.ly/1pJnBXk

Market vendors in Hanoi have found a way to keep healthy while at work — the charming video, from Reuters: http://reut.rs/1T72RnE

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Many Medicare drug plans effectively require the use of “preferred” pharmacies that are inconvenient for patients. That means a long trip or higher copays to stick with the pharmacies that patients like. In urban areas, these plans often fail to meet the government’s standard for pharmacy access. In rural areas, “preferred” pharmacies are often 20+ miles away! Support H.R. 793 / S. 1190. This bipartisan legislation is supported by leading consumer advocates and would let patients use any pharmacy willing to accept the “preferred” pharmacy terms and conditions. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **

CORRECTION An earlier version of this alert misstated Matt Inzeo's last day as communications director for Rep. Diana DeGette, His last day is today.