Volunteers wanted for home-building

The local Habitat for Humanity is recruiting volunteers to travel to Trinidad and Tobago for a home build.

Volunteers will help construct a concrete block home near the Port of Spain. The future homeowners will work alongside Habitat volunteers investing sweat equity and sharing insights about their culture.

“The team will be led by two staff from Bend Area Habitat for Humanity as part of a larger Global Village community of building projects across the world,” according to a Habitat for Humanity spokesperson. “Get your hands dirty on the work site, meet families whose housing situations have been improved with Habitat’s help, experience the country like an insider and do it all alongside a team of like-minded volunteers.”

Bend Area Habitat for Humanity is recruiting 12 volunteers. The trip is Nov. 5-13. Five days will involve building and cultural experiences. The cost is $1,860 per person plus airfare.

Contact: Amber Morey, amorey@bendhabitat.org, 541.385.5387.

Grant given to Medicine Clinic

Volunteers in Medicine Clinic of the Cascades has received a $3,000 grant to increase its success of medical referrals.

The agency provides health care to uninsured, low-income adults who are unable to be insured through Affordable Care Act programs.

These health care services are possible because of hundreds of donors as well as more than 250 volunteers in the clinic and more than 400 community medical partners throughout Central Oregon.

“The community medical partners extend the reach of what we can do in the clinic. They represent 43 different medical specialties and 119 medical groups, clinics and facilities. Through a collaborative effort, VIM patients are able to get the care they need upon referral,” said Kat Mastrangelo, executive director of VIM. “The Pacific Power Foundation grant will support VIM’s referral process to help ensure that our patients are well informed and able to maximize their time with these generous providers.”

Enter father-son look-alike contest

The Bulletin is hosting a Father-Son Look-alike contest just in time for Father’s Day.

To enter, visit bendbulletin.com/look­alike2016 and upload a photo. At least one of the individuals must reside in Central Oregon.

Just in time for Father’s Day, the winning pair will receive a portrait photo shoot with one of The Bulletin’s professional photographers.

The deadline to enter is 9 a.m. June 10. Winners will be notified by the end of June 10. The winning entry and runners-up will be published in the All Ages section on June 17.

Questions? Contact Jody Lawrence-Turner at 541-383-0308 or jlawrence-turner@bendbulletin.com .

— Bulletin staff reports