Health care providers are increasingly asking for family health histories, yet few people know them. Many of us only look into our genetic risks when a family health crisis arises.

That inspired Heather Holmes in July 2013 to create Chicago-based TapGenes, a health family tree that’s like ancestry.com with an okcupid.com interface.

Holmes, the company’s CEO, was creating the platform in 2013 when actress Angelina Jolie Pitt revealed that she had a preventive double mastectomy and blew open the debate on genetic screenings. Holmes discusses the “Angelina Effect” and why DNA alone isn’t enough to predict health risks.

Q. How important has the “Angelina Effect” been in highlighting the role of family history in preventive health care?

A. What she has done is help people take that conversation home and make it more relatable. For some it may be controversial, but what I love about what she’s doing is she’s making decisions that make sense for her based on what she knows about her family history. Because she knows that, she’s able to confidently make decisions that she feels comfortable with. That’s what this is about.

Q. Shortly after that, the Supreme Court ruling against gene patents opened the market for lower-cost genetic tests. How does that affect your business?

A. We find that exciting. The thing people have to remember is a genetic test is one level of testing. What that doesn’t tell you is what genes are going to express themselves. Actually, family health history is considered to be the first and original genetic test and is shown to be the strongest predictor for most common diseases out there.

It’s that piece that all those genetic tests are missing out on. You need to be able to understand some of the lifestyle, behavioral or other things that are captured within a family history that help you find the clues about why your genes are turning on or off and what is happening in a family.

Q. It can be a challenge to get family members to share facts for genealogy, let alone disease risks. How do you address that?

A. We allow individuals to choose what they share and whom they want to share it with. Our intention over time is to help them understand that it doesn’t have to be scary to share more.

We thought if we did it electronically that it wouldn’t be an uncomfortable, face-to-face conversation. What we found is it’s not so much that they’re afraid to have the conversation; it’s that they just never knew how to start asking loved ones about this in a way that felt like it was beneficial to everyone.

Q. What do you see in the culture toward prevention in health care?

A. I think we're coming up on this perfect storm. With all the changes of the Affordable Care Act and people being more responsible than ever for their own health care and being hit with the cost of high-deductible plans, they’re realizing, “What can I do to avoid these problems?”

From a population health perspective, we do a good job in the U.S. of treating people for diseases and conditions. We don't do a good job of getting people to make choices earlier. But if on a population level we can help families to better care for themselves and give them the basic tools and understanding, then hopefully we can make a better impact that way.

Q. Where do you aim to fit into the culture of prevention?

A. We see ourselves as a connector and empowering those consumers and families and then connecting them to the right services or help that they might need. That can be on the provider side.

Part of what we’re seeing now with the higher deductibles and people feeling the effects of their health care choices, we’re seeing people not going to their regular doctors as much. We’re seeing a trend of people going to clinics for one-off types of things.

Those are all great opportunities to help gather all that information together into one place. But then also being able to access what other kinds of care they might need, whether it’s additional screenings and stuff like that, that they may not be aware that they would qualify for based on their family history.

Q&As are edited for length and clarity.

Kate MacArthur is a freelance writer.