The agency managing the hospital at the center of New York City’s Ebola emergency is straining under the weight of rising pension and health-care expenses and the costs of treating poor, undocumented immigrants.

The Health and Hospitals Corp., which runs Bellevue Hospital Center in Manhattan, served 1.4 million patients last year, making it the biggest U.S. municipal health system. A deficit in its annual budget of about $7 billion may more than triple to $833 million in the next fiscal year, according to the agency, which runs 11 hospitals.

Hundreds of thousands of the uninsured, undocumented patients it treats aren’t covered by the Affordable Care Act, HHC President Ramanathan Raju told the city council in May. The agency will continue to need funding to support the cost of serving those patients and to cover other shortfalls caused by inadequate reimbursement, he said.

Bellevue is treating physician Craig Spencer, 33, who tested positive for Ebola after being returning from aid work in West Africa, is being treated in an isolation unit at Bellevue.

HHC is familiar with financial and operational challenges. It’s historically been the “dumping grounds” for patients in bad shape both socially and medically, said Charles Brecher, consulting research director of the Citizens Budget Commission, a business-backed watchdog, and long-time observer of the municipal hospital system.

AIDS Experience

Bellevue was a primary center for care during the AIDS crisis in the 1980s, which gives it an advantage during the current virus emergency, Brecher said.

“The importance of their role in this situation gives them some sense of support,’‘’ said Brecher, adding that HHC can tap into reserves. ‘‘They’re as well-equipped as anybody to deal with it.”

HHC was created in 1969 to take over the operations of the city’s public hospitals and improve management and staffing. Mayor Rudolph Giuliani was unsuccessful in taking some of its operations private because it couldn’t function without public subsidies, Brecher said.

Mayor Michael Bloomberg increased spending on the hospitals, stabilized leadership and improved the quality of care, Brecher said. Bloomberg is the founder and majority owner of Bloomberg News parent Bloomberg LP.

Bulging Deficit

HHC’s deficit is growing even after it saved $600 million annually by freezing hiring in 2010 and cutting 3,700 positions, mostly through attrition, and restructuring operations.

Since 2008, HHC has lost more than $540 million a year because of cuts to Medicaid reimbursement rates. Pension and employee health-care costs have increased by $680 million since July 2001, Raju’s predecessor, Alan Aviles, said in February.

About 80 percent of HHC’s patients are on Medicaid, the federal-state health insurance program for the poor, or are uninsured, according to HHC.

Raju, a surgeon by training and former director of the Cook County, Illinois, public hospital system, was hired by de Blasio in January. Before going to Chicago, Raju served as HHC’s executive vice president for operations and also as chief medical officer.

HHC has planned for Ebola for more than two-and-a-half months, sending “secret shopper” patients simulating suspicious symptoms to test screening protocols. It also conducted drills to practice putting on and taking off of protective gear, Raju said yesterday at an HHC board meeting.

New York state received a Medicaid waiver this year that will bring an estimated $8 billion in federal funding to the state over the next five years if performance targets are met. Most of the money is for changing the delivery of health care.

If performance targets aren’t met, the money will be reduced, Raju said. HHC is submitting its application for funds in December.

The HHC system also includes Coney Island Hospital in Brooklyn, Jacobi Medical Center in the Bronx and Queens Hospital Center.