Nearly four years after an EF-4 tornado devastated the Rose Hill Community in Jasper County, another tornado dealt its fair share of damage. Around 3 o'clock on January 3 the community was once again under the gun as a swift-moving storm aimed it sights right on County Road 20 in Rose Hill where Jalesa Bender and her family lived.

"I was, you know, very nervous and scared," Bender stated. "I didn't know what the outcome would be. We just took heed to the warning that we had received on our IPhone."

A warning that saved not only her life, but the lives of many others, as the tornado destroyed numerous homes.

"I was in tears already, you know, once I heard the news," Bender said in regards to her home. "I was like what, this is my childhood, this is where I grew up. To think it was destroyed and gone just that fast, it's devastating. We're just blessed to be here, material things can be replaced."

Bender says she evacuated her home and went to a relative's house in Newton County, and it was there were she received the news from her friend that her childhood home was no more.

"I couldn't do it," Cousin and friend Latoya Ford said. "I was like how am I supposed to do this. My reaction was to just pick up my phone and get the courage to tell her this has happened to her."

On the other side of County Road 20, one man had taken cover in a storm shelter after hearing the tornado warning. The shelter saved his life, as the tornado ripped through his 66-year-old family home and left it totaled.

While homes were destroyed, and many personal possessions lost, those that lived through the storm say they were blessed that there were no deaths or injuries in this storm.

"You know it just feels really good to know that you have loved ones and people that's not even blood kin that love and care about you."

Bender tells Newscenter 11 that they will rebuild, but not necessarily in the same spot.

The National Weather Service out of Jackson says that the tornado that impacted Rose Hill was an EF-2 Tornado.