The Multnomah County Board of Commissioners made Marissa Madrigal and Joanne Fuller’s new executive posts official on Thursday.

The board voted unanimously to confirm Madrigal as the county’s new chief operating officer, while naming Fuller as the permanent head of the Health Department, where she has served on an interim basis since last fall.

Madrigal’s new job keeps her in a position of power within the county, after giving up her seat as the county’s interim chairwoman earlier this month when voters elected Deborah Kafoury to the office. It also makes her the first Latina chief operating officer in county history.

Tapping Madrigal and Fuller for their new jobs was among Kafoury’s first acts as the county’s new chairwoman.

On Thursday, she lauded the pair for their leadership during a time of turbulence at the county following former Chairman Jeff Cogen’s scandal-ridden resignation last fall.

After more than seven years working as Cogen’s chief of staff, Madrigal made a quick and unexpected ascension to power last fall, when Cogen stepped down following an extramarital affair with a county manager. As his designated replacement, she was appointed to serve in his place until voters elected Kafoury in May.

During that time, Madrigal earned praise from colleagues for maintaining day-to-day order and passing a budget that leaves the county in the better financial shape than it has been for more than a decade.

Madrigal said she would strive in her new job to maintain “day-to-day efficient operations” while pushing county employees to work “at the top of their license” and providing commissioners with timely, relevant information to help them make decisions.

“You showed some leadership far beyond your years,” Kafoury told Madrigal during Thursday’s meeting.

Madrigal replaces Fuller in the chief operating officer's job. Fuller vacated the post last October to lead the Health Department on an interim basis following then-director Lillian Shirley’s departure to work for the state.

Kafoury called Fuller “one of our most experienced leaders” and praised her for stepping down from her post take over the Health Department during a time of “immense uncertainty and transition.”

“You have been a department head in most places in the county, and you have a great understanding of the working of the county,” Kafoury told Fuller.

With her assignment now permanent, Fuller said she would focus on implementing the Affordable Care Act, overseeing the project to build a Health Department headquarters and fighting against federal cuts to public health funding.

“Those are the things that are on my short list,” she said.

--Kelly House