A woman reacts as she looks at the flowers and messages left at a rail cordon close to the Bataclan theatre in the 11th district of Paris on November 14, 2015, the day after a series of attack on the city resulting in the deaths of more than 128 individuals. Some 80 people were gunned down at the Bataclan theatre in Paris late November 13, during a concert by the US band Eagles of Death Metal. (AFP PHOTO / KENZO TRIBOUILLARD/Getty Images)

As President George W. Bush did on September 11, French President François Hollande recognized the barbaric attacks on Paris of November 13 were “an act of war.”

We have in fact been at war since the al-Qaeda attacks of the 1990’s, or since the 1979 Iranian revolution if you prefer. We have had U.S. presidents who chose to ignore (President Bill Clinton) the state of war, or to minimize (President Barack Obama) that painful reality, but the Islamic fundamentalists are indifferent to our perceptions.

Obama’s fundamental, catastrophic misunderstanding of the threat we face, his bizarre notion that we could “end wars” by exiting certain battlefields, his false assertions that al-Qaeda was on its heels and that the Islamic State had been “contained,” his lackadaisical approach to fighting the Islamic State (as if time were not of the essence), his bizarre assertion that halting our own defensive measures (enhanced interrogation, indefinite detention of enemy combatants) would reduce jihadists’ anger toward the West, his insistence on eviscerating the military as threats to the West grew and his demonstrated fecklessness in each and every arena (Iraq, Afghanistan, Iran, Syria, Iraq) in which the Islamists are on offense — all of these systemic and serious blunders — preceded Friday’s events. They are the product of the Obama-Clinton-Kerry foreign brain trust.

Some on the right, to be certain, are equally feckless. Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) worked to hamstring the NSA data gathering operation and just recently declared we should not intervene in the “Syrian civil war.” Donald Trump thinks Russia is fighting the Islamic State. Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) wants to end the NSA all together, and applauded our exit from Iraq and Afghanistan. Dr. Ben Carson is, well, entirely incoherent on national security matters. Congress has refused to dump the 2011 Budget Control Act, allowing deterioration of our armed forces. Senate Democrats chose loyalty to the White House over a realistic assessment of the Iran deal, thereby authorizing $100 billion or more to flow to Iran, and in turn to its jihadist surrogates.

The administration, the Congress and the 2016 presidential contenders now have a decision. Do we blunder on, looking as the president put in his legalistic terms, to bring the jihadists to “justice” or do we fundamentally transform our approach to reflect the seriousness of the threat?

What would a serious national security policy look like?

We would stop unilaterally disarming. We need to adequately fund national security. We would restore the NSA to its previous, robust form. We would aim to capture enemy combatants, interrogate and detain them so as to extract useful intelligence.

We would go on offense. Together with France, other European allies and Sunni Arab states, we would organize an appropriately-sized force to swiftly eradicate the Islamic State, denying it safe harbor in Iraq and Syria from which to launch and inspire attacks. We would reapply economic and political pressure to Iran and work to interdict supplies to Hamas and Hezbollah.

Cyberterrorism would be responded to in kind. Attacks on our information systems would be treated as no different than physical attacks on U.S. territory.

The idea that we can retreat from the world, hermetically seal borders (which does nothing about terrorists who are Western nationals, as some of the Paris killers appear to be) and let Muslim states work things out on their own is precisely the sort of pre-9/11 and pre- 11/13 thinking that leaves us at the mercy of the jihadists’ whims. If we do not fight them there, we will fight them here. That has been the lesson which we, at our peril, have refused to absorb fully.

Friday’s events should prompt some serious reflection about our policies and politicians. We need serious leaders for serious and deadly times. We cannot afford to put our security in the hands of blowhards, know-nothings, or neo-isolationists. Those who advanced or countenanced the policies of the last seven years should not be re-elected or promoted to higher office. If we do not rouse ourselves, the next targets will be U.S. cities. Anyone who thought otherwise got a rude awakening on Friday.