SINGAPORE--(BUSINESS WIRE)--New Zealand life insurance business written through the agent/adviser channel on average continues to exhibit good operating performance; however, the cost of running this distribution model remains very capital intensive due to a high upfront commission structure, according to a new A.M. Best special report.

The Best’s Special Report, titled, “New Zealand Life: Outlook for the Overall Agent/Adviser Sector Remains Stable,” states that inside New Zealand, likely as a result of competitive pressures, commissions appear to have a continuing role of driving distribution of life insurance products, especially within the agent/adviser channel (defined as life insurers who sell their products predominantly through agents and/or advisers). The standard practice is a very high upfront commission (typically around 170%-200% of a life insurance policy’s first-year premiums; and in some cases, over 200%), followed by a stream of lower renewal commissions (typically about 7%-10% of the premium paid). While providing intermediaries with strong incentives to sell the products, this remuneration structure has created a number of ongoing financial challenges to the life insurers relatively reliant on the agent/adviser channel.

In A.M. Best’s opinion, the agent/adviser sector is holding a moderate level of excess capital. Despite a composite solvency ratio generally lower than other sector composites, excess capital is deemed adequate to support insurance and investment risks.

For every NZD 100 of net premiums, the agent/adviser sector held around NZD 35-40 of excess capital. A.M. best believes this represents a comfortable margin for the insurance risks involved. For every NZD 100 of non-linked investments, the agent/adviser sector held about NZD 15-20 of excess capital above the minimum regulatory capital requirement, also representing a comfortable margin for the investment risks involved.

Over the past few years, the agent/adviser sector continued to record good operating performance. On average, return on net premium revenue was reported at around 24%. Return on capital, however, remains modest at around 10%. This is largely associated with a lower net premium leverage ratio resulting from a higher utilization of reinsurance.

Commission and other expenses amounted to as much as 100% of net premium revenue. Net expense ratio was significantly higher than gross, because the agent/adviser sector generally ceded a large portion of gross premiums to the reinsurers, leaving a smaller premium base retained to spread expenditures. The report notes that with such a high net expense ratio, an important implication is that ongoing profitability tends to rely significantly on persistency experience.

The agent/adviser sector’s future operating performance will continue to be influenced by insurance market risks that are generally common to all life insurers operating in New Zealand. Over a longer term, there is some uncertainty as to whether the expected volume and mix of future new business could remain unchanged.

A.M. Best currently has a stable outlook for the overall agent/adviser sector of the New Zealand life insurance industry.

To access a copy of this report, please visit http://www3.ambest.com/bestweek/purchase.asp?record_code=240028.

A.M. Best Company is the world's oldest and most authoritative insurance rating and information source. For more information, visit www.ambest.com.

Copyright © 2015 by A.M. Best Company, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.