STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- A bill in the state Legislature would create a government-funded single-payer health plan and has drawn the ire of Assemblyman Joe Borelli, who is calling on experts to testify to the committee that's considering it.

Assembly bill A05389A and Senate bill S02078A would create New York Health, which would require no premium, deductibles or co-pays.

It would be paid for through "assessments based on ability to pay, through a progressively-graduated payroll tax (paid 80 percent by employers and 20 percent by employees and 100 percent by self-employed) and a surcharge on other taxable income," according to the bill.

Federal funds that the state currently receives for Medicare, Medicaid, Family Health and Child Health Plus would be combined with the state revenue in a New York Health Trust Fund and the state would seek federal waivers that will allow it to completely fold those programs into New York Health.

The revenue would replace that of the local share of Medicaid, the state share of Medicaid, local payments for public employee health coverage and various other health care spending, the bill states.

Private insurance plans "that duplicate benefits" under the state plan would be banned.

Borelli (R-South Shore) is asking health care experts to testify to the Assembly Health Committee to discuss the costs and possible negative impacts.

The fourth of six public hearings will be held on Tuesday and Borelli said little testimony have been received from people opposed to the bill.

He said most speakers at previous public hearings have talked about the benefits of the plan.

"We've already seen the Affordable Care Act detrimentally impact many Americans who had previously been insured, or who relied on state sponsored insurers like Health Plus," Borelli said. "This bill represents a continued move in the wrong direction, and it is unfair that the testimony has been intentionally one-sided. I urge anyone in the health industry, or with knowledge of health policy, to come and testify Tuesday."

Assemblyman Matthew Titone (D-North Shore), a co-sponsor of the bill, called it a "long haul" and while he doesn't expect it to pass right away, "this bill is really looking to jumpstart the dialogue and keep it going," he said. "Is the bill perfect? Probably not. Is it the perfect conversation starter? Yes."

Titone said it's a complex issue and "it would streamline health care in New York State, it would be great for small businesses who are compelled to pay into employees' health insurance benefits."

The public hearing will be held on Tuesday, Dec. 16 at 10 a.m. in the Global Center for Academic and Spiritual Life, 5th Floor, 238 Thompson Street New York, NY 10012.

Those interested in submitting/presenting testimony must complete and return a registration form as soon as possible. The form, and complete notice of this public hearing, can be found here.