Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

Filling the sneakers of famous fathers is fast becoming a theme at this year’s NCAA Tournament.

The latest son to lace ’em up successfully was Oregon’s Joseph Young, whose highlight-reel performance Friday was a worthy follow-up to all the fireworks and upsets that dominated the tourney a day earlier. Young almost single-handedly lassoed Oklahoma State by scoring 23 of his team’s 26 points during a nine-minute stretch on either side of halftime — lifting the Ducks from four down to eight up — and tied it off with a dunk as vicious as anything his dad, Michael Young, threw down during his days as a member of Phi Slamma Jamma.

“It’s just my teammates trusting me,” Young, the Pac-12 Conference player of the year, said after a 79-73 win. “They found me, got me the ball, set good screens, and I knocked down open shots. But I really commend my team for getting me open.”

Actually, just convincing Young to bring his talents to Eugene was no small feat. He played his high school ball at Houston’s Yates High — like his father — and then began his college career just down the road at the University of Houston, where Michael Young made his name as a player and was working as director of basketball operations. After his sophomore year, both Youngs left the Cougars program for different reasons. Joseph, already a rising star and intrigued by the run-and-gun style at Oregon and across the Pac-12, lit out for the Northwest and became an instant hit with the Ducks.

Young’s heroics came on the heels two other notable father-son connections from Thursday. That’s when UCLA’s Bryce Alford channeled father Steve’s sharpshooting skills and made nine of 11 three-pointers against SMU, including hoisting a final attempt resulting in the controversial goaltending call that decided the game. Then there was R.J. Hunter’s last-second deep 3-pointer for Georgia State that sealed the upset over Baylor and gave his father, Ron, his greatest coaching win yet.

For all that, a good pedigree is not an absolute guarantee of victory. Witness Wyoming’s Larry Nance Jr., whose father, Larry Sr., was a star at Clemson and in the NBA. But his son’s Cowboys got thumped by Northern Iowa, a loss that left the senior center fighting back tears and so devastated at playing his last game that Nance couldn’t speak.