March 18– Officials this afternoon announced that McNairy Regional Hospital and its affiliated clinics plan to permanently end all services at the hospital and clinics on May 18.

In a news release, Tennova Health said plumbing and facility experts examined the plumbing systems after a recent breach was identified and determined crews must dig through the hospital’s floors to replace sewer pipes that have deteriorated under the building. Making the repairs would require closing the hospital for six or more months.

“As we considered these significant repairs, we also looked at how community use of the hospital has changed in recent years,” said Pamela Roberts, the hospital’s chief executive officer. “Our quality of care and patient satisfaction have been strong, but far fewer patients are using services here, whether inpatient, outpatient or ER. With the extensive repairs needed, disruption to operations and small number of patients using services, McNairy Regional Hospital is not sustainable.”

According to Tennova, since 2010, the number of patients admitted to McNairy Regional has steadily declined from just over 1,700 to approximately 550 last year, less than two patients per day. Emergency room visits have been fewer as well, averaging 24 a day over the past few months. Looking at ER visits last year, many patients required specialized treatment so they were stabilized, then transferred to a larger acute care hospital in Jackson. The majority of other patients’ needs could be addressed in an urgent care or physician’s office.

Tennova also cited cuts in federal reimbursement for services as part of the Affordable Care Act. These changes were based on more people having insurance, whether through Medicaid expansion or the insurance exchanges.

“Tennessee has not covered more individuals with Medicaid, leaving many of the state’s most vulnerable citizens without access to health insurance, and leaving no means to address the unsustainable burden of uncompensated care,” Tennova said.

Ambulance services will continue after the hospital and clinics close and this will help patients in the community access clinical care in emergencies. The EMS team will adjust its processes in response to this transition. Three hospitals operate within 30 miles of Selmer, and three more within 40 miles. Tennova Healthcare – Regional Jackson is already caring for patients who require more advanced clinical services and clinics in Jackson and Lexington have capacity to support the medical needs of patients from Selmer.

“The history of service and care at McNairy Regional is the result of the nurses, physicians and other caregivers at the hospital who have been dedicated to their patients,” said Roberts. “We appreciate their professionalism as we work through these changes and thank them for all they have done.”

Tennova said in the news release that work will be done to help employees to identify other opportunities to work at regional Tennova Health facilities. Job fairs have already been held at the hospital and more will be scheduled. Those who work until the hospital closes but are not placed in new positions will receive outplacement services and severance.