7 takeaways from the U.S. News Hospital of Tomorrow conference

The U.S. News Hospital of Tomorrow conference kicked off this weekend in Washington, D.C., with hospital leaders discussing a myriad of healthcare topics, including the Affordable Care Act and its impact.

Here are seven things to know about the meeting, which ends Tuesday.

1. This is the third annual Hospital of Tomorrow forum.

2. John Noseworthy, MD, president and CEO of Rochester, Minn.-based Mayo Clinic, opened the conference with a keynote speech on "The Faces of High-Value Health Care: People and Processes."

3. According to U.S. News & World Report, Dr. Noseworthy talked about how Mayo Clinic has better coordinated care during his speech,. He mentioned multiple examples, such as the creation of the "Ask Mayo Expert" interactive online service, which gives patients the ability to connect with a healthcare professional online. "The patients that are coming are much more complex and need that tertiary care," Dr. Noseworthy said, according to U.S. News & World Report. "It's a win-win for everybody."

4. According to the report, Dr. Noseworthy also talked about staff burnout and pointed out that Mayo has invested in personalized, or genomic, medicine, resulting in the stoppage of 650 prescriptions that could have adverse outcomes.

5. The conference also included an executive roundtable called "Transforming Health Care: Strategies for Tomorrow." Dr. Noseworthy; Nancy Schlichting, CEO of Detroit-based Henry Ford Health System; and Warner Thomas, president and CEO of New Orleans-based Ochsner Health System, all participated in the roundtable.

6. In addition, David Fisher, vice president of healthcare policy and strategy at German healthcare supplier Siemens Healthcare, discussed "Diagnosis in a Value-Based World." "We don't fully understand how often misdiagnosis occurs," Mr. Fisher said, according to U.S. News & World Report. "We have to measure it."

7. Kaveh Safavi, MD, global managing director for health industry at Dublin, Ireland-based Accenture, gave the closing keynote Sunday on "Getting Your Money's Worth Out of Healthcare with Digital Technologies." According to the report, he talked about a difference in the way people think about healthcare costs. "It's not that the public thinks we spend too much on healthcare, it's that they think we don't get our money's worth," he said, according to U.S. News & World Report.

More articles on infection control and clinical quality:

CT scans can help ED physicians make correct diagnoses: 5 study findings

NQF launches new patient safety, antibiotic stewardship initiatives: 8 things to know

3 benefits of using microfiber, steam technology to clean the OR

© Copyright ASC COMMUNICATIONS 2016. Interested in LINKING to or REPRINTING this content? View our policies by clicking here.