Team goes 0 for 5 in championship matches at Canon City Invitational

Tigers wrestler Gaven Guess reaches for Jair Flores' leg in the championship match during the Cañon City Invitational on Saturday at the Tiger Dome. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

Tigers wrestler Cody Killis wrestles in the championship match during the Cañon City Invitational on Saturday at the Tiger Dome. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

Getting five wrestlers to the finals on Saturday night wasn't expected by Tigers head coach Duff Seaney.

Dropping all five, well, he knew that was a possibility.

Gaven Guess, Caleb Coffey, Anthony Abbott, Cody Killis and Blake Repshire all made championship-match appearances in the Cañon City Invitational, but each one fell short.

The Tigers had a 12-point team lead on Pueblo Centennial heading into the final round, but Guess', Coffey's and Repshire's losses were to Bulldog wrestlers. That was enough for Centennial to take home the team title.

"Its's kind of the story of the finals this year," Seaney said. "We just can't find a way. But honestly, we're the team of overachievers, really. Just getting to the finals with that many kids is a pretty big accomplishment for us. We're just medium. We're a bunch of medium kids, and we seem to find a way to win and get some points but can't get over the hump at the end.

The Tigers were underdogs in all five of their championship matches. Nineteenth-ranked Guess lost to 13th-ranked Jair Flores (Centennial); unranked Coffey suffered an injury default to Centennial's ninth-ranked James Engle; tenth-ranked Abbott lost to third-ranked Ladd Bunker (Erie); unranked Killis lost to Swink's second-ranked Brody Wisemon; and eighth-ranked Repshire was pinned by Centennial's fourth-ranked Demitrius Miller.

On Deck Wednesday: Cañon City vs. Pueblo West, 6:30 p.m.* Friday: Cañon City @ Garden City Invite Saturday: Cañon City @ Garden City Invite Feb. 8: Cañon City hosts Tiger Quad, 9 a.m. * South-Central League dual

It was Repshire's first time being in a championship match of an individual tournament, he said. It's fresh off Seaney's decision to move him from 195s to 220s. He still weighs around 195, so he gives up weight, but he said he thinks the success he had on Saturday solidifies his decision that it was the right move.

"I fell like it's a great move for me to move up to 220s," he said.

Guess lost a decision in his finals match, but bled form his nose virtually the entire time. Coffey's loss was controversial. Engle slammed him to the mat and the Tigers felt it was illegal. Coffey stayed on the mat for a few minutes.

The Tigers will host Pueblo West in the team's final South-Central League dual at 6:30 p.m. Wednesday.