KALAMAZOO, MI -- The hacking cough started just after Christmas.





The initial diagnosis was bronchitis, with antibiotics and cough syrup prescribed.





But the cough persisted. Week after week after week. It was the kind of cough that kept the household awake at night and had co-workers reaching for Purell.





There was another visit to the urgent care center and two more to the family doctor -- three physicians in total, all sympathetic but unable to cure the cough.





If anything, the cough got worse as the weeks went on. New symptoms developed, including wheezing and shortness of breath.





After three months, a trip to an specialist in allergies and asthma brought a definitive diagnosis: Long-dormant allergies had roared back to life, provoking a runaway case of adult-onset asthma. A combination of drugs finally, quickly, brought everything under control.





As miserable and dragged-out as the whole experience was, it did offer some teachable moments about the health care, a timely subject right now.





1. Even something as seemingly minor as a chronic cough can be expensive in the U.S. health care system. Very expensive.





The total amount billed for six doctor visits (two at urgent care, two with the family doctor and two with the asthma specialist) plus tests, prescriptions and an initial round of allergy shots has totaled more than $3,500 so far.





And the cost for ongoing treatment isn't cheap: The retail price for the prescribed everyday asthma inhaler is $276 a a month. The retail cost for the prescribed nasal spray is $159 a month. The retail cost for the prescribed rescue inhaler is $54.





This is why people need health insurance.





2. Insurance with a high-deductible can save big money even before the deductible is met.





Insurance doesn't just pay a part of the cost. It also acts as a discount card, thanks to the prices negotiated by insurance companies.





The best example in this case file: A prescription of Levofloxacin, an antibiotic, had a retail price of $197, which the insurance discount knocked down to $4.





On average, insurance discounted the price of prescriptions by more than half, and the office visits and tests at the family doctor by a third. The specialist got more than 91 percent of what his office billed.





3. Health care is not subject to the same market forces as discretionary expenditures.





The Republican mantra on health-care reform revolves about harnessing free-market forces.





This case illustrates the limitations of that approach. Sure, it would be great to have more transparency up front about costs. But it's also hard to see how that would have helped much.





After all, there wasn't the option of choosing a less costly illness. From a practical sense, there was no opportunity to shop for a deal when the doctor ordered a chest x-ray to be taken down the hall. Likewise, there's not much point in price-shopping for an allergy/asthma specialist when most in the region work for the same practice.





That's the problem with health care and capitalism: If the consumer wants to get well, he/she must obtain very specific goods and service, which gives the health-care provider considerable leverage in setting the price.





It's no coincidence that the United States has the most free-market health-care system in the developed world and the most expensive.

Other countries see health care as a public good and set price caps. In the United States, health-care is a money-making business, and a very profitable one at that. Four of the 10 most profitable industries in the U.S. are related to health care, according to a 2011 study.





That prescribed asthma inhaler for $276? It can be bought in Canada for $85.





4. Access to health care is a qualify-of-life issue.





This case had not yet evolved into a life-or-death situation. But between the sleepless nights and the shortness of breath during the day, it was a serious problem, and becoming more serious by the day.





It begs the question: How would this have played out for someone without insurance? Or discouraged by a high deductible from going to the doctor?





About 25 million Americans have asthma. It's the fourth-leading cause of absenteeism from work and, for children, the leading cause of chronic absenteeism from school, according to the Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America.





It's a condition that requires medication care and regular doctor visits. But many don't have access to that care -- 15 percent of Michigan adults with asthma have gone without insurance for a time, according to an estimate by the federal Centers for Disease Control





The New York Times recently used asthma as a case study in how and why health-care costs in the United States are so much higher than other countries, and how that negatively impacts patients. Asthma inhalers are so effective at preventing hospitalization that they given free or at very low cost to patient in countries with national health care systems, the story noted. But in the U.S., "even people with insurance coverage struggle" to pay for their inhalers. As a result, U.S. asthma suffers are much more likely to end up in the hospital and much more like to die compared to other developed countries.

It is, really, a perfect microcosm of U.S. health care: We're a leader in developing the drugs and the methods to bring a serious, chronic disease under control, but fail to ensure everyone who needs treatment gets it. Compared to other countries, we spend more and get less in return.





It remains to be seen how effective the Affordable Care Act will be reforming American health care. But it's clear some kind of reform is desperately needed.





Julie Mack covers K-12 education and writes a column for Kalamazoo Gazette. Email her at jmack1@mlive.com, call her at 269-350-0277 or follow her on Twitter at kzjuliemack.