The budget crisis in Oklahoma has affected multiple areas of state services. Many folks have lost their jobs. Many more face an uncertain future.

One group hit hard by budget cuts is low-income Oklahomans on SoonerCare – Oklahoma’s Medicaid program. SoonerCare serves more than 800,000 individuals; approximately 523,000 of those are children.

SoonerCare receives federal funds based on mandates by the federal government. Mandates require that certain services be offered to specific populations in each state. If Oklahoma is forced to continue significant cuts, the state will not be able to provide required services and will not meet qualifications to receive federal funds. Since federal funds support more than 50 percent of Medicaid expenses in Oklahoma, SoonerCare is in trouble.

Many people believe the answer is to expand Medicaid at the state level. Unfortunately, expansion of Medicaid, offered under the Affordable Care Act, means amplification of the federal deficit. This in turn robs everyone in Oklahoma of their purchasing power with the dollar devalued.

Throwing more money into Medicaid is not a solution; it just adds to the problem. Even with more money passed out at the state level, providers will still struggle to accept Medicaid patients because reimbursement rates are below Medicare rates. Nico Gomez, CEO of the Oklahoma Health Care Authority, fears providers will leave the program because they will be unable to afford to deliver care to the poorest residents.

In 2009, President Obama was asked at a town hall meeting about the cost of health care reform and whether the government could afford to do it. His response was, “If we don’t do anything, costs are going to go out of control. Nobody disputes this. Medicare and Medicaid are the single biggest drivers of the federal deficit and the federal debt by a huge margin. If we don’t do something soon to rein in health care costs, Medicare and Medicaid will consume all of the federal budget.”

Well, its 2016, and nothing has been done. Obama and elected officials continue to talk, but offer no solutions. In essence, the federal government has not reined in costs in the name of health care reform, but have increased costs. Revenues collected cannot keep up with expenditures.

It is difficult for hardworking citizens to stay out of poverty when debt consumes our country and citizens must cover the tab. Oklahoma needs a creative solution to save SoonerCare, but not one rooted from the federal government.

David L. Holden is a board-certified orthopedic surgeon and serves on the board of directors at the Oklahoma County Medical Society.