What can be found at the Loveland Public Library isn't bound by the walls of the building at 300 N. Adams Ave. — in fact, the library has access to millions of books and other materials.

The Loveland Public Library joined the Prospector Consortium of Colorado libraries in May 2014 to provide access to more than 12 million items and to speed up the interlibrary loaning and borrowing process. In September 2014, Prospector partnered with a similar consortium in Missouri to increase that access to more than 42 million items.

On its racks and shelves, the Loveland library has 160,000 books, periodicals, compact discs, digital video discs, cassettes and other items.

"Medium-sized libraries like us can't begin to provide everything we want," said Marcia Lewis, library director of the Loveland Public Library. "We try to meet the needs of our people, but there's 12 million items in Prospector. There's a lot more materials available."

Prospector

Prospector is an interlibrary loan system that is more streamlined and automated than the traditional process with the patron entering the information to access the system as opposed to library staff. If the library doesn't have an item in its stacks, the patron can click on the Prospector Search to search the consortium of Colorado and Missouri libraries to search for the item, place it on hold and have it delivered within a few days or longer, if it has other holds. The item will be sent from the closest library via a courier.

Advertisement

The Prospector consortium consists of 42 public, academic and specialty libraries, and the Loveland library was the 42nd library to join. The Missouri consortium, called Mobius, has 71 library members, 61 of which are academic.

The Loveland library lends out more items than it borrows through Prospector. From May to December 2014, the library lent out 8,717 items and borrowed 5,868 items. In January, the library lent out 1,591 items and borrowed 957.

"It's taken awhile for people to realize we have Prospector," Lewis said.

Most items can be borrowed through Prospector for three weeks, except DVDs, which are for one week. The library checks out most items for three weeks, except new books and some of the books on CD, which are for two weeks, and DVDs, which are for one week.

Virtual Books

Patrons can access a range of virtual books and materials through the Overdrive Front Range Downloadable Library, which offers e-books, audiobooks, music and television through the Overdrive app. For example, OneClickDigital provides audiobooks published by Recorded Books; Zinio for Libraries has thousands of digital magazines; and Safari Books Online, Tumble Book Cloud and TumbleBook Library has e-books.

Patrons can check out the e-books and other virtual materials from the Overdrive for two weeks.

"You don't have to come to the library to use the library," Lewis said.

By having access to the virtual materials from other libraries, the Loveland library can make fewer purchases to replace older materials, especially those in a series, Lewis said. But having that access hasn't changed the way the library purchases books, she said.

The library circulated 718,187 items in 2014 and 716,750 items in 2013, an increase of two-tenths of a percent. That includes 39,218 items in 2014 and 32,231 items in 2013 through Overdrive, a jump of almost 22 percent.

The patron gate count also was up nearly 3 percent from 392,196 visits in 2013 to 403,126 visits in 2014.

Interlibrary loans were up 120 percent from 3,838 items in 2013 to 8,445 items in 2014, including the items in Prospector.

Goals for 2015

The Loveland library wants to increase its collection and build its patron base in 2015, based on the goals of its strategic plan.

"One of the focuses is some marketing and rebranding, just letting people know what's in the library," Lewis said, adding that patrons might not know about the library's 3-dimensional printer or computer classes.

Library staff will do three things to carry out the plan:

• Focus on data collection to identify users and non-users to build collections and provide additional services.

• Expand and target services to teens, young adults, Spanish speakers and local businesses, gathering information through several focus groups.

• Improve marketing and promotion, including building a library bicycle decked out with Wi-Fi. The library received a donated Surrey Bike two-person bicycle, which will be modified to carry books, make library cards and serve as a hotspot.

Starting this summer, staff will take the bike to farmers markets, parades and other community events to do outreach, Lewis said.

"We're trying to let people know what we have and take the library out to the community," she said.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm