Other Related Content Prussing vs. Carle

Outtakes from News-Gazette interviews with Carle Foundation CEO Dr. James Leonard and Urbana Mayor Laurel Prussing:

Prussing, on why Carle and the city aren't talking things out: "People ask me: 'Why aren't you at the table with Carle?' We were at the table with Carle — and they sued us."

Leonard, on the value Carle adds to the community: "People use us as a reason to move here."

Prussing on whether Carle can afford to pay both property taxes and charity care: "If they were going broke over paying charity care, they would not be clearing a half a billion dollars in two years."

Leonard, on accusations that his position as Illinois Hospital Association board chairman in 2013 gave Carle clout to get the new state law on nonprofit hospitals and tax exemptions passed, when the law was actually passed the previous year: "That's the kind of thing people throw out there that makes this difficult."

Prussing on whether she's concerned about the legal expenses involved with challenging the constitutionality of the state's new hospital tax-exemption law: "The legal expense is nothing compared to what's at stake."

Leonard, on whether he's taking criticism about Carle personally: "It can't be personal. I can't allow myself that. It's too important."

Adding up

$1.83 billion: Carle Foundation total revenues, 2013.

$1.68 billion: Carle Foundation total expenses, 2013

$157.9 million: Carle Foundation net operating revenue, 2013, excluding investment income.

$91.2 million: non-operating investment income, 2013.

$180 million: The effect of the Affordable Care Act on payments to Carle over 10 years, $150 million of which is in reductions to Medicare payments.

$60 million: Total budget for the city of Urbana in 2014-15.

$44 million: The value of free and discounted care (reflected at cost) given away by Carle in 2013.

$20.8 million: Carle property taxes paid under protest prior to 2012 tax year.

$6.3 million: Cost of Carle's tax exemptions to Champaign County taxing districts, 2013.

$1.3 million: Property taxes paid by Carle throughout its service region in 2013, including $45,000 for Health Alliance Medical Plans.

$72,924: How much the city of Urbana paid in outside legal expenses from February 2013 to November 2014 dealing with its two local hospitals, with 90 percent related to Carle.

Along the way

A timeline of the contentious issues surrounding Urbana's hospitals, courtesy staff writer Debra Pressey:

2002

— Champaign County Board of Review denies a tax exemption for then Provena Covenant (now Presence Covenant) Medical Center.

2004

— The county board of review adds long-exempted Carle properties to the tax rolls.

2007

— Carle files a lawsuit to restore exemptions to four properties.

2010

— Carle Foundation purchases Carle Clinic for $250 million, pulling the formerly for-profit clinic system under the non-profit foundation.

— The Illinois Supreme Court finds Covenant Medical Center failed to meet the requirements of a public charity deserving of a tax break for 2002 tax year.

2012

— Carle begins imposing a "facility fee" on cancer and radiology departments, then gets patients' attention when it expands the practice to physician offices and some specialty services the following year.

— A new state law redefines the terms of how nonprofit hospitals qualify for tax exemptions, requiring them to provide at least as much charity care as their tax breaks are worth.

2013

— Both Urbana hospitals are granted tax exemptions under the new state law, though both hospitals continue seeking exemptions for several previous tax years.

— Carle files a second lawsuit seeking exemptions for 29 additional properties.

— A settlement between Carle and the Urbana school and park districts allows both districts to keep some of the tax money Carle paid under protest prior to 2012.

— Urbana Mayor Laurel Prussing writes in a memo to the city council: "Carle's shift of its fair share to other Urbana taxpayers puts an unsustainable economic burden on the city. Significantly higher tax rates will force Urbana onto a downward spiral, unable to compete for businesses and residents."

— Champaign County Judge Chase Leonhard determines the state's new law on hospital exemption can apply to Carle's exemption claims for 2004-2011 and grants Carle's motion for a summary judgment on that the following year.

2014

— Urbana refuses to accept more than $100,000 Carle offered the city to help pay for police and fire protection.

— In December, Fitch Ratings affirms an AA rating for the Carle Foundation, stating that, for the first nine months of the year, Carle generated operating income of $67.5 million on revenues of $1.48 billion and linking a strong growth in Carle's patient volume, in part, to its new inpatient tower.