Outlook for nursing jobs continues to look positive





Photo: iStockphoto Image 1 of / 2 Caption Close Image 1 of 2 The growth for the industry is exceptional, where a nurse can do anything from assessing patient health problems and needs, developing and implementing nursing care plans, and maintaining medical records. The growth for the industry is exceptional, where a nurse can do anything from assessing patient health problems and needs, developing and implementing nursing care plans, and maintaining medical records. Photo: iStockphoto Image 2 of 2 In the Houston market, jobs are plentiful, with the continued expansion of local hospitals and health care facilities creating a shortage possibility in the field. In the Houston market, jobs are plentiful, with the continued expansion of local hospitals and health care facilities creating a shortage possibility in the field. Photo: Comstock Images Outlook for nursing jobs continues to look positive 1 / 2 Back to Gallery

The 2015 outlook for nursing as a profession of choice continues to be hot as the diversity of opportunities continue to change with the demands of the health care industry.

From hospitals to clinics, nurses have more options than ever to choose the type of career they want in addition to the level they'd like to pursue.

The growth for the industry is exceptional, where a nurse can do anything from assessing patient health problems and needs, developing and implementing nursing care plans, and maintaining medical records. They also have the chance to administer nursing care to the ill, injured, convalescent or disabled patients. Duties may include advising patients on health maintenance, disease prevention and possibly providing case management.

The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics indicates the demand for registered nurses is expected to grow 26 percent between 2010 and 2020, which is a faster-than-average rate of growth for a job in the United States. An aging population and advancements in medical care are the main reasons behind this level of growth.

For the Houston market, jobs are plentiful, with the continued expansion of local hospitals and health care facilities creating a shortage possibility in the field.

Laura Rooney, D.N.P., A.P.R.N., director, UT Health Services, said these factors fuels the fire for the mixture of nursing positions.

"Drivers of the shortage include an aging nursing workforce, increased number of people receiving health care via the Affordable Care Act along with increased number of people living with complex, chronic disease that requires care," Rooney said. "Nursing provides a diverse array of opportunities from health care and bedside nursing to advanced practice nursing to positions for nurses in the business world."

The variety of settings nurses are needed in is evolving, and jobs are not necessarily always in a hospital, Rooney said.

"The field of nursing extends to occupational settings, with nurses providing health and wellness, education, and case management. In the outpatient clinic setting, nurses are moving into positions such as 'care management' roles where their knowledge of the health care system allows them to effectively manage and facilitate the care for more complex patients," she said.

According to www.nursingworld.org, the job market for nurses will continue to be strong in the coming year as demographic trends and new federal legislation regarding health care affect demand for nurses.

Data from 2013 on Monster.com stated registered nurse is the No. 1 health care job.

Having a bachelor's and/or master's degree in nursing also is a plus when finding a nursing position, stated a 2013 report from the American Association of Colleges of Nursing.

Pinpointing the specifics driving the demand and opportunities for nursing jobs is based in part to the Affordable Care Act and the expanding health care industry. The emphasis on improved utilization of resources consistently affects employment opportunities in nursing.

All types of nurses are still a winning bet, Rooney said.

"There is no one type of nursing that is more in demand than others. The registered nurse (RN) is the springboard into the health care field, and therefore a great place to start. From here, given education and a desire to learn, the possibilities are endless for nursing," Rooney said.