Minuteman Health, the lowest-cost and second-biggest participant on New Hampshire’s ObamaCare exchange, warned last week that it’s requesting a 45.2% premium hike for 2017.

The news comes as New Hampshire insurers reported an 11.7% decline in membership, down from the 55,183 signups reported by the Obama administration as of early February to 48,704 members with up-to-date payments at the start of April.

Including ObamaCare customer exits in five other states — Connecticut, Colorado, Minnesota, Oklahoma and Washington — previously reported by IBD and other news outlets, that averages out to a 14.2% decline. The six states combined had nearly 647,000 customers at latest word, down from more than 753,000.

That’s an early sign ObamaCare’s individual mandate isn’t working as well as its supporters hoped. With the mandate tax penalty jumping to a minimum of $695 per adult for going without coverage this year, the fact that people are opting not to pay suggests that many would prefer to gamble on going uninsured and pay a fine rather than buy a bronze plan with a deductible of $6,000-plus.

If the same rate of attrition occurred in the rest of the country, which is by no means clear from the small sample, that would cut enrollment to just under 11 million from the 12.7 million who signed up.

Minuteman, with nearly 13,500 customers and nearly 40% of bronze-plan members, trails Anthem (ANTM) as the biggest player on the exchange, excluding Medicaid customers up to 138% of the poverty level. Near-poor customers became eligible this year for marketplace plans through a state waiver granted by the Department of Health and Human Services.

Centene (CNC) unit Ambetter from N.H. Healthy Families plan has 20,800 Medicaid waiver customers, nearly half the 41,800 total.

Minuteman officials said they were being financially conservative in requesting the high rate increase and could substantially lower the request, but there’s good reason for their caution.

The company, which also competes in Mass., had to pay out $2,150 per plan member last year into ObamaCare’s risk-adjustment program, based on 2014 results. The program shifts funds from insurers who get a relatively healthy group of enrollees to those who attract sicker customers. Yet insurers and experts alike have said it does a poor job of accurately balancing the risk taken on by insurers.

Now Minuteman, expecting even worse, has set aside $3,000 per 2015 customer. HHS will report risk-adjustment results for 2015 on June 30, and Minuteman will update its rate request in July.

Small carriers like Minuteman would like to see risk-adjustment pay-outs capped at a fixed percentage of premiums. But others, like UnitedHealth (UNH), have suggested they’re already being short-changed. (UnitedHealth this month said it would pull out of all but a “handful” of exchanges in 2017.)

The Obama administration brought stakeholders together for a big risk-adjustment meeting last month to hash out the future of the program.

Minuteman this year is offering the cheapest bronze plan and the two cheapest silver plans in New Hampshire. Its lowest-cost bronze offering is 11% cheaper than its nearest rival, Harvard Pilgrim Health.