Lafayette's Flatirons Community Church is expanding into Denver, where it will begin holding services this fall at the Paramount Theatre. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

LAFAYETTE — Flatirons Community Church announced at weekend services that it's opening a third campus at Denver's Paramount Theatre.

The Lafayette-based church signed a one-year lease to hold Sunday services at the historic theater, located next to the 16th Street Mall at 1621 Glenarm Place, said Zack Weingartner, Flatirons campus ambassador.

He said the church counts about 6,000 members with Denver addresses. Providing Sunday services in Denver, he said, will allow the church to expand its volunteer base and do volunteer work in Denver neighborhoods.

"We want an opportunity to reach people in every community in Colorado," he said.

The Denver services, which are expected to start in the fall, will include a live band and have a video feed of sermons from the Lafayette church.

The theater, which was built in 1930 and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places, can seat up to 1,900 people.

"It's a wonderful facility," he said. "We love the theater and its history."

The church is asking Denver parishioners to take an online survey on their preferences for service times and whether they would use the Paramount as their primary campus, an occasional campus or not all.

Flatirons, which has experienced tremendous growth in recent years, has bought commercial property and parking lots across Lafayette and Colorado to accommodate its gains in parishioners.

Advertisement

Those moves have included Flatirons acquiring a 162,000-square-foot site in Lafayette that once housed a Walmart and Albertsons; buying a 51,200-square-foot church in Genesee; and, most recently, agreeing to purchase a 38,000-square-foot portion of the Lafayette Marketplace at 400 W. South Boulder Road.

The church paid $2.75 million for its future share of the Lafayette Marketplace, Boulder County public records show.

Flatirons acquired about half of the 93,000-square-foot, Jax Mercantile-anchored property at 400 W. South Boulder Road. Flatirons officials have said they plan to serve as the landlord for existing retail tenants and would convert about 15,000 square feet of space into offices.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa