Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

DENVER (AP) — Wes Welker’s receiving stats over a productive NFL career are impressive. Still, there’s another set of numbers associated with him that cannot be ignored: three concussions, nine months.

Cleared to play following his third diagnosed concussion since November, the Broncos receiver will get back in a game Sunday, when Denver travels to Seattle for a Super Bowl rematch. Welker’s suspension for testing positive for amphetamines in the offseason was cut in half when the NFL and the union agreed to a revamped drug policy.

Still, the comeback feels a bit rushed, with the potential for life-altering consequences if the next big hit the 33-year-old takes to the head winds up being his last.

“We know that having multiple concussions is not good,” said Dr. Julian Bailes, clinical professor of neurosurgery at the University of Chicago and a member of the NFL Players Association’s concussion committee, who noted that all sorts of factors must be taken into account on an individual basis. “It’s not necessarily career-ending. … A contact-sport athlete who’s had multiple concussions in a short period of time does risk further concussions and risks that it becomes a season- or career-ending proposition if they return to play.”

Welker returns less than a month since leaving an Aug. 23 preseason game after a hit to the head.

On Wednesday, he said he’d been medically cleared to play in the past week or so. But his drug suspension delayed his comeback by at least a game, a layoff he said was probably for the best. He has heard ongoing debate about his future — whether an 11-year NFL veteran who’s earned more than $20 million along with a reputation as one of the game’s best slot receivers should even bother playing anymore.

“I appreciate their concern, I really do,” said Welker, who has 841 catches for 9,358 yards. “But at the same time, I feel great. I feel sharp and I feel ready to go.”

An NFL player’s assessment of his own health is one of the most important factors in determining when he returns. It’s also a reason the NFL has no hard-and-fast rules about saying, for instance, that three concussions in less than 12 months should rule a player out.

“It would create a tremendous disincentive to report that third concussion,” says Chris Nowinski, a driving force behind research on the topic. “You really want to leave the decision in the hands of a great doctor and an honest patient and let them make the best decision for that athlete.”

The 5-foot-9, 185-pound Welker has been going over the middle and taking punishment for decades — in high school, at Texas Tech, and with three NFL teams.

But he passed the NFL’s revamped return-to-play protocols established in 2009; independent doctors cleared him to play after comparing his brain function to the “baseline” numbers established in pre-training camp tests that look at memory, concentration and other cognitive functions.