Medicare reimbursement payments went to nearly 150 ineligible physicians and potentially tens of thousands of incorrect addresses in 2014, according to a new government watchdog report. David McNew/Getty Images

Nearly $60 billion in Medicare funds distributed in 2014 that were meant to reimburse doctors for the care they gave older Americans were doled out to practices with dubious addresses or delivered to medical providers who had been given disciplinary actions by professional boards, according to the federal government's watchdog agency.

The findings were concerning to members of Congress because they showed an increase in improper payments of more than $10 billion – or 20 percent – from 2013, despite reforms put in place beginning five years ago as a result of President Barack Obama's health care law, the Affordable Care Act. Lawmakers expressed concerns about findings that showed the physical address of one practice was a vacant lot. In another case, the listed location was a burger joint.

The questions around Medicare were raised in a report from the Government Accountability Office, which used site visits and search methods like Google Maps to check addresses in the government's payment system.

"I am dismayed to learn that improper payments are still flowing to con artists who built the system from fictitious locations," Sen. Susan Collins, R-Maine, said in a hearing Wednesday of the Senate Committee on Aging.

The report found that within the $554 billion Medicare system, payments were sent to 147 doctors who had committed crimes but were not removed from databases out of a total of about 1.3 million registered physicians, and that about 23,400 of 105,234 locations were not what they claimed to be. In addition, 38 providers continued to receive Medicare payments after they died. The report said the mistakes are partly the result of a system that verifies providers largely after they have been paid, though health care officials say this method is changing.

Dr. Shantanu Agrawal, deputy administrator at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services – the agency responsible for distributing the payments – defended the verification system, saying that officials already checked on many of the questionable addresses GAO flagged. He noted many of the findings were a result of improper documentation rather than the work of con artists. For instance, some doctors may have moved and not notified the agency.

The vacant lot and the burger joint, shown at the hearing, were examples of such cases and had not billed the agency for more than a decade, Agrawal said. Seto Bagdoyan, director of audit services at GAO, said it was difficult to assess the difference between improper payments and those that were fraudulent. In addition, GAO was not able to identify why improper payments increased over the previous year.



CMS noted that it already made changes under the health care law, including removing 34,000 providers and 540,000 addresses from its system since 2011. Some of the new laws around provider registration, Agrawal said, make it difficult for providers to keep up.

Concerns about where Medicare funds go are growing as government projections show the program will continue to become more expensive in coming years. The aging baby boomer population is contributing to the growing demographic of Americans who will qualify beginning at age 65. Estimated at 43 million in 2012, they are projected to reach more than 80 million by 2050.

In the report, the GAO encouraged CMS to update the software it uses to check where funds are sent. The agency last year paid a contractor $1.2 million to carry out the duties, and Collins asked why it did not already use methods that were free online, like Google Maps or 411.com. Sen. Claire McCaskill, D-Mo., agreed. "Why would we hire people who wouldn't use a tool that's free? Why do we need another layer?" she asked during the hearing.

Agrawal responded that the agency instead looked toward more automated methods and already used data from the Postal Service. "What we want to move away from is potentially inconsistent manual checks," he said, noting that the agency already had folded GAO data into its system.

Sen. Tom Cotton, R-Ark., responded that the government doesn't have a strong track record with automated methods, and other members of the committee during the hearing pushed CMS to update its system for checking where payments are going.