AFP/Getty Images

There’s a frenzy of merger and acquisition activity underway right now, in industries ranging from pharmaceuticals to communications and media. And as of today, you can add the doggie day care business to the list of targets – Camp Bow Wow, which has sold 152 franchises in the U.S. and Canada since 2003, has been snapped up by VCA, one of the country’s biggest animal health companies.

VCA's stock-market ticker, it should be noted, is WOOF.

And now, WOOF will include Camp Bow Wow. “Across the nation, the demand for dog daycare is growing,” reads the opening to Camp Bow Wow’s explanation for why its services are in demand. And this isn’t a standard kennel we’re talking about here: “We provide a social environment for our dogs,” the company says, letting them spend the day playing together outdoors, with a a staff-to-canine ratio of 1:15.

And not any random mutt can get into this club – the camp has “a very stringent application and interview process”, which about 10% of dogs flunk. It has become a business that employs thousands and brings in tens of millions in revenue each year, reports the WSJ’s Ryan Dezember:

As part of the deal, Ms. Ganahl plans to hire a president to run Camp Bow Wow’s day-to-day operations, while she, as chief executive, focuses on strategy. Camp Bow Wow’s core business offers day care for dogs at franchise-owned facilities, starting at about $25 a day, as well as overnight boarding for between $40 and $60 a night. Since settling on a franchise model in 2003, the company has sold 152 franchises in the U.S. and Canada. Of those, 122 camps and seven house-call franchises are running, two are corporate-owned, with the rest in development. Some of the franchises also offer dog training. The company said that together, the businesses employ about 3,500 people and last year generated systemwide sales of $71 million.

Camp Bow Wow has capitalized on the vast sums of money owners are willing to spend on their animals, with Halloween costumes for pets now estimated to be a $300 million market and retailer PetSmart rolling out pet clothing branded by the likes of Martha Stewart and Tommy Bahama. In April, Mars Inc. agreed to pay $2.9 billion to buy Iams and other pet food brands from Procter & Gamble.

Mars, which is not publicly traded and doesn’t disclose results, is the largest pet food maker in the world, and sold an estimated $16.5 worth of the stuff in 2012. Among its more intriguing pet offerings: Wisdom Panel, a DNA testing service for dogs.

See also:

VCA to Acquire Camp Bow Wow Chain – WSJ