State legislators are debating what response state government should make to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's Clean Power Plan rules announced Monday.

Duke Energy’s plans to convert its plant at Lake Julian off Long Shoals Road in Skyland from generating electricity with coal to using natural gas and solar instead will help North Carolina meet a target set in the federal government’s Clean Power Plan. (Photo: Citizen-Times photo)

North Carolina could reduce greenhouse gas emissions to levels mandated in new federal rules to fight global warming without straying dramatically from current plans and would see cleaner air and lower electric rates in the process, environmentalists backing the rules say.

But they will have a tough sell as the issue plays out in coming weeks.

Gov. Pat McCrory's administration and other critics say the rules will drive up the cost of electricity — by 7 to 9 percent, an industry study says — and the state has already made strides in cleaning its air, meaning additional health benefits will be small.

State legislators are debating what response state government should make to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's Clean Power Plan rules announced Monday while McCrory's administration is making plans for North Carolina to join other states in suing to block its enforcement.

The national Clean Power Plan calls for a 32 percent reduction in carbon dioxide emissions from power plants nationally by 2030 and a 36 percent cut in North Carolina, a less stringent target for the state than was originally proposed because of adjustments to the plan. Carbon dioxide is a key cause of global warming.

Legislators are deciding whether North Carolina should adopt a plan of its own to hit the target or ignore the rules for now. Taking no action might mean the state would be subject to a carbon reduction plan the EPA has written as a backup for states that choose not to develop one.

The other big issue is whether a North Carolina-written plan should focus solely on reducing emissions from power plants or include more reliance on solar and wind power or other methods.

It's time to do something, said Swannanoa resident Steffi Rausch, a website designer who is also a leader in a local group pushing for action on global warming.

"We're already in climate change. I feel this is the number one threat to us," she said. Rausch favors a totally different way of dealing with the problem — a tax on carbon — but says it is "very frustrating" to hear state leaders dragging their feet on taking action.

The federal Clean Power Plan only covers emissions from power plants, which account for about a third of CO2 emissions in North Carolina and the United States. It sets reduction targets for each state tailored to its situation then leaves most of the decisions about how to comply up to state governments.

North Carolina critics say it is an unwise step. They regard the science of global warming as unsettled and say the plan is an unwanted intrusion into matters that should be subject to state control or will cause unacceptable increases in power costs.

They also say the rules could be struck down in the courts as going beyond the provisions of the federal Clean Air Act.

"The EPA's one-size-fits-all approach fails to consider the unique nature of each state's energy generating system and does not take into account recent measures to reduce emissions," Donald van der Vaart, secretary of the state Department of Environment and Natural Resources, said in a statement. "DENR's initial review of the final rule reveals that it is legally flawed and will not stand up in court."

Supporters of the Clean Power Plan in the state say North Carolina should employ more than one method to cut carbon dioxide pollution. To do otherwise would require changes to existing power plants that would be unnecessarily expensive and set up a conflict with the EPA that could delay action, they say.

They say the rules are on solid legal ground, give North Carolina authority to decide how to comply and would make an important contribution to dealing with a recognized global problem.

The Republican McCrory administration is letting politics guide its response to rules from the Democratic administration of President Barack Obama, not facts, said Gudrun Thompson, an attorney with the Southern Environmental Law Center who specializes in air issues.

"They are trying to use the Clean Power Plan sort of like Obamacare as a political football to score points with their base," she said.

The plan gives states the ability to make its own decisions about how to reduce emissions if DENR will just use it, Thompson said, and the rules could actually cut electricity costs for North Carolinians.

The McCrory administration's legal concerns "are just incorrect," she said.

Choices, choices

States most heavily reliant on coal generation are generally required to make the biggest emissions reductions in the Clean Power Plan because reducing coal burning is a relatively easy way to reduce the release of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.

"This plan reflects the fact that not everybody is starting in the same place. So we're giving states the time and the flexibility they need to cut pollution in a way that works for them," Obama said when announcing the final plan Monday.

States are in the driver's seat when it comes to deciding how to meet the targets, federal officials say.

Adopting standards that would require switching some coal plants to use natural gas to generate electricity instead is likely to be a component of many plans. But states could also take steps to require utilities to use more renewable electricity sources or to improve the energy efficiency of homes, offices or other power users.

Another possibility is setting up trading programs in which companies able to make major decreases in emissions at a generating plant could sell emissions credits to another company with plants where reductions are less economical. The sales could occur across state lines.

Duke Energy's recently announced plan to convert its Lake Julian plant, off Long Shoals Road in Skyland, from using coal and natural gas to generate power to gas and solar only will help the state meet the federal target.

It is difficult to say exactly what will be in North Carolina's plan, due next year, but legislation moving through the General Assembly may determine what won't be.

The House passed a bill, endorsed by both industry and environmental groups, in April directing DENR to draw up a state plan. A Senate committee last month rewrote it to actually prohibit DENR from writing a plan, but van der Vaart recently persuaded senators to back off that idea.

On Wednesday, the Senate passed on a 31-12 party-line vote a bill that allows DENR to go ahead. But, the bill says the state plan can only include steps to improve efficiency and reduce emissions at coal-fired plants. It says measures must be cost effective, gives the General Assembly the ability to block new rules and directs DENR to sue the federal government over the issue to the extent it finds the Clean Power Plan is inconsistent with federal law.

The House won't vote until at least next week whether to agree to the Senate changes.

The Senate bill excludes the possibility of relying more on renewable sources of electricity, trading emissions credits or of finding ways to reduce demand for electricity. That dovetails with DENR's position that the federal government does not have the authority to require other measures.

Van der Vaart "would like to submit a plan that is consistent with the Clean Air Act," said DENR spokeswoman Crystal Feldman. Some environmental groups have taken a similar position as the state's on the question of EPA's legal standing to issue Clean Power Plan rules, she said.

But some plan supporters say the federal government has more power than DENR believes and, even if the courts see things the same way DENR does, the state would be on firm ground to use its own authority to require more renewables or find ways to reduce power demand.

"If you're restricting yourself to only measures (at power plants), it's going to be a lot harder to meet" the target, Thompson said. "The administration is sort of shooting itself in the foot."

Sen. Mike Woodard said during Senate floor debate that state officials and senators are trying to resist the Clean Power Plan for political reasons.

"Why are we going to go with the most expensive option for our consumers?" he asked. The Senate approach "dooms North Carolina to have our plan disapproved," he said.

Go (away) solar?

State laws that give tax breaks to companies that build renewable energy facilities and require utilities to get a certain percentage of their power from renewable sources are under attack in the General Assembly this year.

Opponents say the laws distort the market, cost the state tax dollars and increase electrical costs. Proponents say solar farms and other facilities create jobs, help make North Carolina's air cleaner and help fight global warming.

DENR said the state is already on track to reduce carbon emissions by 30 percent by 2030 because of plans already in place to convert coal plants to gas and to increase the share of electricity generated in the state by renewable sources. Feldman said doing more in the Clean Power Plan would be expensive because the EPA target is too aggressive.

EPA projects that the state would be 80 percent of the way to its goal by 2020 without taking any additional action whatsoever.

"That doesn't sound like a big gap," said Robin Smith, a Chapel Hill attorney and environmental consultant who was an assistant secretary at DENR for 12 years. The state should be able to figure out how to get the rest of the way to meet the target, she said.

Thompson noted that the state's primary utility, Duke Energy, issued a neutral statement about the Clean Power Plan after Monday's announcement. That suggests it isn't worried about dire consequences if it has to help meet targets in the rules.

"Utilities have to plan for the future based on existing and foreseeable regulations. A lot of people seem to be ignoring the fact that Duke Energy has been planning for carbon regulation for years," Thompson said.

Duke CEO Lynn Good told stock analysts last week that the company is still evaluating the Clean Power Plan.

Duke spokeswoman Paige Sheehan said the utility will not make decisions on what it will do in North Carolina in response to the new rules until after North Carolina comes up with a state plan. She said Duke cut its carbon dioxide emissions by 25 percent from 2005 to 2014.

The state's Clean Smokestacks Act, adopted in 2002, required polluters to take a number of steps to reduce emissions. Duke says it has retired 26 coal-burning units in the state and invested $3 billion on pollution control equipment.

Needs and rights

The Obama administration is pushing the rules to fight global warming directly and to show the United States is doing its part ahead of a United Nations conference in Paris in December where participants hope to come to an agreement on steps to limit warming to 3.6 degrees or less. Some scientists consider that level of warming a tipping point, an amount of increase above which the worst effects of global warming would occur, even though many say negative effects of global warming will happen with less change in temperature.

Some of the opposition to the Clean Power Plan and state efforts to participate comes from global warming skeptics or deniers.

"There's still a large, raging debate about what the nature of climate change is," said Donald Bryson, executive director of conservative group Americans for Prosperity and a critic of the plan.

He views the plan as imposition on the state's sovereignty, saying, "If there is a problem in North Carolina, then perhaps we can figure it out in North Carolina."

Climate scientists, however, overwhelmingly say the data about man's contribution to global warming are clear and many say quick action is needed on a national and international scale.

"I don't think there's much of a debate," Smith said.

She said one of the strengths of the plan is, "It allows flexibility," allowing people in North Carolina to craft a response.

Your power bill

McCrory said in a press release that the rules would increase electricity rates in the state and "have the potential to jeopardize the success we've made in making North Carolina's air the cleanest it's been since we began tracking air quality back in the 1970s."

The power cost issue is a case of dueling studies. An October study for coal and oil groups said the draft Clean Power Plan would result in a 7 percent to 9 percent increase in power costs for consumers in North Carolina. It was based on a higher emissions reduction goal than EPA ultimately set for the state.

Rate increases predicted by the industry study suggests the typical North Carolina family might pay between $8.44 and $10.85 a month more because of the Clean Power Plan, based on an average residential power bill of $120.52 in 2013.

Part of the challenge for keeping electric costs in line lies in adding more renewable sources of energy like solar or wind, Feldman said.

"Because they are an intermittent source of energy, they always have to have a backup source," she said. A generating plant burning natural gas will not be as efficient and make maximum use of the investment a utility makes to build it if it switches off and on frequently to meet demand when renewable power isn't available, she said.

An analysis for the Southern Environmental Law Center says electricity costs would drop by $200 million to $300 million in the state when the plan is fully implemented in 2030, Thompson said. Most of the drop would be created by more efficient use of electricity, an area DENR wants to leave out of its response to the Clean Power Plan.

Nationally, the EPA says the typical family's electric bill will fall 7 percent because of the plan. It says North Carolina will benefit financially from lower carbon emissions because cutting them will also involve lowering the amount of soot and other pollutants, thereby creating significant health benefits.

In addition, curbing global warming would prevent major negative impacts from sea level rise, extreme weather, an increase in pests and diseases affecting trees and declining crop yields caused by higher summer temperatures.

Feldman says the Clean Smokestacks Act has already resulted in a big improvement in the state's air quality, so health benefits in North Carolina will be less than in other states.

The number of days when people are warned to limit outdoor activities has dropped dramatically, but there are still warning days for sensitive groups. Three groups pushing for improvements in air quality to improve public health cited an estimate that the Clean Power Plan would save more than 1,200 lives in the state from 2020 to 2030.

North Carolina is already one of the leading states for renewable energy. Thompson said that bodes well for the effort to reach the Clean Power Plant goal, if DENR will just take renewables into account.

"It's because North Carolina has been a leader in clean energy development that the state is really well positioned to meet this new target," she said.

North Carolina's carbon emissions

North Carolina was 15th among the states in emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in 2012, according to data complied by World Resources Institute. Figures are in millions of metric tons and do not include offsets to emissions created by changes in land use, like reforestation.

• Electricity generation: 55.9

• Transportation: 47.1

• Industrial: 15.7

• Agriculture: 10

• Waste emissions: 8.1

• Residential: 4.5

• Commercial: 4.5

• TOTAL: 145.9

Hot enough?

The earth's average temperature has increased 1.4 degrees since 1880, NASA and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration say, and nine of the 10 hottest years on record occurred since 2000. The other was 1998.

Last year may have been the hottest since records were kept, but there is some uncertainty about that because of the margin of error involved in such measurements. Some sources say 2015 is on track to be hotter than 2014.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1NhDOZo