EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — For the second consecutive week, with the weight of a game on his shoulders, Eli Manning sagged.

The two-time Super Bowl MVP — who has made his living and his legend doing just enough to win — tried to do too much in the New York Giants’ 41-23 loss to the Broncos on Sunday, tying a career high with four interceptions and racking up many of his 362 passing yards after the game’s outcome was decided.

“You can’t afford to turn the ball over like that,” Manning said after the loss, which drops New York to 0-2 for the year.

The Giants’ last first-half possession summed up Eli’s game. With Denver clinging to a one-point lead, Manning hit Hakeem Nicks for 34-yard strike, then benefited from a Broncos penalty to put the Giants at the 28-yard line with 16 seconds left.

The team’s MVP to that point — kicker Josh Brown — was well within range to give New York a halftime lead. But Eli forced a ball into the corner of the end zone, where Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie chased it down for the first of Manning’s interceptions.

No poise, no points.

Later, two more interceptions came with Manning desperate to force something deep.

It’s not all Manning’s fault. The Giants’ anemic rushing game mustered only 23 yards and averaged 1.2 yards per carry, and Brandon Jacobs’ rushing touchdown came only after Denver defensive tackle Terrance Knighton taunted the Giants inside the 5-yard line, giving them a fresh set of downs.

But Manning’s calling card throughout his career has been his ability to recover from early inconsistency in the second half. His best chance — the team’s best chance — to keep up with Denver came in the fourth quarter with the Broncos up 13. On second down, Manning sailed a ball over Victor Cruz’s head out of bounds. The next play, he missed a wide-open Hakeem Nicks on a pass that would have extended the drive.

Really, Manning’s only highlights were a 51-yard bomb to Cruz on the Giants’ first play from scrimmage and a touchdown to backup running back Da’Rel Scott that came after Broncos returner Trindon Holliday had sent Giants fans heading for the exits after an 81-yard punt return touchdown.

Peyton Manning’s greatness was undeniable Sunday, as the future first-ballot Hall of Famer became the fastest quarterback in NFL history to reach 60,000 passing yards.

It’s Peyton who leads the league with nine passing touchdowns. Eli leads the league with seven interceptions and remains winless against his kin.