“There is no line in the budget … for waste, fraud and abuse.”

At a committee hearing in June 1981, Sen. Pete Domenici (R-NM) may have been the first to publicly enunciate this truism.

But New York’s former senator, James L. Buckley, brings us real solutions for reining in waste, excessive federal spending and a national debt now exceeding $18 trillion in his incisive new book, “Saving Congress from Itself.”

Buckley writes about his frustrations as a legislator, when constituent groups increasingly appealed to the federal government for services that had been traditionally managed by state and local authorities.

That disturbing trend has only expanded over the decades. Buckley writes about a recent meeting convened by a new senator from Connecticut, at which the politician not only suffers through constituents pleading for better local bus schedules and service, he appreciates their appeals, and promises to assist them.

Buckley points to the explosive growth in federal grants-in-aid, money given to states with strings attached, as the expensive enabler of such thinking.

For 2015, these grants are scheduled to total $640.8 billion in spending, out of an overall budget of $3.1 trillion to $3.8 trillion. So grants-in-aid will amount to perhaps more than 20 percent of the federal budget.

That’s a ripe target, the elimination of which would eliminate this year’s federal deficit, and put us on the road to eventually retiring our national debt.

One of the primary problems with grants-in-aid is that, directed by congressional legislators distant from local, real-world problems, is that they tie up state budgets with federal priorites. So “free” federal grant money is offered to a state or locality, if the locals can pony up “just” 10 percent or 20 percent of the costs.

For instance, the feds provided $459.4 million for a 9.4-mile “busway” in Connecticut — money the state could hardly turn down, even if it had to spend $113.3 million of its own funds.

The grant-in-aid prodded the state into funding a large public work that would marginally benefit a small number of commuters, while truly pressing matters, such as repairs to crumbling bridges, highways and other infrastructure, have been de-prioritized.

Buckley cites Rhode Island as a positive example of what happens when states are liberated from a federal “partnership.”

Because of the state’s dire fiscal situation in 2009, the feds granted a five-year waiver from Medicaid regulations, in return for capping federal contributions to Rhode Island’s program.

Until that decision, Medicaid program costs had escalated year after year, with the federal government reimbursing the state for more than half of the costs, while they, not Rhode Island, decided what would be covered.

In the year prior to the waiver, costs grew 6.6 percent. In the first year of the waiver, when Rhode Island was making coverage decisions instead, cost inflation dropped rapidly to 1.1 percent, followed by declines of 2.3 percent and 3.1 percent, writes Buckley.

While Medicaid costs grew 7.5 percent a year nationally, Rhode Island provided improved coverage at costs lower than were incurred five years previously. The Obama administration has been persuaded to extend the waiver program through 2018.

One form of federal grant-making that has come in for deserved criticism is earmarking. This practice permits senators and Congress members to “earmark” funds for pet projects, attaching them to budget resolutions. Legislators support each other’s grant requests, leading to the impression that they have “clout” in Washington, while the budget and deficit swell up.

Buckley’s exhibit A for ending this practice is the now-infamous “Bridge to Nowhere,” successfully advanced by the late US Sen. Ted Stevens (R-Alaska) in 2005.

The deal he brokered with his colleagues garnered $223 million from the US taxpayers for the purpose of building a bridge from the Alaskan mainland to the sparsely populated island of Gravina, at a total cost of $398 million.

Sen. Tom Coburn (R-Okla.) introduced an amendment to commit these funds to more urgent priorities (such as Hurricane Katrina relief), but his Senate colleagues disagreed and supported the Bridge to Nowhere by an 82-15 vote.

As Buckley points out, earmarks had attracted such negative attention, especially due to the bridge, that the practice was ended by Congress in 2010.

But senators and House members continue to pressure federal agencies for their pet projects, so funding for the bridge continues under the Surface Transportation Act of 2011, even without earmarks.

As Buckley’s friend, President Ronald Reagan, observed: The closest thing to eternal life in this world is a government program.

Buckley’s solution? He proposes a five- to six-year phase-out of federal grants-in-aid. Instead, states would prioritize their own spending and request federal funding when appropriate.

When weighing Buckley’s challenge, we would do well to recall one of his pithy, accurate observations: “Easy money is the enemy of prudent spending.”

Herbert W. Stupp served as a regional administrator in the Reagan and George H.W. Bush administrations and as a commissioner in Mayor Rudy Giuliani’s administration.