SHARE Kitty Rhoades Affordable Care Act

Special Section: Videos, interactive maps, summaries and local coverage of Obamacare



By of the

Madison — State taxpayers will need to round up $760 million more to pay for health care for the needy over the next two years, according to a projection by Gov. Scott Walker's administration.

The report by the state Department of Health Services calculates the effects of inflation in programs such as medical care for families and nursing home and in-home care for the elderly.

Part of the added cost to state taxpayers for these Medicaid programs also comes from automatic decreases in federal aid that are being triggered because of Wisconsin's improving economy.

The new spending figures are laid out in the health department's spending request for the next two-year budget, running from July 2015 to June 2017.

The request assumes that the state will resolve a gap in this year's Medicaid budget but will not accept additional federal tax dollars available to Wisconsin through President Barack Obama's health care law.

At a time when some are looking to growth in state taxes to eliminate a projected hole in the 2015-'17 budget, the new Health Services report sounds a cautionary note.

On the one hand, the state is expected to bring in more money in taxes over the next two and a half years — and a new memo Tuesday raised hopes for somewhat better than expected tax growth.

On the other hand, the state is also expected to see its costs rise, with health care being the biggest driver of the $1 billion in new spending that state agencies are requesting over the next two years.

That total didn't include some potential big new costs, including increases for schools and road building.

In a cover letter with the report, Health Services Secretary Kitty Rhoades said the expected increases in health costs were actually somewhat better than the ones being projected.

"That said, health care costs continue to consume an ever-larger share of the state budget, creating funding pressures for other state priorities," Rhoades wrote.

The Health Services projections look at the state's cost to continue its current programs without any changes in services or efficiencies.

Doing that will require $311 million more in state tax dollars in the fiscal year starting on July 1, 2015, with an additional $449 million required the following year.

Medicaid programs are jointly paid for by the state and federal government.

Over the state's 2015-'17 budget, the federal government will ratchet down slightly the share of Medicaid costs it covers, the Health Services memo said.

That change comes from a long-standing formula that increases the share of federal support for Medicaid in hard economic times such as the recent recession, and then decreases it when the economy improves.

Federal taxpayers are now expected to pick up 58% of Wisconsin's Medicaid costs two years from now — down from 58.5% today.

That would leave Wisconsin taxpayers paying $103 million more over the next two years to maintain the same level of Medicaid services.

The projections on Medicaid costs in the next budget assume that the Walker administration will come up with about $93 million in undisclosed savings to close a shortfall in the current budget for BadgerCare Plus and other health programs.

The report also assumes that the state will not accept new federal tax dollars available for Medicaid through Obamacare.

Mary Burke, Walker's Democratic opponent in the governor's race, said that taking the extra funds would help the state cover more people and save state taxpayers money.

Walker said, however, he doesn't want to increase the state's reliance on federal tax money because Washington's own budget challenges might lead to less federal funding for Medicaid in the future.

State agencies submitted budget requests this week to Walker's Department of Administration as a first step toward writing the budget bill that the governor will send to lawmakers in February:

■ The state's flagship jobs agency is not asking for more money for its operations.

The Wisconsin Economic Development Corp. is seeking to spend $111 million in state and federal money over the two-year period, the same amount as the current budget.

■ The Department of Corrections is seeking $2.65 billion over the next two budget years, a $57 million increase.

■ The Department of Transportation won't submit its full budget request until later this year, after the Nov. 4 election.

The agency has long submitted its full request later than other agencies because it is so reliant on federal funds and wants a better sense of how much aid it might get from Congress.

The DOT did report, however, that the state's cost to produce driver's licenses and identification cards would increase from $2.25 to $3.10 per card because of new security features.

The agency did not say whether it would seek a fee increase to cover the $1.7 million in higher costs over the next two years.

■ State Schools Superintendent Tony Evers will also wait to submit a request for additional state aid for running K-12 schools.

His Department of Public Instruction did ask to spend an additional $43 million on initiatives such as school safety and technology improvements.

■ State Attorney General J.B. Van Hollen is asking for $8 million more for the state Department of Justice, including $738,000 more over the next two years to help carry out a new state law requiring outside agencies to investigate whenever a police officer kills a suspect.

There was one piece of good news for the state budget Tuesday.

Lagging state taxes picked up by $49 million in July and August, holding out the possibility that revenue could catch up from last year's disappointing numbers, the Walker administration reported.

The administration released the tax figures to help counter concerns about the new spending requests and the budget shortfall projected for the next two years.

The state took in $1.31 billion in July and August, or $49 million more than the $1.26 billion expected, said the state Department of Revenue.