A viable infrastructure is important for the operations of a society. From the buildings that occupy a city right down to the very roads we drive on everyday, they give us an idea of the infrastructure in an area. Meridian City Council President Randy Hammon says with the passing of a new budget for the 2016 fiscal year, there is more money to work with and he associates that with more money coming in from taxes.

"The most important thing is half of our income comes from property taxes and half from sales tax.," Hammon said. "My take on it, was we were losing a lot of our property tax due to a lot of people leaving the city. To me we had to stabilize that and I believe we have."

Hammon says with the city bringing in more money, they are able to allocate those extra funds to what is needed most to work towards a stronger infrastructure.

"Two things that have to be fixed are our infrastructure and our roads," stated Hammon. "I think we knew that. I spent a lot of time dealing with the infrastructure."

Hammon says plans are in place to work on getting rid of abandoned buildings in the city, repair the roads, and work on continuing to make downtown a destination that many want to bring their business. He says because of the Riley Center, downtown is becoming art driven and more and more businesses are relocating or moving into the downtown area, but for them to stay, the infrastructure has to be updated.

"They want to see the streets done and the neighborhoods cleaned up," said Hammon. "They want to see a city, that not only cares about their city, but a city that's thriving. They want to say hey, this is where I want to bring my business, so we are trying to set ourselves up for success in that area."

Hammon says these and other issues will continue to be discussed in upcoming meetings.

The city council meets twice a month in city hall. Their next meeting is slated for Tuesday, October 6th at 9 AM, where they will discuss where to allocate the fiscal 2016 budget subsidies, grants, and public relations expenditures.