The city’s top doctor on Tuesday pronounced the municipal hospitals in critical financial condition — and says New Yorkers will have to step up to save them.

Are you ready to pitch in? Mayor de Blasio hasn’t been. Fifteen months into his term, it suddenly dawns that the Health and Hospitals Corp.’s 11 major medical centers are hemorrhaging hundreds of millions of dollars a year. Without radical treatment, they are terminal.

Reflecting the gravity of the crisis, HHC Commissioner Dr. Ram Raju promised his workforce, “The Health and Hospitals Corp. must and will survive.” Then, he presented a rescue plan whose success would hinge on beating incredibly tough odds.

Landmark institutions like Bellevue, Kings County, North Central Bronx and Elmhurst Medical Center face dire futures thanks to accelerating changes in the health-care marketplace, including Obamacare. Yet the mayor has raised no warnings about the looming crisis, let alone offered a vision for maintaining the nation’s largest public health-care system.

De Blasio’s distance is all the more remarkable given the months and the millions he wasted tilting his lance at the lost cause of Long Island College Hospital when pretending that he could pull a failed hospital back from the brink.

HHC President Dr. Ram Raju (Debbie Egan-Chin/Daily News)

Raju envisions luring patients who have never set foot in public hospitals away from name-brand private powerhouses. Five years from now, he wants to see 2 million New Yorkers walk in HHC’s doors, up from the current 1.4 million, including many more privately insured individuals.

And he wants to double enrollment in the HHC-sponsored MetroPlus insurance plan, whose membership now numbers half a million, mostly Medicaid patients. Droves of private shoppers would have to choose MetroPlus via the state’s Obamacare exchange — a mighty leap from the 27,000 signed up for 2015.

Even then, Raju is counting on most of those enrollees signing up with an HHC doctor as their primary-care physician. Oh, and he’ll have to raise an additional $300 million a year.

The challenges are monumental. Here’s hoping that Raju has more success than de Blasio did at LICH, which essentially vanished after the shouting died.