More than $1,000 raised for family's medical bills

Runners take off from the starting line of the Longer Longmont benefit race Monday at McIntosh Lake. The benefit raised more than $1,000 for Longmont resident Wesley Pickering. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

Instead of joining the 50,000 runners that participate in the annual Bolder Boulder, a few dozen Longmont residents opted for a less crowded and more local option.

About 50 people participated in the third annual Longer Longmont race Monday around McIntosh Lake.

Runners participated in three events: a single lap around the lake that is a little more than a 5 kilometers, two laps — which is about 11 kilometers — and a kids run.

Race organizers James and Leah Davis said the event is not intended to replace the Bolder Boulder, but to offer a low-key alternative that supports a good cause.

Every year the race accepts donations that benefit a local family in need, and this year it was the Davises' neighbors, the Pickering family.

Longmont resident Wesley Pickering, 39, was diagnosed with breast cancer in October. Between daily radiation treatments, Pickering takes care of her mother, who is currently in the hospital and suffers from Stage 4 pancreatic cancer, and her two children.

Pickering's daughter, Alyssa, 12, has a heart condition and her son, Kody, 9, has a chromosomal disorder that add to her piles of medical bills.

Even monthly bills are difficult to keep up with since the single mother cannot work full-time due to daily treatments and driving her mother and children to and from appointments.

More than $1,000 was raised for the Pickering family at Monday's race.

"We've had so much support from people here and I am proud to say that we're currently caught up on everything," Pickering said. "But the medical bills come in every day, and without that support, I don't know how we'd do it."

The informal race drew twice as many runners as last year, organizers said. The size of the event is dependent on a Facebook page and word-of-mouth.

"This is about a core group of people who really care," James Davis said. "It's about helping someone. That's it."

Next year, the Davises are considering moving the Memorial Day event to the afternoon or evening to increase participation and allow Longmont's Bolder Boulder runners to compete in both races.

Contact Times-Call community reporter Whitney Bryen at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com.