Obama administration should not be harassing nuns about birth control.

Sister Mary Grace visits with a resident at an elderly home run by Little Sisters of the Poor in Denver last month. (Photo: Brennan Linsley, AP) Story Highlights The Obama administration alleges that the Sisters are "fighting an invisible dragon."

The dismissive tone of the administration's brief is consistent with its overall attitude toward religious liberty issues.

Why not just use the more than 50 family planning clinics in Colorado, where the nuns are based?

Friday, the Supreme Court gave the Colorado-based Little Sisters of the Poor a reprieve in their battle over the Obamacare contraception mandate. While the Sisters' case is on appeal, the government must cease demanding that the nuns sign a form they say violates their religious beliefs.

The Sisters had been facing hefty fines.

This is a very strange case. The government has argued that signing the form is meaningless because the nuns' insurer, the Christian Brothers Employee Benefits Trust, is exempt from the mandate. Yet it has fought the Sisters all the way to the Supreme Court to make them sign it. What's going on?

Dragon-slaying nuns

The government's brief to the Colorado court provides a clue. It drips with contempt. The Obama administration finds the nuns' complaint "implausible" and alleges that the Sisters are "fighting an invisible dragon." Oh, you silly, simple-minded nuns! Just stop imagining things and do what the government tells you.

The Sisters reject the government's contention that the form does nothing, as did all six lower courts to consider the claim in other church plan cases. They are wise to be leery of Uncle Sam's intentions.

The dismissive tone of the administration's brief is consistent with its overall attitude toward religious liberty issues throughout the implementation of the contraception mandate. Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius never bothered to consult the Justice Department to determine whether the mandate was consistent with the Constitution and the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, despite requests from Congress.

Pick up the phone

When asked whether she consulted the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops over their complaints about an effort to find an "accommodation," Sebelius said she didn't. Considering it was the primary group complaining, why not?

The administration's indifference to religious liberty complaints is not limited to issues arising from Obamacare. In 2011, the government made the argument in Hosanna-Tabor v. the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission that churches do not have special rights under the First Amendment but merely association rights, like unions. Justice Antonin Scalia called this "extraordinary," and Justice Elena Kagan said it was an "amazing" claim. Another word that comes to mind is "disturbing." A unanimous court rejected the administration's claim.

Personally, I support the mandate. The government has a compelling interest in providing free birth control. But there are ways to provide it that don't involve harassing nuns. Why not just use the more than 50 family planning clinics in Colorado, where the nuns are based?

The government should leave the Little Sisters alone.

Kirsten Powers writes weekly for USA TODAY and is a Fox News political analyst.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the opinion front page or follow us on twitter @USATopinion or Facebook.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1iIb9AE