U.S. Attorney John Suthers speaks during a news conference outside the Federal Courthouse in Denver, Colorado June 17, 2002 following the arraignment of U.S. Forest Service employee Terry Lynn Barton. Barton has been charged in connection with the origin of the Hayman wildfire, the largest in Colorado history. REUTERS/Robert Galbraith RG/MMR - RTR6IC4

4201660

Colorado Attorney General John Suthers, one of three Republicans to hold statewide office in what is otherwise a state dominated by Democrats, is considering running for mayor of Colorado Springs, the state’s second most populous city.

Suthers’ term ends in 2015 and due to term limits, he’s unable to run for re-election.

“I am very fortunate that I have lots of options,” Suthers told the Colorado Springs Gazette. “I am considering a run for mayor, and I will make up my mind in September.”

Suthers was first appointed attorney general in 2005, to replace Ken Salazar, who had been elected to the U.S. Senate. He won the seat in general elections in 2006 and 2010.

Suthers was one of 12 state attorneys general to file suit against the federal government on the same day the Affordable Care Act was passed.

Suthers was also vehemently opposed to the passage of Amendment 64, which legalized marijuana in Colorado for adults in 2012. Yet, once it was passed, he announced that he would defend the amendment in court if challenged by federal authorities. He also advocated for passage of a taxing scheme for marijuana sales, saying in a statement at the time “the state must do the best job possible of implementing Amendment 64 and regulating the new recreational marijuana industry.”

Current Springs Mayor Steve Bach recently received a B grade from the Gazette for his performance as mayor, earning accolades for helping secure transportation funds, increasing public safety and adding new jobs to the local economic base.

He was dinged, however, for his lack of diplomacy.

“Despite an impressive record of achievements, Bach has garnered a reputation for not working well with others,” the Gazette wrote. “His full-speed ahead approach to achieving goals often leaves other leaders feeling left out and/or disrespected. One Bach advocate suggested a fundraising event to pay for sending the mayor to charm school.”

Bach hasn’t said whether he will seek re-election.

Colorado Springs has a “strong mayor” form of government in which the mayor is the city’s chief executive and the City Council is its legislative branch.

Follow Greg on Twitter

Content created by The Daily Caller News Foundation is available without charge to any eligible news publisher that can provide a large audience. For licensing opportunities of our original content, please contact [email protected]