'A huge difference for student understanding'

Monarch High School juniors Garyn Grace, front left, Ambree Campbell, and seniors Kaylee and Kassandra Mickens, back, use special glasses to watch a three-dimensional video about mitosis during an AP Biology class on Friday at Monarch High School in Louisville. ( Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera )

Students at Monarch High learning everything from cellular function to math equations now can visualize concepts in 3D thanks to new mobile carts.

Monarch High science teachers Kristin Donley and Tony Tolbert first tried 3D visualization technology with their students five years ago, as part of a Texas Instruments-sponsored project to study its effectiveness in the classroom.

Donley said the power of the technology is it can illustrate abstract concepts, like polynomial equations, or help students visualize what it looks like inside a cell so they can better understand how reactions happen.

"The technology makes it come to life," she said. "It makes a huge difference for student understanding."

She said her students' test scores improved by 10 to 20 percent, but the equipment itself — 3D projectors — was expensive and time intensive to set up, limiting its usefulness. But since then, she said, equipment has become more affordable and user-friendly.

To bring the technology to more students at Monarch, Land Rover Flatirons in Superior and other local businesses sponsored a fundraiser in October.

The event raised $15,000, enough money to buy two 3D carts for Monarch, one loaded with math lessons and the other loaded with science, plus a third for Eldorado K-8 in Superior, which feeds into Monarch.

"Our goal was just to get one system, but the community came out in force to support this," said Ed Dobbs, general manager at Land Rover Flatirons

Also helping with the project at Monarch is NxGenLearning, a 3D consulting company based in Lakewood.

"We hope it's going to make a difference in a lot of kids' lives," said NxGen's Sheila Lucas.

The mobile carts, which include 3D software, a 3D ready LG flat screen T.V. and a class set of 3D glasses, debuted at the school last week.

Students who tried out the technology were enthusiastic.

Sophomore Elijah Soto said he was expecting "movie theater" 3D, but instead found crystal clear images that "really popped out."

"It was pretty cool," he said. "It's really good for visual learners."

Added classmate Harrison Waldmann, who saw a lesson on cells, "It shows the whole process of everything."

"Having a visual representation corrects you if you're not thinking about it that right way," he said.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa