Work on the outbound (westbound) lanes of the Fort Pitt Tunnel was completed overnight. The tunnel has reopened to traffic. All work on the Fort Pitt Tunnel and I-376 Parkway West has been completed for the weekend.

A single-lane will be maintained in the inbound direction from 10 p.m. Sunday to 5 a.m. Monday morning.

Other traffic restrictions:

Parkway East/I-376 -- The parkway will close for two weekends to prepare for the Greenfield Bridge implosion. The outbound/eastbound side of the parkway will be closed from Oakland to Squirrel Hill/Homestead. The inbound/westbound side will be closed from Wilkinsburg/Forest Hills to Squirrel Hill/Homestead. Detours will be posted.

■ The first full closure is scheduled for Light Up Night weekend and begins at 11 p.m., Nov. 20, about an hour after the fireworks display ends Downtown, and runs through 6 a.m. on Monday, Nov. 23.

■ The second weekend closure is set to begin at 10 p.m. on Friday, Dec. 4 and run through 5 p.m. Sunday, Dec. 6.

West Carson Street/Route 51 -- Closed between Stanhope Street and Corliss Street from 7 a.m. to 4 p.m., Saturday.

Hulton Bridge -- Motorists are reminded that the recently opened Hulton Bridge, which connects Oakmont to Harmar over the Allegheny River, will maintain a lane restriction through the spring to construct the final wing wall of the new bridge after the old bridge is demolished in mid-January.

Route 28 -- Lane restrictions on southbound Route 28 in Shaler between the Etna (Exit 4) and Millvale (Exit 3) interchanges, weekdays from 9 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. through Nov. 16.

Greenfield Bridge -- Closed for two years while a new span is constructed over the Parkway East/Interstate 376. The bridge, which connects Alger Street in Greenfield with Schenley Park, will be imploded on the parkway in late December to make way for the $17.5 million construction project. The parkway will be closed for five days between Christmas and New Year’s Day. Detours are posted and can also be found, along with a construction schedule, on the Greenfield Bridge Project website of the Oakland Transportation Management Association.

Indiana Township -- The new Lefever Hill Road bridge over Little Deer Creek has opened.

Birmingham Bridge -- PennDOT says single-lane restrictions will occur periodically throughout the winter in each direction of the bridge. At least two lanes will be maintained in each direction through the end of February.

Smithfield Street, Downtown -- The portion of the street between Fourth and Fifth avenues open for time being. Then seven-month closure resumes for reconstruction of the Forbes Avenue and Smithfield intersection. A northbound lane and parking lane will be closed from Fourth to Fifth avenues. The southbound bus-only lane will remain open to accommodate the Port Authority bus schedules.

Monongahela Incline -- Closed through late November. Shuttle buses provided. Lower station service is provided at the Station Square bus shelter.

Route 286/Golden Mile Highway, Monroeville -- Overnight ramp closures at Route 22 will close at 10 p.m. weekdays and Saturdays through Sunday, reopening by 6 a.m. daily. Ramp traffic detoured via Alpine Village Drive.

Route 51 -- Restricted to one lane southbound, from 8 a.m. to 3 p.m. between Overbrook Boulevard and Maytide Street, through Nov. 16.

Homestead-Duquesne Road, Munhall -- Closed for slope stabilization project at the Franklin Bend near Vondera Street. Completion expected mid-December.

Old Clairton Road, Pleasant Hills -- Southbound traffic has shifted to newly reconstructed northbound side with northbound traffic remaining on detour through the end of November.

Renzie Road, Elizabeth Township -- Closed at Holsing Street through late November.

Round Hill Road, Elizabeth Township -- Closed until late November during replacement of a bridge structure, about a half-mile east of Route 48. It is the second closure of the road this year; the first was to correct a slide.

Streets Run Road, Baldwin Borough -- Closed near Brentwood Road for bridge replacement. Completion expected mid-November.

Brightwood Road, Bethel Park -- Paving causing lane closures with flaggers directing traffic from 7 a.m. to 6 p.m. weekdays until further notice.

Monongahela Wharf -- Paving to alter entry/exit patterns.

Baum Boulevard-North Craig Street-Bigelow Boulevard, North Oakland and Bloomfield -- Baum closed to westbound traffic at Melwood Avenue through late November. Eastbound traffic in single lane. Bloomfield Bridge closed to northbound traffic until further notice.

Fall Run Road, Shaler -- Closed indefinitely between Maple Street and Middle Road. Those who live along the roadway will be able to access their homes from Middle Road.

Route 51/West Carson Street -- Closed to outbound traffic. Estimated completion June 2016.

Route 51/88 intersection, Overbrook -- Northbound Route 88 closed, no access to Route 51 through late November.

Route 8, Hampton -- Northbound lane closed between Clearview Road and Murray Avenue through mid-December.

East Ohio Street, North Side -- Around-the-clock single-lane restriction of East Street from the Parkway North off-ramp to East Ohio through mid-November. East Street will be restricted to one 12-foot lane and Madison Avenue restricted to one 11-foot lane.