Our family has had some amazing close encounters over the years.

VIP red grunge round stamp on white background (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

It’s the 1940s and a young serviceman from Wisconsin is on leave in New York City. He sits in a Broadway theater. On the stage, the actors ply their craft.

In this particular scene, two women and a man sit at a dinner table. Upon the table sits an almost-consumed meal and a birthday cake. The three engage in conversation until the discussion results in an insult, at which point the man erupts into a display of anger.

So skilled is the actor and so explosive is the eruption that the serviceman springs from his chair on the aisle and rushes the stage. So engulfed was he in what was taking place that he lost sight of the fact that he was seeing a play performed by actors. So riveting was the brutish performance that he thought the women on the stage were in danger and attempted to rush to their aid.

Fortunately, he came to the realization of where he was before reaching the stage and he returned to his seat. The young serviceman was my father, Norbert. The play was “A Streetcar Named Desire” and the actor was Marlon Brando.

I’ve seen many live plays and other performances, some of which involved celebrities that many of you would recognize. I’ve even been moved to tears by some performances. But I don’t think anything I’ve experienced would compare to the emotions that Brando evoked from my father that day.

It was in the late 1930s that a woman recalls that, as a young girl, she was taken to her first professional baseball game in old Comiskey Park in Chicago by one of her older brothers. In the excitement of being in a professional ballpark and at her first game, she waves at a player as he approaches the dugout near which she sits. The player, who’s from the opposing team, smiles and waves back.

In his next at-bat, he hits a towering home run — one of the 30 home runs the player would hit that year. The young girl was my mother, Sallee. The player was Joe DiMaggio.

Just like in the earlier instance, I’ve had the opportunity to witness many sporting events. I’ve seen performances by several professional athletes that can legitimately be described as superstars, yet I don’t look at those performances as being significant when compared to that summer day when my mother witnessed a performance by a true sports legend.

Over the years, I’ve also come into contact with more than a handful of politicians, both on a local and on a national level. I even had the opportunity to witness an address by a sitting president. I’ve found these meetings and events to be interesting and engaging.

I find it interesting to interact with people who have a hand in shaping our world, even in a small way, yet these interactions seem insignificant when I’m reminded of a story I’ve been told.

It was approximately 1915 and a young woman had left her home in Poland to study in Russia. She was attending what was at time the time called secondary school, the equivalent of what we would call a college today. This was very rare for women in that era.

One day, a parade took place in the city in which she was residing and studying. She and several of her schoolmates attended. In the parade was a man on horseback, a giant white steed. The man was adorned in ribbons and plumes. The horse’s bridle and saddle appeared to be studded with jewels.

The young woman watched as the horse and rider pranced within a few feet of her. As he passed, he looked in her direction. When the procession continued beyond her, the young lady may not have realized that she had just been in the presence of a historic figure.

The young lady was my grandmother, Halina, and the rider on horseback was Tsar Nicholas II, emperor of Russia.

— Bob Kowalczyk is a Manawa resident. He can be reached at pcletters@postcrescent.com

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1CUv6PF