SAN ANTONIO - Community health clinics all over the state are starting to worry about what will happen when the federal health care trust fund expires in October of 2015.

"My husband is a chronic diabetic, he's a two-time cancer patient. So if this weren't here, we would have a hard time getting him in for medical care," said clinic patient, Norma Smith.

For people like Norma and her husband Rodrick Smith, community health clinics are vital.

"I'm a professional truck driver. I lost my license due to diabetes. (I) couldn't pass my physical and I have no insurance," Rodrick Smith said.

The East Side clinic Rodrick Smith goes to is one of more than 300 statewide that serve patients without insurance, in part due to the five-year trust fund, which is part of the Affordable Care Act.

An optional part of the act was Medicaid expansion, designed to kick in once the trust fund expires next year. But Texas leaders turned down Medicaid expansion, leaving community clinics facing an uncertain future.

"When the Affordable Care Act was laid out, that was to help community health centers. But since that didn't happen, we're faced with a big fiscal cliff," said Atascosa Health Center CEO Monte Small.

"Wait times may be higher. They will have to turn some people away. They will probably have to lay off some help," said University of Texas Dean of Medicine Francisco Gonzalez-Scarano.

Looking at the big picture, Gonzalez-Scarano points out there are 5.7 million uninsured Texans.

Currently, emergency rooms are absorbing much of their care.

"Not having insurance usually means you wait until you're sicker and you end up in an emergency room, and emergency room care is more expensive and it's not preventative," Gonzalez-Scarano said.

He worries the result will be less care at a greater cost to Texans in the long run.

Tennessee rejected Medicaid expansion and is now considering reversing that decision.

Click here to see a detailed map of each state's status.

Copyright 2014 by KSAT - All rights reserved.