Photo of Aetna headquarters from Wikipedia.

The merger between Aetna and Humana didn't come together overnight. In fact, based on a new Securities and Exchange Commission filing by Humana outlining the takeover, the deal stretches back to October 2014.

The below transcript from the filing shows just how complicated the deal was, with Humana holding discussions with a number of payers. While the transcript does not mention other parties by name, only Aetna, a Modern Healthcare report said "Party X" in the transcript is Cigna, "Party Y" is Anthem and "Party A" represents United Health Group. It's also interesting to see how a May Wall Street Journal report on Humana's plans to put itself up for sale factored into the dealmaking.

The transcript is long, but for healthcare insiders who want to see how big mergers come together it is a fascinating read.

Here is the section taken straight from the SEC filing:

During the course of the reviews by Humana's board of directors described above, at various meetings of the Humana board over the last several years, the board discussed, among other things, discussions that Bruce D. Broussard, the President and Chief Executive Officer of Humana, had, from time to time, with the chief executive officers of other managed care companies, including Mark T. Bertolini, the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Aetna. The topics of these conversations included, among other things, developments in the managed care industry and potential industry consolidation and, from time to time, the prospect of Humana combining with their respective companies. During the course of the board's discussions of potential industry consolidation, the board discussed various factors that could lead to consolidation, including continued shifts in health insurance products to retail-based offerings (and attendant emphasis on wellness and preventative offerings), potential long-term policy changes regarding value-based reimbursement of providers for health care services, the need for enhanced technology to meet industry changes, increased emphasis on clinical capabilities for population health management, increased regulation and favorable interest rates.

On October 23, 2014, Mr. Broussard and Mr. Brian A. Kane, Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of Humana, met with the chief executive officer and the chief financial officer of another managed care company (which is referred to in this joint proxy statement/prospectus as Party X) in New Jersey, and discussed recent developments in the managed care industry and potential industry consolidation, including the prospect of Humana combining with Party X.

On December 14, 2014, during a regular meeting of Humana's board of directors held in Louisville, Kentucky, representatives of Goldman Sachs, financial advisor to Humana, discussed with the board an overview of the managed care industry and various industry scenarios, including potential strategic transactions that managed care companies might consider, as well as the environment for industry consolidation given regulatory developments and stockholder sentiment.

During the course of the reviews by the Aetna board of directors described above, at various meetings of the Aetna board over the last several years, the board discussed, among other things, discussions that Mr. Bertolini had, from time to time, with the chief executive officers of other managed care companies. The topics of these conversations included, among other things, developments in the managed care industry and potential industry consolidation and, in the case of conversations with the chief executive officer of one managed care company (which is referred to in this joint proxy statement/prospectus as Party A), from time to time starting in August 2014, Party A's interest in discussing a potential acquisition of Aetna. The Aetna board considered Party A's interest at various meetings of the Aetna board, including a meeting on January 14, 2015, following Party A's delivery of a non-binding proposal to acquire Aetna for $104 per share for a mix of cash and stock. At that meeting, the Aetna board, together with Aetna's senior management and financial and legal advisors, noted that the price proposed by Party A was not at an attractive level, and that such expression of interest did not address the significant regulatory and other risks of completing a potential transaction with Party A. Accordingly, the board concluded that it was not in the best interests of Aetna's shareholders to engage in discussions with Party A regarding a potential transaction at that time. The board did conclude, however, that in light of a range of developments in the managed care industry, it would be appropriate for management to consider its strategic alternatives in depth over the course of the coming months.

On January 19, 2015, Mr. Kane and the chief financial officer of Party X met in Louisville, Kentucky and discussed recent developments in the managed care industry and potential industry consolidation, including the prospect of Humana combining with Party X.

On March 4, 2015, Mr. Broussard met with the chief executive officer of another managed care company (which is referred to in this joint proxy statement/prospectus as Party Y) in Washington, D.C. During this meeting, Mr. Broussard and the chief executive officer of Party Y discussed a variety of topics, including recent developments in the managed care industry and potential industry consolidation, including the prospect of Humana combining with Party Y.

On March 9, 2015, the chief executive officer of Party X called Mr. Broussard to discuss a variety of topics, including recent developments in the managed care industry and potential industry consolidation, including the prospect of Humana combining with Party X.

On March 10, 2015, Mr. Bertolini contacted Mr. Broussard to invite him to a meeting on March 28, 2015. Mr. Bertolini did not specify what topics he proposed to discuss at the meeting.

On March 22, 2015, after the telephonic meeting of Humana's board of directors at which the sale of Humana's Concentra subsidiary was approved, Humana's board of directors held a telephonic executive session of the board, at which Mr. Broussard updated the board on his recent discussions with the chief executive officers of Parties X and Y and informed the board of the invitation that he had received from Mr. Bertolini to meet in person during the following weekend, including that Mr. Bertolini had not indicated what topics he proposed to discuss at the meeting. The board authorized Mr. Broussard to proceed with the meeting with Mr. Bertolini and authorized additional discussions with the chief executive officers of Party X and Party Y.

On March 24, 2015, Mr. Broussard met with the chief executive officer of Party Y in Washington, D.C. During this meeting, Mr. Broussard and the chief executive officer of Party Y discussed a variety of topics, including recent developments in the managed care industry and potential industry consolidation, how industry consolidation may affect transformation in the industry toward improved population health management, consumer focus and value-based reimbursements, the prospect of Humana combining with Party Y and the ability of Humana to be a substantial part of the key operations of a combined company with Party Y.

On March 25, 2015, Mr. Broussard met with the chief executive officer of Party X in Washington D.C. During this meeting, Mr. Broussard and the chief executive officer of Party X discussed a variety of topics, including recent developments in the managed care industry and potential industry consolidation, how industry consolidation may affect transformation in the industry toward improved population health management, consumer focus and value-based reimbursements, the prospect of Humana combining with Party X and the ability of Humana to be a substantial part of the key operations of a combined company with Party X.

On March 28, 2015, Mr. Broussard met with Mr. Bertolini in Newport, Rhode Island. During this meeting, Messrs. Bertolini and Broussard discussed a variety of topics, including recent developments in the managed care industry and potential industry consolidation, how industry consolidation may affect transformation in the industry toward improved population health management, consumer focus and value-based reimbursements, the prospect of Humana combining with Aetna and the ability of Humana to be a substantial part of the key operations of a combined company with Aetna. In the context of this discussion, Mr. Bertolini raised the possibility of a potential strategic transaction between Aetna and Humana, and indicated that Aetna would consider submitting an indication of interest to Humana if Humana would be willing to consider such a proposal. Mr. Broussard advised Mr. Bertolini that Humana had a favorable outlook on its prospects as a stand-alone public company, and he informed Mr. Bertolini that he would have to discuss the matter with Humana's board of directors before providing a response. Mr. Broussard indicated that he would raise the subject of Aetna's approach for discussion at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Humana board of directors, which was scheduled for mid-April. Mr. Bertolini indicated the Aetna board also had a regularly scheduled meeting in mid-April, at which he expected the Aetna board to discuss a potential strategic transaction with Humana. Recognizing that both companies were scheduled to announce their earnings for the first quarter of 2015 in late April, Mr. Broussard and Mr. Bertolini discussed resuming discussions after their respective regularly scheduled board meetings and earnings announcements.

On April 7, 2015, Humana's board of directors held a telephonic meeting, at which members of Humana's management discussed with the board various factors that could lead to industry consolidation. At that meeting, Mr. Broussard advised the board of the recent conversations he had had with the chief executive officers of other managed care companies regarding the potential for industry consolidation, including the March 28 meeting with Mr. Bertolini. The board requested that, at future board meetings, management provide it with additional information regarding potential industry consolidation and the contributing factors. The board determined to continue at its next regularly scheduled meeting on April 16, 2015 its discussion of Mr. Bertolini's indication that Aetna would consider making a proposal to Humana.

On April 13, 2015, the Aetna board of directors held a regularly scheduled meeting in New York, New York, which was attended by Aetna's senior management and representatives of Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP, which is referred to in this joint proxy statement/prospectus as Davis Polk, Aetna's outside legal counsel, Jones Day, Aetna's outside antitrust counsel, and Simpson Thacher & Bartlett LLP, which is referred to in this joint proxy statement/prospectus as Simpson Thacher, outside legal counsel to the non-management members of the Aetna board. At the meeting, the Aetna board discussed, among other things, Mr. Bertolini's March 28, 2015 meeting with Mr. Broussard, a potential strategic transaction with Humana, including the regulatory aspects of any such transaction, potential industry consolidation and potential strategic alternatives that Aetna might pursue. Following discussion of such matters, the Aetna board of directors concluded that it would be appropriate for management to continue discussions with Humana regarding a potential strategic transaction between Aetna and Humana.

On April 16, 2015, Humana's board of directors held a regularly scheduled meeting in Atlanta, Georgia, at which members of Humana's management made presentations to the board regarding potential industry consolidation, including the views expressed by a certain Humana stockholder regarding Humana's potential involvement in industry consolidation. Christopher M. Todoroff, Senior Vice President and General Counsel of Humana, reviewed with the board the directors' fiduciary duties in connection with considering the possibility of exploring potential business combination transactions. At the meeting, the board discussed Humana's strategy objectives in light of potential industry changes and possible consolidation, including Humana's prospects as a stand-alone public company. Humana's board of directors requested that, at an upcoming meeting of the board, management and the Company's outside financial and legal advisors discuss with the board Humana's potential involvement in industry consolidation as opposed to Humana continuing as a stand-alone public company. The board also discussed Mr. Bertolini's indication to Mr. Broussard that Aetna would consider making a proposal, but the Humana board determined not to pursue this overture at that time.

On April 25, 2015, at the request of the chief executive officer of Party X, Mr. Broussard met with the chief executive officer of Party X in Washington, D.C. At the meeting, Party X's chief executive officer delivered to Mr. Broussard a letter containing a non-binding indication of interest on the part of Party X to acquire all of Humana's outstanding shares for $230 per share (to be paid approximately one-half in cash and one-half in Party X's common stock). The indication of interest was subject to, among other things, due diligence and negotiation of definitive transaction documents.

On April 27, 2015, Humana's board of directors held a telephonic meeting. Members of Humana's management and representatives of Goldman Sachs and Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver & Jacobson LLP, which is referred to in this joint proxy statement/prospectus as Fried Frank, Humana's outside legal counsel, participated in the meeting. At the meeting, the board and management discussed Party X's letter and the terms of its indication of interest. Representatives of Goldman Sachs provided the board with an overview of Party X. In addition, representatives of Fried Frank advised the board regarding its fiduciary duties in the context of Party X's unsolicited letter. Following discussions, Humana's board of directors decided to meet in person later in the week to further consider Party X's letter and further discuss Humana's potential involvement in industry consolidation and Humana's prospects as a stand-alone public company.

On April 30, 2015, Humana's board of directors held a meeting in Chicago, Illinois. Members of Humana's management and representatives of Goldman Sachs and Fried Frank participated in the meeting. At the meeting, members of Humana's management discussed with the board Humana's financial condition and operations and provided, among other things, a comparison of Humana with other managed care companies. The board and management then engaged in an extensive discussion regarding the potential impact of industry trends on Humana's business prospects, including the impact of potential industry consolidation. Members of Humana's management and representatives of Goldman Sachs also provided additional details of Party X's offer, and representatives of Fried Frank advised the board regarding its fiduciary duties in the context of exploring potential business combination transactions. After discussion, the board determined that further analysis and consideration would be needed prior to engaging in any discussions with Party X or any other third party regarding a potential transaction, including Humana's prospects as a stand-alone public company. The board instructed Mr. Broussard to advise Party X's chief executive officer that Humana's board of directors was considering Party X's letter, and that a response would be forthcoming by the middle to end of May. Mr. Broussard telephonically communicated this message to Party X's chief executive officer following the meeting.

On May 1, 2015 and again on May 8, 2015, the chief executive officer of Party X called Mr. Broussard regarding the Humana board's response to his company's indication of interest letter and next steps.

On May 4, 2015, Messrs. Bertolini and Broussard had a telephonic conversation regarding the Humana board's response to Mr. Bertolini's indication that Aetna would consider submitting a proposal and next steps. On the call, Mr. Broussard informed Mr. Bertolini that the Humana board had determined that, due to various circumstances which Mr. Broussard declined to elaborate on, the Humana board was not prepared to discuss a potential strategic transaction with Aetna further at that time. However, Mr. Broussard told Mr. Bertolini that he expected to be in a position to discuss such matters with Aetna in the next few weeks, and indicated that he would contact Mr. Bertolini if and when the Humana board decided to approve his engagement in such discussions.

On May 11, 2015, Humana's board of directors held a telephonic meeting. At the meeting, members of Humana's management discussed with the board Humana's financial and operating results.

On May 13, 2015, Humana's board of directors held a meeting at the New York offices of Fried Frank. Members of Humana's management and representatives of Goldman Sachs and Fried Frank participated in the meeting. At the meeting, members of Humana's management discussed with the board Humana's stand-alone strategic plan as well as Humana management's financial forecasts for Humana. Representatives of Goldman Sachs presented to the board a preliminary financial analysis of Party X's offer, including a comparison of the financial condition of Humana and Party X, potential synergies in a combination of Humana and Party X, and a pro forma valuation of the companies on a combined basis. Representatives of Goldman Sachs also discussed with the board strategic alternatives potentially available to Humana, including remaining as a stand-alone public company and combinations with other managed care companies. Representatives of Goldman Sachs discussed with the board potential scenarios for consolidation in the managed care industry and its preliminary financial analysis of Humana. The board discussed the advantages and disadvantages of Humana exploring strategic alternatives with Party X, Aetna and other managed care companies as opposed to continuing to operate as a stand-alone public company. The board decided to continue these discussions at the board meeting to be held on May 19, 2015.

On May 19, 2015, Humana's board of directors held a meeting at the New York offices of Fried Frank. Members of Humana's management and representatives of Goldman Sachs and Fried Frank participated in the meeting. At the meeting, members of Humana's management updated the board regarding Humana's financial and operating results. Representatives of Goldman Sachs discussed with the board (i) a potential business combination with each of Aetna, Party X and Party Y, as well as the ability of each of the companies to make an attractive transaction proposal to acquire Humana and complete a transaction with Humana, and (ii) a process through which Humana could explore potential acquisition transactions with those three companies if Humana's board of directors determined to do so. Members of Humana's management and representatives of Goldman Sachs and Fried Frank also discussed various other potential counterparties for a potential transaction with Humana. Following discussion, the board, although making no decision as to whether to engage in a sale process, authorized Humana's management to communicate to Party X that Humana was not prepared to accept the proposed terms reflected in its April 25 letter, but at the same time to communicate to Aetna and Parties X and Y that Humana's board of directors was considering whether to explore a potential transaction and, in that connection, was prepared to share with each party limited, non-public financial information regarding Humana and receive a preliminary indication of interest from each party regarding a potential transaction with Humana. A representative of Fried Frank discussed with the board potential terms of non-disclosure and standstill agreements (each of which is referred to in this joint proxy statement/prospectus as an NDA) that Humana would seek to enter into with those companies prior to sharing such information.

Following the May 19, 2015 meeting of Humana's board of directors, Mr. Broussard contacted Mr. Bertolini and the chief executive officers of Parties X and Y. On each call, Mr. Broussard communicated that Humana's board of directors was considering whether to explore a potential transaction and, in that connection, (i) he was authorized to determine that party's interest in a possible transaction with Humana, (ii) Humana was prepared to expeditiously enter into an NDA with that party if it was interested in pursuing a potential transaction with Humana, (iii) following execution of an NDA, Humana would share limited, non-public financial information with that party, and would schedule management meetings to take place in New York City during the week of May 25, 2015, and (iv) Humana would ask the party to submit a preliminary indication of interest by June 5, 2015. In addition, Mr. Broussard communicated to Party X's chief executive officer that Humana was not prepared to accept Party X's proposal as reflected in its April 25 letter. Goldman Sachs also held telephonic conversations with the financial advisors of Aetna, Party X and Party Y to further discuss the process.

From May 20, 2015 through May 24, 2015, Humana and its advisors negotiated and entered into NDAs with each of Aetna, Party X and Party Y. Each of the NDAs contained an 18-month standstill provision (subject to customary exceptions). The NDAs do not currently restrict Party X or Party Y from making a confidential proposal to Humana's board regarding a possible business combination with Humana.

On May 27, 2015, at Humana management's direction, Goldman Sachs began providing limited, non-public financial information regarding Humana to Aetna, Party X and Party Y.

On May 28, 2015, members of Humana's management and representatives of Goldman Sachs met with members of Party Y's management and representatives of Party Y's financial advisor at the New York offices of Fried Frank, at which meeting Humana's management gave a presentation regarding Humana's strategy, financial condition and operations. Also on May 28, 2015, Mr. Broussard had a telephone conversation with the chief executive officer of Party Y (who did not attend the management meeting) to discuss the process and the potential of Party Y submitting a preliminary indication of interest.

On May 29, 2015, members of Humana's management and representatives of Goldman Sachs met separately at the New York offices of Goldman Sachs with each of (i) members of Aetna's management and its financial advisors and (ii) members of Party X's management and its financial advisor. At each of the meetings, Humana's management gave a presentation regarding Humana's strategy, financial condition and operations.

In addition, during trading hours on May 29, 2015, the Wall Street Journal reported that, based upon rumors, Humana was exploring a possible sale transaction. Humana's stock closed at $214.65 per share on May 29, 2015, an increase of approximately 20% from its closing price of $178.41 per share on May 28, 2015.

On May 29, 2015, Humana's board of directors held a telephonic meeting in which members of Humana's management and representatives of Goldman Sachs and Fried Frank participated. At the meeting, the board discussed the Wall Street Journal report. In addition, representatives of management and Goldman Sachs briefed the board on the management meetings with Aetna and Parties X and Y and discussed next steps in the process.

Over the next few days, members of Humana's management and Goldman Sachs had several telephonic conversations with each of (i) members of Aetna's management and its financial advisor, (ii) members of Party X's management and its financial advisor and (iii) members of Party Y's management and its financial advisor, in each case to discuss various due diligence topics, including the Humana projections (as defined below). See the section titled "--Unaudited Prospective Financial Information--Humana Projections" beginning on page [●] of this joint proxy statement/prospectus for a summary of the Humana projections.

On June 2, 2015, the chief executive officer of Party Y called Mr. Broussard to discuss the potential of Party Y submitting a preliminary indication of interest.

On June 4, 2015, the Aetna board of directors held a telephonic meeting, which was attended by Aetna's senior management and representatives of Davis Polk, Jones Day and Simpson Thacher. At the meeting, the board received an update from management on, and discussed the status of, discussions with Humana regarding a potential strategic transaction, and also discussed potential industry consolidation. Following discussion of such matters, the board authorized management to submit a preliminary, non-binding indication of interest regarding a potential strategic transaction with Humana at or prior to the June 5 deadline in Humana's process.

On June 4, 2015, Humana's preliminary review of its May 2015 claims data indicated the need for further analysis of the adequacy of its individual Medicare Advantage Part C Incurred But Not Reported medical reserves (which are referred to in this joint proxy statement/prospectus as IBNR reserves). In light of this analysis, and after consulting with Kurt J. Hilzinger, the Chairman of Humana's board of directors, and other board members, representatives of Goldman Sachs and Fried Frank, Humana's management decided to delay the June 5 deadline for submission of indications of interests previously communicated to Aetna and Parties X and Y, and to temporarily suspend its exploration of a potential transaction until Humana could complete its analysis of its claims data. Accordingly, Goldman Sachs contacted the financial advisors of each of Aetna and Parties X and Y to inform them that the deadline had been delayed and that further information would be forthcoming concerning resumption of the process. Mr. Broussard also contacted Mr. Bertolini and the chief executive officers of Parties X and Y to communicate the same message.

On June 5, 2015, Humana's board of directors held a telephonic meeting. Members of Humana's management and representatives of Goldman Sachs and Fried Frank participated in the meeting. At the meeting, members of Humana's management discussed with the board the recent claims data, the potential impact on Humana's IBNR reserves, the delay to the deadline for indications of interest and the temporary suspension of the exploratory process. Representatives of Goldman Sachs also discussed with the board the process to date, including due diligence discussions with each of Aetna and Parties X and Y.

On June 12, 2015, Humana's board of directors held a telephonic meeting. Members of Humana's management and representatives of Goldman Sachs and Fried Frank participated in the meeting. At the meeting, members of Humana's management discussed with the board management's review of the claims data and its determination that Humana's IBNR reserves were adequate, including the engagement by Humana of an independent actuarial and consulting firm that concurred with Humana's management in that determination. The board also discussed the potential timeline for the resumption of the exploratory process with Aetna and Parties X and Y. The board then authorized Humana's management to resume that exploratory process.

On June 14, 2015, the chief executive officer of Party X called Mr. Broussard to discuss the status of the process. Mr. Broussard advised Party X's chief executive officer that he should expect to hear back from Humana shortly.

On June 15, 2015, Messrs. Bertolini and Broussard had a telephonic conversation to discuss the status of the process. Mr. Broussard advised Mr. Bertolini that he should expect to hear back from Humana shortly. Later that day, the Aetna board of directors held a telephonic meeting, which was attended by Aetna's senior management and representatives of Davis Polk and Simpson Thacher. At the meeting, the board considered a non-binding expression of interest provided by Party A on June 12, 2015 concerning a potential acquisition of Aetna. The Aetna board noted in particular that Party A had not addressed the regulatory and related risks of a potential transaction with Aetna in any meaningful respect. The board also noted that, although Party A had indicated that it would be willing to pay a significant market based premium, it had not proposed a specific price or premium.

Despite the absence of a specific proposal, and the failure to address regulatory and related risks, the Aetna board concluded that it would be appropriate to consider Party A's expression of interest in more detail at a later meeting, and instructed Aetna senior management and its advisors to present at such meeting an analysis of the range of proposals that Party A might make with respect to a potential transaction with Aetna. At the June 15, 2015 meeting, the Aetna board also received an update from Mr. Bertolini on his call with Mr. Broussard earlier that day, and discussed other matters concerning the status of a potential strategic transaction between Aetna and Humana and potential industry consolidation.

On June 16, 2015, representatives of Goldman Sachs had telephonic conversations with the financial advisors of each of Aetna and Parties X and Y. On each call, Goldman Sachs informed the financial advisors that Humana was prepared to resume its exploration of a potential transaction, and further discussed the reasons why Humana had temporarily suspended the process. On its calls with Aetna and Party X's financial advisors, Goldman Sachs communicated that Humana management was prepared to discuss with them the following day the outcome of Humana's review of its IBNR reserves. Goldman Sachs also indicated that each party should be prepared to submit written indications of interest no later than June 24, 2015. On its call with Party Y's financial advisors, Goldman Sachs communicated that Humana was reluctant to have further discussions with Party Y as part of its exploratory process in light of public reports that Party Y had made a proposal to acquire Party X that would, if consummated, preclude Party Y from acquiring Humana, but would include Party Y in the process if Party Y provided assurances that it was, in fact, committed to evaluating a potential transaction with Humana.

On June 16, 2015, following the calls by Goldman Sachs, Mr. Broussard spoke with Mr. Bertolini and the chief executive officers of each of Party X and Party Y regarding the resumption of the process. The chief executive officer of Party Y reiterated to Mr. Broussard that Party Y was still interested in a potential transaction with Humana, but that he was not prepared to discuss any specifics of Party Y's publicly reported proposal to acquire Party X. In light of the fact that the chief executive officer of Party Y could not provide Humana comfort that it was not pursuing an alternative transaction that would limit Party Y's ability to enter into a transaction with Humana, Mr. Broussard communicated that Humana was not prepared at that time to engage in further due diligence with Party Y. Later in the day on June 16, 2015, Mr. Bertolini called Mr. Broussard and communicated Aetna's interest in acquiring Humana at price of $225 per share, payable partly in cash and partly in stock. Mr. Broussard indicated that he did not believe that the Humana board of directors would consider a price of $225 per share to be sufficient, noting that the Humana board had determined not to pursue a recent offer from another party at a higher price. On his call with the chief executive officer of Party X, Mr. Broussard and Party X's chief executive officer also discussed rumors that had been publicly reported that Party X had received an acquisition proposal from Party Y. Party X's chief executive officer indicated that Party X continued to be interested in pursuing a transaction with Humana.

On June 17, 2015, members of Humana's management had calls with the management of Aetna and Party X to discuss Humana's review of its IBNR reserves. In addition, on June 17, 2015, Mr. Broussard and Mr. Bertolini had a telephonic conversation during which they discussed Aetna's interest in a potential transaction with Humana as well as other industry developments, as well as the rumors that had been publicly reported concerning Party A's interest in acquiring Aetna. Goldman Sachs also had a telephonic conversation with Citi, financial advisor to Aetna, on June 17, 2015 to discuss the process with respect to Aetna.

On June 18, 2015, Mr. Broussard and Mr. Bertolini had a telephonic conversation, during which Mr. Broussard reiterated his belief that a price of $225 per share would not be considered sufficient by the Humana board. Later in the day on June 18, 2015, Humana received a letter from Aetna containing a non-binding indication of interest to acquire all of Humana's outstanding shares for $230 per share, consisting of approximately 47% in Aetna stock and the remainder in cash, with the stock component of the consideration fixed based on the exchange ratio implied by the 10-day volume weighted average price per Aetna common share as of June 12, 2015 of $117.42. The letter stated that Aetna would be prepared to agree to use reasonable best efforts to obtain the required regulatory approvals for the potential transaction, up to a material adverse effect standard (i.e., as long as such efforts would not have a material adverse effect). The letter also indicated that Aetna was prepared to complete its due diligence and, subject to satisfactory completion of diligence, negotiation of a mutually satisfactory merger agreement and the final approval of its board, enter into a merger agreement within 10 days.

On June 19, 2015, Humana's board of directors held a telephonic meeting. Members of Humana's management and representatives of Goldman Sachs and Fried Frank participated in the meeting. At the meeting, representatives of Goldman Sachs discussed with the board (i) the process to date with Aetna and Parties X and Y, (ii) potential consolidation within the managed care industry, and (iii) the terms of Aetna's proposal. The board also discussed the possibility of another managed care company making an offer to acquire Aetna in light of market rumors that Party A had contacted Aetna with respect to a potential transaction. The board and its advisors discussed possible terms that could be included in a merger agreement with Aetna or Party X or Y to address this possibility. Following discussion with Goldman Sachs, Fried Frank and members of Humana's management, the board determined that Humana should respond to Aetna's letter by communicating to Aetna a proposed purchase price of $240 per share. At the request of the board, Mr. Broussard left the board meeting temporarily to communicate this response by telephone to Mr. Bertolini. Mr. Bertolini advised Mr. Broussard that he would need to discuss the matter with Aetna's board of directors. Also at the meeting, the Humana board formed a transaction committee, consisting of Messrs. Broussard, Hilzinger, Frank A. D'Amelio, and David A. Jones, Jr. (which is referred to in this joint proxy statement/prospectus as the Humana transaction committee), to oversee the negotiation of, and advise the Humana board on, aspects of the transaction process. The other directors were advised that they would be invited to participate in all meetings of the Humana transaction committee. A majority of the other directors participated in each of the eight transaction committee meetings described below.

In addition, on June 19, 2015, Goldman Sachs had a telephonic conversation with Citi to further discuss Humana's response to Aetna's proposal, including Humana's counter-proposal (i) of $240 per share, and (ii) that the merger agreement contain appropriate deal protection provisions. On the same day, Fried Frank held a telephonic meeting with Davis Polk to discuss deal protection provisions that could potentially be included in the merger agreement.

On June 20, 2015, Mr. Bertolini called Mr. Broussard to inform him that he had conveyed Humana's counter-proposal of $240 per share to Aetna's board of directors and that Aetna was not prepared to commit to any increase in the price indicated in Aetna's June 18 offer. On the call, Messrs. Broussard and Bertolini agreed that their respective teams would engage in due diligence (including reverse due diligence by Humana on Aetna) on an expedited basis consistent with the ten-day time frame included in Aetna's June 18 letter and Mr. Broussard advised Mr. Bertolini that Fried Frank would shortly send a draft merger agreement to Davis Polk. Messrs. Broussard and Bertolini agreed to defer any further discussion of the purchase price until due diligence was substantially completed.

On June 20, 2015, Party Y publicly confirmed that it had made offers to acquire Party X.

On June 20, 2015, the Humana transaction committee held a telephonic meeting, at which representatives of Goldman Sachs and Fried Frank participated. At the meeting, representatives of Fried Frank discussed with the committee the proposed terms of a draft merger agreement, which the committee approved to be sent to Aetna. Later in the day on June 20, 2015, Fried Frank delivered an initial draft of the merger agreement to Davis Polk, which provided (i) a "hell or high water" standard (i.e., an obligation of Aetna to take any and all actions required) for obtaining required regulatory approvals for the transaction, (ii) a right of Humana to terminate the merger agreement to enter into a superior proposal, (iii) a "force the vote" provision (i.e., a requirement to submit the adoption of the merger agreement or the approval of the stock issuance, as applicable, to a stockholder vote, and no right to terminate the merger agreement, even if a superior proposal were received) applicable to Aetna only, (iv) termination fees in unspecified amounts (A) payable by Humana in the event of (1) Humana's termination of the merger agreement to enter into a superior proposal, (2) Aetna's termination following a change of the Humana board's recommendation in favor of the merger or (3) either party's termination in certain circumstances if Humana's stockholders fail to adopt the merger agreement following a public acquisition proposal for Humana (which fee is referred to in this section of this joint proxy statement/prospectus as the Humana termination fee), and (B) payable by Aetna in the event of (1) Humana's termination of the merger agreement following a change of the Aetna board's recommendation in favor of the stock issuance or (2) either party's termination in certain circumstances if Aetna's shareholders fail to approve the stock issuance following a public acquisition proposal for Aetna (which fee is referred to in this section of this joint proxy statement/prospectus as the Aetna termination fee) and (v) certain provisions that would limit Aetna's rights to terminate the merger agreement if, among other things, Aetna shareholders fail to approve a transaction in the event that Aetna received an acquisition proposal from an industry participant.

On June 21, 2015, Mr. Broussard spoke with the chief executive officer of Party X, who informed Mr. Broussard that Party X still expected to submit an indication of interest on Wednesday, June 24, 2015.

On June 21, 2015, the Aetna board of directors held a telephonic meeting, which was attended by Aetna's senior management and representatives of Davis Polk, Jones Day and Simpson Thacher. At the meeting, the board received an update from management on, and discussed the status of, discussions with Humana regarding a potential strategic transaction, and also discussed potential industry consolidation. Following discussion of such matters, the board concluded that it would be appropriate for management to continue discussions with Humana regarding a potential strategic transaction between Aetna and Humana.

During the week of June 22, 2015, the management and operational personnel of Humana and Aetna met at Fried Frank's New York offices for due diligence meetings. During this period, in furtherance of Aetna's due diligence review of Humana as well as Humana's due diligence review of Aetna, the two parties held over 40 in person or telephonic due diligence sessions attended by a significant number of employees from each company, covering a variety of financial and operational matters. During this timeframe, each of Humana and Aetna also made available to the management and operational personnel of the other party and its advisors an electronic dataroom containing certain non-public financial, legal and other information of such party. Aetna also engaged an independent actuarial and consulting firm to provide an independent evaluation of Humana's 2016 Medicare Advantage Part C and Part D bids, including an evaluation of baseline experience and Humana's IBNR reserves.

On June 22, 2015, Fried Frank and Davis Polk had a telephonic conversation to discuss certain terms of the merger agreement, including that Aetna would not be willing to accept (i) a "hell or high water" standard for obtaining required regulatory approvals for the proposed transaction, (ii) provisions that would limit Aetna's rights to terminate the merger agreement if Aetna shareholders fail to approve a transaction or (iii) any asymmetrical "force the vote" provisions, termination fees or other related provisions (which are referred to in this section of this joint proxy statement/prospectus as deal protection provisions) in the merger agreement.

On June 22, 2015, the Humana transaction committee held a telephonic meeting, at which representatives of Goldman Sachs and Fried Frank participated. At the meeting, members of Humana's management and representatives of Goldman Sachs discussed recent developments in the managed care industry, including with respect to potential consolidation scenarios, and updated the committee regarding the day's events, including Humana's discussions with Aetna. The committee also discussed and approved Humana's formal engagement of Goldman Sachs as its financial advisor in connection with a potential business combination. In that connection, Goldman Sachs discussed with the committee certain of Goldman Sachs' prior relationships with Aetna and Parties X and Y. Later on that same day, Fried Frank had a telephonic conversation with Davis Polk to discuss the terms of the merger agreement.

On June 23, 2015, Messrs. Broussard and Bertolini met in New York to discuss the potential transaction. Later in the day, Davis Polk delivered a revised draft of the merger agreement to Fried Frank with terms consistent with the telephone discussion held on June 22, 2015, including an obligation of Aetna to use reasonable best efforts to obtain required regulatory approvals for the proposed transaction, up to a material adverse effect standard determined by reference to a company the size of Humana.

On June 23, 2015, the Humana transaction committee held a telephonic meeting, at which representatives of Goldman Sachs and Fried Frank participated. At the meeting, members of Humana's management and representatives of Goldman Sachs updated the committee regarding the day's events, including Humana's discussions with Aetna. Representatives of Fried Frank also discussed with the committee Davis Polk's response to the merger agreement, including the deal protection provisions applicable to Aetna, and Aetna's proposed contractual commitment with respect to obtaining required regulatory approvals for the proposed transaction.

On June 24, 2015, Messrs. Hilzinger and Bertolini had a telephonic conversation during which they discussed a potential commitment by Aetna to maintain certain operations of the combined company in Louisville, Kentucky, and the potential addition of Humana directors to the Aetna board of directors, in each case following completion of any transaction. On the same day, Fried Frank and Davis Polk held a meeting at Davis Polk's office in New York to negotiate terms of the merger agreement.

On June 24, 2015, Humana received a letter from Party X containing a non-binding indication of interest to acquire all of Humana's outstanding shares for $225 per share. Following receipt of this letter, Goldman Sachs had a telephonic conversation with Party X's financial advisor to further discuss the terms of Party X's proposal. As part of this discussion, Goldman Sachs communicated to Party X that, in light of the public reports that Party X had been approached by Party Y with respect to a transaction, Humana would be willing to explore a potential transaction with Party X if Party X would present Humana with a proposed transaction that did not require approval by Party X's stockholders. Later that day, the Humana transaction committee held a telephonic meeting, at which representatives of Goldman Sachs and Fried Frank participated, to discuss Party X's letter and to update the committee on the day's events.

On June 25, 2015, Goldman Sachs held a meeting with Citi to communicate Humana's counter-proposal to Aetna: (i) a purchase price of $240 per share, (ii) a Humana termination fee equal to 3.25% of the transaction value, (iii) an Aetna termination fee equal to 7% of Aetna's equity value and (iv) a stronger contractual commitment by Aetna to obtain required regulatory approvals for the proposed transaction. Following the call, Fried Frank delivered a revised draft of the merger agreement to Davis Polk reflecting these terms, including a right of Humana to terminate the merger agreement to enter into a superior proposal, a "force the vote" provision applicable to Aetna only and an obligation of Aetna to use reasonable best efforts to obtain required regulatory approvals for the proposed transaction, up to a material adverse effect standard determined by reference to the combined company. Later that day, while the board meeting described below was in progress, Mr. Shawn M. Guertin, Aetna's Chief Financial Officer, Chief Enterprise Risk Officer and Executive Vice President, called Mr. Kane to reject Humana's counter-proposal. In addition, on the same date following the board meeting described below, Mr. Bertolini communicated to Mr. Broussard that, given Humana's counter-proposal, Aetna intended to withdraw from the process. Following several telephonic communications between Messrs. Broussard and Bertolini, Mr. Bertolini agreed to continue negotiations with Humana, but Mr. Bertolini did not offer any specific counter-proposals with respect to the open points. Messrs. Kane and Guertin also had a telephonic discussion following such communications to discuss Humana's counterproposal. In addition, on that same date, Goldman Sachs had two telephonic conversations with Party X's financial advisor to further discuss Party X's offer in advance of the Humana board meeting held later that evening, and Goldman Sachs also had a telephonic discussion with Party X's financial advisor while the board meeting was in progress to discuss Party X's offer.

On June 25 and June 26, 2015, Humana's board of directors held meetings in New York. Members of Humana's management and representatives of Goldman Sachs and Fried Frank participated in the meetings. At the meetings, members of Humana's management discussed with the Humana board the ongoing operations of Humana and also reported on the results of Humana's due diligence review of Aetna. Representatives of Goldman Sachs discussed with the Humana board (i) the negotiations with Aetna to date, (ii) a preliminary financial review of the combined company, and (iii) a financial review of Humana as a stand-alone public company. Representatives of Fried Frank also discussed with the board its fiduciary duties and the proposed terms of the merger agreement based on negotiations with Aetna to date. In addition, on June 26, 2015, the non-executive members of Humana's board of directors held an executive session of the board, at which representatives of Goldman Sachs and Fried Frank participated, to further discuss the matters discussed at the full board meeting.

On June 26, 2015, Aetna's board of directors held a meeting in New York, New York, which was attended by Aetna's senior management and representatives of Citi, Lazard (financial advisor to Aetna), Davis Polk, Jones Day and Simpson Thacher. At the meeting, the board received an update from Aetna management on, and discussed the status of, negotiations with Humana, discussed the financial and political aspects of a potential transaction with Humana with representatives of Citi, discussed the regulatory aspects of a potential transaction with its legal advisors and discussed potential industry consolidation in light of, among other things, Party Y's recent public confirmation that it had made offers to acquire Party X. At this meeting, as requested by the Aetna board at its June 15, 2015 meeting referred to above, the board also received a presentation of Aetna senior management and its advisors relating to Party A's most recent expression of interest in a potential acquisition of Aetna. During that presentation and the ensuing discussion, the Aetna board, together with Aetna's senior management and its advisors, concluded that the regulatory and related risks of a potential transaction with Party A were significant, and noted that none of Party A's expressions of interest had addressed such risks in any credible way. In addition, the Aetna board, together with Aetna's senior management and advisors, noted that Party A had not proposed a specific price or premium in its most recent expression of interest, and the specific price that Party A had proposed in its prior expressions of interest had not been at an attractive level, including Party A's offer on February 17, 2015 where Party A reiterated its $104 per share offer, which Party A indicated was full and fair value. However, in order to evaluate the prospect of Party A making a specific proposal, the Aetna board, together with Aetna's senior management and financial advisors, considered the range of prices that it believed that Party A might pay in a potential acquisition of Aetna, and the other potential benefits of a potential transaction with Party A to Aetna's shareholders. Taking into account these factors, the other facts and circumstances of Party A's prior expressions of interest and the risk that engaging in discussions with Party A could disrupt or lead Humana to terminate discussions with Aetna regarding a potential transaction, the Aetna board concluded, as it had at earlier board meetings, that it was not in the best interests of Aetna's shareholders to engage in discussions with Party A regarding a potential transaction, and that instead it would be appropriate for management to continue negotiations with Humana regarding a potential strategic transaction.

On June 27, 2015, members of Humana's and Aetna's management held several telephonic discussions to negotiate the terms of the transaction, and early on June 28, 2015, Davis Polk delivered a revised draft of the merger agreement to Fried Frank, including (i) a right of each party to terminate the merger agreement to enter into a superior proposal, (ii) a Humana termination fee of 3.25% of the transaction value, (iii) an Aetna termination fee of 3.25% of Aetna's equity value and (iv) an obligation of Aetna to use reasonable best efforts to obtain required regulatory approvals for the proposed transaction, up to a material adverse effect standard determined by reference to a company the size of Aetna. During the course of the day and the following days, Aetna's due diligence team reviewed the results that Humana had received from a recent, ordinary course CMS comprehensive audit of Humana's Medicare Advantage Parts C and D plans.

Members of Humana's and Aetna's management continued discussions throughout the day on June 28, 2015. As part of those discussions, Aetna's management communicated to Humana's management that Aetna would not be willing to execute a merger agreement before CMS released its report on June 30, 2015 regarding risk adjustment and reinsurance settlement amounts for 2014 under its risk spreading premium stabilization programs established pursuant to the provisions in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act related to the 3R's. During these discussions, members of Aetna's management proposed (i) that Humana and Aetna have the benefit of symmetrical deal protection provisions in the merger agreement, as reflected in the draft of the merger agreement most recently delivered by Davis Polk to Fried Frank, (ii) the enhanced contractual commitment on the part of Aetna to obtain required regulatory approvals for the proposed transaction, as reflected in the draft of the merger agreement most recently delivered by Davis Polk to Fried Frank, (iii) a termination fee equal to $450 million, which would be payable by Aetna in the event the parties fail to obtain required regulatory approvals for the proposed transaction (which fee is referred to in this joint proxy statement/prospectus as the regulatory termination fee), and (iv) that the cash component of the purchase price be increased to $125 per share and the stock component of the purchase price be based on a fixed exchange ratio of 0.8250 of an Aetna common share, which reflected an implied value of approximately $105 per share, based on the 10-day volume weighted average price per Aetna common share as of such date, and would result in an implied purchase price of $230 per share.

On each of June 27 and June 28, 2015, the Humana transaction committee held a telephonic meeting, at which members of Humana's management and representatives of Goldman Sachs, Fried Frank and Crowell & Moring LLP, Humana's outside antitrust counsel (which is referred to in this joint proxy statement/prospectus as Crowell), participated. At these meetings, members of Humana's management and representatives of Fried Frank updated the committee regarding the day's events, including the negotiations with Aetna, and representatives of Crowell made a presentation to the committee regarding the likely antitrust regulatory review of the mergers. During the course of these days and the following days, Aetna's due diligence team reviewed the results that Humana had received from a recent, ordinary course CMS comprehensive audit of Humana's Medicare Advantage Parts C and D plans. On June 28, 2015, Mr. Kane spoke with representatives of Lazard to discuss the Humana projections.

On June 29, 2015, Fried Frank delivered a revised draft of the merger agreement to Davis Polk, which provided for (i) "force the vote" provisions applicable to each party, (ii) an Aetna termination fee equal to 4% of an amount equal to 130% of Aetna's equity value, (iii) a Humana termination fee equal to 4% of the transaction value, (iv) an obligation of Aetna to use reasonable best efforts to obtain required regulatory approvals for the proposed transaction, up to a material adverse effect standard determined by reference to a company 150% of the size of Aetna, and (v) a regulatory termination fee equal to 7% of the transaction value. Later that day, Fried Frank and Davis Polk had a telephonic conversation to discuss the terms of the merger agreement.

In the early morning of June 30, 2015, Davis Polk delivered a revised draft of the merger agreement to Fried Frank, which provided for (i) an Aetna termination fee equal to 3.75% of Aetna's equity value, (ii) a Humana termination fee equal to 3.75% of the transaction value, (iii) a revised contractual commitment on the part of Aetna to obtain required regulatory approvals for the proposed transaction, (iv) a regulatory termination fee equal to $450 million and (v) a new termination right for Aetna in the event that Humana became subject to CMS sanctions prior to completion of the mergers.

On June 30, 2015, members of Humana's and Aetna's management, along with representatives of Goldman Sachs, Fried Frank, Citi and Davis Polk, held a meeting at the New York offices of Davis Polk to negotiate the remaining material terms of the transaction. During a break in these discussions, the Humana transaction committee held a telephonic meeting at which Mr. Broussard updated the committee with respect to Humana's management's discussions with Aetna. Following the discussions, the parties agreed, subject to final approval by their respective boards of directors, on (i) symmetrical deal protection provisions, including "force the vote" provisions applicable to each party and termination fees as set forth in the last draft of the merger agreement delivered by Davis Polk to Fried Frank, (ii) an obligation of Aetna to use reasonable best efforts to obtain required regulatory approvals for the proposed transaction, up to a material adverse effect standard determined by reference to a company the size of Aetna, and (iii) a $1 billion regulatory termination fee. In a discussion between Messrs. Broussard and Bertolini, Mr. Broussard discussed Aetna's proposal to change the cash and stock mix of the purchase price discussed above. Mr. Broussard expressed Humana's view that Humana and Aetna should split the exchange ratio implied by Aetna's June 18 letter and the revised exchange ratio proposed by Aetna on June 28, 2015, which would result in an implied purchase price of $235 per share, based on the price per share of Aetna common shares as of June 30, 2015. Mr. Bertolini rejected Mr. Broussard's proposal, and following this rejection, and Mr. Broussard's rejection of Aetna's proposed termination right relating to CMS sanctions, Messrs. Broussard and Bertolini terminated discussions.

Later in the day on June 30, 2015, each of the Humana transaction committee and Humana's full board of directors held telephonic meetings, at which members of Humana's management and representatives of Fried Frank, Goldman Sachs and Crowell participated. At the meetings, members of Humana's management and representatives of Fried Frank provided updates regarding the termination of negotiations with Aetna. Humana's management also informed the board that as a result of the risk adjustment and reinsurance settlement amounts for 2014 applicable to certain of Humana's commercial medical products announced by CMS earlier that day, Humana would be required to make certain adjustments to its estimated net receivables related to the 3R's for both 2014 and 2015. Mr. Kane also called Mr. Guertin to inform him of the impact the CMS announcement would have on Humana.

Also later in the day on June 30, 2015, the Aetna board of directors held a meeting in New York, New York, which was attended by Aetna's senior management and representatives of Citi, Lazard, Davis Polk, Jones Day and Simpson Thacher. At the meeting, the Aetna board received an update from management on and discussed the results of Aetna's due diligence on Humana, certain terms of the potential transaction that had been negotiated and the termination of negotiations with Humana. On the same day and the following day, Aetna's management reviewed the risk adjustment and reinsurance settlement amounts for 2014 announced by CMS on June 30, 2015 and the potential impact on Humana's receivables related to the 3R's for both 2014 and 2015.

On July 2, 2015, Citi called Goldman Sachs to indicate Aetna's willingness to resume discussions on the basis of Aetna's last proposal regarding the remaining material terms of the transaction. Throughout the day, Davis Polk, Fried Frank and members of Aetna's and Humana's management held several telephonic discussions regarding such terms, including Aetna's proposed termination right in the event of CMS sanctions that are material and adverse to Humana. Throughout the day on July 2, 2015, Davis Polk and Fried Frank continued to exchange drafts of the merger agreement and attempted to finalize the remaining terms of the merger agreement, with the parties ultimately agreeing to include a condition to the completion of the mergers and a termination right relating to CMS sanctions that are material and adverse to Humana, as more fully described below in the section "The Merger Agreement--Conditions to Completion of the Mergers" and "The Merger Agreement--Termination of the Merger Agreement" beginning on pages XX and XX, respectively, of this joint proxy statement/prospectus. In addition, at their respective clients' direction, Goldman Sachs and Citi held a telephonic conversation to negotiate the exchange ratio for the stock component of the merger consideration to be paid to the Humana stockholders that resulted in an agreed upon per Humana share purchase price of $125.00 in cash and 0.8375 of an Aetna common share.

On July 2, 2015, Goldman Sachs and Party X's financial advisor had a telephonic conversation to discuss Party X's offer. Party X's financial advisor indicated that Party X would be willing to revise its offer to increase the cash consideration portion of the offered purchase price, but that doing so would require a reduction in the overall purchase price due to increased financing costs that would be required as a result of the increase in the cash component of the consideration. Party X's financial advisor also communicated that Party X would not (i) commit to a timeline for the completion of due diligence, (ii) be willing to submit the revised offer in writing or (iii) provide assurance that the deal value would remain at $225 per share of Humana's common stock less the increased financing costs referred to above.

On July 2, 2015, Humana's board of directors held a telephonic meeting. Members of Humana's management and representatives of Goldman Sachs and Fried Frank also participated in the meeting. At the meeting, representatives of Goldman Sachs updated the board regarding its discussions with Party X, including that Party X would be willing to revise its offer as described above. Mr. Broussard communicated to the board that management's recommendation was that the board decline to pursue Party X's offer in light of the uncertainty of the proposal, including the uncertainty due to the public offer for Party X then pending from Party Y, and that delaying negotiations with Aetna to engage in a due diligence process with Party X could jeopardize the pending negotiations with Aetna. Representatives of Fried Frank updated the board regarding the proposed merger agreement with Aetna. Also at the meeting, representatives of Goldman Sachs presented its financial analysis of the transaction, and rendered its oral opinion to Humana's board of directors, which was subsequently confirmed by delivery of a written opinion, dated July 2, 2015, to the effect that, as of such date and based upon and subject to the factors, qualifications, limitations and assumptions to be set forth in the written opinion, the consideration to be paid to Humana's stockholders (other than Aetna and its affiliates) pursuant to the merger agreement was fair, from a financial point of view, to such stockholders, as more fully described below in the section "--Opinion of Humana's Financial Advisor" beginning on page XX of this joint proxy statement/prospectus. Following these presentations, and consideration of the factors described under the section "--Humana's Reasons for the Mergers; Recommendation of the Humana Board of Directors that Humana Stockholders Adopt the Merger Agreement" beginning on page XX of this joint proxy statement/prospectus, Humana's board of directors unanimously (i) determined that the merger agreement, the mergers and the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement are advisable and fair to and in the best interests of Humana and its stockholders, (ii) approved and adopted the merger agreement with Aetna, (iii) directed that the adoption of the merger agreement be submitted to a vote at a meeting of Humana stockholders and (iv) recommended that Humana's stockholders adopt the merger agreement.

On July 2, 2015, the Aetna board of directors also held a telephonic meeting, which was attended by Aetna's senior management and representatives of Citi, Lazard, Davis Polk, Jones Day and Simpson Thacher. The board, management and their advisors discussed the terms of the merger agreement, the strategic and financial rationale of the proposed transaction, including the synergies expected to be realized in the transaction, management's expectation based on discussions with the rating agencies that Aetna would maintain its investment grade credit rating upon completion of the transaction, the merits and considerations of other strategic alternatives that Aetna might pursue and the impact of potential industry consolidation, and reviewed the directors' fiduciary duties in considering the proposed transaction. Citi then reviewed with the board its financial analysis of the merger consideration provided for in the merger agreement and rendered its oral opinion to the board, which was confirmed by delivery of a written opinion dated July 2, 2015, to the effect that, as of such date and based on and subject to the assumptions made, procedures followed, matters considered and limitations and qualifications set forth in the written opinion, the merger consideration to be paid by Aetna in the merger was fair, from a financial point of view, to Aetna, as more fully described below in the section "--Opinions of Aetna's Financial Advisors--Opinion of Citigroup Global Markets Inc." beginning on page XX of this joint proxy statement/prospectus. Lazard then rendered its oral opinion to the board, subsequently confirmed in writing, that, as of July 2, 2015 and based on and subject to the assumptions, procedures, factors, qualifications and limitations set forth therein, the merger consideration to be paid by Aetna in the merger was fair, from a financial point of view, to Aetna, as more fully described below in the section "--Opinions of Aetna's Financial Advisors--Opinion of Lazard Frères & Co. LLC" beginning on page XX of this joint proxy statement/prospectus. After consideration and consultation with its advisors, including consideration of the factors described in the section "--Aetna's Reasons for the Mergers; Recommendation of the Aetna Board of Directors that Aetna Shareholders Approve the Stock Issuance" beginning on page XX of this joint proxy statement/prospectus, the Aetna board unanimously (i) determined that the merger agreement, the mergers and the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the stock issuance, are advisable and fair to and in the best interests of Aetna and its shareholders, (ii) approved and adopted the merger agreement, (iii) directed that the approval of the stock issuance be submitted to a vote at a meeting of Aetna shareholders and (iv) recommended that Aetna's shareholders approve the stock issuance.

That night, following the Humana and Aetna board meetings, Humana and Aetna entered into the merger agreement, and early in the morning of July 3, 2015, issued a joint press release announcing the transaction.

Twitter: @HenryPowderly