Yesterday, the House once again passed legislation to reject the Iran nuclear accord. Like the more than 60 votes to gut Obamacare, House votes to block the Iran accord from going forward have so far only resulted in one outcome: a big, fat waste of lawmakers' time.

What makes such votes all the more myopic is that while some in Congress perform as if they are starring in a re-make of "Groundhog Day" set on Capitol Hill, the world has witnessed transformative breakthroughs in U.S.-Iran relations over the past month.

The Iran accord is now fully implemented, with Iran dramatically shrinking its nuclear program. Iran defied all expectations on how quickly it would shrink-wrap its program. Tehran has already dismantled centrifuges, shipped out its stockpile of enriched uranium overseas and poured concrete in its Arak reactor, cutting off its ability to make plutonium for a bomb. For the first time in a decade, Iran doesn't have enough fuel for a nuclear weapon. 53 national security leaders praised the agreement for subjecting Iran to “some of the most sweeping inspections and transparency obligations in history, many of which will remain in place for decades.”

[MORE: Political Cartoons on Iran]

And if that wasn't enough good news to celebrate, five U.S. citizens who were jailed in Iranian prisons are now free, in a stunning display of what diplomacy can accomplish.

Yet despite these breakthroughs, Congress went ahead with an attempt to vote down the Iran accord. With the bill lacking enough votes to override the president's promised veto or even guarantee Senate support, this is clearly nothing more than a poorly-executed partisan gimmick.

Partisan gimmicks aside, the congressional threat to the nuclear accord remains as real as ever. It comes not from the rejection of the accord a la Obamcare repeal, but in the form of the bipartisan push to extend the Iran Sanctions Act. The Iran Sanctions Act is the bedrock of the U.S. sanctions regime against Iran, and is set to expire at the end of 2016.

Already, the fate of the Iran Sanctions Act has been dubbed "Round 2 of the Iran Deal Debate." Sens. Mark Kirk, R-Ill., and Bob Menendez, D-N.J. – both opponents of the accord – already introduced legislation to extend the act through 2026. The Senate Foreign Relations Committee is likely to take up consideration of a reauthorization later this month, along with other Iran sanctions measures.

[READ: Has Obama Been Vindicated on Iran?]

Spoiler alert: the 114th Congress is extremely unlikely to let the bedrock of the U.S. sanctions regime expire. The authors of this article cannot predict whether the 114th Congress will avoid another government shutdown this year, but we can confidently predict that the 114th Congress will extend the sanctions act. The question is what form that will take.

Another spoiler alert: the final bill is not going to be the current iteration of the Kirk/Menendez bill. That means there is still time to shape what the extension of this bill looks like.

The Iran nuclear accord prohibits the U.S. from imposing new nuclear-related sanctions. It does allow for the U.S. to continue to sanction Iran for terrorism and human rights abuses.

The Iran Sanctions Act, however, was built on the premise of punishing Iran for its nuclear program. Administration officials have warned that Congress cannot take existing nuclear-related sanctions and simply relabel them without violating the agreement.

Indeed, Congress must do everything in its power to make sure it continues to comply with both the letter and spirit of the nuclear accord. With the success the accord has already made in scaling back Iran's nuclear program, we cannot afford an escalation that would jeopardize this progress and put our countries on a path toward war.

[SEE: Congress Cartoons]

Together, we can ensure that an extended Iran Sanctions Act doesn't violate the Iran nuclear agreement. Last summer, anti-deal lobbying groups poured tens of millions of dollars into their ill-fated campaign to torpedo the historic Iran nuclear accord. Yet the anti-deal campaign coffers were no match for the determined will of citizen advocates. Fed up with the prospect of yet another war, the American people chose diplomacy over aggression.