State Rep. David Simpson answers a question as he and fellow state Rep. Bryan Hughes square off in a Texas Senate District 1 primary runoff forum Wednesday at the Longview Community Center.

Texas Senate District 1 candidates state Reps. David Simpson and Bryan Hughes are facing off in a runoff for the seat.

The Longview News-Journal submitted a series of questions to candidates for Texas Senate District 1, Reps. David Simpson and Bryan Hughes. We have printed the questions and each candidate's answers below.

Also, find more local elections coverage at www.news-journal.com/elections.

Bryan Hughes

Bio

Address: 701 North Pacific, Mineola

701 North Pacific, Mineola Age: 46

46 Family: Lifelong resident of Northeast Texas; parents, brothers, nieces and nephews all live in the area

Lifelong resident of Northeast Texas; parents, brothers, nieces and nephews all live in the area Campaign website: www.bryanhughes.com

www.bryanhughes.com Length of residency in city and current voting district: Lifetime

Lifetime Occupation(s)/main source(s) of income: Attorney

Attorney Education/degrees: BBA - Economics, UT Tyler, 1992 JD - Baylor Law School, 1995

BBA - Economics, UT Tyler, 1992 Current civic involvement: Rotary Club, Kiwanis Club, Life Member of NRA

Rotary Club, Kiwanis Club, Life Member of NRA Past civic involvement: Former Longview City Fire Fighter

Former Longview City Fire Fighter Previous public offices sought or held: Currently State Representative, District Five

Currently State Representative, District Five How much have you raised for your campaign?Approximately $500,000

Identify your top three contributors: Texans for Lawsuit Reform, Texans for Education Reform, Texas Association of Realtors

No

Have you ever declared personal or professional bankruptcy? If so, please explain: No.

Q&A

Our state and nation are facing challenges like we have never seen. With the retirement of Senator Eltife, Northeast Texas needs a Senator who shares our values and has the experience, relationships, and proven record to represent us in Austin.

Q: Why should East Texan voters choose you over your opponent?

A: I have a proven record of effective, conservative leadership in the Texas House. I have walked the walk on the issues East Texans care about from securing the border to fighting back against Obamacare.

Q: What do you see as the single most important issue that will face the Texas Legislature over the next two years?

A: Securing our border and stopping illegal immigration continues to be the top issue brought up at town hall forums and events across the district. It is a matter of national security - we must know who is coming across our borders and what their motives are.

Q: What is your position on expanding Medicaid in Texas? Why?

A: I have opposed the expansion of Medicaid in the House, and I will continue to oppose its expansion in the Senate.

Medicaid is already a broken system, as fewer and fewer doctors are accepting Medicaid because of its low reimbursement rates and the federal red tape required to participate. Expanding Medicaid would exacerbate these problems.

Additionally, while it was promoted as "free money" by the Obama Administration, expansion would cost the State of Texas over $87 billion over the next decade due to the strings attached. This would completely consume our state budget and would likely lead to an increase in our taxes.

Q: What would be your vote on a “convention of states” to make proposed amendments to the U.S. Constitution? Why?

A: We need a Balanced Budget Amendment as well as other provisions to limit the out of control federal government.

Convention of the States has become an increasingly popular concept after the release of Mark Levin's book and Governor Abbott's recent proposal. Our nation is in a crisis, and our Founders included Article V of the Constitution as tool for states to use to reign in the federal government.

Proponents of a convention of the states argue it would return power to the people and finally allow us to add protections to the Constitution that will require us to balance the budget and stop the spending spree. Opponents fear that we could end up with a "runaway convention" and lose many of the freedoms we currently enjoy under the Constitution.

I think this is a concept that Texas needs to look very closely at, while making sure that any proposal passed contains proper protections to prevent a runaway convention.

The State of Indiana passed a law providing that if an Indiana delegate votes for an amendment that was not authorized by the state of Indiana, the delegate is held criminally liable.

To support a Convention of the States, I would at the very least like to see this kind of protection in place.

Q: Do you believe Texas’ highway system is falling behind both on capacity and maintenance? If so, what do you think the Legislature should do to expend our highway system?

A: For years transportation was neglected at the state level. To make matters worse, taxpayer dollars for transportation have been diverted away from their intended purpose.

I have long opposed the diversion of transportation funds to other programs. Last session, we ended about $1.3 billion in diversions, in which gas tax money was going to pay for items other than road construction and maintenance. I support passing a Constitutional Amendment to ensure the legislature cannot divert funds in the future to ensure we stay on top of keeping our infrastructure up-to-date.

In 2014, voters approved a Constitutional Amendment that put $1.7 billion towards transportation in the first year alone. Last November, we approved a provision that is expected to give the transportation an estimated $3 billion in extra funds each year.

Q: What is your position on a proposed Marvin Nichols Reservoir? Why?

A: There are plenty of sources of water for Dallas that do not require taking East Texas land and water. We can sell water to Dallas in a free market transaction, just like we sell them oil and gas, but we cannot allow them to take the land and water from us by eminent domain.

Q: Should marijuana for medical use be legalized in Texas? What about a complete legalization of the drug?

A: No, I am against the legalization of marijuana in any form.

Last session, the legislature passed and Governor Abbott signed a bill to allow for certain patients to receive medicine derived from CBD oil. This oil originates from the same plant as marijuana but does not contain THC or any sort of psychoactive compound that gives users a high.

Every law enforcement officer and prosecutor that I had asked has confirmed that marijuana is a gateway drug. We also know that it does serious and permanent damage to the lungs and brain of adolescents.

Legalization of marijuana would be a terrible mistake.

Q: What is your position on a statewide ban of texting while driving? Why?

A: Distracted driving is dangerous and current laws should be enforced.

Q: What is your position on the state’s current approach to southern border security?

A: Our porous southern border is an economic threat and a national security threat.

Since the federal government has refused to secure the border, Texas has no choice but to act. I am proud to be the only person in this race that has voted to double our resources at the border.

Q: What is your position on the U.S. accepting Syrian refugees? Why?

A: We know that at least one of the ISIS terrorists in the deadly Paris attacks had come into the country posing as a Syrian refugee. Even President Obama's own Attorney General admits that we do not have enough information to vet these folks and figure out who they are. So accepting Syrian refugees at this time is a threat to our national security.

We can help the refugees by setting up safe zones for them in or near their home countries. In this way we can offer them protection and make it easier for them to return home once the danger is passed.

Q: Who do you support in your party’s presidential primary? Why?

A: I support Ted Cruz. I am on his statewide leadership team and I was honored to join him on the stage and offer the invocation on his last Northeast Texas campaign stop in August. Editorial note: Since Ted Cruz suspended his presidential campaign, Hughes said he would support the GOP's presumptive nominee Donald Trump to stop a possible Hillary Clinton presidency.



Loading Video Primary candidates: Bryan Hughes

David Simpson

Bio

Address: P.O. Box 5100 Longview, TX 75604

P.O. Box 5100 Longview, TX 75604 Age: 54

54 Family: Wife of 30 years, Susan, seven children, and three grandsons

Wife of 30 years, Susan, seven children, and three grandsons Campaign website: DavidSimpson.com

DavidSimpson.com Length of residency in city and current voting district: 16 years

16 years Occupation(s)/main source(s) of income: Small businessman/Simpson Capital, LLC

Small businessman/Simpson Capital, LLC Education/degrees: BA in philosophy from Vanderbilt University in 1983

BA in philosophy from Vanderbilt University in 1983 Current civic involvement: State Representative

State Representative Past civic involvement: Volunteer firefighter. Soccer coach for a city league.

Volunteer firefighter. Soccer coach for a city league. Previous public offices sought or held: City of Avinger- Texas Alderman (1993) Mayor (1993-98); Cass County Judge (1996); State Representative for District Seven (2011–Current)

City of Avinger- Texas Alderman (1993) Mayor (1993-98); Cass How much have you raised for your campaign?$363,465 (not including $147,786 of cash on hand that I raised prior to commencing this campaign)

Identify your top three contributors: For this campaign: Nelson Roach ($30,000), Wade & Delcine Johnson ($15,000), Ward Timber ($15,000).

No

Have you ever declared personal or professional bankruptcy? If so, please explain: No.

Q&A

After being asked to run for this seat, much prayer, and lengthy consideration, I decided to seek this office to increase individual liberty and limit civil government to its proper role. I have enjoyed governing with these principles in the Texas House.

Though this has not always been popular, it is what most East Texans desire. They want government to be efficient and as small as possible. If they have not harmed their neighbor, they don’t want government in their way. In the Texas Senate I will have five times as much influence to do just this, serving about 900,000 Texans in sixteen counties.

Secondly, I am running to protect the resources and economic future of East Texas. Geographically, Senate District One is uniquely situated. It encompasses much of the Sulphur, Cypress, and Sabine river basins and the Carrizo-Wilcox aquifer.

This normally abundant water supply combined with rich soil, iron ore, oil and gas, and other minerals is at the heart of East Texas’ economy—its timber, farm, and ranch lands and its paper, steel, and mining industries. However, it is also the envy of our neighbors to the west who will take it by force, not by consent, if we do not fight for it on a constitutional basis. I want to continue to lead this fight to a successful end using free market ideas and protecting property rights.

Finally, I am running because what is needed in the political arena today is courage to do what is right, come what may, not simply going along to get along. What is needed is guts to stand up and to shine a light on the governmental process, to speak the truth even when it hurts, and then to lead with courage and confidence based on principles of individual liberty and limited government.

What is needed is not party faithfulness, nor political astuteness, but the fear of God; it is virtue that has made us a great nation. Our problem today is not that we do not know what to do, so much as we do not have the courage or will to do it. We need to stand up and lead! It is where the battle rages that the loyalty of a soldier is tested. If we are steady and stand tall everywhere else besides, but flinch and that point, we are a disgrace. What good then are our principles?

I believe I was prepared to do this: to serve God and the people, leading with liberty and light. I am a testimony to the fact that God uses little people. My confidence is in Him! He has given me a passion to serve Him and East Texans in the Texas Senate.

Q: Why should East Texan voters choose you over your opponent?

A: The problem in Austin and Washington today is not so much in knowing what is the right thing to do, but in having the courage to do it. When leadership, special interests, or even your friends are pressuring you to go along to get along, we need leaders who will stand up and do the right thing. I am not afraid to do that, even when it means I have to stand up alone. I have done it in the Texas House and there is no other candidate in this race who can make that claim. I hope to have the opportunity to do the right thing in the Texas Senate.

One of my opponents in this race has garnered the endorsements of the Lieutenant Governor, and through his coercion, many conservative organizations, not because he has earned a higher score on those organizations’ voting records, but because as one activist stated it, “His is a vote we can count on.”

They are not referring to a principled vote, those are already reflected in the voting records issued by each organization. They are referring to doing what the organization or leaders pulling the strings want to accomplish. In past sessions, that has included voting to cut $5 billion from public education while expanding corporate welfare, passing unconstitutional retroactive legislation, and using funds collected for things like volunteer fire departments to balance the budget instead of funding equipment and training for fire fighters. After taking those votes, legislators then come home to tell you what a conservative budget they have passed.

Q: What do you see as the single most important issue that will face the Texas Legislature over the next two years?

A: Integrity is the single most important issue facing the Texas Legislature and government in general. Regardless of whether the issue is protecting our water and property rights, constitutionally funding our public schools, or balancing a budget, the integrity of the process is in question when the people in the process refuse to follow the constitution and the rules. Leadership that is unwilling to abide by the rules and the constitution is equally bad regardless of whether the tyranny is liberal, moderate, or conservative.

Q: What is your position on expanding Medicaid in Texas? Why?

A: I believe there is a role for helping people who cannot help themselves when it comes to health care. For the most part, though, that should not be a government function except in limited circumstances.

Medicaid is a federal program that started out small and has increased exponentially over the years. When the state chases after federal dollars (which the feds do not have) to fund Medicaid, we exacerbate the nearly $19 trillion federal debt and the strain on our state budget.

Furthermore, as we have expanded the roles of Medicaid, we have reduced the reimbursement rates we pay providers. The result is that we have more people covered but fewer providers who are willing to take on new patients. It is only a matter of time until the system implodes.

We need to be looking at local options to provide charity and uncompensated care without dependence on government dollars because: (a) government does not have the money, and (b) anything the government subsidizes gets increasingly expensive and dysfunctional.

Q: What would be your vote on a “convention of states” to make proposed amendments to the U.S. Constitution? Why?

A: I believe that the convention of states is a legitimate constitutional remedy that was provided to us by our founders. It may, at some point, be necessary. However, I do not believe that the Constitution is the problem. The problem is more fundamental.

The people we have elected often refuse to abide by the constitution and limit their actions and others in government accordingly. We have a balanced budget requirement in Texas. However, that does not stop our legislature from using accounting ingenuity, accessing dedicated funds, and intentionally underfunding constitutionally required spending (education) in order to “balance the budget.”

Q: Do you believe Texas’ highway system is falling behind both on capacity and maintenance? If so, what do you think the Legislature should do to expend our highway system?

A: Unlike many items in our state budget, transportation funding is a legitimate function of government. The current system of roads was created in a time when the responsibilities for state, county, and municipal roads were much more clearly defined. We now have state and county roads serving in metropolitan areas. The problems are intensified by an agency that is so large it has been known to lose a billion dollars.

We have made some progress in recent years. Going forward we need to ensure that funds dedicated to transportation are used only for that purpose. We need to ensure that funding collected from across the state is used to benefit all areas, not just the densely populated metropolitan areas.

Q: What is your position on a proposed Marvin Nichols Reservoir? Why?

A: I do not support the Marvin Nichols Reservoir.

The current water planning system, where consent of the region where the project is to be built is not required, is our biggest threat and I have sought to end this threat by introducing and fighting for legislation that would require consent between regions.

Also, I oppose the reservoir because leaders for the Dallas-Fort Worth (DFW) metroplex want to subsidize their water supply at the expense of East Texans by taking their private property through eminent domain instead of relying on a free market.

I believe the Texas Constitution protects the economic development and property rights of all Texans, not just those in urban areas, the many, or the majority. I support people settling and trading freely, not forcing one region to support another. If DFW wants more water, let them flood their own property along the Trinity River or move their businesses and residences to East Texas.

Q: Should marijuana for medical use be legalized in Texas? What about a complete legalization of the drug?

A: The marijuana plant should be legalized for medical use for treatment of epilepsy, cancer, acute and chronic pain, PTSD, etc., without creating an Obama-style regulatory scheme, bureaucracy, and registry.

Users should not be required to suffer first from the ineffective use of a man-made pharmaceutical drug and its side-effects before the natural plant can be utilized. Doctors and patients should determine the amounts of CBD and THC and their ratios as medicine, not politicians or bureaucrats.

I am a Constitutional Conservative Republican and firmly believe that we need less government in our lives. I have never authored nor supported legislation that would remove provisions that hold people accountable when they harm someone else. By those principles, I do support repealing prohibition of the plant but keeping measures in place that would hold anyone who used it accountable should they inflict any harm on another individual and to limit sales to minors.

Q: What is your position on a statewide ban of texting while driving? Why?

A: Texting while driving is dangerous, as is all distracted driving. One of the unintended consequences of banning texting in other states has been holding the phone where it is even less visible. This has led to even more dangerous conditions and more harm. Public awareness programs and prosecution of distracted driving are more effective means of addressing the issue of distracted driving of any sort.

Q: What is your position on the state’s current approach to southern border security?

A: Texas can and must take these steps to stop illegal immigration: (1) Stop government handouts that drive illegal immigration—education, healthcare, or any kind of licenses; (2) Catch and keep violent criminal aliens; (3) Prohibit sanctuary city policies and de facto amnesty; (4) Work with other states to uphold immigration law and fully vet all persons crossing the border into Texas while enforcing the current law for those who are found in violation of immigration law; and (5) Support federal immigration reform requiring a “high fence and a broad bridge.”

Q: What is your position on the U.S. accepting Syrian refugees? Why?

A: Who we allow into our country and how we allow them to enter is an important national security issue. At a time when foreign nationals have expressed their desire to destroy our way of life, it is imprudent to allow anyone into the nation who is not thoroughly vetted and monitored.

In the past, refugees have been allowed to come in through Ellis Island, or other controlled entry points, to ensure a complete screening process for health and security issues. Anyone admitted to the U.S. should have a security vetting to ensure they are not a risk and be committed to assimilating into American life. Refugees should have a sponsor who is willing to provide financially and to offer a bond to guarantee that the refugee does not become a financial or security risk to the nation. The sponsor would be responsible to ensure that the refugee be compliant with all immigration law.

Q: Who do you support in your party’s presidential primary? Why?

A: I support Ted Cruz because of his willingness to stand up and shine a light on our government; Ben Carson because of his humility, faith, and honesty; Rand Paul because of his willingness to restrain government to its constitutional limits.