SEAN HANNITY: Nine million fewer viewers than the Republican debate. I'm surprised people watched as much as they even did last night.

[...]

How did we ever get to the point in America where all lives don't matter? Where four out of the five Democratic candidates up there, if you had any doubt about the radicalism that has now poisoned the entire Democratic liberal socialist party, last night's debate answered this question once and for all. Every candidate on that stage was asked whether they agree with all lives matter or black lives matter, only one candidate came out and said it -- and that was Bernie the socialist curmudgeon Sanders.

[...]

The plan here among Democrats is to openly say what Obama tried to hide from us in 2007 and 8. It is amazing, it is a completely different party. I went through the list last night and wrote it all down. We are going to get free college, family leave is going to be paid for, we are going to expand Social Security for the poor, and healthcare for all, and childhood healthcare is free, early childhood education is free. And Hillary talked about a new new new deal... we are going force colleges to drive their prices down, no more free market there as well, in-state college tuition for illegal immigrants. Undocumented workers get Obamacare subsidies, and the poor get more Social Security benefits. It goes on and on. Well we just double the debt, Obama's accumulated more debt than every other president before him combined.

Do you understand what this is? This is a group of people in this country now that want to empower the federal government of the United States, this is the antithesis of what has made America great, which has led to more prosperity, where even the poorest amongst us have essentials that would be the envy of the rest of the world. You're going to hire a government to empower them to basically go out and punish successful people, people that have worked hard, established marketable skills worked 12, 14, 16 hour days and you are going to empower government, to basically put a gun and threaten to take off to jail anybody that does not surrender a vast majority of their wealth. You are hiring a government to rob from one group of people, steal from one group of people and if they don't give their money willingly they will be handcuffed, fingerprinted, perp-walked, and put in jail probably for a long period of time and Hillary Clinton was the worst among them. Promising to make the wealthy pay.