Many assumptions leaders had before the shutdown are being proved wrong. Pre-shutdown wisdom that wasn't

The shutdown was supposed to be short, if it happened at all.

After all, Republicans were sure President Barack Obama would give in at the last minute, like he has in past budget battles. Democrats were equally certain that Republicans would collectively conclude a shutdown wasn’t in their best interests. The assumption of a deal seemed like a good bet.

Story Continued Below

But now Washington’s power players are finding out why they should never assume.

( PHOTOS: 25 great shutdown quotes)

Here’s a look at six pre-shutdown assumptions that have turned out to be flawed, or just plain wrong.

1) The president will negotiate

For weeks before Tuesday’s shutdown, the president and his aides insisted he wouldn’t negotiate on raising the debt limit or rewriting his signature health law — a position Republicans ignored in saying they would only keep the government funded if the White House agreed to undermine Obamacare.

That’s because past experience suggested to Republicans, and some Democrats, that Obama would cave at the end. It’s why Democrats told him to stay out of negotiations before the shutdown and Republicans assumed they could keep driving straight down the middle of the highway without fear of a massive collision. Obama is proving more hidebound than Democrats or Republicans gave him credit for.

Now, Republicans think his intransigence will cost him with the public. If the nation defaults on its credit limit — or the government remains closed for an extended period of time — Obama’s non-negotiation stance will make him look unreasonable to Americans, they say.

( WATCH: Jim VandeHei on shutdown state of play before Obama, Boehner meeting)

So much so that firebrand Sen. Rand Paul was caught on a hot mic this week telling Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell that the GOP should start sounding conciliatory notes to contrast with Obama’s hard line. And House Speaker John Boehner was the first to say after Obama met with congressional leaders at the White House Wednesday that the president “won’t negotiate,” a repetition of Obama’s line that suggests GOP leaders are happy to help bake it in to the public consciousness.

2) House Republicans are driven by the military and Wall Street

Obama spent much of Wednesday messaging to Big Business, meeting with the Financial Services Roundtable and sitting for an interview with CNBC.

“This time I think Wall Street should be concerned,” he told CNBC’s John Harwood of the fiscal fight. “When you have a situation in which a faction is willing to default on U.S. obligations, then we are in trouble.”

The effort to rally big business against the GOP — or at least to lean on Republican leaders to cede ground — mirrors the Democrats’ belief that Republicans would rush not only to fund the government but raise spending so that the Pentagon could avoid planned sequester cuts. But it seems that Obama and some congressional Democrats aren’t terribly familiar with the vein of populism running through the House GOP.

( Also on POLITICO: K Street sidelined in shutdown fight)

In consecutive elections, the ranks of Republicans whose constituents are wary of big institutions — like banks and the military — has grown. Will the threat of a default eventually persuade enough of them to get off the far-right line? Possibly. But it hasn’t yet.

3) Constituents will force a quick resolution

Conventional wisdom, and many lawmakers, have always held that a government shutdown would spark outrage among the American public, forcing even the hardest-core Republican lawmakers to abandon their positions when they were deluged with phone calls from angry constituents. Clearly, that hasn’t happened yet.

Washington has created enough sacred cows that keep their funding in a shutdown — including military pay and Social Security benefits — to insulate the political class from a shutdown revolt. One GOP lawmaker told POLITICO he’s gotten about a dozen calls so far from residents who are upset about the government closure.

(WATCH: Protesters interrupt GOP presser on Capitol Hill)

A good number of Republican voters are happy about the shutdown, and it gives both sides another opportunity to use the ill effects to suggest the other side doesn’t care about America. Don’t expect the people to pull the politicians out of this mess — at least not anytime soon.

And the majority of the House Republican and Democratic caucuses are so safe from a challenge by the other party that they take more risk — the danger of a primary — if they cut a bad deal than if they keep the government closed.

The executive branch’s quick turnaround on the closure of the National Mall’s World War II Memorial earlier this week demonstrated that particular issues of concern to voters may be resolved quickly, but less provocative matters won’t garner as much attention — or any rectifying action.