Hackensack University Medical Center and its parent company are merging with Meridian Health and its six hospitals in Ocean and Monmouth counties to create the state’s largest hospital network.

file photo Hackensack University Medical Center

The new organization, to be called Hackensack Meridian Health, will employ 23,400 people and have more than $3.4 billion in revenues, eclipsing Barnabas Health, currently the state’s largest health care system.

The “combined organization would serve a much broader geography, expanding access to services and developing a vast array of new non-hospital services to conveniently serve area communities,” Robert C. Garrett, president and CEO of Hackensack University Health Network, said. The plan to merge was announced Thursday.

Hackensack and Meridian together admit nearly 135,000 patients annually at nine hospitals and two children’s hospitals. Two additional hospitals are expected to join the network once Meridian’s proposed merger with Raritan Bay Medical Center in Perth Amboy is completed, officials said.

If the merger moves forward after a four-month review, it will mark another major expansion for the Hackensack University Health Network, which continues to grow well beyond its Bergen County roots to become a statewide force as radical changes in health care delivery unfold under the Affordable Care Act.

Large organizations with services ranging from outpatient clinics to the most expert organ-transplant and surgery programs are considered better positioned to care for the health of entire populations more efficiently. They can share patient medical information across the system and coordinate efforts to keep patients healthier and out of the hospital, as incentives in the federal law encourage. At the same time, they have the resources to assume the financial risk of providing all of the care for large groups of people.

On the other hand, a growing body of academic research has found that hospital consolidation, by reducing competition, leads to higher prices for care.

“Such mergers offer opportunities to improve care, as hospitals pool resources to improve the delivery system,” said Joel Cantor, director of the Rutgers Center for State Health Policy. “But they can also be worrisome. There is ample evidence that greater concentration in hospital markets leads to higher negotiated rates with insurers.”

Research by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation found that it was competition, rather than consolidation, that improved the quality of care. “Hospital consolidation generally results in higher prices,” a foundation report said.

With increased leverage in negotiations with insurers, larger health systems can demand higher reimbursements.

“Provider and hospital consolidation are often sold as measures to increase ‘efficiency,’Ÿ” said Ward Sanders, president of the New Jersey Association of Health Plans, which represents insurance companies. “But ironically they often result in higher prices for employers and individuals as efficiencies can be overshadowed by higher charges.”

The Hackensack-Meridian deal could yield cost savings for the network by increasing its buying power, a major advantage over standalone hospitals. For patients, it is possible, when the systems are integrated, that a Bergen County patient could see primary-care doctors and specialists near his home for care, and have access to all his medical records at a hospital on the Shore, if an accident occurred while vacationing there.

“This is about delivering value to the patients we serve, which means the highest quality at the most appropriate cost,” Garrett said.

Hackensack’s current network includes the non-profit Hackensack hospital as well as two for-profit joint ventures with LHP Hospital Group of Texas: HackensackUMC at Pascack Valley in Westwood and HackensackUMC Mountainside on the Montclair-Glen Ridge border. Last month, it acquired Palisades Medical Center and its associated nursing home in North Bergen, and committed $35 million in facility upgrades.

Thursday’s announcement follows other proposed or completed mergers in the state:

-- The for-profit Prime Healthcare Services completed its purchase of St. Mary’s Hospital in Passaic over the summer, and awaits state approval to buy St. Michael’s Medical Center in Newark and St. Clare’s Health Care System’s two hospitals, in Dover and Denville.

-- Chilton Hospital in Pompton Plains was acquired by Atlantic Health System, which includes Morristown Medical Center, Overlook Medical Center and Newton Medical Center.

-- Barnabas Health has completed its acquisition of Jersey City Medical Center.

“We’ve been seeing this for the past four years,” said Linda Schwimmer, vice president of the New Jersey Health Care Quality Institute. “The technology and risks just drive systems to come together.”

However, Bergen County remains a bastion of stand-alone, independent hospitals, including The Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, Holy Name Medical Center in Teaneck and Englewood Hospital and Medical Center.

The new Hackensack Meridian system, by joining health care providers in Bergen, Ocean and Monmouth counties, will also tap into a market area with one of the highest percentages of older residents in the country, Schwimmer noted. Older people generally use more health care services.

In fact, both Hackensack and Meridian offer HMO-like Medicare Advantage insurance plans in their regions. Hackensack’s “zero-premium” plan will start coverage in January, in partnership with Aetna.

Besides the geographic scope of their services, the new Hackensack Meridian Health will be able to build and expand a full continuum of care, including everything from wellness services like gyms and walk-in clinics at retail pharmacies to post-acute services such as rehabilitation and skilled nursing facilities.

Meridian operates Jersey Shore University Medical Center in Neptune, Ocean Medical Center in Brick and hospitals in Red Bank, Manahawkin and Holmdel. All of its hospitals are non-profit.

With an eye on more primary care services and ensuring wellness, Meridian Health opened a new “health village” in Jackson that offers a fitness center, rehab services, outpatient surgery and primary care physician offices, one-stop shopping for patients, separate from any hospital campus.

Garrett and John K. Lloyd, president and CEO of Meridian Health, will serve as co-presidents and chief executive officers of the system for 2½ years, after which Garrett will become president and CEO, according to a prepared statement.

The new corporate board will include an equal number of trustees from both organizations, officials said.

Hackensack officials said the deal will be reviewed by the state Department of Health and attorney general, as well as the Federal Trade Commission.

It’s unclear at this point if the deal will require a certificate of need from the health department, officials said.

Email: layton@northjersey.com, washburn@northjersey.com