New Hampshire House Republicans are taking steps to dismantle one of Gov. Maggie Hassan’s signature legislative achievements.

Click to watch News 9's report.



Medicaid expansion is on the chopping block, potentially cutting access to health care for 39,000 residents.

Republicans are looking to cut approximately $240 million from the governor’s proposed budget. They said $180 million of that would come out of the Department of Health and Human Services. A number of big cuts are being made in addition to allowing Medicaid expansion, known as the New Hampshire Health Protection Program, to expire.

Republicans voted in committee to allow the expansion to lapse at the end of 2016.

“It will not be in the House budget. The people of New Hampshire do not like the Affordable Care Act known as Obamacare. We were elected to represent that position, and that’s why it’s not going to be in there,” said Rep. Neal Kurk, R-Weare.

“That means about 39,000 people will lose health insurance, and that will be devastating to those families,” said Rep. Mary Jane Wallner, D-Concord.

Democrats are decrying a number of proposed reductions in the HHS budget: Meals on Wheels, the Sununu Youth Services Center and homeless shelters.

Although they helped elect the current speaker of the House, Democrats said the cuts are being tailored to win the support of conservatives still smarting from that defeat.

“I think part of the issue is how do the Republicans get their budget pass?” said Rep. Sharon Nordgren, D-Hanover.

Republicans said it’s purely about the money.

“The governor had unrealistic and excessive revenue estimates,” said Dan McGuire, R-Epsom.

Hassan disputed that claim, saying revenues are on track and Medicaid expansion should stay in the budget.

“We’ve seen the rate of uninsured at our hospitals and our health care providers go down. We’ve seen increased access to preventative and primary care, a healthier workforce, a creation of jobs and a strengthening of our economy,” Hassan said.