Photo

You may have read the list of the articles that the readers of The Upshot liked the most. This is the list of Upshot features that the writers, photo editors and graphics editors most liked doing for you:

Derek Willis:

He enjoyed looking into the small, but mysterious, Virgin Islands Republican Party fund-raising operations. He also outlined how ActBlue became a powerful force in political fund-raising and how Facebook was starting to change how campaigns are conducted.

Alan Flippen:

He smashed a ludicrous bit of received wisdom with No, Celebrity Deaths Do Not Come in Threes, as he says, “just for the fun of it.”

Neil Irwin:

Neil can write on just about any topic, and his favorites reflect that scope. The Fried Calamari Index remains a favorite for all of us:

Why World War I Matters to Today’s Economy

Special Sauce for Measuring Food Trends: The Fried Calamari Index

Of Kiwis and Currencies: How a 2% Inflation Target Became Global Economic Gospel

Josh Barro:

Josh took on loads of serious topics but got the biggest kick out of peeling off the skin of the fruit industry, first with his despised honeydew melons — That Honeydew Melon Looks Good, but Does Anyone Eat It? — and then with berries — Americans Are Eating a Lot More Berries. Here’s Why. “I learned new things that took the piece in a direction I didn’t expect. (Reporting!)”

Margot Sanger-Katz:

Margot liked the whole package of stories she and Kevin Quealy developed on who gained insurance because of the Affordable Care Act. “But I kind of loved the Medicaid expansion story, because it was a crazy and interesting thought experiment.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

She also felt good about the piece she did with Amanda Cox on the importance of insurance shopping because it saved people money if readers took their advice.

She said her other favorite was “Kevin’s cool animated porcupine chart on the incredible shrinking Medicare budget.”

Amanda Cox and Josh Katz:

They worked as a team on creating the amazing Leo, our Senate election forecasting model. And it is their favorite project.

Josh said he also got a kick out of his examination of the 11 most interesting Senate races and the college football fan maps, where his spatial smoothing algorithms clarified the raw data from Facebook.

Nate Cohn:

Nate spent the year tracking the Senate elections. He said the most fun was, not surprisingly, election night as the results poured in. His favorite thing was the election night results page, built with Amanda, which was nothing short of a revolutionary way to display election night results.

Kevin Quealy:

Kevin has wanted to explain N.F.L. playoff scenarios for a couple of years now. “The text-only version is about as good as you can do without writing your own software, but even that involves head-scratching and it’s easy to get wrong (which we did, at least once!),” he said. “The N.F.L. playoff simulator and mapping the playoff paths for every team show how technology can help you understand something in a way that just wasn’t possible before.” He says all the hard parts of this were done by his colleague Mike Bostock. In a similar way, our live-updating of the 984 Ways the United States Can Advance to the Next Round let you enjoy the U.S.-Germany World Cup game and let you watch the game like an expert without having to do any math on bar napkins.

“And of course I’ll always love the 4th down bot, who was introduced to the Bills head coach in a news conference this year,” he said.

Gregor Aisch:

The graphic editor who invented the way for The Upshot reporters to easily make charts turned North Dakota upside down. He showed the state’s oil wells above ground to illustrate the stunning magnitude of the boom. He also said one of his most fun projects was the state migration graphics , one of the most popular features we did this year.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Darcy Eveleigh:

Our photo editor had the most fun with historic photos, which is one of the hallmarks of The Upshot. Some of her favorite photo essays were Halloween 1964, Black Voter Turnout in 1964, Painkiller Abuse and Terrorism in 1964.

Claire Cain Miller:

Claire said her article on the financial bonus fatherhood brings at work was fun “because the data surprised both men and women.”

She said the article on paternity leave was particularly gratifying because of the number of readers she heard from who said they approached their employers about paternity leave after reading it.

And the article about how robots are taking the jobs of a new and different class of worker was a favorite “because I learned so much while reporting it,” she said. “It was interesting to tell a different side of a story I’ve been covering for years — how technology is changing our lives.”