The four Republican senators considering a run for president will likely complicate Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell's vow to shepherd a spending blueprint through the GOP-controlled Congress. CONGRESS Budget debate could prove awkward for 2016 hopefuls The four Republican senators considering a run for president will have to take sides.

Congress’ battle of the budget could be coming soon to the 2016 Republican presidential primary.

The four Republican senators considering a run for president will have to take sides in the feud between fiscal hard-liners and defense hawks over the budget. That will give voters a clear read on their ideology just as they’re hitting the campaign trail — and likely complicate Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell’s vow to shepherd a spending blueprint through the GOP-controlled Congress.

Story Continued Below

Two of the White House hopefuls, Sens. Rand Paul and Ted Cruz, have voted against GOP budget plans in past years and are viewed as potential “no” votes, given their calls for deeper cuts in previous battles. Two others, Sens. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and Marco Rubio of Florida, have pushed for more defense spending, an issue that has emerged as an early sticking point between the House and Senate as they try to craft their first Republican budget since the George W. Bush era.

Adding to the challenge is that the budget fight will consume this spring, just as each of the four men prepares to launch his likely presidential campaign. If they endorse a plan, they’ll have to defend it against criticism from the right that it does too little to address pressing national challenges. But if they oppose a budget, they could be blamed for killing a proposal that GOP leaders say is paramount to proving the Republican Party can responsibly govern.

Their positions, illuminated in interviews with POLITICO, underscore the larger challenges McConnell faces in trying to bridge diverging views within his caucus.

“I think part of our national security is trying not to overburden the country with debt,” Paul said.

Graham fired back: “I agree with Sen. Paul that one of the threats to our nation is the debt. But I reject the idea that defense spending has anything at all to do with that.”

Sens. Ted Cruz, Rand Paul, Marco Rubio and Lindsey Graham will have to take sides, giving voters a clear read on their ideology just as they're hitting the campaign trail.

With 54 seats in his caucus, McConnell has little margin for error. While Senate rules prohibit Democrats from filibustering a budget resolution, McConnell can’t lose more than three votes. If Congress can’t pass a budget resolution, Republicans would also lose the ability to use fast-track budget procedures to take aim at Obamacare.

Still, it’s doubtful that a budget that cuts as much as Paul and Cruz are seeking could win the support of the centrist elements of the Senate Republican Conference.

At the same time, Senate Republican defense hawks are skittish about the plan unveiled Wednesday by Sen. Mike Enzi, chairman of the Senate Budget Committee. At least one — Arizona Sen. John McCain — said he would oppose the plan if it does not ratchet up spending for national security.

Enzi’s plan would maintain spending levels set by the Budget Control Act of 2011 for defense, starting at $523 billion in 2016 and rising to $549 billion in 2018. The idea is to create a separate “reserve fund,” forcing Congress to later reach a deal to increase spending on defense. But the costs would have to be offset with other cuts in the budget so that it does not add to the deficit over a decade — no easy task.

That differs sharply from a House Republican plan drafted by Georgia Rep. Tom Price, which calls for an increase in defense spending to $574 billion in 2017 and $599 billion in 2018. But the House does an end run around the budget caps by proposing $94 billion in emergency spending in 2016 to fight the war against terrorism, a plan critics in both parties deride as a gimmick. The Senate plan caps emergency overseas contingency funding at $58 billion.

Both approaches have been panned by defense hawks — and led to a robust private debate Wednesday in a meeting of Senate Republican chairmen in the chamber’s Strom Thurmond Room, attendees said. The matter will grow more complicated as the Senate Budget Committee begins voting on the plan Thursday, followed by floor action next week. Assuming the two chambers can pass their respective proposals, the differences will then have to be reconciled between the House and the Senate, which is bound to intensify the GOP divisions.

McCain, the Armed Services Committee chairman, said in an interview Tuesday he would vote against the Enzi plan as it currently stands, and he called the House proposal “the lesser of two evils.”

“National security as an issue has gone from eight or nine to tied at No. 1 with the economy, with the beheadings, ISIS, all of those things,” said McCain, the GOP’s 2008 presidential nominee, using an acronym for the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. “So it has dramatically changed the field of debate as far as the people seeking the Republican nomination are concerned.”

Some of the presidential aspirants seem to agree.

In an interview, Rubio made clear he needs to see higher defense spending levels to get behind a budget resolution. He argued that Congress should return to budget levels under former Defense Secretary Robert Gates, before across-the-board cuts known as sequestration were imposed. Before sequestration, $577 billion was projected to be spent on defense in fiscal 2016.

“It certainly has to be at least as much or more than what’s in the president proposal, which I don’t think is enough, given the national security threats our country faces,” Rubio said, referring to Obama’s $561 billion budget for defense, a $38 billion increase.

Rubio signaled he was open to the House tactic of labeling extra emergency spending as part of an overseas contingency fund.

“As for the process of how we get the money, I’m open-minded,” Rubio said. “In terms of the exact number, obviously we have to get something done. I think not raising defense spending has been shortsighted in the past. Every time we have dramatically cut defense spending in this country, we have had to come back and scramble to make it up.”

Rubio added: “Again, on the tactics of it, obviously, it has to be something reasonable and responsible, and it doesn’t set us up for other long-term problems. The priority here is to make sure … our national security is funded adequately.”

Graham, who frequently sides with McCain, said he’s prepared to vote for the Enzi budget because it’s a “step in the right direction.” But he said it does not go far enough to overhaul costly entitlement programs.

“The real debate comes from people who are going to run for president on our side — [they need to] lay out a plan of what they will do to come up with the long-term unfunded liabilities,” Graham said. “The retirement of the baby boomers is as much of a threat to our livelihood as foreign terrorism.”

Even if McConnell wins over Graham, he may have trouble wooing deficit hawks in his party who have been skeptical of GOP budgets in the past. In addition to Cruz and Paul, who have voted against previous budgets produced by Rep. Paul Ryan (R-Wis.), GOP leaders also have lost support from a like-minded conservative, Utah Sen. Mike Lee. More moderate senators, Dean Heller of Nevada and Susan Collins of Maine, also voted in 2013 against the Ryan plan, which sought to cut spending by $4.6 trillion over a decade.

In an interview this week, Cruz was mum about whether he would endorse the budget plans this year, even as his office previously told reporters he opposed the Ryan plan because he thought “it didn’t go far enough.” (The Enzi plan would slash the deficit $5.1 trillion through cuts and interest savings over the next decade.)

“I am going to wait until I have the opportunity to review the proposed budgets in detail before I express my opinion,” Cruz said Tuesday.

In an interview this week, Paul said he was “very disappointed” in the last GOP budget, pointing to gimmicks that he argued would prolong the time it takes to reach balance well beyond 10 years. Paul has previously proposed plans to balance the budget in five years.

“It has to have balance in a finite period of time,” Paul said. “If we decided as a country that we need more spending for defense, then we have to take it from somewhere else and not just add it to the deficit.”

But if Paul follows recent history and bucks his party on the budget, it could make it harder for McConnell to keep his promise to restore order to an unruly Congress.

When asked about the challenges in passing a GOP budget last year, McConnell declared: “Failure is not an option.”