Two other Americans suffered leg injuries in the attacks. At least one of them required surgery.

Just one week ago, an American was murdered by Muslim terrorists in Paris. The victim’s name was Nohemi Gonzalez. She was a 23-year-old college student spending a semester studying abroad. She lost her life because some devout Muslims acted on the teachings of the Quran . And so she was slaughtered in a barrage of bullets.

A few days after the Paris attacks, another American was murdered by jihadists when a “Palestinian” terrorist set out to shoot as many people as possible in the West Bank. In the line of fire was American Ezra Schwartz, who was studying in Israel for a year. The young man was gunned down as he set out to deliver food to Israeli soldiers.

Then on Friday, an American in Mali working on development projects, Anita Datar, was killed during an Islamic terror attack. A Peace Corps veteran, Ms. Datar was mourned by her brother:

Anita was one of the kindest and most generous people we know. She loved her family and her work tremendously. Everything she did in her life she did to help others — as a mother, public health expert, daughter, sister and friend.

Where is the outrage? And more importantly, where is the action?

War has been declared against us and is being waged with ruthless savagery. In the face of this, the president and the entire Democratic Party are staging an all-out PR battle to convince Americans that this has nothing to do with Islam as they put their best foot forward to weaken our national security and frame us as responsible for these barbaric attacks. (See here, here, here, here, here, here, here, here, here, here, and here for a small sampling.)

If people with access to the bullhorn have never read the Quran and know nothing about its teachings, they need to shut up and learn. And if they don’t want to learn, then they just need to shut up.

Let each and every one of us educate the clueless, ever mindful of the fact that the Quran is not written in chronological order and that Chapter 2, Verse 106 (abrogation) forces the bellicose Medina verses to replace or override the earlier peaceful verses written in Mecca. The result is a totalitarian doctrine that mandates world domination.

Spread the word. (Consider buying The Complete Infidel’s Guide to the Koran, by Robert Spencer, as a Christmas gift.)

Hat tips: CBS, Fox News, Reuters, The Right Scoop, Breitbart, Counterjihad Report, Atlas Shrugs