Even with Louisiana facing a $1.6 billion gap in next year's budget, Gov. Bobby Jindal can't come up with solutions without checking with Americans for Tax Reform for permission. His administration has made that clear to legislators. "The Louisiana Department of Revenue (LDR), in speaking to a group of legislators where I was present, plainly stated, in no uncertain terms, that the administration won't agree with any proposal which doesn't get the seal of approval from ATR and the Governor will veto any proposals that don't have the ATR's approval," Monroe Republican Rep. Jay Morris said in a recent email to supporters.

Rep. Tim Burns, a Mandeville Republican, has expressed similar frustrations on his blog in the past week. "If Louisiana has to depend on national groups to bail us out of our problems, then God help us. The good news is that I have been in discussion with many of my colleagues in the legislature and we are ready to roll up our sleeves and tackle our fiscal problems, despite the Scarlet T."

The Scarlet T, of course, stands for taxes.

Americans for Tax Reform, which is a conservative political advocacy group based in Washington, has given Gov. Jindal a thumbs up on a partial repeal of a state inventory tax credit. But the group has nixed other possible tax credit revisions.

Gov. Jindal isn't the only one to pledge his fealty to Americans for Tax Reform. Twenty-six state legislators made the no-tax promise to the group. But some of them see the folly of sticking with the pledge.

"It was stupid on my part," Rep. Steve Carter, R-Baton Rouge, said of signing the pledge.

"I'm more worried about the people of Louisiana than a document from out of state," Sen. Fred Mills, R-Breaux Bridge, said.

Louisiana voters surely would prefer not to have to pay more taxes. But lawmakers and the governor should make budget decisions based on what is best for this state, period.

The no-taxes pledge has led Gov. Jindal to make some ridiculous arguments in the past. In 2011, he vetoed legislation extending an existing 4-cent cigarette tax. He argued repeatedly that the measure was a new tax, which would have violated his commitment not to raise taxes.

The cigarette tax had been in place since 2000. There is no logical way to argue it was a new tax. Lawmakers, who wanted to dedicate the $12 million per year produced by the tax to health care programs, ended up getting it onto the ballot that fall as part of a constitutional amendment.

The amendment -- and the cigarette tax -- passed. But the original legislation that the governor vetoed would have been better. A cigarette tax shouldn't be enshrined in the Constitution.

Still, lawmakers were right to work so hard to save a source of revenue for health care. Gov. Jindal, as has often been the case in recent years, was more concerned about his political future than the effect of his veto on the welfare of Louisiana residents.

So, it is no surprise that the governor is making decisions based on how they will play with Americans for Tax Reform.

He's trying to win over conservative presidential primary voters for 2016 with his anti-tax credentials and his rejection of the Affordable Care Act and Common Core academic standards. Throw in his rants about President Obama's approach to Iran and Islamic terrorists, and that about sums up his national campaign platform.

The thing is, he is still governor of Louisiana. At least in title.

The Louisiana Constitution gives that office a great deal of power. To have Gov. Jindal cede that authority to a national group in hopes of furthering his political ambitions is offensive.

It is his duty to work with lawmakers to find a rational way to balance the budget and prevent health care and higher education from being eviscerated any more than they already have been. Americans for Tax Reform shouldn't be part of the equation.