When Arnold Palmer stepped onto the tee box on the first hole at Cherry Hills Country Club more than five decades ago, he was staring down real estate that had flummoxed him for three consecutive rounds.

It was the 1960 U.S. Open, and Palmer had played the 346-yard par-4 No. 1 at 3-over par during the first three rounds of the tournament, including a double bogey in the first round when his tee shot landed in the stream to the right of the fairway. It was a major reason he entered the final round trailing the leaders by seven shots.

But Palmer, one of a few players in that era capable of driving such a distance, didn’t stop going for the green. In the final round, it finally paid off. His drive bounced onto the left half of the putting surface, coming to rest about 22 feet from the cup.

Palmer two-putted for birdie. Then he birdied five of the next six holes on his way to a 6-under 65, one of the greatest rounds in major championship history. It was enough to give Palmer a two-shot victory over an amateur golfer named Jack Nicklaus.

“It set the tone for that round,” said John Ogden, the head golf professional at Cherry Hills, who recently spoke with Palmer at length about that tournament. “He knew to get himself off in the right frame of mind, he had to be aggressive.”

When the BMW Championship begins Thursday at Cherry Hills, the best golfers in the world will have an opportunity to follow Palmer’s historic path. The tournament will use the “Palmer Tee” for all four rounds, marking the first time since Palmer’s memorable win that a PGA Tour event has used that tee box as a launching point.

The Palmer Tee also was used during the 2005 U.S. Women’s Open.

The tee most commonly used at No. 1 today is 389 yards from the green, with a slight dogleg left. But with the FedEx Cup playoffs making a stop at Cherry Hills, tour official Stephen Cox said the opportunity to honor the game’s history, and set the stage for first-hole drama, was too good to pass up.

“We’ve got a fairly unique opportunity that we don’t have very often to almost allow our players to emulate what Palmer did,” said Cox, who added that the tour considered alternating tee boxes between rounds before deciding to stay with the Palmer Tee every day. “It’s not very often you get a drivable par-4 to start. We were very happy to embrace that. It’s going to be a really cool atmosphere around the first tee.”

The golfers Ogden has spoken with are thrilled to have the opportunity to walk in Palmer’s shoes, he said. More often than not, an opening hole is designed to get golfers settled into their rounds and play it safe. At No. 1 this week, with many players in the field capable of driving the green, the drama will begin early.

“They’re all capable of (driving the green), but they’re going to have to think,” Ogden said. “They can set the tone of the round. By today’s standards, it’s not a difficult hole. It’s a tricky green, but it’s not a difficult hole.

“But from the first hole in the day, you have to say: ‘Wait a second. Am I going to lay up? Am I going to hit a 4- or 5-iron down there? Or am I going to take a whack at it?’ “

Nick Kosmider: 303-954-1516, nkosmider@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickkosmider