MARTINSBURG, W.Va. (AP) - Berkeley County Central Dispatch is working to improve its longtime service of providing an interpreter for non-English speaking callers to offer a better experience for the organization and residents.

For about 15 years, Central Dispatch has provided an interpreter for non-English speaking callers. The organization receives about 10 calls a month that require translation, said Mary Kackley, 911 director.

“You would think Spanish dialects would be the No. 1, but we also get a lot of French-speaking people traveling the interstate from Quebec to Florida. Then, we’ve had, not with any frequency, an African dialect caller,” she said, adding that Central Dispatch does not currently have any bilingual dispatchers.

As a means to save money and connect an interpreter to a caller faster, Central Dispatch is changing its service provider from AT&T;’s LanguageLine Services to Voiance. With LanguageLine Services, Central Dispatch was paying $1.70 per minute for a call whereas it will pay 75 cents with Voiance.

Light described the process as a three-way call when, after selecting the correct language, the dispatcher asks any question to the interpreter who asks the caller and then translates. Due to the process and number of people involved, he said calls usually take longer than a traditional 911 call, around 10 minutes.

Light estimates Central Dispatch is billed for no more than 1,200 minutes per year, so by switching providers the organization could save more than $1,100.

Additionally, the new service will connect the non-English speaking caller to a translator faster, said Deputy Director Andrew Light.

“With Voiance, everything is hooked into the phone. When we connect, it automatically detects we’re Berkeley County and has a prompt of what language. We can even have a speed dial for different languages, like programming the No. 1 for Spanish,” Light said.

“While we’re connecting, we have a 911 caller that does not speak English on the line, usually in some kind of panic. It’s important to connect quickly,” he said.

Central Dispatch will be entering into a 16-month contract, once it is reviewed by Berkeley County’s Legal Counsel Norwood Bentley.

___

Information from: The Journal, http://journal-news.net/