The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ (HHS) announcement on Wednesday that Connecticut will receive “New Access Points” grants totaling $3,673,286 toward community health centers, increasing access to health care services for over 42,500 Connecticut patients.

In Greenwich $566,667 was awarded to Family Centers to operate a health care center inside Wilbur Peck Court on Davis Ave. The full service primary health clinic will be operated and staffed by Family Centers, and will serve Section 8 residents, those living in Greenwich Housing Authority complexes and the surrounding neighborhoods.

The $566,667 “New Access Points” grant – which was made possible through the Affordable Care Act

“Community health centers are on the front lines of public health, providing vital, primary care to families across Connecticut,” said Senator Richard Blumenthal.

“Today, we see the ACA continuing to support programs that serve the Southwest Connecticut residents that need access to healthcare most,” said Congressman Jim Himes. “Family Centers, Inc., based out of Greenwich, and recipient of a $566,667 grant to create a new health center at the Wilbur Peck Court, is a vital member of the community and leading example of how access to healthcare can make a dramatic difference in people‘s lives.”

“We are beyond thrilled to be able to open this new health clinic for Greenwich residents,” said Bob Arnold, Family Centers’ President & CEO. “More often than not, access to quality healthcare services is a barrier that can hinder a person’s level of self-sufficiency, independence and overall well-being. Having this clinic located in central Greenwich right on site at Wilbur Peck will be a benefit to all residents of Greenwich Public Housing.”

“This new Community Health Center will change and save lives, increase the lifespan and improve the overall health of our residents,” added Anthony Johnson, Executive Director of the Greenwich Housing Authority. “We look forward to the day that the clinic opens and begins offering services.”

Work on Family Centers’ new health center will begin within the next few weeks. An opening is anticipated in late fall/early winter.

See also:

Family Centers Graduation at Armstrong Court is a Sea of Smiles

Family Centers Honors Employees for Customer Service Excellence

GHS Interns Assist Family Centers’ Baby Whisperers

Family Centers Pre-Schoolers On Parade

Email news tips to Greenwich Free Press editor Leslie.Yager@GreenwichFreePress.com

Like us on Facebook

Twitter @ GWCHFreePress

Subscribe to the daily Greenwich Free Press newsletter.