After arriving back from Chicago during the night, and once it was determined Snowmageddon would be at least delayed, the Avalanche practiced Saturday afternoon at Family Sports Center. Colorado next faces the Tampa Bay Lightning Sunday at 5 p.m. in the Pepsi Center.

“The only reason why we’re on the ice today is because we’re not going to skate tomorrow morning,” Patrick Roy said. “If it would have been a 7 o’clock game, I don’t think we would be here today. The fact that tomorrow morning, we’re not even going to be going to the rink, so I thought it would be good for us to go for less than 30 minutes, 25 minutes, just move our pick, move our feet, to make sure we’re ready for a strong game tomorrow.”

Roy is reluctant to look ahead, but I asked him what the 4-1 victory at Chicago Friday could mean for this team.



“I won’t lie to you, I was a little nervous for that game because we played so well against Los Angeles, and we haven’t been rewarded (for) our effort,” said Roy. “Last night, we were. I was a little nervous in the way that I was hoping that we would not be discouraged … Actually, it was the opposite. The guys showed a lot of poise out there. They showed that they were not going to give up and that meant a lot.”

As of Saturday afternoon, the Avalanche (61 points) is seven points out of the final Western Conference wild-card playoff spot, which at this point would go to the San Jose Sharks. Realistically, Colorado’s playoff chances are slim, in part because it’s more than making up points. The Avalanche would have to pass Dallas, Minnesota, Los Angeles and one other team — with the most likely candidates being Calgary and Vancouver. And when all those teams play each other, somebody has to win and there will be some three-point games.

Roy said he wouldn’t change his recent lineup, so barring snow-shoveling mishaps in the next 26 hours, Daniel Briere and Stefan Elliott will be the healthy scratches and Semyon Varlamov will be in goal. And Paul Carey, recalled from Lake Erie for the third time this season on Feb. 13, will play his fourth consecutive game on the fourth line.

In the Avalanche briefs from Chicago, Roy cited Carey’s speed as a helpful asset at this point.

“I try to bring some energy and use my speed as much as I can,” Carey, who had a full four-season career at Boston College, said after Saturday’s practice. “Whether that’s on the forecheck, backcheck, I’ll try to create more space for my linemates if I can.”

Carey played 12 regular season games for the Avalanche last season, plus the first three playoff games against Minnesota when Matt Duchene was out. He said he wasn’t disillusioned to end up back at Lake Erie for much of this season.

“I knew there were a lot of aspects of my game I needed to fine-tune,” he said. “I think sending me down just kind of gives me a kick in the butt and really puts me to work. I’d obviously rather be here. It’s not a good feeling to go down. There’s two ways to take it. You can go to work or you can kind of give up.”

In his third full pro season, Carey already is 26.

“You learn a lot in college, but it’s just such a different schedule, such a different grind in general,” Carey said. “In pro hockey, there’s a lot more x’s and o’s and I had to learn a lot more ‘D’ zone. I had to be a lot more responsible with that stuff. You can’t get away with it at this level.”

Does he have hopes of becoming more than a fourth-line “energy” guy?

“Every time I come up, that’s my goal, to work my way up in the lineup,” he said. “That’s kind of on me and how hard I work and what I can bring to the upcoming games.”

Looking ahead: In the Sunday paper and online, I’ll have a couple of pieces, filed Friday from Chicago, taking looks at Avalanche “scooter” defensemen of past and present. Coincidentally, both played major junior for the Kelowna Rockets, though their stays didn’t overlap.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei