On Aug. 1, the S.C. Department of Health and Human Services expanded Medicaid services to an estimated 300,000 low income South Carolinians who have no health insurance. This South Carolina-funded Medicaid expansion is called “Healthy Connections Checkup” and it will provide a physical examination every two years and a variety of health screenings.

Screenings for diabetes, obesity, breast cancer, colorectal cancer, lung cancer, hepatitis C and mental health may be covered depending upon the patient’s age, gender and risk factors. To be eligible for Healthy Connections Checkup, you must be a U.S. citizen or legal alien, a S.C. resident, earn less than about $22,500 and you must not be eligible for full Medicaid or Medicare benefits.

Full Medicaid coverage is reserved for low-income parents, children, seniors, pregnant women, and people with disabilities. Consequently, Healthy Connections Checkup will cover many low-income, middle-aged single persons or childless couples who have no health insurance.

The SC League of Women Voters (LWVSC) welcomes the Healthy Connections Checkup initiative because so many middle-aged South Carolinians earn minimum wages, have no health insurance through their employer, and do not qualify for health coverage under Medicaid or Medicare. Early diagnosis saves lives and reduces medical expenses. We encourage all who qualify to take full advantage of Healthy Connections Checkup.

Although Healthy Connections Checkup is a significant benefit for those who qualify, the benefits of Medicaid expansion under the Healthy Connections Checkup initiative do not make financial or economic sense when compared to the Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act (ACA).

1. If a health screening results in a diagnosis of diabetes, cancer or other serious medical condition, Healthy Connections Checkup will not cover any subsequent cost for treatment. Since patients who qualify for Healthy Connections Checkup are uninsured, they must rely on free or low-cost health clinics and indigent hospital health care.

2. Physicians and hospitals pass the cost of indigent healthcare to patients who have health insurance. Consequently, the cost of medical care is generally higher in states having a higher rate of indigent care per capita. The premiums paid by insured South Carolinians reflect the expense of indigent healthcare.

3. Most South Carolinians who qualify for health screenings under the Healthy Connections Checkup Medicaid expansion would qualify for comprehensive health insurance under the ACA Medicaid expansion.

4. S.C. receives approximately $1.92 in federal subsidies for every federal tax dollar paid by South Carolinians. However, South Carolinians are subsidizing much wealthier states that agreed to ACA Medicaid expansion. Furthermore, South Carolinians will pay the entire expense of Medicaid expansion under the Healthy Connections Checkup initiative. Healthy Connections Checkup is estimated to cost South Carolinians $48 million in the first year.

5. In December 2012, the University of South Carolina Moore School of Business published research conducted on behalf of the South Carolina Hospital Association titled “Medicaid Expansion in South Carolina.” The purpose of the research was to estimate the annual economic impact on South Carolina if we agreed to ACA Medicaid expansion beginning in 2014.

The research estimated that South Carolina would receive over $795 million in federal funding in 2014 and $11.2 billion by 2020. By 2020, this infusion of “new” capital into the state was projected to create approximately 44,000 jobs and increase state revenue by $105.6 million annually.

In contrast, funding for Healthy Connections Checkup is not an infusion of “new” capital into S.C. but a reallocation of existing capital within the state. Consequently, Healthy Connections Checkup is not expected to create many jobs or increase state revenues significantly.

6. An innovative alternative being implemented in Arkansas is to use ACA Medicaid Expansion funding to provide premium assistance for newly eligible beneficiaries. This enables beneficiaries to purchase qualified health plans from private insurers through the Health Insurance Marketplace.

The LWVSC supports the Healthy Connections Checkup Medicaid expansion initiative. However, Medicaid expansion under the ACA would deliver everything that the Healthy Connections Checkup program promises and much more including comprehensive healthcare for 300,000 low-income South Carolinians, lower healthcare costs, an infusion of new capital into the state, job creation, and higher state revenues. LWVSC urges Gov. Nikki Haley and the General Assembly to reconsider and opt into Medicaid expansion under the ACA.

Victor T. Volskay Jr. is vice president of the League of Women Voters of Greenville County.

Read or Share this story: http://grnol.co/VtwvZ1