Denver, CO (LiveActionNews) — A new investigative video produced by Live Action shows a Planned Parenthood staffer coaching a 15-year-old girl on how to view pornography, visit sex shops, and experiment with torture and bondage sex without parental knowledge.

Episode Two of Live Action’s video series, SEXED, details how a counselor in Colorado’s Planned Parenthood of the Rocky Mountains encouraged a teenager to subject herself to or inflict sexual pain on her boyfriend. The investigation is the latest in a series of exposes under covering the abortion giant’s dangerous sex education for kids.

SEXED: Episode Two reveals how a Planned Parenthood counselor tells a teenager that “sexual exploration is normal” for minors. The counselor encourages the minor to visit adult sex shops, which is illegal under municipal law, and watch pornography to obtain ideas on how to experiment with BDSM with her boyfriend.

Planned Parenthood: “You can do it [watch porn] together… some people like to do that together and act that out.”

Teen: “If I were to look that up on my computer, um, could my parents see that?”

Planned Parenthood: “Possibly, do they get on your computer a lot?”

Teen: “Well, I use the family computer.”

Planned Parenthood: “So they might be able to go in your history and look, so you might want to do it elsewhere. It depends though if they are on your computer a lot.”

Teen: “It’s a family computer so I probably wouldn’t want to look anything up, I guess.”

Planned Parenthood: “If your phone has Internet, you can use your phone too.”

During the consultation, the counselor only counseled the teenager to using only a “safe word” during bondage and torture sex to communicate to the partner if pain becomes dangerous or unbearable.

Click here to sign up for daily pro-life news alerts from LifeNews.com

“Planned Parenthood of the Rocky Mountains is already bragging about receiving ObamaCare grants specifically for sex education,” said Lila Rose, President of Live Action. “Here’s an abortion corporation, which gets 45 percent of its budget from the taxpayers, telling 15- and 16-year-olds not only to have sex, but also to choke each other in the process. Police should be busting down its door.”

Live Action’s previous installment details similar counseling by a Indianapolis Planned Parenthood staffer who encouraged a minor to watch porn and experiment with BDSM.

LifeNews Note: This post originally appeared at Live Action News and is reprinted with permission.