Top 13 Hated Words in English Language (2013)

Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd poses as a man takes a 'selfie' on his cell phone.

(Photo : Reuters)

Selfie, the recently introduced word in the Oxford English Dictionaries Online, has been crowned the most detested word of the year. The 2013 international word of the year is followed by twerk, hashtag and obamacare on Lake Michigan State University's 39th annual list of words that people want to do away with.



Like Us on Facebook

The list, which is released every year on New Year's Eve, debuted December 31, 1975 when Bill Rabe (former university public relations director) and his colleagues came up with the idea to discard unoriginal words and phrases from the language. Words are sent to the university throughout the year and the most hated words are compiled into a list.



Thomas Pink, the university's spokesman, said that this year the school's website received more than 2, 000 nominations and several dozen of them were for 'Selfie', USA Today reports.



"People have taken pictures of themselves for almost as long as Samuel Eastman's company made film and cameras. Suddenly, with the advent of smartphones, snapping a 'pic' of one's own image has acquired a vastly overused term that seems to pop up on almost every form of social media available to us," Lawrence from Coventry, Conn. and Ryan of North Andover, Mass., wrote in their nomination.



The men further said that self taken shots need not necessarily have a name. They added that in due course, photos of one's self and a friend might be known as 'dualies.'



The men are suggesting that the University must take action and ban the hated words.



Echoing similar sentiments, Marissa Randall, a 53-year-old from Novi, Mich., said, "Isn't it just a picture?"



Eric Coles, a 22-year-old of Ann Arbor, Mich., has no problem with the word but agrees that certain other words are always used out of context.



"That's what it is - a picture of yourself," Coles said. "I don't like any word being used out of its right context - like when people are talking and say 'hashtag itscoldout' or something. Use it on Twitter, but not talking with me."



Top 13 Hated Words in English Language of 2013



Selfie

Twerk/Twerking

Hashtag

Twittersphere

Mister Mom

T-Bone

On Steroids

Ageddon

Pocalypse

Intellectually/Morally Bankrupt

Obamacare

Adversity

Fan Base



© 2016 University Daily News, All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.