The magic moves to Mile High.

In beating the Brown Bears 15-9 on Sunday at sold-out Barton Lacrosse Stadium to extend their nationally leading home-winning streak to 16 games, the Denver Pioneers advanced to the NCAA Tournament quarterfinals for the fifth consecutive year, and their opponent will be the last team to beat them.

DU will put its 10-game winning streak on the line against unseeded Ohio State in a first-of-the-kind college lacrosse event Saturday at Sports Authority Field at Mile High. The Buckeyes, who upset two-time defending Duke on Saturday, shocked the preseason No. 1 Pioneers 13-11 on March 14 in Columbus, Ohio.

PHOTOS: Denver Pioneers top Brown Bears 15-9

Third-seeded Denver (14-2) used excellent performances from the Cannizzaro brothers (seven goals) and goalie Ryan LaPlante (16 saves) to lead from start-to-finish against Brown. The Pioneers join the Buckeyes, No. 1 Notre Dame and unseeded Albany (N.Y.) at the Denver quarterfinal.

The Fighting Irish and Great Danes will play in the first quarterfinal game at Mile High. Two berths to the May 22-25 NCAA Final Four in Philadelphia will come out of Denver.

The Pioneers, who are 43-5 at home under sixth-year coach Bill Tierney, are looking to advance to championship weekend for the fourth time in five years. They lost in the national semifinals to Virginia in 2011, Syracuse in 2013 and Duke last year.

Behind LaPlante’s 13 first-half saves Sunday, Denver led 10-2 at the break, but Brown scored the first four goals of the third quarter to make things interesting in front of the 23rd sellout crowd at DU’s sport-specific stadium.

Connor Cannizzaro, a sophomore transfer from Maryland, stopped the bleeding by putting a top-shelf, behind-the-back shot past goalie Jack Kelly and, following a Brown penalty, scored his second straight and fifth of the game to put DU ahead 12-6. Brother Sean Cannizzaro scored in the next minute to get Denver back up by seven after three quarters.

In the end, Sean Cannizzaro, Tyler Pace and Zach Miller each had two goals and three points, and Wes Berg had a goal and two assists.

LaPlante was the story in the first half. He made eight saves in the first nine minutes as DU took a 3-0 lead. Freshman faceoff specialist Trevor Baptiste, who took an NCAA-leading .725 winning percentage into the game, scored seven seconds into the game after winning the opening draw and started 4-2 at the “X.” But he began to struggle on restarts against Brown’s Will Gural, who was 8-6 in the first half and 15-11 overall.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers