About a year after Heather Rowe’s youngest son was born with Down syndrome, her father died. Two years after that, her mother was diagnosed with lung cancer.

“I was emotionally exhausted,” said Rowe, 45, who lives in Takoma Park, Maryland, with her wife and boys, ages 6 and 9.

Rowe is on the cusp of a fast-growing population — a mashup of Generation X and millennials — starting to care for young and older loved ones.

The term “sandwich generation” was coined in the 1980s to describe people squeezed between taking care of children and parents. Now, as members of the baby boom are entering their 70s, that sandwich is poised to become a footlong.

There are about 75 million baby boomers in the United States, and many are beginning to experience the changes nobody wants and nobody likes to talk about: disease and chronic conditions. They are starting to look to their children for assistance.

The boomers’ children, meanwhile, tended to have babies in their 30s and 40s, meaning that it’s not uncommon to juggle young children and a mom or dad in need of care.

“I was sad I was spending so much time away from my kids,” Rowe said. “When my mom was very sick, it was hard to be really present with them.”

Carol Abaya, a writer on aging issues, created a magazine called the Sandwich Generation in the 1990s. It happened after she suddenly felt pressure to take care of her parents at the same time she was running her public relations firm in the New York area. The publication offered advice and support to mid-life adults who felt stretched thin in their caregiver roles.

“When I looked around for help in dealing with my parents, there wasn’t anything,” Abaya said. “But there’s been a big change. Today, there’s more awareness of aging, chronic illness and the toll that it takes on society.”

If caregivers change their lives to make more time, then the problem often becomes money.

“Let’s say the woman who was working quit work to take care of her elderly parent,” Abaya said. “Later in life, she has less money. You have a snowball effect. Everything snowballs to the next generation.”

So what’s a sandwicher to do? Experts say they should find and accept as much help as possible.

Rowe’s mother died in December 2014 at age 76. Rowe said she could not have managed the dual caregiver role without the support of her wife, her friends and her mother-in-law, who watched her kids on the long, draining days when she took her mother to chemotherapy treatments.

“It helped to come home and everyone there understood what I was going through,” Rowe said. “I couldn’t have done it without my support network.”

People who are sandwiched need to take breaks. Otherwise, they become burned out and even sick themselves.

“Caregivers are notorious for not doing self-care. They feel guilty for not being there,” said Anjana Chacko, a social worker who runs a pre-hospice program. “Having breaks and getting out and doing something fun for themselves is not frivolous. It’s self-care. It’s vital.”

Chacko said one client of hers was recently stressed out from the intensity of caring for a loved one.

“She says to me, ‘I do get a break — I go to the dry cleaner and the grocery.’ . . . I said, ‘OK, we need to have a talk about what we consider a break.'”