Australian Grand Prix boss Ron Walker. Photo: Getty Images

Australian Grand Prix boss Ron Walker is confident pressure from race organisers all over the world will force formula one authorities to accelerate efforts to make this year’s new-generation cars sound better.

Walker, who has led the push by F1 race promoters for noisier engines, believes almost unanimous support will result in the latest turbocharged V6 motors producing an improved exhaust note as early as next month. The muted sound of the more fuel-efficient turbo motors has been widely criticised by F1 fans, leading to race chiefs expressing fears that attendance at their events will suffer if urgent action isn’t taken to restore the sport’s traditional aural appeal.

"We can’t wait until next year," Walker told Fairfax Media. "Something has to be done soon."

As well as heading the board of the Australian Grand Prix Corporation that stages the Melbourne GP at Albert Park, Walker is also the chairman of the Formula One Promoters Association, which met during last weekend’s Spanish GP in Barcelona.

The gathering was attended by senior representatives of 18 of the 19 events in this year’s F1 world championship, along with F1 commercial chief Bernie Ecclestone.

According to Walker, the promoter group formally called on motor sport’s world governing body, the Paris-based International Automobile Federation (FIA), which administers the F1 technical regulations, to press F1’s three engine suppliers – Mercedes-Benz, Renault and Ferrari – to retune their motors to sound racier.

"We’re all concerned about the noise level," he said. "It’s being handled by Mercedes and others to restore the excitement to the sound of the cars.

"Everybody agreed. We’re all in the entertainment business. The people in the stands don’t understand the new regulations. They want aggression, they want a gladiatorial contest.

"My customers don’t care about only using 100 kilograms of fuel in a race. Ticket sales are hard to get these days because the sports market is so competitive."

The Mercedes team trialled a megaphone-style addition to the exhaust pipe of its pacesetting racer on the final day of the post-Spanish GP F1 test, with the noise output recorded by the FIA’s acoustic experts.

The results and recommendations are due to be released on Tuesday by the FIA, which is expected to detail the measures the F1 engine makers will have to take to produce an initial "quick fix" to boost the quality and volume of the noise made by motors.