BioAccel, with laboratory and business facilities at BioInspire, announced last week a new venture development program partnership with Life365.

Life365 is a new venture founded by Arizona native and entrepreneur Kent Dicks. The Life365 “Rain” platform uses light-touch hardware, software and services to keep patients engaged with their health, assist in adherence to prescribed health regimens, and integrate individual health data into electronic medical records.

Life365’s objective is to build on the demonstrated efficacy of remote-patient monitoring with cost effective, scalable and adoptable solutions to reach a greater number of patients. This health monitoring solution will enable business models of payors, providers, Accountable Care Organizations and other entities financially responsible for patient populations.

Life365 was recently selected by BioAccel to receive early-stage funding, including office space at BioInspire’s 7,000-square-foot facility in Peoria.

Life365 president Dicks is an Arizona native, and a graduate of Arizona State University. This is his third company.

His first company, MEDAPPS, 2006, folded 2012 into a large company, ALERE, a $3 billion company.

“They were using technology to connect patients in their home, automatically sent to a server, where a doctor could look at it anytime,” Dicks said. “So, if you left the hospital, the patient would step on a scale in the morning and send results to a caseworker.

“We connect through cell phones to the Internet, take readings, blood pressure, weight, (all) connected to a doctor.

“There’s a whole new phenomena working: keep patients out of the hospital, monitored at home. We were quite successful.”

Now, Dicks is creating a new company, which is working on what he said is “basically a wearable, on the wrist, and helps with vital signs, assists with medication compliance, makes sure you take your medicine today, and helps people with chronic conditions stay connected with family members to make sure mom or dad is OK at home. Anybody authorized to receive the information can detect what is going on.”

Dicks said, “In the case of my mom and dad, they live in Iowa, I’m in Arizona. They’re in a new house, want to stay connected. So, they would have this device. We can be instrumental in helping with their care.”

Life 365 comes with a big bonus, Dicks said.

Life365 can be very useful for veterans, seniors and the uninsured population. Dicks said there is a major emphasis on veterans.

“I did testify in Washington several years ago about veterans affairs and rural (populations),” Dicks said. “Veterans tend to not return because they’re not connected to a doctor.

“With this, we’re hoping to be able to take glucose readings on a regular basis, medicine on a regular basis.”

The challenge: healthcare resources.

“We’re trying to optimize the care and better quality of life, reduce costs. It allows for better outcomes in a more cost-effective solution,” Dicks said. “Part of the reason why we developed the band, 20 percent of the population contributes 80 percent of health care costs. It is in our best interest as a country to find new, innovative care for people and try to make the experience better for them in a home setting.”

It will be three years before the first product enters the market, Dicks said, and two months before a prototype will be ready. Then six months after that, it will be generally available.

The cost? Optimizing to around $99, Dicks said.

“It’s a great price,” Dicks said. “A prescription model over the counter. It’s more important to get the healthcare out there. It’s a band that’s economical, download apps from the Cloud. We’ve made it so it connects from WiFi directly. In assisted living, we can talk to hundreds of bands over a network.

“We made it for the senior generation, but you don’t have to have a Smartphone or computer to use it. You can connect it directly to a Smart TV. We want to make it really simple.”

Because he is an Arizona native, Dicks is concentrating on Arizona, where he said there is a big need among seniors and indigent.

“I contacted MaryAnn Guerra, BioAccel, and she said we would be a great candidate for BioInspire,” Dicks said. “I thought it was an incredible opportunity. There are a lot of great resources in Peoria, and Arizona. Peoria has tech resources. I don’t have to travel around the world to attract people to work with our company. Everybody’s here in Arizona, and Peoria in particular.”

The Life365 office is already in Peoria.

“I am more excited about 365 than ever before,” Dicks said. “Do more with less. Affordable Care Act, and reimbursement, electronic health records - all in place. What is needed is the next step, lightweight technology to connect with their doctor on a regular basis. I think it’s an incredibly exciting time in healthcare.”

“BioAccel is excited to partner with Life365,” said MaryAnn Guerra, BioAccel CEO. “BioAccel believes that use of digital, wearable and mobile health innovations has the potential to transform social conditions, systems processes, access to care, desired health impact and outcomes. Life365, with its integrated platform, allows us to enter the rapidly growing wearable sensor space and enables synergistic opportunities for other vanguard technologies included in BioAccel’s portfolio.”