http://www.dennys.com/" href="http://www.dennys.com/" target="_blank">Denny’s in Wickenburg will celebrate its recent remodeling by serving up an all-day Grand Celebration Feb. 2, beginning at 8 a.m.

Located at 1010 N. Tegner St., the newly renovated restaurant offers diners a first look at its all-new, locally inspired design and updated features.

Denny’s has undergone an extensive top-to-bottom interior renovation, complete with a hint of Wickenburg flavor. The recently reopened diner will feature an exclusive Wickenburg mural, in addition to updated booths, chairs and tables. Modern wall accents, hardwood floor tiles, a fresh coat of paint and landscaping ensure guests will enjoy an all-new Denny’s from every angle.

To kick off the grand re-opening festivities, Denny’s will offer select diner classics at a reduced price from 8 a.m. until 10 p.m. Feb. 2. For $1.99, guests can enjoy Denny’s Everyday Value Slam, which includes two buttermilk pancakes, two eggs cooked to order and two bacon strips or sausage links. Discounts will also be available during lunch, dinner and anytime in between with $3.99 Classic Burger & Fries and $5.99 Country-Fried Steak. Hundreds of additional prizes, including complimentary cups of Denny’s new signature coffee blends for one month with the purchase of a limited-edition Denny’s mug, will be given away during the celebration.

Open 24 hours a day, 365 days a year, the Wickenburg Denny’s will continue to serve breakfast, lunch, dinner and late-night in a relaxed, friendly environment. Denny’s is also known for providing its customers with tremendous value, including these deals:

$2 $4 $6 $8 Value Menu – Denny’s all day, every day value menu lets guests choose from 16 dishes at affordable prices, including traditional favorites as well as several new a la carte items.

Kids Eat Free – Guests can receive up to two free kids meal for children ages 10 and under with the purchase of each adult entrée. The offer is good from 4 to 10 p.m. on Tuesdays and Saturdays; menu items and prices may vary.

“Fit Fare” – “Fit Fare” options feature healthy choices like egg whites and hearty wheat breads that can be substituted into any meal for no extra charge. Using the expansive Build Your Own Grand Slam menu, diners have more than 250 ways to build a meal with 550 calories or less, and 32 ways to build a meal of 400 calories or less.

Free Birthday Grand Slam– Celebrate your special day with a free Original Grand Slam meal at participating Denny’s restaurants. The Original Grand Slam offer is free for the birthday guy or gal who can show proof that it’s their birthday, and is good for dine-in only.