When Jon Stewart departs “The Daily Show” tonight, it will be more than a television event. The country may never be the same, because in polarized America, Stewart forced everyone from the most liberal to the superconservative to pay attention.

Of course, liberal America liked him better because he was a forceful critic of President George W. Bush, a Republican, and a constant skewerer of the current GOP presidential candidates.

Yet conservative America took notice when Stewart challenged Kathleen Sebelius, then secretary of health and human services, on the disastrous rollout of Obamacare. Republicans visited the show through the years. Just this week, Stewart spoofed Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton’s attempts to show a human side.

Stewart’s farewell, at 11 tonight on Comedy Central, is expected to run one hour. No guests have been announced, but show alumni such as Steve Carell, Stephen Colbert and John Oliver would be good bets.

In 16 years at “The Daily Show,” Stewart helped comedy in general and commentary in particular.

Louis C.K., the guest Wednesday, "I came on behalf of comedy ... just to say, 'Nice job. Well done.'" Larry Wilmore, host of "The Nightly Show," expressed his thanks to Stewart and saluted the host's support for veterans and 9/11 first responders.

Even Arby's, long a Stewart joke target, ran commercials paying tribute to the host.

The Newseum in Washington announced it has acquired Stewart's set and noted that he was called "the Walter Cronkite of the millennial generation" -- high praise for a fake newsman.

In commentary, Stewart pushes the conversation beyond the familiar and tired conservative/liberal labeling. Some Stewart detractors don't understand his power and influence because they don't look at the full picture. He is an equal-opportunity satirist.

Stewart puts imaginative punch in the media, so often derided and dismissed as liberal. Stewart asks if the media are being effective and fair. He challenges ideologues of the left and right. He pushes viewers to think beyond slogans and polls.

His commentary takes many forms. He was heartbroken and furious about the Charleston shootings and the country’s unending racism. He issued grunts and grimaces about Mike Huckabee’s comparing the Iran nuclear deal to the Holocaust. Stewart used sexual gestures to mock how some GOP candidates are trying to please the billionaire Koch brothers.

The show edits to devastating effect, and Stewart performs voices with the frenetic energy of a Looney Tunes cartoon.

Reports that Stewart visited President Barack Obama at the White House several times set off over-the-top speculation, which the host blasted. He ripped Fox News Channel for branding him an Obama stooge.

“Your hypocrisy isn't a bug in the Fox model,” Stewart said. “It's the future. Your job is to discredit any sorts of criticism that might hurt the conservative brand by angrily holding them to standards you yourselves jettisoned in your news network's mission statement.”

He took issue with Fox News' Howard Kurtz, who weighed in on Stewart's “bromance” with Obama and the notion that Stewart is being spun by the president. To answer charges of being a sellout, Stewart played a clip of Fox News host Sean Hannity being taught, on the air, how to speak Republican spin against Obamacare.

Stewart told Fox News: “My hunch is this show has been harder on the Obama administration and this president per capita than you ever were” in covering George W. Bush for eight years.

Stewart has challenged Obama on Obamacare and veterans affairs. Even so, Obama called him “a great gift to the country.”

Louis C.K. on Wednesday praised Stewart for keeping the show good for so long and being a voice of reason. Stewart pulled off "one of the great comedy accomplishments of all time," Louis C.K. said.

Stewart is a patriot who has asked, in his pointed way: Why can’t America do better?

That’s a question too important to ignore, and we were lucky Stewart was asking it for 16 years.