Almost two dozen elders with sex on their minds — nearly half of them male — sat very quietly in the cafeteria at The Friendship Center in Sarasota the other day.

They were there for a lecture that was part of a weeklong educational series with the jaunty title, "Birds Do It, Bees Do It ... and So Does Grandma."

Topics included "In the Mood Foods," and "Safe Sex for Seniors." But on this particular morning, Sarasota mental health counselor Karel S. Cooperman was talking about some of the real-life problems that might crop up on the late-life path to sexual fullfilment.

Cooperman started out with some reassuring words about the joy of sex after 65 — which, she said, is a decidedly different version of joy.

"We are here to get rid of all the thoughts you had when you were a kid," she said. "I have patients in their 70s, 80s and 90s who have wonderful sex. They plan it and look forward to it. It's slower, it's more fun, and it has more meaning."

But like a lot of things worth having, sexual satisfaction at this time of life may not come easily.

"There are some problems, and they have to be met," Cooperman said, telling the story of a patient who was reluctant to be intimate with his wife because of a recent heart attack.

She asked him if his cardiologist had cleared him for sexual activity.

"I'm just afraid," he told her. "It has nothing to do with the doctor. I'm just so worried about getting another heart attack."

Cooperman counseled him to start by enjoying a quiet, romantic evening with his wife — who came in and consulted with her about creating the right environment. The man's wife lit candles and wore "a sexy nightgown," which the therapist had approved in advance.

"I didn't know they sold these things anymore," Cooperman said. "It was like Lana Turner reincarnated."

The experiment went well, she reported: "They have had wild sex every time for the past year, and he has not had another heart attack."

Cooperman mentioned a few other stumbling blocks that can beset a late-life hookup:

"The Viagra problem." Older people may be reticent about medications they are taking and possible side effects. Cooperman said open communication is essential.

"Do you know each other? Have you been able to talk to each other?" she asked a patient who was worried about discussing the topic with his much younger girlfriend. His reply: "You don't talk about sex to women."

She had them come in together for a chat.

Boredom. "Many people who have been married for 50 or 60 years simply do not want to have sex with each other," Cooperman said. "But just being able to lie in bed and talk to each other and feel a closeness is a way of being sexual."

Depression. "If you're dealing with depression, it's very difficult to feel that you are worthy, or capable or even interested in sex," she said. "Depressants work against you. A therapist can help."

Cooperman said older adults, especially men, can be reluctant to trust in therapy.

"It is amazing how bottled up they've been and how wonderful they feel after they've opened up," she said. "You don't have to go back into your childhood and talk about your mother and father; you can stick to the recent past."

At any age, Cooperman said, the key to a successful love life is an ability to laugh.

"Especially in sex, you have to have a sense of humor," she said, "because nothing goes right all the time."

BECAUSE THEY CARE

Sarasota's 14th annual forum for caregivers — both professionals and amateurs — is slated for 9 a.m. to 1:30 p.m. Saturday, Nov. 8, in the main auditorium at Sarasota Memorial Hospital.

A lunch will be provided by the Sarasota County Aging Network, a coalition of elder care providers, and local caregiving specialists will answer questions.

To reserve a seat, call the Senior Friendship Center Caregiver Resource Center at 556-3268, by Nov. 3.