More than 200 bus stops later, Mississippi enrollment numbers remain dismal. | MADELINE MARSHALL FOR POLITICO ACA bus rolls, enrolls in Mississippi

GREENWOOD, Miss. — In the poorest state in the nation, where supper is fried, bars allow smoking, chronic disease is rampant and doctors are hard to come by, Obamacare rolls into town in a lime green bus.

It took some real convincing by the Obama administration and a leap of faith by one state Republican official to get one of the nation’s largest insurance companies — Humana — to set up shop across Mississippi. Virtually no other insurer was willing to do so, discouraged by the acute health needs here and most elected officials’ outright hostility to the law.

Story Continued Below

Four months and more than 200 bus stops later, enrollment numbers here remain dismal. Only 9 percent of the state’s Obamacare-eligible population have signed up, putting it near the bottom of yet another national statistic.

( PHOTOS: Obamacare in the Mississippi Delta)

Yet the Humana bus rolls, pulling into hospital parking lots and Wal-Mart shopping centers, parking at churches large and small and hitting other obvious targets to find and convince the uninsured that President Barack Obama’s signature health achievement will benefit them. Sometimes the company’s agents see dozens of people per stop. Other times, just a few individuals climb aboard.

The effort in Mississippi illustrates the obstacles the health law must overcome in many parts of the country, particularly in deeply conservative areas where antipathy toward Washington mixes with challenges of geography, education and general skepticism or ignorance of the Affordable Care Act. High rates of poverty and disease — which mark much of this state — don’t necessarily aid recruitment. Add the strident opposition of GOP leaders and enrollment gets that much tougher.

“This law’s letdown in my home state and the premium hikes on hardworking families are no different than the problems we are seeing across the country,” said Rep. Gregg Harper, whose congressional district cuts diagonally across Mississippi. “I have heard from folks I attend church with to small-business owners and everyone in between about their issues enrolling.”

( Also on POLITICO: Health law enrollment hits 5 million)

Humana knew the obstacles it faced would force intense outreach. And even after aggressively crisscrossing the state, that only pushed sign-ups as of early March to 25,554 residents — results that were worse than in all but eight states, according to an estimate from the Kaiser Family Foundation. Even an enrollment surge in the last days before the March 31 deadline won’t change the standing much, if at all.

A few days ago, one of the insurer’s two Obamacare buses stopped at the Greenwood Leflore Hospital in this small town on the eastern edge of the Delta. Once called the Cotton Capital of the World for its booming cotton trade and access to the Yazoo River, Greenwood today is down to a population of 15,000. It’s a majority African-American town where the median income is $25,000 less than the national average.

It’s where Rosie Olive showed up to look for coverage.

“I was just on pins and needles every day because I was trying to find insurance,” said Olive, who lost her job and health insurance two years ago. “Every day I prayed pretty hard for God to keep me healthy.”

( PHOTOS: 25 unforgettable Obamacare quotes)

She sat down with an agent in a tiny, retrofitted cubicle on the Wi-Fi-equipped bus. Together, they found a policy that would cost, after subsidies, $73.44 a month for the 49-year-old Olive, her husband and daughter.

“I was skeptical about coming, to tell you the truth,” she said afterward. “I was worried I was going to pay this on my own, and this is going to cost us an arm and a leg.”

Despite all the political rhetoric about a government-run health program, Obamacare relies on private insurers to sell policies on the state and federal exchanges. If there’s no insurance company, then there’s really no Obamacare.

( Also on POLITICO: Full health care policy coverage)

And Mississippi is one of the last places the typical risk-averse health insurance company would choose to sell policies under the law. Statistically, it’s one of the unhealthiest states, topping the charts in all kinds of negatives such as obesity, diabetes, hypertension and cardiovascular disease — conditions that can be stabilized with treatment or kill without.

That’s why Mississippi Insurance Commissioner Mike Chaney, a rare Southern Republican working to implement the law, was so worried when he realized last summer that no insurer had signed up to sell policies in nearly a third of the state. A local company named Magnolia was operating in some areas, but about 36 counties with about 1 million people, many with incomes low enough to qualify for federal subsidies, would have had no access to coverage.

( PHOTOS: 20 quotes: More Obamacare, less work)

The Obama administration had the same concern and contacted Chaney early last summer to see whether he would help them recruit an insurer. Both Blue Cross Blue Shield and United HealthCare turned him down, Chaney said. He tried Humana, and CMS Administrator Marilyn Tavenner also made a plea. In July, the company agreed to expand from four to 40 counties.