It's our weekly roundup of the stories that mattered most in Indian country:

HE SHOOTS, HE SCORES, HE SHOOTS AGAIN: T.J. Oshie, Ojibwe, a standout right winger for the NHL's St. Louis Blues, scored on four of six shootout attempts to lead the U.S. men's Olympic hockey team past Russia, 3-2, in a thrilling preliminary round match.

KEEP FIGHTING: Robert Charles Onco, a member of the Kiowa Tribe of Oklahoma and an American Indian Movement activist, passed into the spirit world on January 31.

TAYLOR PROTECTED: Mount Taylor, an 11,300-foot, snow-capped peak in central New Mexico, will be protected as a traditional cultural property following the state Supreme Court’s ruling February 6 that upheld the mountain’s designation as a sacred site.

NO JUNK FOOD TAX: After the Navajo Nation Council voted 12-7 on January 30 to approve a 2-percent increase in sales tax for processed foods high in fat, sugar and salt, as well as sweetened drinks sold on the 27,000-square-mile reservation, Tribal President Ben Shelly vetoed the legislation February 12.

OUT, BUT NOT DOWN: Aranesa Turner, Pomo, was eliminated from American Idol, but fans eagerly assured her that she was destined for bigger and better things.

COLLEGE FUNDING: The College of Muscogee Nation in Okmulgee, Oklahoma is eligible for operation funding from the Bureau of Indian Education. The college has been trying to get this funding since April of last year. The funding will begin in July 2014.

WONDO VS. THE WORLD: Soccer star Chris Wondolowski has yet to fulfill his goal of representing the United States in a World Cup. He's hoping to have that chance at this year's quadrennial tournament. The 32-nation, month-long spectacle, which will be held in Brazil, begins on June 12.

HAVE A HEART: Shortly after ICTMN posted a list of unfortunate Native-themed Valentine’s Day gifts, the artistic product website Zazzle removed two of the products listed in the article and issued a response on Twitter.

TEMPLE REMEMBERED: Legendary child star Shirley Temple walked on at her home in Woodside, California at the age of 85 on Monday night. In the years following her entertainment career, she embraced numerous causes, including Native ones -- a Lummi Elder reflected on her visit to the Lummi Nation in the 1970s.