Call 573-815-1776 or email tribtalk@columbiatribune.com to contribute.

Jim Robertson, managing editor

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

“Obamacare is on life support, as evidenced by this latest report. Of the 893,000 doctors in the United States, 216,000 have refused to treat patients on Obamacare, while only 9,000 have refused to treat Medicare patients.”

Robertson replies: Politifact rated the chain email you read as false, saying it is not based on reliable information. The study, conducted by the American Action Forum, extrapolated from a relatively small, select group of physicians surveyed. About 76 percent of those surveyed accepted payments from insurance sold on an exchange. Almost half of those who were not said it was because no insurance company had asked them to.

“Should marijuana be legalized? Here are some elements about legalization we must consider: potency, management of the states engaged in sales, regulations for driving under the influence, and treatment as needed. The war on drugs is costly and attractive to criminals. Is marijuana an ‘entry-level drug’? Opponents of legalization say it is. A friend lost a 28-year-old son to an overdose of heroin, introduced to him by a dealer he came to admire. Told his dad he was told, ‘If you like this weed, wait till you try coke, etc, etc, etc.’ Let’s be vigilant as we recognize the benefits but not discount the harm.”

“Paul Ryan should tell the Trump voters that congressional Republicans will not pass legislation to build a wall, deport millions of undocumented immigrants or ban Muslims from entering the United States. They will vote to cut taxes on the rich called for by both the Trump and Ryan plans. Once again making suckers out of Republican voters.”

“I hope Trump wins the election, as it would be nice to have an outsider who will work for the people. The others running have been molded alike and could care less about the lower-paid working class. I didn’t want another Bush or Clinton, and as for Sanders, who wants to give free schooling to all students, I would like to know where is he going to get money.”

“This is for the Neanderthal who’s wondering if the woman would use the boys’ bathroom if she genders boy. I bet she could hit the toilet better than you could. Ha. Ha. Ha.”

“As they want to improve the airport, how much is Jefferson City going to pay in? The airport is close to Jefferson City. It could have been much closer to Columbia. They certainly need to pay their fair share.”

“Whoever keeps calling in and trying to give the facts about Obamacare that there’s 20 million people that have signed up for this fiasco needs to get their facts straight. As of this year, official numbers are 12.7 million. Approximately half of those were people that had insurance before Obamacare came on, lost their insurance and had no place else to go. So you’ve got maybe a net 7 million over the last seven years of new insurers that are signed up for this thing. It has destroyed the health industry.”

“I agree with the person who wrote in about Ryan and McConnell and the GOP being broken. They are so right. They’ve nailed that.”

I have one comment about two different issues in Tuesday night’s Trib Talk, and I’m going to assume they were both offered by the same person because it makes no sense. First of all, the roundabouts: I know how to navigate a roundabout, but that doesn’t mean that I like them and think they’re safe, because I don’t. The second one about the Obamacare. I used the federal marketplace, and I still cannot afford the premiums. So maybe you need to get a clue.”

“Michael Trapp, you are my councilman, I’m in your ward, and you voted against the housing freeze for students. I’m just wondering where your head is. We have more housing than we need, especially downtown. It is ridiculous the way we are putting up high-rises for student housing in the district. It’s not shopping-friendly anymore.”

“Jim, this is in response to your reply about the CATO Institute linking the CIS study to comparing apples to elephants. You indicated that the study found that poor immigrants were less likely to use federal benefits than poor natives. I dare you to do some research and just print a number of the dollars spent on illegal aliens in the federal benefits. I bet you, you either won’t do it or can’t find a number to do it.”