Last summer Indiana, Clarion and Punxsutawney hospitals signed an agreement to create a new entity called Pennsylvania Mountain Care Network.

Over the past year agreements were finalized and on July 2, after Pennsylvania Attorney General Kathleen Kane’s review, PMCN became an official organization.

So you may be asking two questions about this:

• What does it mean to me and my family?

• Secondly, why?

Simply stated, Indiana Regional Medical Center becoming part of PMCN means that “local volunteer board members, medical staff and senior leaders will decide how IRMC fulfills its community mission in services.”

Many hospitals that enter into large systems or for-profit chains see services that are not profitable shut down or scaled back over time.

Local leaders whose families live and receive care in our community view decisions on these services much differently than leaders in another city or out-of-state headquarters for a for-profit.

So with the Supreme Court ruling upholding Obamacare, we now know that hospitals will be redefined over time in what they can provide to their communities.

But in our case, with local leaders in control, IRMC will continue to provide a “mission” focus to caring for our community, not just financial.

Why?

Obamacare’s impact has been dramatically felt across the region, state and nation, creating financial hardships on patients, families, hospitals and insurance companies.

The amount of consolidation in hospitals and insurance companies has been staggering. Just around in the past couple years Altoona, Conemaugh (Johnstown), DuBois, Clearfield, St. Marys, Brookville, Nason (Roaring Spring), Tyrone (pending) and Jameson (New Castle — pending) have all merged.

Indiana, Clarion and Punxsutawney believe they can maintain local ownership by working together in a more integrated fashion to improve quality across the region, grow and enhance services by recruiting physicians and services, and become more efficient to better serve the communities represented.

The goal of PMCN is to provide the highest quality and service, in the closest location at the lowest cost.

As patients and families are asked to continue to pay more for their care, PMCN and IRMC strive to be there for you.