KING OF PRUSSIA, Pa. — Republican Sen. Pat Toomey declared his long-expected re-election bid Sunday afternoon, saying that although he’d accomplished things for Pennsylvania, “There’s so much more we need to do.”

Mr. Toomey, first elected in 2010, told supporters at a hotel ballroom here, “I’d like to continue my work to fight for Pennsylvanians every day.”

Mr. Toomey touted his work on a number of initiatives, citing efforts to limit government spending while securing funding for state infrastructure projects. He also called himself “the point guy in the U.S. Senate fighting crony capitalism and corporate welfare.”

But he said more remains to be done, citing a litany of conservative criticisms of the Obama administration’s spending and its overhaul of health care. He singled out the recent nuclear deal with Iran, which he said “legitimizes a nuclear program that I fear will lead to the production of nuclear weapons.”

Congressional Republicans failed to block the deal last week, but Mr. Toomey said, “I am not going to give up the fight.”

He begins his re-election effort in a strong position. His campaign had $8.3 million in cash on hand at the end of June, and in August, two statewide polls showed him leading Democratic rivals Joe Sestak and Katie McGinty. A third Democrat, Braddock Mayor John Fetterman, plans to announce his campaign today.

But Mr. Toomey’s job approval rating hovers just under 50 percent, according to a Quinnipiac University poll. And Democrats see Pennsylvania as a key battleground in their bid to take the Senate next year.

Mr. Toomey’s rivals greeted Sunday’s announcement with statements attacking his record. Mr. Sestak faulted Mr. Toomey for votes to scale back veterans’ programs, and Ms. McGinty’s camp blasted his support for trade deals — and efforts to convert Medicare into a voucher system that Democrats say won’t keep pace with costs — as proof that Mr. Toomey is “out of touch with Pennsylvanians.”

The Toomey campaign noted that trade deals have been a priority for the Obama administration but otherwise declined to address the criticism.

Mr. Toomey has trodden a careful path as senator, touting economic policies consonant with Tea Party conservatives while eschewing their confrontational style. Mr. Toomey previously headed the Club for Growth, a conservative advocacy group, and holds a nearly 95 percent rating from the American Conservative Union.

But he also has cultivated an image as a pragmatist who can reach out to Democrats on issues such as expanding background checks for gun purchases. Mr. Toomey didn’t mention the gun issue Sunday, but speakers and a promotional video repeatedly cited his willingness to work across the aisle.

And he struck a cautious note when reporters asked whether he, like some conservative Republicans, favored a government shutdown to press for an end to federal funding of Planned Parenthood. While noting he’d voted against funding the family-planning group in the past, Mr. Toomey said, “I don’t think it’s a good idea to shut down the government.”

Chris Potter: cpotter@post-gazette.com or 412-263-2533.