A Republican Governors Association ad against John Bel Edwards released Friday (Oct. 9) seeks to tie the Democratic gubernatorial candidate with President Barack Obama, including by linking him with Obamacare.

But what's interesting about that line of attack, which references the expansion of Medicaid to cover hundreds of thousands of uninsured people in Louisiana, is that it could be directed at any of the Republican candidates. None of the candidates running for governor, Republican or Democrat, has said they are completely opposed to expanding Medicaid in Louisiana.

Edwards is perhaps most direct in his support of the expansion, which is part of the Affordable Care Act, popularly known as Obamacare. He is the only one to say that he would accept Medicaid expansion in the way the federal government offers it to all states; other candidates have said they would seek a waiver to alter it in some way.

But whether this year's gubernatorial candidates seek a waiver or accept the expansion as offered, all would be seen as accepting a key part the Affordable Care Act. Critics of Gov. Bobby Jindal have said that's why Jindal hasn't accepted the Medicaid expansion: it would be seen among conservatives as support for a program that's the signature legislative accomplishment of a liberal president.

The current funding model for Medicaid that the state uses leaves nearly 300,000 people without health insurance, mostly the working poor. Supporters of Medicaid expansion say that if those patients were covered, they would be less likely to seek treatment in emergency rooms, which drives up the cost of care.

Opponents of the expansion say it would cost more over the long term because eventually, the federal government won't cover 100 percent of the cost of the expansion -- the state will have to chip in 10 percent by 2020. But the Louisiana Hospital Association has a proposal where hospitals will finance that 10 percent cost through a fee.

Edwards defended his support for Medicaid expansion in an email Friday.

"Bringing $16 billion of our taxes home is probably the most fiscally conservative idea that has been suggested to finance health care since Bobby Jindal took office," Edwards said in a statement. "The independent Legislative Fiscal Office estimated that Edwards' health care legislation referenced in the attack ad would save $52 million for the state in the first year alone, and would have prevented the federal government from sending $1.6 billion a year in Louisiana taxes to other states."

Here's what other candidates have said about Medicaid expansion.

U.S. Sen. David Vitter, Republican: Said in June he wouldn't rule out expansion, but said he would seek to make changes to the way the federal government offers the program to other states.

Lt. Gov. Jay Dardenne, Republican: Has said he wants a safeguard in place if the state accepts Medicaid. "If the federal funding decreased, we need the ability for the state to exit the plan," he said.

Public Service Commissioner Scott Angelle, Republican: Has said he would favor a model similar to one used in Arkansas, which uses federal money to buy insurance for the poor.