An architect's drawing shows a $24 million outpatient mental health center planned by Broadlawns Medical Center in Des Moines. The building, which will be east of the main hospital, will also house dental, pain relief and family practice programs. (Photo: Special to the Register)

Polk County homeowners should soon get a small property-tax break, thanks to Obamacare.

Broadlawns Medical Center, which is the county’s public hospital, plans to cut its property-tax rate by 15 percent, or $9 million. The once-struggling hospital has seen its finances soar in recent years, largely because the Affordable Care Act has brought health insurance to many Iowans who used to lack it.

The proposed tax cut would mean the owner of a median-valued home, worth about $170,000, would pay $249 instead of $288 next year toward the public hospital.

Broadlawns ended its fiscal year last June 30 with a $45 million balance, representing an operating margin of 26 percent. If the hospital were a private business, that balance would be referred to as a profit.

“It’s a good problem to have,” said Gretchen Tegeler, president of the Taxpayers of Central Iowa. The group is urging Broadlawns leaders to cut property taxes, which historically have been used to pay for treating uninsured patients.

A decade ago, the public hospital was teetering on the brink of insolvency. But that situation began turning around after Jody Jenner became chief executive officer in 2006. Hospital leaders cut costs, attracted more patients and found new sources of revenue. The ensuing black ink allowed Broadlawns to refurbish its once-crumbling facility. The improvements have included a new emergency department and medical office building. The hospital has started expanding its mental-health unit and it has several other projects on the drawing boards.

Jenner said Broadlawns’ managers are being careful with the organization’s money, because they remember the tough times. “It’s almost like you grew up during the Depression,” and remain reflexively cautious with cash, he joked.

Under the Affordable Care Act, Iowa is using federal money to effectively expand its Medicaid program to cover tens of thousands of previously uninsured, poor adults. That has boosted Broadlawns’ bottom line over the past two years, because many patients who used to be uninsured now have health insurance financed by federal taxpayers. Bills that would have been paid out of local property-tax revenues are now being covered by the federal government.

After the Affordable Care Act passed, there was some speculation that many former Broadlawns patients would choose to use their new insurance cards to go to private hospitals, such as Mercy Medical Center or Iowa Methodist Medical Center. But the public hospital hasn’t seen its patient numbers slide, Tegeler said. “People love it. People love going there.”

Tegeler’s group supports Broadlawns’ plan to spend $60 million over the next five years to continue improving its facility. But the group thinks Broadlawns could cut property taxes more than the 15 percent that has been proposed.

Jenner said he would like to cut the tax levy more deeply, but he said the future isn’t clear. For one thing, he noted that next November’s presidential elections could affect whether the Affordable Care Act is rescinded. Also, he said, Broadlawns and many other hospitals expect to be pinched by Iowa’s impending shift to private management of its Medicaid program. Hospital leaders expect the new managed care companies to demand pre-authorization for many treatments, which could lead to fewer reimbursements and more hospital staff time devoted to hashing out billing differences.

Jenner predicted that even as more Iowans gain health insurance, Broadlawns will continue to serve an important role. For example, he said, many people with insurance are struggling to meet high deductibles, and they could seek subsidized care at the public hospital.

Jenner said that as the picture clears, Broadlawns could consider cutting its property tax levy more deeply. “Certainly if we can do more, we want to do more.”

Broadlawns forum

A public forum is scheduled Wednesday morning to discuss Broadlawns Medical Center's property-tax collection, and whether the hospital is cutting the levy deeply enough. The forum, sponsored by the Taxpayers of Central Iowa, is slated to run from 7:30 to 9 a.m. at the Greater Des Moines Botanical Center. The discussion will be led by the hospital's chief executive officer, Jody Jenner, and by the taxpayer group's president, Gretchen Tegeler. It is to be moderated by retired Des Moines Register editorial writer Rox Laird.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1Xtiaqk