By Karin Jeffers

Clinical & Support Options, Inc. (CSO) is a nonprofit behavioral health agency that serves more than 14,500 individuals and their families of the Pioneer Valley and employs more than 580 members of our communities. As you may know, some employees held a strike organized by the SEIU Local 509 (union) last week.

As chief executive officer of CSO, it is difficult to see some of the misinformed statements and half-truths that have been published over the last several weeks – often aimed at attacking leadership and guiding the conversation away from the legitimate, real need for supporting the mental health field. We have put forth fair and competitive contract offers with sincere attempts to finalize a contract. There are important facts to consider including CSO's industry-leading compensation and benefits, the nature of nonprofit organizations and the challenges we currently face in the behavior health field.

CSO has become a large regional provider, operating in ten locations throughout Western Massachusetts. Our workforce has grown from 93 in 2005 to 580 today. This represents more than a 500% growth in the CSO workforce in ten years. The ability to manage this kind of growth in staff and programs has been possible only through the organization's diligent work in building administrative and clinical capacity, refining and enhancing systems and putting into motion an extensive and effective training and support system for our employees.

As CSO has grown, we have invested heavily in employees, including increasing salaries by 30 percent, raising fee-for-service rates, financing over 450 hours of free training per year, premium health insurance and over four weeks of paid vacation per year, all while maintaining the lowest productivity levels in the industry and having a flat or decreased expectation for over 10 years.

The issue of overtime has also been publically debated throughout the past week. It is important to note that CSO does pay overtime to any non-exempt employee. Additionally, fee-for-service employees make up only 24 percent of our workforce and they are employed in that role by choice. Clinician's at CSO have the option to be salaried, but many of them choose to be a fee-for-service employee because of the flexibility made possible by this structure, or because they only want to work part time.

In the past 10 years, local agencies have consistently closed down their outpatient clinics because of poor margins. CSO was able to take on most of the displaced employees and almost all of their clients to ensure for continuity of care.

The complexity of ensuring long term viability in this field is met with challenges on every front. A medical doctor in a hospital or group practice receives 7-20 percent higher reimbursement rates from the State Medicaid for the same exact service code than a medical doctor (psychiatrist) working in a behavioral health clinic. Despite federal parity laws, the funding for behavioral health workers lags behind the medical field.

With the Affordable Care Act came a requirement that all health providers must adopt and use electronic health records by 2015. Hospitals and group medical practices received millions of dollars in health IT funding to support the implementation, ongoing development, and use of such electronic health records. Behavioral health providers had to meet the same requirements, costing hundreds of thousands of dollars, yet were not eligible for any health IT funding for their clinician's to support the adoption of health IT. Behavioral health nonprofit agencies had to fund such implementation from existing budgets which are already too tight.

As the operators of the socioeconomic safety net, nonprofits are mission-driven to deliver high quality, effective services to address a vast range of social and economic challenges to an equally broad range of populations in need. Its financial health as an industry is often overlooked while the demands and pressure on it as the main societal safety net increase exponentially. The nonprofit organization is continually expected to do more with less.

While nonprofit organizations have unique and important mission statements, we do not have a "bye" on operating as a successful business. Being a nonprofit is a tax status, not a business expectation. In fact, nonprofits have to operate under increasingly stringent regulations and must meet the same banking covenants and fiscal health requirements as a for-profit business. This requires talented and competent leadership. The public doesn't like to see us referred to as "businesses," yet if we fail to operate as a competent business, the consequence is devastating to our clients and communities.

CSO is not perfect, but is a wonderful place to work. CSO employees are among the best in the Commonwealth and show compassion and dedication that I am proud to be a part of. CSO management works tirelessly to support our employees, advocate on local, state and national levels for improved funding, decreased bureaucracy, and improved outcomes for the system. We are committed to continuous improvement and the support of our staff, our clients, and our Communities.

If any positive came from the union-CSO labor dispute, it is that it has highlighted the very real issue of need for increased funding for behavioral health services and the lack of parity that still exists as compared to the physical health field. CSO is not the cause of the problem – we offer industry leading wages, salary increases, low productivity levels, premium insurance coverage and benefits such as free on-site training, staff morale activities and career advancement opportunities including tuition reimbursement and upward mobility. CSO agrees that there is work to be done to improve the advancement of the nonprofit behavioral health industry, but there are more meaningful ways to make a difference for those in the field and those that need our services. Call your legislator. Find out which bills are at the Statehouse that can support mental health workers and agencies. Demand parity in funding and access. Think about consequences of decreased taxes. I and the management at CSO will continue to advocate for positive change – we invite your help!



Karin Jeffers is president and CEO of Clinical & Support Options, Inc.