Congratulations, Florida. Your duly elected state legislators are poised to do what their counterparts in the nation’s capital did with disastrious results — shut down the government.

The reason: opposition to Obamacare. What else.

After years of bragging that none of that Washington gridlock stuff would ever happen here in the Sunshine State, guess what?! It’s happening here in the Sunshine State. Only this time it’s a big family feud between Republicans. Can’t they just all get along? Apparently not.

To recap:

Senate President Andy Gardiner, R-Orlando, proposed a three-week special session beginning June 1. The proposal prompted an email response from House Speaker Steve Crisafulli: “Finally progress. I look forward to getting back to the Senate President soon.”

Crisafulli had adjourned his chamber on Tuesday, angering the Florida Senate. Gardiner responded by saying the move was unconstitutional and asked Crisafulli to reconvene. Crisafulli said ‘no.’

Meanwhile, Senate Democrats filed a motion with the Florida Supreme Court asking the justices to order the lawmakers back to Tallahassee. The court ordered the House to respond, which they did in a 23-page brief that basically said the Dems were full of it.

The justices agreed with the House Republicans, kicking the Dems to the curb.

All this leaves Gov. Rick Scott stewing on the sidelines. He’s still opposed to Obamacare and Medicaid expansion. He just wants lawmakers to pass a budget. While he’s waiting, he’s going after non-profit hosptials again by setting up a commission to study their finances.

There are still 60 days left. Lawmakers could come together, agree on a budget and drop that sine die hanky in the capitol corridor to mark the official end of the legislative session.

Or, they could continue the standoff and shut down the government.

I’m opting for an agreement. But, this is Florida, where the unthinkable can become the norm.

Douglas C. Lyons is a Sun Sentinel columnist and editorial writer. He can be reached at dlyons@sun-sentinel.com or on Twitter @douginflorida.