Topics: cool culture, ed catmull, innovation, Movies, Pixar, Silicon Valley, Steve Jobs, Innovation News, Entertainment News

Pixar released “Toy Story” nearly 24 years ago — the first full-length film created entirely with computer animation. For Ed Catmull, president of Pixar and Disney Animation, it’s an accomplishment 20 years in the making.

Catmull, who has a Ph.D. in computer science and five Academy Awards, and previously worked at companies like Boeing and LucasFilms, dreamed of being a Disney animator ever since he was a kid watching “The Wonderful World of Disney” on television. The successful completion of “Toy Story” stirred mixed emotions. The movie soared at the box office, and forever changed the face of animated film. But Catmull was left with a sense of “What’s next?”

Catmull’s new book, “Creativity, Inc.,” is a candid look at Pixar: its practices, successes and surprising near-failures — not to mention its iconic co-founder, Steve Jobs. In an interview earlier this week, Catmull spoke with Salon about Silicon Valley, the secret to innovation, the evolution of Pixar and more. This interview has been edited for length and clarity.

“Toy Story” came out in 1995.

Next year will be 20 years.

Watching it, it still seems new and relevant and visually compelling. That’s to an untrained eye, though. As somebody who is a computer animator, it must look different so many years later.

Well, the way we viewed it then — which I think was the correct way — is whatever the innovation process is, it is actually secondary. I will say that not everybody got that. And what happens then is, you’ll look at a lot of movies you’ll say, “The movie looks fantastic, but the story isn’t very good.” So it’s clear one can focus on making it look good, and actually lose sight of the real goal, which is to make a movie that affects people.

I believe one of the things, which we started off with, was we never got confused about that. If we didn’t make a good movie none of this mattered. And I think that’s a thing we keep coming back to. By the end of the book, we say, “keep making this stuff better and cheaper and faster and do all that.” It’s not the real goal, though. The real goal, in our case, is to make movies that are going to touch the culture in a positive way.

You discuss in the book how important candor is — that people working on these creative projects should not be afraid to speak their minds. Why do you think that’s so important?

One of the points I always want to make is that all of our films start out as disasters. And it took us a while to really understand that this is the way it’s going to be. So the issues of, “Are people candid or are they holding back what they think?” — that still exists. It would be misleading for people to think, “Well, somehow Pixar has figured out how to be candid.” When actually what we’ve figured out is that we always have a problem with people saying what they think — it’s human nature — and, therefore, we always have to work at it.

I was curious if you have a favorite animated movie or, more specifically, a favorite Pixar movie — either from the standpoint of actually viewing it or the process of it coming together.

OK, so I’ll give you some examples, although I can’t put it in terms of favorites. The real issue which I think you are articulating is that the making of the film gives me a point of view or an experience which is different than the film itself. So I can’t look at “WALL-E” or “Finding Nemo” or “Up” and look at in the same way as people outside of the company would look at it. Each one of them had angst.

When I see a film, I’ll remember that there was a time when it wasn’t working and there was some pain and angst in order to get it to work. Then there are these events that happen — they usually happen once per film, sometimes twice per film. Every once in a while, magic happens and it’s the hardest thing to describe, and that is when [our brain trust] is all of a sudden focused on the problem itself and you just feel it.

I remember one time it happened on “Frozen” when we had added a director. We had one of these meetings, which we don’t record because they’re meant to be spontaneous. There’s something about recording which alters the dynamic. But I was in this meeting when we hit one of these magical points when all of a sudden problems were being solved. And there was an intensity. If you looked around the room and the way everyone was thinking and the way they were engaged — it was stunning.

I was taken by it and that I went back the next say and said, “That was so magical, I wish we had recorded” — but we didn’t, but we do take notes. And I said, well, I’d like to look at the notes. And when I read the notes, it didn’t capture anything that took place in the room. And I was so disappointed. And I asked the directors and they said, “All we do is use those notes to remind us one or two days later, because it never catches what’s in the room.”