UNITED NATIONS — Iranian President Hassan Rouhani said Thursday that he believes nuclear negotiations with the major powers can be completed before the Nov. 24 deadline.

In his speech to the United Nations General Assembly, Rouhani said the Iranians believe the only solution to the conflict regarding his country’s nuclear program is negotiation, but the West must be “motivated and flexible.”

Rouhani said delays in coming to an agreement would impose costs both on Iranians, who are subject to sanctions, as well as on trading partners who cannot conduct business with Iran. He also said delays will affect the security of the Middle East.

“No one should doubt that compromise and agreement on this issue is in the best interest of everyone especially that of the nations of the region,” Rouhani said.

The P5+1 nuclear talks include the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council (the United States, Russia, China, France and the United Kingdom) plus Germany.

The talks began in 2006, with the Security Council passing numerous resolutions since then imposing sanctions on Iran for its defiance of nuclear regulation. Iran denies that it is using the technology not to create a nuclear weapon, but for energy purposes only.

“We are committed to continue our peaceful nuclear program, including enrichment, and to enjoy our full nuclear rights on Iranian soil within the framework of international law,” said Rouhani. “A final accord regarding Iran's peaceful nuclear program can serve as the beginning of multilateral collaboration aimed at promoting security, peace and development in our region and beyond.”



Photos: U.N. General Assembly 2014 EXPAND GALLERY Photo Gallery x of x Full Screen Felipe VI, King of Spain, addresses the 69th session of the U.N. General Assembly on Wednesday at the U.N. headquarters in New York City. Don Emmert/AFP/Getty Images x of x Full Screen U.N. ambassador Samantha Power, center, embraces National Security Advisor Susan Rice, left, as they and Secretary of State John Kerry wait for President Barack Obama to speak at the U.N.'s 69th General Assembly on Wednesday. Jason DeCrow/AP x of x Full Screen President Barack Obama speaks to political leaders from around the world at the U.N. General Assembly on Wednesday. Andrew Burton/Getty Images x of x Full Screen President Obama shakes hands with the U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon after addressing the U.N. General Assembly. Don Emmert/AFP/Getty Images x of x Full Screen Queen Letizia of Spain, left, Queen Maxima of the Netherlands, center, and Michelle Obama listen as President Obama speaks at the U.N. General Assembly. Seth Wenig/AP x of x Full Screen Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, left, speaks with a member of his delegation Wednesday, Sept. 24, 2014, in New York City.

Jason Decrow/AP x of x Full Screen President Obama shakes hands with Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi after a meeting on Wednesday at the U.N. headquarters in New York City. Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images x of x Full Screen A protestor dressed as a polar bear dances in the streets during the Flood Wall Street protest on Monday in New York City. Bryan Thomas/Getty Images x of x Full Screen Protesters calling for economic and political action to curb the effects of global warming gather on Monday near New York City's Wall Street Bull statue. Andrew Burton/Getty Images x of x Full Screen A police officer peeks over the edge of a banner on Broadway during the Flood Wall Street protest on Monday. Bryan Thomas/Getty Images x of x Full Screen A woman dressed as Captain Planet joins a group of protesters on Monday. Bryan Thomas/Getty Images x of x Full Screen A protester joins thousands of people calling for action against global warming ahead of Tuesday's U.N. Climate Summit 2014. Timothy A. Clary/AFP/Getty Images x of x Full Screen Leonardo DiCaprio, actor and U.N. ambassador, addresses the Climate Summit on Tuesday. Richard Drew/AP x of x Full Screen Former Vice President Al Gore speaks at the opening of the U.N. Climate Summit. Don Emmert/AFP/Getty Images x of x Full Screen U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon speaks at the U.N. Climate Summit in front of scientists and world leaders committed to discussing options to alleviate climate change. Andrew Burton/Getty Images x of x Full Screen Iranian President Hassan Rouhani, right, greets Iraqi President Fuad Masum, left, as he arrives at the U.N. headquarters in New York City. Craig Ruttle/AP x of x Full Screen Actress and U.N. ambassador Li Bingbing speaks at the Climate Summit on Tuesday in New York City. World leaders, scientists and activists attended the summit, scheduled one day before the U.N. General Assembly meeting begins. Andrew Burton/Getty Images x of x Photo Gallery x of x Felipe VI, King of Spain, addresses the 69th session of the U.N. General Assembly on Wednesday at the U.N. headquarters in New York City. Don Emmert/AFP/Getty Images x of x U.N. ambassador Samantha Power, center, embraces National Security Advisor Susan Rice, left, as they and Secretary of State John Kerry wait for President Barack Obama to speak at the U.N.'s 69th General Assembly on Wednesday. Jason DeCrow/AP x of x President Barack Obama speaks to political leaders from around the world at the U.N. General Assembly on Wednesday. Andrew Burton/Getty Images x of x President Obama shakes hands with the U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon after addressing the U.N. General Assembly. Don Emmert/AFP/Getty Images x of x Queen Letizia of Spain, left, Queen Maxima of the Netherlands, center, and Michelle Obama listen as President Obama speaks at the U.N. General Assembly. Seth Wenig/AP x of x Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, left, speaks with a member of his delegation Wednesday, Sept. 24, 2014, in New York City.

Jason Decrow/AP x of x President Obama shakes hands with Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi after a meeting on Wednesday at the U.N. headquarters in New York City. Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images x of x A protestor dressed as a polar bear dances in the streets during the Flood Wall Street protest on Monday in New York City. Bryan Thomas/Getty Images x of x Protesters calling for economic and political action to curb the effects of global warming gather on Monday near New York City's Wall Street Bull statue. Andrew Burton/Getty Images x of x A police officer peeks over the edge of a banner on Broadway during the Flood Wall Street protest on Monday. Bryan Thomas/Getty Images x of x A woman dressed as Captain Planet joins a group of protesters on Monday. Bryan Thomas/Getty Images x of x A protester joins thousands of people calling for action against global warming ahead of Tuesday's U.N. Climate Summit 2014. Timothy A. Clary/AFP/Getty Images x of x Leonardo DiCaprio, actor and U.N. ambassador, addresses the Climate Summit on Tuesday. Richard Drew/AP x of x Former Vice President Al Gore speaks at the opening of the U.N. Climate Summit. Don Emmert/AFP/Getty Images x of x U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon speaks at the U.N. Climate Summit in front of scientists and world leaders committed to discussing options to alleviate climate change. Andrew Burton/Getty Images x of x Iranian President Hassan Rouhani, right, greets Iraqi President Fuad Masum, left, as he arrives at the U.N. headquarters in New York City. Craig Ruttle/AP x of x Actress and U.N. ambassador Li Bingbing speaks at the Climate Summit on Tuesday in New York City. World leaders, scientists and activists attended the summit, scheduled one day before the U.N. General Assembly meeting begins. Andrew Burton/Getty Images x of x ×

President Barack Obama said in his U.N. address on Wednesday that Iran cannot let this opportunity for a diplomatic resolution to the decades-old conflict pass. “We can reach a solution that meets your energy needs while assuring the world that your program is peaceful,” he said.

Ongoing nuclear talks are being conducted on the sidelines of the high level week at the U.N. General Assembly, with under secretary for political affairs Wendy Sherman attending meetings Thursday. Last year, there was speculation that Obama and Rouhani would shake hands on the sidelines of the General Assembly, but the two leaders did not end up greeting one another. The U.S. administration has not announced any bilateral meetings at this year’s gathering and Obama declined to answer when asked Thursday if he would meet with Rouhani. The Iranian did meet Wednesday with British Prime MInister David Cameron.

The Iranian president said that his country has so far complied with all requirement of the negotiations, and that the West must avoid “excessive demands” during the process. Sanctions, said Rouhani, are only an impediment to reaching an accord.

The Iranian president also blamed the West for causing instability in the world, including the rise of Islamic extremism, while calling his nation one of the “most tranquil, secure and stable nations” in the world.

“The strategic blunders of the West in the Middle East, Central Asia, and the Caucuses have turned these parts of the world into a haven for terrorists and extremists,” said Rouhani.