The scandal over hidden wait times for Veterans Affairs patients has some conservatives saying it is time to start privatizing the giant VA health system.

It’s a recommendation driven by a clash of ideologies. At least since the 2008 presidential race, Republicans have sought to improve health care by lessening government involvement. Democrats have favored a larger government role, culminating in the 2010 Affordable Care Act.

The debate over which approach costs less while providing quality care is an endless one.

Most private care is run on a fee-for-service basis, though, where health care providers have an incentive to do more care rather than less. VA doctors are salaried. A Rand Corp. study a decade ago found the VA system was significantly less expensive.

Many in both parties agree that patients forced to wait weeks or months to see a doctor should instead see private caregivers, with the government paying the tab. While Democrats look at this as a temporary fix, many Republicans want the choice made permanent.

“Veterans who want to continue to get care through the VHA should be able to do so; those who don’t should be provided private insurance just like federal employees have,” said Maryland Republican Rep. Andy Harris.

Waiting for care has been an issue since at least 2005, as pointed out in several reports by the inspector general’s office of the Department of Veterans Affairs.

The last two Republican nominees for president — Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., and former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney — supported private care for the health needs unrelated to military service of veterans. Romney backed away when the American Legion denounced his plan.

President Barack Obama opposed the idea, and said better management and adequate funding would fix the problems with veterans’ health care. The problems remain. On Friday, Obama accepted the resignation of VA Secretary Eric Shinseki.

VA system

The Veterans Health Administration is the largest health care provider in the nation. It spends nearly $56 billion a year treating more than 6.2 million veterans at over 1,700 hospitals, clinics and other care facilities.

The VA health system got its start after World War I, both as a benefit for veterans and because the lifetime health needs of wounded service members were different from those of civilians. As a benefit, VA care is considerably less expensive than private health insurance or Medicare, the government health insurance for seniors and the disabled.

The VA has specialized in prosthetics, post-traumatic stress disorder and other service-related injuries.

In times of war, Congress has tended to extend veterans health benefits, while funding has lagged. Long waits for initial physician appointments have been a characteristic of the system in the aftermath of conflicts.

Access to care is now determined on a priority basis based on seven classifications. Those totally disabled during military service have top priority.

Task force

In the 1980s, Congress required wealthier veterans to share in the cost of VA care. The VA also bills the private insurance carriers of veterans for nonmilitary medical needs. (About half of veterans have Medicare or private insurance.) Those provisions now pay about 6 percent ($3.1 billion) of the VA’s health costs.

In 1973, Congress created a VA health benefit (CHAMPVA) for dependents and survivors of veterans killed or disabled during military service. The benefit doesn’t provide access to VA medical facilities, however. It’s an insurance program covering 75 percent of the cost of private medical care.

That’s similar to the approach for veterans favored by several Republicans. Rep. Harris’ bill would provide health insurance to veterans modeled on the federal government’s plans. Veterans with service disabilities and lower incomes would not face premiums, while others could pay up to 28 percent of the premium cost.

Despite repeated scandals over waiting and the quality of care received, veterans have supported their separate health care system and have given it good marks for quality. The American Legion has operated a roving task force for the last decade that seeks upgrades at various VA facilities called “A System Worth Saving.”

Follow Jim Landers on Twitter at @landersjim.