NBC Democratic Debate: Everything You Need To Know For Fourth DNC Debate

The first Democratic debate of 2016 is set for Sunday, Jan. 17. Here's all you need to know heading into it.

Jan 16, 2016 12:00 PM EST

The three Democratic candidates will take the stage again on Jan. 17 to debate in the race for president, hosted by NBC News. (Photo : Twitter/rabilecofef)

The fourth installment of the Democratic National Committee's sanctioned debates is set and ready for Sunday, Jan. 17. Despite previous complaints about the debate schedule and low ratings, DNC Chair Debbie Wasserman-Schultz has stood her ground on the debate schedule, and we're set for another weekend night debate, this time in South Carolina, where the Republican party just held its sixth debate.

This final contest before the Iowa and New Hampshire caucuses comes after a recent development in the Iowa and New Hampshire polls, showing a formerly-large lead by front-runner Hillary Clinton to be nearly diminished. The competition, Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, is leading in some polls, as reported by HNGN and according to FOX News.

The two candidates have been going head-to-head more recently in a health-care clash, according to CNN. Sanders went on the offensive in a Wall Street speech in early January, according to the International Buiness Times. In response, the former secretary of state and her daughter, Chelsea Clinton, lauched a barrage of attacks on the issue of Sanders' criticism of Obamacare. The attacks backfired, resulting in a windfall of donations – $1.4 million – for Sanders.

Amid Clinton's sharp delcines in the polls, former Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley just barely met the qualifications to make the stage, according to USA Today. O'Malley has maintained low numbers since the start. Now it appears he's slipping out of the national conversation. This debate may be his final chance to bump up his numbers and keep a place on the stage.

What: The fourth DNC-sponsored Democratic debate. It will last two hours, form 9:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.

Where: The Galliard Center in Charleston, S.C.

Who: Moderators include NBC's Lester Holt, a "Nightly News" anchor, and Andrea Mitchell, the chief foreign news affairs correspondent for the network.

Candidates participating

9 p.m. debate - Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Vt. Sen. Bernie Sanders and former Md. Gov. Martin O'Malley.

Rules

The debate will last two hours, and will include subjects such as gun control, inequality and national security. In order to qualify, candidates needed at least 5 percent in recent surveys from Iowa, New Hampshire or South Carolina, or in the national polls, according to NBC.

How To Watch

The debate can be watched on NBC, its website, or live streamed online on YouTube. It can also be viewed on the NBC News Android app, the Amazon App, or on Roku.

Online: Follow HNGN's President and Editorial Director Michael Bullerdick (@mbullerdick) for his live tweets during the event!

Bullerdick's Predictions: The fireworks between Clinton and Sanders over health care were the first of the all-too polite campaign so far. Expect more of it from Clinton who may be experiencing a bit of déjà vu after squandering a hefty lead in the 2008 campaign and eventually losing her party's nomination to a barely-known, first-term senator named Barack Obama. Another reason she'll go hard at Sanders: She desperately needs to displace the dearth of headlines related to her role as the subject of an intense FBI probe into her alleged "pay-to-play" abuses and alleged illegal handling of classified information while secretary of state.

Drinking games!

After a calculated, deep investigation, we found this sites' drinking game to be most exciting and fun for viewers, regardless of party affiliation. Or if you are solely watching to get drunk.

Debate Drinking

A word to the wise, though! Know your limit and drink in moderation, because as Surgeon General Vivek Murthy points out, "You simply can't drink every time one of these guys says something silly... It's just a formula for disaster."

This is the fourth debate of the 2016 presidential cycle. Two more are set to take place. Check below to see all of the debates scheduled between now and election day 2016, courtesy of USPresidentialElectionNews.com.

Remaining Debate Schedule

Thursday, February 11, 2016

PBS Democratic Primary Debate

Location: Wisconsin

Sponsors: PBS

Candidates: TBD

Wednesday, March 9, 2016

Univision Democratic Primary Debate

Location: Miami Dade College in Miami, Florida

Sponsors: Univision, The Washington Post

Candidates: TBD