A New York firm that purchased the former St. Joseph's Hospital in Hazleton wants to convert the building into an assisted living facility and nursing school.

The company also plans to turn the nearby Price's Dairy building into office space for professionals who will work at the former hospital, a facility administrator said.

Kate Daye, a facility administrator for The Claremont Group, applied to the Hazleton Zoning Hearing Board for a "use by special exception" to convert the hospital at 681 N. Church St. into an assisted living facility and nursing school.

In a separate application filed with the zoning board, Daye seeks a variance for using the former dairy at 659 N. Church St. as a business office.

The zoning board will hear both cases on Sept. 26, according to a legal notice published in the Standard-Speaker.

The facilities proposed for Hazleton are among 12 that Clare Care, a subsidiary of The Claremont Group, is opening throughout the country, Daye said.

Clare Care will use the first two floors of the former hospital for housing 30 assisted-living rooms, Daye said. Crews will continue developing upper floors, which will open as more people are brought to the building, Daye said.

The facility will offer amenities such as a coffee shop, a beautician and barber "to really make it feel like a community" for guests, Daye said.

"It's really going to be a place where they can retire with dignity," Daye said. "We'll offer complimentary transportation (for guests) to and from anywhere. We'll have wonderful activities. We want to really make it feel like a community in there."

A small nursing school will open in part of the building that housed a convent, Daye said.

The nursing program will give students the opportunity to live in and work at the facility, she said. The nursing program will be accredited by the state and give participants the opportunity to secure licensed practical nursing (LPN) and certified pediatric nursing (CPN) certifications, she said. Developers are still working out details of the nursing program but Daye said the program could begin with 10 and 15 students and "will grow from there."

Organizers have a candidate in mind to head the nursing program.

"The person we're looking to bring on is the dean of another nursing school that is closing in the area," she said. "We're going to have that nursing school accredited through the state. (When students complete the program) they will be able to go anywhere … and be certified and take their boards."

The facility should be open within three months, she said.

"We're looking to have that all set and ready to go … at three months from today," Daye said Monday. "We have a very aggressive team that's very passionate as to what we're doing."

Earlier this year, a general manager for The Claremont Group said that residents would start moving into the Hazleton facility in July.

The project will not involve additions onto existing buildings, she said.

"Everything that is there is there," she said. "We're just going to continue to renovate the upper floors as we go. We want to get the community moved in, involved and (get the property) up and running. It's going to take more months to complete the top floors and fill it up."

The former Price's Dairy property will be converted into offices for doctors, pediatrists, optometrists and others who will be working at the assisted living facility, she said.

When interior renovations at the former hospital are complete, the firm will lease the office space at the dairy property, which had been used for similar purposes by St. Joseph's Medical Center in the mid-1980s.

At this point, Clare Care is focused on securing zoning approval. It will then work to secure all appropriate licenses for the assisted living community, Daye said.

Daye said she toured the former hospital on Monday with the city's zoning officer and found the building is in better shape than expected.

"There's really not much wrong with it," she said. "It's going to bring a lot of not only jobs, but opportunity and value to people of all ages."

Daye said she is not sure at this point of the number of jobs that will be created, but said she'll be in charge of hiring.

"There's a lot of positions to fill," she said. "There's subcontractors and doctors to nurses to (human resources). There's a wide variety of jobs coming to that facility. There's instructors for the nursing school."

The Claremont Group, whose website says that it is in the business of acquiring real estate in depressed markets, was drawn to Hazleton because of the hospital property, Daye said.

"It's just really exciting to bring the value to the community and not have the city spend $3 million on (demolishing) a building like that," she said. "It is now going to be put to use."

The New York firm bought the hospital, parking lots and the building at 659 N. Church St. for $300,000. The firm plans to open assisted living facilities in Illinois, Florida, Texas and Montana, according to its website.

sgalski@standardspeaker.com