Opinion

Letters to Insight, Oct. 13





Photo: Michael Macor, The Chronicle Image 1 of / 2 Caption Close Image 1 of 2 Bob Smith, is a driver of one of the 34 CNG, (Compressed Naturgal Gas) powered school buses. The maintenance yard of he Napa Valley Unified School district on Friday August 28, 2009 in Napa, Calif., is filled with one of the most eco-friendly school bus fleets in Northern California if not the entire state. less Bob Smith, is a driver of one of the 34 CNG, (Compressed Naturgal Gas) powered school buses. The maintenance yard of he Napa Valley Unified School district on Friday August 28, 2009 in Napa, Calif., is filled ... more Photo: Michael Macor, The Chronicle Image 2 of 2 The maintenance yard of he Napa Valley Unified School district on Friday August 28, 2009 in Napa, Calif., is filled with one of the most eco-friendly school bus fleets in Northern California if not the entire state. less The maintenance yard of he Napa Valley Unified School district on Friday August 28, 2009 in Napa, Calif., is filled with one of the most eco-friendly school bus fleets in Northern California if not the entire ... more Photo: Michael Macor, The Chronicle Letters to Insight, Oct. 13 1 / 2 Back to Gallery

I guess I'm the only driver in San Francisco who knows not to pass a school bus in either direction when its red lights are flashing.

SFPD should follow these buses on their rounds for a few days. It would be like shooting fish in a barrel.

Jerry Azzaro, San Francisco

Kudos for naming names

Congratulations to Robert Reich for calling out, by name, a number of the rich, right-wing egomaniacs who want to take over America, a goal that some of them have stated publicly.

Let Americans beware of them and the puppet politicians who front for them.

Steve Gregory, Kentfield

House GOP deaf to public

The hearing aid industry should contact House members about tests and aids immediately. They obviously are not hearing the public, selectively hearing only the Limbaugh short-circuit and Tea Party conservatives, about 5 percent of the public at best.

Excellent articles by John Diaz ("California's cautionary tale") and Robert Reich ("Time to push back against GOP's right-wing bullies") in Insight on Oct. 6 lay out the abyss that these Republicans have dug for themselves.

In 2010, when President Obama and speaker John Boehner had a deal, Boehner couldn't deliver. Why should Obama talk to Boehner? Boehner and the House Republicans have no clout, no spine and no chance to deliver a deal or win any seats in 2014.

John Hopper, Walnut Creek

Republican behavior is treason

Like petulant children, congressional Republicans shut down the government because they don't like Obamacare. More to the point, they don't like Obama.

Obamacare is primarily a Republican program, modeled after the Massachusetts program signed into law by Mitt Romney. It provides health insurance to all through private insurance companies.

When bringing the Affordable Care Act into law, Obama compromised wholeheartedly with Republicans; he even abandoned the key element, a single-payer public option.

The Republicans who want to destroy Obamacare by shutting down our federal government are saying "Obama needs to compromise." Our democracy cannot yield to terrorists within the halls of Congress who want to destroy our system of government.

If Republicans wanted to fix Obamacare, they could pass a specific bill to fix it. They tried 42 times to kill Obamacare and failed. Now they are attacking our governmental budget and national economy. It's treason.

Bruce Joffe, Piedmont

Tribute to Nobel winners

Let us all pay tribute to the nine winners of the Nobel Prize in physics, chemistry and medicine, three of whom are here - two at Stanford, one at UC Berkeley.

These brilliant scientists have advanced our knowledge of complicated processes in nature, chemistry and medicine that have already brought tangible benefits.

Thomas Letchfield, Palo Alto

Pacific Heights all about the 1%

Pacific Heights ("Rarefied air," Oct. 2)? An example of how San Francisco's "leading families" "give back" on behalf of a "committed elite"? Seriously?

Pacific Heights is and has always been a bastion of the 1 percent, most of whom could not care less about the 99 percent from whom they make their millions.

This article was truly shocking, putting the "sick" in sycophantic. In fact, Pacific Heights is full of people who make their money by exporting jobs to Singapore, Bangladesh or wherever workers are paid little and treated worse. These "elite" fabricate the clothing and computer products they sell anywhere the labor is cheapest and the environmental regulations are weakest.

Sure, these people have helped create and improve Crissy Field, the Presidio and other beautiful public spaces.

But they make sure their money stays near their neighborhoods. What big Pacific Heights projects help anyone or anyplace south of Cesar Chavez, in the Bayview or Outer Mission? Many people in the city can't even afford to feed their children.

In this period of increasing and unprecedented class inequality in the U.S. -and S.F. - this article is at the least inexplicable.

Emily Robertson, Berkeley