Still basking in the glow of its recent $4.3 billion Department of Defense contract win, Cerner showed this week that smaller and midsize projects also continue to be part of the company's repertoire.



The EHR giant announced two new contract wins this first week of September, one with Western Connecticut Health Network, the other with Glens Falls Hospital in upstate New York, both longtime clients.

[See also: DoD awards Cerner, Leidos, Accenture EHR contract.]

Western Connecticut Health Network will implement Cerner's EHR system, which includes a suite of clinical and financial solutions and population health management.

"We are committed to ensuring a higher level of care and providing cutting edge technology to help improve the health of the communities we serve, one person at a time," said Kathy DeMatteo, Western Connecticut Health Network's CIO, in announcing the project. "This technology provides the platform that will enable providers to engage with individuals beyond the four walls of the hospital to help improve outcomes and transform health care delivery."

WCHN will replace multiple existing software systems from various vendors with Cerner's Millennium EHR full suite of acute and ambulatory solutions, as well as upgrade Soarian Enterprise Revenue Cycle solutions. Soarian was a Siemens product, and Siemens is now part of Cerner.

The health system will also leverage Cerner's HealtheIntent population health management platform to assist with identifying health risks for individuals. The work will occur across its three hospitals, 36 clinical locations and 400-physician medical group.

Western Connecticut Health Network first implemented Cerner's Millennium EHR in 1993.

[See also: Intermountain live with Cerner EHR.]

Glens Falls Hospital

Cerner also announced this week that Glens Falls Hospital, an integrated healthcare system in upstate New York, tapped it to connect the health system on one EHR. Under the contract, Cerner will extend its Millennium EHR into the healthcare system's ambulatory facilities, enhance clinical processes and healthcare delivery capabilities and position the health system for future growth and advancement.

The enhanced collaboration will help enable the health system to deploy new capabilities to optimize resources and achieve efficiencies and cost savings by implementing one EHR across the organization, officials say.

"After evaluating all EHR suppliers, we decided that extending our use of Cerner Millennium to our ambulatory clinics and leveraging Cerner ITWorks gave us the best opportunity to deliver value and connect the health system," said Dianne Shugrue, president and CEO of Glens Falls Hospital, in a news release.

This past February, Cerner assumed operational and administrative responsibilities for the health system's information technology environment through its Cerner ITWorks services, including remote hosting, security monitoring and system performance capabilities.



"Our new alignment enables Cerner to work even closer with Glens Falls Hospital to further connect the health system onto one EHR and deliver healthcare IT infrastructure innovation today and into the future," said Marcos Garcia, vice president of Cerner ITWorks, in a news release.

Glens Falls Hospital, which offers primary care, specialty care and hospital services, has worked with Cerner since 1996.