Avalanche center Paul Stastny was invited to play for the United States in his second Olympics on Wednesday, but Colorado defenseman Erik Johnson was not, passed over by five younger D-men with less international experience.

Johnson, 25, seemed nervous about the pending announcement after practice Wednesday, some two hours before the roster was revealed following the Winter Classic in Ann Arbor, Mich.

“I’m hoping for the best and preparing for the worst,” he said. “Kind of a bad way to find out. Last time around, they called us in the morning. It will be interesting.”

It is undoubtedly heartbreaking for the native of Bloomington, Minn., who has represented USA Hockey since age 16, beginning at the U.S. National Development Program in Ann Arbor. He is currently enjoying his best NHL season with the Avs.

Johnson and Stastny both helped the Americans win the silver medal at the 2010 Vancouver Games, and many expected both to play in Sochi, Russia, during hockey competition Feb. 13-23.

Stastny and Johnson practiced Wednesday, and both said they would learn about the selections when they were announced after the game at Michigan Stadium. In 2010, they were told in advance.

“It’s good that it’s almost over with,” Stastny said after practice. “Sometimes it’s in the back of your mind a little too much. Whatever happens, happens. It’s out of our hands. If it turns out well, it will be another dream come true.”

Stastny, 28, had three points (one goal) in six games at the 2010 Games and served as U.S. captain at the 2013 World Championship last spring during the Stanley Cup playoffs. He helped the Americans win the bronze medal — their first medal since 2004 — by leading the team with 15 points (seven goals) in 10 games. Stastny also represented the U.S. at the 2007 and 2012 World Championships.

Stastny was born in Quebec City but was raised in St. Louis. He holds dual citizenship.

Johnson also played at the 2013 World Championship. He was passed over for younger defensemen John Carlson of the Washington Capitals, Justin Faulk of the Carolina Hurricanes, Cam Fowler of the Anaheim Ducks, Ryan McDonagh of the New York Rangers and Kevin Shattenkirk of the St. Louis Blues.

Shattenkirk was a first-round draft pick of the Avalanche who was in the big 2011 trade with St. Louis that brought Johnson to Colorado.

Johnson was the NHL’s No. 1 overall draft pick in 2006, selected by the Blues.

He has 17 points (six goals) in 39 games this season, with a plus-10 rating.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mchambers