A federal judge struck down a city law that called on banks to document how well they serve the poor, saying the measure represented an illegal expansion of the city's authority.

The ruling is a blow to the City Council and Mayor Bill de Blasio, whose administration had begun implementing the law, called the Responsible Banking Act, after the Bloomberg administration refused to do so. The law, adopted by the City Council in 2012 over a mayoral veto, required banks that together hold $6 billion in deposits for the city to prepare reports detailing how many mortgages they've modified or foreclosed, delinquency rates in individual census tracts and other such information. If the city determined from the data that some banks aren't serving the poor well, it could take its deposits elsewhere.

But Judge Katherine Polk Failla ruled that the city doesn't have the power to demand so much information from banks and deemed the Responsible Banking Act "void in its entirety." She observed that federal and state regulators already collect information from banks about their low-income lending. While the Fed's data collection efforts may not be as detailed as what the law's backers sought, Washington's and the state's authority pre-empts the city's, she determined, as the banking industry had argued from the outset.

"The animating concerns of the City Council are valid, [but] the means by which it sought to harness banks to redress those concerns intrudes on the province of the federal and state governments," the judge wrote.

The ruling derails the de Blasio's administration's effort to make a powerful regulator of the once-sleepy New York City Banking Commission, whose primary responsibility is to determine which institutions have the capacity to process deposits and withdrawals on the city's behalf.

A spokesman said the city was disappointed with the judge's ruling and is reviewing its legal options. It has 30 days to appeal. "The city has a vital role in understanding the effect banks are having on the economic health of our neighborhoods," the spokesman said.

The Association for Neighborhood and Housing Development, a group representing many affordable-housing organizations, said supporters of the law were "profoundly disappointed" with the judge's ruling. The group described the Responsible Banking Act as "an important transparency law that lets the city use the power of [its] deposits to hold banks accountable."

But Kathryn Wylde, president and CEO of the Partnership for New York City, cheered the ruling. "Local politics should be kept out of business regulation and, when it comes to the financial sector, city government lacks the infrastructure and the expertise to accomplish that," she said in a statement. "On the other hand, the banking industry has been and will continue to be responsive to voluntary initiatives to work with the city and its communities to ensure that the goals of the Responsible Banking Act are realized. That should be the focus of the de Blasio Administration’s response to this ruling."

Robert Giuffra, an attorney for the New York Bankers Association, which sued to stop the law, called the judge's decision an important precedent that could be used to challenge similar laws in Boston, Cleveland, Los Angeles, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, San Diego and Seattle.

Get Crain's Daily Alert Sign up for our FREE daily email newsletter. A summary of the day's top business and political headlines from the newsroom of Crain's New York Business. More Newsletters ›

Comments