Corbett signs CHIP law for uninsured kids

The law also ends a waiting period for some children who need subsidized insurance.

The law extends the state's 21-year-old Children's Health Insurance Program through 2015, and also wipes out a six-month waiting period some uninsured children had to undergo before getting subsidized insurance.

HARRISBURG — Surrounded by school children and lawmakers Wednesday, Gov. Tom Corbett signed into law the first piece of the health-care plan he has offered as an alternative to the federal Affordable Care Act.

"In Pennsylvania, we take care of our own," Corbett said. "By reauthorizing and broadening our CHIP program, we have taken the first important step toward implementing, in my mind, our Healthy Pennsylvania program, a program that is designed to increase access to quality health care for Pennsylvanians without expanding the reach of government into the private lives of our citizens."

CHIP was started in 1992 by Democratic Gov. Bob Casey to offer children health insurance if their parents made too much money to qualify for Medicaid but not enough to buy private insurance. The program, which became a national model, was expanded by Republican Gov. Tom Ridge and then again by Democratic Gov. Ed Rendell.

As part of Rendell's 2006 Cover All Kids plan, CHIP remained free for a family of four making between $23,550 and $47,100. Families making up to $70,650 had low co-payments and prescription drug costs. Families making more money had higher out-of-pocket costs.

As they expanded the program to higher income brackets, Rendell and the Legislature set a six-month waiting period to ensure parents did not deliberately drop their private insurance in favor of a low-cost or full-cost CHIP program, state Health Department spokeswoman Rosanne Placey said. The waiting period has never applied to children qualifying for free coverage or to children whose parents lost a job, Placey said.

Last month, Corbett, a Republican, advocated ending the waiting period as part of his broader Healthy Pennsylvania plan.

The plan also seeks to expand technology resources to hospitals to expand Internet-based telehealth programs that allow physicians and nurses to diagnose patients over the Internet. Corbett has not earmarked any state money to expand telehealth; he is seeking federal grants.

Corbett also needs the federal government to allow him to reduce federally approved benefits and set work requirements for existing Medicaid recipients in exchange for his allowing more poor people to buy private Medicaid-like insurance as part of Obamacare.

The federal government has allowed states to reduce some Medicaid benefits, but not set work requirements. The federal government has not yet given Corbett a formal answer because his administration has yet to send a mandatory waiver seeking the changes.

There are 206 children in the state's official six-month wait period, Placey said. But that number does not reflect an unknown number of children who miss out on health insurance because their parents do not apply for coverage because of the six-month delay.

Sen. Don White, R-Indiana, chairman of the Senate Banking and Insurance Committee, said the waiting period affects thousands of children. Most people do not think about insurance until they need it, White said, and when some parents find out about the waiting period, they instead go to the emergency room.