You can almost hear the fairybells (Disporum trachyearpum) chime along the Middle St. Vrain Trail. ( Courtesy photo/Glenn Cushman )

If you go Highlights: Rainforest atmosphere, streams, wildflowers, wildlife Distance: 2 miles round-trip Elevation gain: about 200 feet Difficulty: Easy Access: From Ward, drive about six miles north on the Peak to Peak Highway (Colo. 72) and turn west at the sign on a big curve onto Forest System Road 114 (also called County Road 92). Park along the road before you reach the bridge. A large wooden sign marks the trailhead.

The shady stretch of the Middle St. Vrain Trail between Peaceful Valley and Camp Dick campgrounds feels like a rainforest on a hot summer day.

The white bog orchids, ferny nooks and flowing streamlets could almost be in the Pacific Northwest.

Blue columbines, white geraniums, pink pyrola, delicate fairybells and chiming bells bloom beside the trail. White orchids and white monkshood, an aptly named flower that is usually deep purple, thrive in bosky dells beside the numerous streams. Also look for clumps of tiny twinflowers (Linnaea borealis, Linnaeus's favorite flower) that usually grow at higher altitudes in subalpine forests.

Chipmunks and chickarees chatter from the spruce and fir trees, and woodpeckers hammer on the aspens. Once, on a winter ski tour, a snow-white ermine (short-tailed weasel) dashed along a downed log and across the trail only a few feet from us.

Advertisement

We like to start this hike just before reaching Peaceful Valley Campground, to the left of the bridge across the tumultuous Middle St. Vrain Creek. Although you could do the trail in reverse by starting at Camp Dick, we prefer to do the uphill first.

In a short distance, the trail splits briefly — left for horses, right for hikers. Halfway between Peaceful Valley and Camp Dick the Sourdough Trail veers to the left. If you want a long hike, head up to the Beaver Reservoir Road and beyond (all the way to the Rainbow Lakes Road) on the Sourdough. A short spur trail also splits from the main trail and goes to the lower end of Camp Dick Campground.

At this point, things start to get wetter. Numerous streams gurgle down the slope to the left, and we're grateful for the boardwalks across the muddiest sections. As you near the end of the trail, it becomes steeper and then drops to join Forest System Road 114.

If you cross the road and follow the roar of Middle St. Vrain Creek, you will drop to a bridge and find many private spots for a picnic lunch. Sometimes an American dipper will fly by as you sit at the creek's edge.

From here you can retrace your route back to Peaceful Valley, or you can extend your hike for many miles on the Buchanan Pass Trail, which goes up to the St. Vrain Glaciers, Buchanan Pass or Sawtooth Mountain.

In winter, ski touring is delightful on both the Middle St. Vrain Trail and on Buchanan Pass Trail as well as on the Forest Service road. As you get higher, the conifers are festooned with usnea lichen.

There's some confusion about the name of this short trail. Some people refer to it as the lower section of Buchanan Pass Trail, but we call it Middle St. Vrain because that's the name of the trailhead.

A historical note: Camp Dick was a Civilian Conservation Corps camp in the 1930s. CCC workers built 45 miles of trails in addition to building roads and dams and fighting fires in the Indian Peaks area.

This is a popular area, so try to go early in the morning on a weekday.

Ruth Carol and Glenn Cushman are the authors of "Boulder Hiking Trails," published by Graphic Arts Books.