Getty Images Presidents Obama and Bush arrive together on July 2, 2013, at a wreath-laying ceremony.

Where have we seen this before? President Barack Obama’s next few months are shaping up to be similar to George W. Bush’s in 2006, when the Republicans racked up losses in the midterm elections, according to a column by Stuart Rothenberg of Roll Call. Rothenberg puts much of the onus on foreign policy: the daily dose of bad news from the Middle East and Ukraine makes it difficult for the public to appreciate any good economic data, he says. Plus, Obama has concerns on the domestic front, too, notably the Affordable Care Act and the recent problems at the border.

Slightly better views on the economy: The data seem to back up Rothenberg’s view that the public is only gradually warming toward the economy. According to Pew Research, the public says they’re hearing less bad news on the economy, and slightly more good news. About a quarter (24%) say they are hearing mostly bad news about the economy, down from 33% in February and as low as at any point over the past five years, the report says.

Low marks on Gaza: According to CBS News, only a third approve of Obama’s stance on the Israeli-Palestinian fighting. Thirty-four percent think Hamas is most to blame, while just 6% lay most of the blame on Israel. But 47% think both sides are equally to blame.

Mixed message: Sen. Pat Roberts, the Kansas Republican, defeated tea-party-backed Milton Wolf and two other challengers. Roberts was considered the last realistic target for tea-party groups this cycle. The rebellious Michigan Rep. Justin Amash also won his Republican primary, beating a business-backed challenger. Also in Michigan, the chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, Rep. Fred Upton, won easily.

Yes, even Wall Street is ahead of Congress: The net 12-point disapproval for Wall Street is better than the 35-point disapproval for Republicans in Congress and the 15-point disapproval for congressional Democrats, according to the latest WSJ/NBC poll.

– Steve Goldstein

Follow @mktwgoldstein



Follow @capitolreport

Also read: Corporate tax is broken and needs major surgery

Want to read the latest and most interesting stories and analysis to come out of D.C.? Subscribe to the WSJ’s email newsletter, Capital Journal Daybreak.