Bruegger’s Bagels employee Brannyn McKendrick helps a customer. The shop is one of many participating in Thursday’s Java for Justice fundraiser to benefit local nonprofit Pisgah Legal Services. (Photo: Erin Brethauer , ebrethau@citizen-times.com ) Story Highlights Local coffee shops and cafés will host the third annual Java for Justice event Thursday.

The event raises money and awareness for Pisgah Legal Services, www.pisgahlegal.org or 253-0406.

Donors can enter a drawing to win six months of free coffee from Counter Culture Coffee.

Find a list of all participating coffee shops and bakeries at the end of this story, below.

For just the price of a cup of coffee, you can buy a cup of coffee Thursday for a good cause.

Area coffee shops and cafes will host the third-annual Java for Justice fundraiser Thursday, raising money and awareness for local nonprofit law firm Pisgah Legal Service.

Proceeds from the fundraiser will support Pisgah Legal’s work to provide free civil legal aid to help low-income Western North Carolinians by preventing homelessness, stopping domestic violence and child abuse, and more than ever this year — securing health care.

“A lot of customers are definitely surprised at what Pisgah Legal does,” said Chris Barnhart, owner of Bruegger’s Bagels, which has supported the cause each year.

“Most people know that they’re there or who they are but don’t necessarily get how much they do. They’re helping people who desperately need it, doing something most other people can’t help them with.”

Barnhart said he’s had employees in the past who have gone through abusive relationships and gotten out.

“It’s more people than you think, who need help having that voice,” he said.

Each coffee shop will have a Pisgah Legal ambassador there to talk with interested customers and spread the word on Pisgah Legal’s mission.

Lee Anne Mangone, a volunteer and board member with Pisgah Legal, said she’s been surprised how many people have been willing to stop and talk each year.

“For people just heading in for a quick cup of coffee, we have some great, real conversations with folks. So many people have no idea what Pisgah Legal does, or what a role it can plan in transforming people’s lives.”

Pisgah Legal, founded in 1978, provides low-income people with everything from protection from cases of domestic violence, fighting for tenants’ rights and navigating the Affordable Care Act.

It has 17 attorneys on staff, and relies heavily on the pro bono services of more than 300 volunteer attorneys and more than 50 office volunteers.

JAVA FOR JUSTICE SHOPS

The following Asheville shops will donate a portion of their proceeds Thursday to Pisgah Legal Services:

• City Bakery, 60 Biltmore Ave. and 88 Charlotte St.

• Bruegger’s Bagels, 671 Merrimon Ave. and 160 Hendersonville Road

• High Five Coffee Bar at 190 Broadway St.

• Izzy’s Coffee Den, 74 N. Lexington Ave.

• West End Bakery, 757 Haywood Road

• Mosaic Café, 1 Town Square Blvd., Biltmore Park

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1lD9Tv4