For U.S. Senate, we urge voters to support Ron Wyden in the Democratic primary, Bend businessman Sam Carpenter in the Republican primary and Steven Reynolds in the Independent Party primary.

It’s easy to recommend Wyden because of his accomplishments, leadership and his way of negotiating the precarious path between the Senate factions to reach compromise.

Wyden has been a leader in trying to bring some sense to federal management of forestlands and wildfire. We are not satisfied with what he has been able to accomplish — there is much more to be done — but neither is he. Notably, he is responsible for co-authoring the program in 2000 that started the federal government’s timber payments.

Wyden has also been a leader in the debate over digital privacy. He didn’t want the government to be able to peek inside someone’s cell phone without a warrant. He fought the plan that would have had social media companies enlisted by the government to help track the behavior of their users. He spoke out loudly when some, including President Obama, brought up the possibility of eliminating or reducing the tax deductions for charitable contributions. That was a foolish idea and deserved to be squashed.

Wyden has not lost touch with the lives of Oregonians. There’s more to it than just holding town meetings, but he has been holding a town meeting in each of Oregon’s 36 counties every year.

Wyden faces challenges in the Democratic party from Paul Weaver, a former locomotive engineer, and Kevin Stine. Stine, a Navy veteran on the Medford City Council, is a noteworthy candidate and is more liberal than Wyden on a number of issues. Stine’s policy positions line up fairly well with presidential candidate Bernie Sanders.

We have disagreed with Wyden on some issues — on some areas of forest management, designation of new wilderness and taxation policy. But he is a formidable voice for Oregon and for the nation, and the best choice in the Democratic primary.

Four candidates are on the Republican primary ballot: business owner Carpenter from Bend, consultant Mark Callahan, consultant Dan Laschober, and Lane County Commissioner Faye Stewart.

There are policy differences among them. But there isn’t a lot of daylight there. They seem more focused on Wyden than each other.

Carpenter stands out. He has created businesses and jobs. He knows what that takes. He owns Bend’s Centratel, the telephone answering service, and a number of other businesses. He also has a nonprofit organization, Kashmir Family Aid, that has provided education assistance in the Kashmir region of Pakistan. Former state representative Jason Conger has endorsed him.

Carpenter came to Oregon in his 20s, working in the timber industry. And he has a particular interest in cultivating the federal forests — not clear-cutting, he emphasized. He wants a wall on the U.S.-Mexico border to control who is coming into the country and what they are bringing. He is an opponent of Common Core and favors school choice and vouchers to get government out of education.

In general, he told us he hopes to see government get smaller and reduce regulation. For instance, he deals with regulations dealing with patient privacy every day because of his answering service business, and while he certainly believes in the importance of patient privacy, he said the regulations could use some thinning. As a general rule, he would vote against new taxes.

Carpenter could make a difference in Washington for Oregon.

As for the Independent Party’s primary, Reynolds is the clear choice. He’s a progressive who wants to get big money out of politics and the government out of bulk data collection, end the Affordable Care Act and replace it with expanded Medicare. If conspiracy theories are your thing, the candidate for you is his opponent: Marvin Sandnes. He can tell you what he thinks really happened on 9/11.

To recap, it’s Wyden, Carpenter and Reynolds.