On pace to shatter school passing records, Buffs QB coming into his own as a sophomore

Colorado quarterback Sefo Liufau throws over Oregon State's Jabral Johnson during the second half Saturday at Folsom Field in Boulder. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

It's becoming clear that Colorado quarterback Sefo Liufau is likely to hold every major passing record in school history before he graduates unless he hits a ceiling in his development or takes a dramatic step back.

After 14 games, 13 as a starter, he already is 10th in school history in career passing yards and eighth in touchdown passes.

Right now, Liufau continues to show signs of improvement almost on a weekly basis, but he would be the first to say he'd prefer to have a great won-loss record above all. He's 4-9 as a starter.

"I think he's getting better every day and think that he's a heck of a football player," CU coach Mike MacIntyre said of Liufau on Saturday after the Buffs' most recent frustrating Pac-12 loss to Oregon State.

Only four quarterbacks have thrown for more yards this season in major college football than Liufau. Only five players are responsible for more points for their teams and only three have thrown more touchdown passes.

Liufau has completed 188 of 288 passing attempts for 1,887 yards with 19 touchdowns and seven interceptions. He needs three more touchdown passes to tie the single-season CU record set in 1996 by Koy Detmer.

Considering he has thrown at least one touchdown pass in every one of the 14 games he has played in during his career and two or more in eight consecutive games, the bar will be set considerably higher in that category at CU by the end of the season.

Advertisement

While Liufau is definitely coming into his own halfway through his sophomore season, he is still very much a work in progress. Liufau has made some huge plays this season for the Buffs, but he also continues to make some poor decisions that cost his team on a weekly basis.

Of the top-10 quarterbacks in the nation in terms of passing yards, Liufau and Washington State's Connor Halliday have thrown the most interceptions with seven each. Two of those interceptions have come in the past two games and have led to points for opponents in games that were ultimately decided by one score.

CU coaches continue to believe those mistakes are part of the development of a young quarterback and not a larger problem.

Liufau and his offensive teammates have learned some hard lessons about late-game execution being a huge factor in winning close games over the past two weeks. In double overtime time two weeks ago at Cal, a miscommunication between Liufau and running back Tony Jones led to Liufau being tackled for a loss on fourth-and-goal. On Saturday when the Buffs got the ball back at the OSU 40-yard line with 2 minutes, 8 seconds remaining and one timeout, the offense managed to gain just four yards on four plays and had to watch the Beavers run out the clock.

"I'll take responsibility for that," Liufau said. " Put that on my shoulders. It's just a matter of executing."

While Liufau hasn't been able lead the Buffs to wins the past two weeks, he did lead them on a crucial game-tying touchdown to force overtime at Cal, where he threw seven of his 19 touchdowns.

And no one can argue with Liufau's passing numbers in the red zone this season. Inside the opponent's 20 yard line, he has completed 18 of 20 passes for 140 yards and 11 touchdowns with no interceptions. Halliday at Washington State is the only quarterback in the nation with more red zone touchdown passes.

If anything, those numbers argue for putting the ball in Lufau's hands more often in the red zone and possibly getting away from some of the momentum-killing running plays CU has endured in the red zone this season.

Liufau will face a tougher slate of teams in the second half of this season than he has in the first half. If he can continue the same level of production and cut down his mistakes, CU might be able to pull off a surprise or two.

Contact BuffZone.com Writer Kyle Ringo at ringok@dailycamera.com or on Twitter: @kyleringo.