Cook County Jail's inmate population rising

Police crackdown, closing of mental health facilities cited as causes

With his burglary case stuck in the court system for the past two years, Reginald Brown has plenty of time to consider his future. Sitting in a mental health unit at Cook County Jail, he gazes at a piece of paper with a cross colored on it that he taped to the bottom of the bunk over his own bed.

"It's where I pray to God that something good will happen for me, that maybe this time I don't have to go to prison," he said in a recent interview.

Brown, who says he has schizophrenia, is one of the mentally ill inmates swelling the jail's population. After dipping to 8,900 in 2011, the average annual jail population — primarily inmates awaiting trial — has been on the rise, with the daily count now frequently more than 10,000, the highest totals since a day in 2007. About 5 percent of detainees at the jail have been awaiting trial for more than two years, according to the sheriff's office.

With that rise in population, Chicago has regained its spot, once held by Houston, as home of the most populous single-site jail in the country — and also effectively Illinois' largest mental health facility.

Jail overcrowding is a complex and stubborn problem that's been around for decades, driven by the number of Chicago police arrests, the pace at which judges and attorneys move cases through the system and Cook County budget pressures. While the jail is overcrowded, detainees no longer sleep on mattresses on the floor, as they did during some other episodes of overcrowding, and the sheriff, whose operation of the jail is monitored by a federal judge, no longer assigns inmates to sleep on bunks in shifts.

The exception is at Cermak Health Services, the county-run hospital on the jail grounds where acutely mentally ill inmates are treated and patients sometimes sleep on mattresses the floor, according to the sheriff's office.

Each person held at the jail costs county taxpayers about $143 a day — $190 a day for the mentally ill — and overtime costs for correctional officers are soaring. As of Thursday, an additional 324 Cook County detainees were being housed at six jails elsewhere in Illinois.

Sheriff Tom Dart attributes the growing jail population to a Chicago police crackdown in violent neighborhoods, which contributed to jail admissions last year rising for the first time in a decade; a backlogged court system that keeps inmates in jail about 20 percent longer than five years ago; and a surging mentally ill population fueled in part by the closing last year of six Chicago mental health clinics and the Tinley Park Mental Health Center.

"We're sort of the receptacle of every conceivable problem in society here, and now the most convenient one for them to dump on us is the mentally ill," Dart said. "There's one guy who can't say no, and that's the sheriff, so dump them on him."

On a recent weekday, some inmates in one of Division 2's mental health units gathered in front of a blaring TV, while others lay on their bunks, talking or playing cards. Most inmates admitted to their crimes but they said they were worried about getting treatment once they're out.