Paul Babish, foreground, and Oliver Lee Bashor, next to him, are part of the group of 123 veterans that left for Washington, D.C., on a chartered plane Sunday morning to view the war memorials in D.C. They will return on Monday night. ( Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

On the Web Find out more about honor flights at www.honorflightnortherncolorado.org/.

Veterans heading to Washington, D.C., on Sunday got the full treatment; police cars, a giant flag hanging over the street from a firetruck ladder, two helicopters, the Larimer County Sheriff's Department, the VFW Warriors and Patriot Guard on motorcycles and a brief message from U.S. Rep. Ken Buck.

Family members held signs that said, "Thank you for your service" and "From our hearts to yours; thank you!"

For many of the veterans departing for Honor Flight No. 13, this is the first time they are able to go to D.C. to visit the memorials of the wars they were a part of.

"This means that people still care (about what we did)," said Paul Babish of Denver as he surveyed the hundreds of people in the Embassy Suites auditorium Sunday morning. "I think it will be a wonderful experience." Babish served in the Navy from 1942 to 1945.

The Northern Colorado Honor Flight organization invites veterans from World War II to Vietnam, and any Purple Heart veterans of any conflict, to visit the Capitol. There are many such chapters around the country.

"World War II veterans are the priority obviously, and any veterans with a nontreatable disease are the second priority," said Honor Flight board member, Ray Delgado.

Advertisement

The plane they charter holds around 208 seats and is usually full by the time the veterans and their guardians are accounted for. Any guardian along for the ride is responsible for up to three veterans, depending on the needs of the individuals. The veterans spent Sunday night in D.C. and are returning Monday night.

"Let me tell you, these veterans are well-taken care of," Delgado said. He is a veteran of the Vietnam War and has been a guardian on the trip three times, although he has never taken the trip as a veteran.

Oliver Lee Bashor of Loveland — who served as a B-17 pilot in World War II, got to go with his son, Robin Bashor, who was a major in the Marine Corps.

"I only made captain so he makes me salute," Lee Bashor joked about his son's rank. "If I don't do what he thinks I should, I have to do push-ups."

Bashor said he was excited to take the trip with his son.

"This is just amazing how many people have served and accomplished. It's an honor to be able to go and participate," Bashor said.

Bashor grew up in Loveland and joked that Loveland let him come back when he was done with the service. "I didn't have to get a special permit to come back to Loveland," he said.

Former Navy Seal Mark Hotaling, now a pastor at High Plains Harvest Church in Nunn, said he reads about the heroes of faith in the Bible that have "walked before us standing for the Lord."

"As I stand here, I stand a very humble man because I'm looking at the faces of men that have gone before me," Hotaling said. "They literally paved the way for me."

The Northern Colorado Honor Flight makes the trip twice a year — in May and September — and Delgado said the organization receives donations to take veterans to D.C. at no cost to the veterans. He said they are halfway to being fully funded for the next trip in September already.

"It's all paid for by money donated by generous people and organizations throughout this region," he said. "Various organization put on fundraisers to raise money."

During the ceremony before the three buses left for Denver, the Northridge High School JROTC presented the colors.

Joe Hoberman attended the event to see if the people at this event would be as excited as he was when he went on his Honor Flight in September.

"Last year there were 150 motorcycles. When you got there, there was a bagpipe band that met us at the airport," Hoberman said. "The World War II Memorial is probably one of the most fitting memorials that you're ever going to see."

And about whether the veterans were excited enough, Hoberman said simply, "yes."

Find out more about honor flights at www.honorflightnortherncolorado.org/.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.