<p>FILE - Proceeds from the food concession at Palmetto Ridge High School home football games benefit the school's marching band. Photo by Tim Aten</p>

Friday night and it’s high school football season in the Blue Zone.

Before taking your seat you head to the concession stand for a hot dog granola bar and a Coke flavored water . Gotta fuel up for kickoff.

After an exciting half of football the band takes the field. What better way to support these young musicians than by visiting the concessions again for a candy bar fruit cup ? Proceeds benefit the band boosters after all.

As the sun sets and the game enters the third quarter it gets chilly. Good time for a cup of hot chocolate bottled water .

The clock winds down as the band boosters take to the stands. Seems they prepared too many cheeseburgers apples and they’ve slashed the price. Better have one, just to help them out. And another Coke bottled water to wash it down.

Under a plan being considered by Collier County schools, an option schools can use to achieve Blue Zones status is to limit concession stand offerings at sporting events to items that meet the USDA Smart Snacks standards.

That bodes poorly for game-day staples such as hot dogs, buttered popcorn, pizza and walking tacos.

And it demonstrates one of the challenges facing the Blue Zones Project as it struggles for a foothold in the schools.

The concession stand limits are purely optional and there are dozens of other steps a school can take to earn points toward achieving Blue Zone status as a place that promotes healthy living.

Some of those steps are no-brainers and are already being done in many cases. Enforce a tobacco free campus. Establish a salad or fruit bar in the cafeteria.

But others upset cherished traditions, like the goodie-laden cash cow, the concession stand, or carry a financial cost, or would put new demands on an educational agenda already struggling to teach reading, writing and arithmetic.

Some smack of Big Brother. If I think it’s OK for my son to bring a Gatorade to football practice, is it the place of the school to tell me he can’t?

There just aren’t enough easy choices. Getting the necessary points to reach Blue Zones status requires schools to adopt some of the potentially controversial actions.

One option calls for updating cafeteria equipment to promote healthier foods. A noble goal, but cafeteria equipment isn’t cheap.

Another calls for recess for elementary school students. Collier elementary schools did away with recess years ago, citing an array of problems, including injuries, fights and the time it took away from classroom instruction.

Still another suggests a program to teach “mindfulness” to students. One example of such calls for students to do “mindful breathing” exercises three times a day. What curriculum will be cut as a result?

All of this has contributed to the uncertain status of Blue Zones in the schools.

A four-school pilot program initially approved by Superintendent Kamela Patton has been placed on hold until at least September after School Board members said they wanted to take a closer look at Blue Zones idea.

Until then, Blue Zones is working to educate parents about the program, hoping to dispel some of the concerns, said Blue Zones Executive Director Deb Millssap. The entire community is invited to an event set for Sept. 1 at Cambier Park to provide information about the project.

Each participating school, through its principal and a committee made up of staff and parents, will decide which course of action is best for the individual school, Millsap said. Some might think of ways to earn credit that aren’t even on the Blue Zones menu yet.

Schools have up to eight years to implement all their items and achieve Blue Zones certification. So cafeteria equipment might be replaced on a normal schedule and still qualify for credit, Millsap said.

She acknowledged that some of the offerings outlined in the Blue Zones menu aren’t good fits in Collier County. The limit on concession stands is one of them. “We’re pretty sure none of the schools would do that. We know that’s not the deal here. If you want to go to a football game and have the full experience, have a hot dog. This is not to take choices away,” she said.

David Bolduc, president of the group Parents Rock, is one of those who is suspicious of the Blue Zones Project. He sees similarities to the rollout of Common Core and the Affordable Care Act. In both cases, assurances given early on turned out to be unreliable, he said. “We didn’t see the true intentions ahead of time,” he said. “They’re telling us our choices are going to increase then they decrease.”

Teaching healthier living through the schools will be immediately embraced accepted grudgingly, if at all .

(Connect with Brent Batten at brent.batten@naplesnews.com, on Twitter@NDN_BrentBatten and at facebook.com/ndnbrentbatten)