DALLAS — If call levels hold from the first three months of the year, Dallas’ Emergency Medical Service (EMS) is on track to respond to more than 4,000 incidents in 2016.

That would be more than 20 percent growth over 2015, said Dallas Fire & EMS Chief Fred Hertel.

“Our EMS is going crazy,” he said “That’s enormous. Traditionally we’ve been 5- to 7-percent a year increases. It’s a pretty significant change for us.”

Hertel said a component of the year-over-year growth is more people having insurance under the Affordable Care Act.

A recently completed fire and emergency services master plan for Dallas and Southwest Polk Rural Fire Protection District doesn’t see that work load lessening in the future, especially given that the population in the Dallas area is trending older.

That plan outlined performance measures for Dallas and Southwest, including the city’s two full-time and one backup medic units. Fire responses were far behind performance objectives for both agencies, largely due to relying almost exclusively on volunteers.

EMS response times also were longer than established goals, but had far less ground to make up.

Goals for medic units are for “turnout” time, or getting out of the station, within 90 seconds, 90 percent of the time. Response times (including travel) within the city should be within 6 minutes, 30 seconds and 11:30 for responses in Southwest’s coverage area.

Actual performance has turnout times at about three minutes. Response time in the city is within 8:09, 90 percent of the time and within 16:04, 90 percent of for incidents in Southwest Polk.

EMS has two staffed medic units available 24 hour per day.



“There’s some work to do there,” said Joe Parrott, a consultant with Emergency Services Consulting International, with completed the study and plan.

Parrott recommended a number measures that could improve turnout times, which are now three times longer than national standards and twice as long as Dallas’ own performance goals.

“I’m recommending you look at the station, its configuration,” he said.

Parrott noted simple fixes like adding doors, rearranging furniture and installing alert system speakers could cut important seconds off response times. The report said survival rates decrease by 10 percent for each minute that passes between collapse and medical intervention.



He said another time saver is the use of technology to find incident locations instead of paper maps. He said the agency should ensure the technology used is reliable and that staff members are willing to use it.

Parrott also recommended that officials consider the use of a single-paramedic unit for calls that are not life-threatening. That would reduce the work load on the two-person medic units. He said the concept is being used in a number of places, including in Oregon by Tualatin Valley Fire & Rescue.

“It’s being successfully used in a number of locations,” he said. “This is a cheap way to offload some of the work from the existing two medic units to make their capacity greater.”

Hertel said the idea is an option, but he would need to study it carefully before implementing it in Dallas.

He said while it noted a number of areas that need to be improved, Hertel is happy with the quality and comprehensiveness of the report, which included not just data, but interviews with city leaders, volunteers and fire and EMS staff.

“It tells us how we should be moving forward in the future,” he said. “It’s not going to be accomplished in six months, but we are going to take pieces of it and start working our way toward those.”