Sioux Falls, SD

For 35 years the Bob Burns Dakota Bowl has been showcasing the O'Gorman Knights. This year their historic rivalry with the Washington Warriors will be renewed at Howard Wood Field.

"This is the big event every year. The Dakota Bowl is the one we all look forward to," O'Gorman Head Coach Steve Kueter said.

With the Presidents Bowl in the past, O'Gorman and Washington can now focus on yet another key 11AAA matchup.

"It is a big event again. Two weeks in a row our kids get to get excited to play on a Saturday night and be the focus of everyone again this week," Washington Head coach Chad Stadem said.

"I think it's a good match up. Washington is coming off their state championship and is a very good football team. We think we have a young football team that is getting better every week. I just think it's a good match up of two teams," Kueter said.

Washington and Cathedral High School were once the only two high schools in Sioux Falls. O'Gorman replaced Cathedral in 1961 and the Knights have been given the OK to wear their old green uniforms once again in honor of the rivalry.

"There was a huge discrepancy in the number of students in those schools. Cathedral could compete with them because of the desire, dedication, the will, and the toughness. That is what we want our kids to see and that is what we try to celebrate with the green jerseys. It's a big deal every year to wear the green against Washington," Kueter said.

The game is just one part of the weekend's festivities. But to these two foes with identical 1-1 records, the outcome could define their seasons.

"The win is important, as I've said because of the playoff scenario. We need to get where we're going in the right direction while staying positive and healthy like we have been," Stadem said.

O'G alumni plan their family outings around the Dakota Bowl bringing together past, present, and future Knights.

"We talk about that. You better be ready to go, because this is the one game they are going to see and you want that to be your best," Kueter said.

Kickoff for the game is set for 8 o'clock.