Judge Nancy Phelps and her attorney won a temporary halt Friday to county efforts to cut off her publicly funded health insurance.

Her insurance, a unique coverage paid for by the county since 1998, was scheduled to end Tuesday after a unanimous County Council vote on June 9.

Instead, Circuit Court Judge Philip Caroom granted Phelps a temporary injunction and restraining order requested by attorney Greg Jimeno. Caroom set a hearing in October to consider a permanent injunction.

Jimeno said he is working with Phelps to keep her health insurance until the end of her current term in 2018. She is the chief judge of the Orphans' Court, a three-judge panel that considers disputes over estates and wills.

Phelps was undergoing a biopsy Friday, which Jimeno said was proof that cutting her health insurance so quickly could result in damages.

"We are prepared to litigate this to the end," Jimeno said.

County Orphans' Court handles wills and estates, but few people know that and understand its function. Orphans' Court, whose name belies its mission of handling over 1,000 wills and estates cases annually, could easily be missed.

The insurance provided by Anne Arundel County covers Phelps' husband, a retired pastor, as well, according to court documents. It is the only means of health insurance the family has, the documents said.

Phelps has maintained health insurance coverage through the county since being elected in 1998, but is the only Orphans' Court judge with it. She has served consecutive terms since that time, according to court documents.

The council voted 7-0 to end Phelps' insurance as it considered the budget set to take effect July 1. The judge was receiving health benefits for several years after county attorneys questioned the validity of those benefits.

Officials with County Executive Steve Schuh's administration said they wanted Phelps to retain her health insurance until the end of her term so it wouldn't remove the benefits suddenly.

County Auditor Teresa Sutherland recommended the council cut the benefits, about $13,000 a year.

In court papers, Jimeno argued health insurance is considered compensation under the law, and the compensation of a public officer, agent or contractor can't be "increased or diminished during his term of office" except those whose full, fixed term exceeds four years.

John Hammond, Schuh's chief administrative officer, warned about a potential lawsuit as the council considered the insurance — words that proved prophetic.

"We feel it will be saving the county money in terms of litigation," Hammond said earlier this month. "Do you really want to take someone's insurance away? There's also an issue of fairness."

Council Chairman Jerry Walker said he was aware of the temporary injunction. Like the rest of the council, Walker voted to end Phelps' insurance after the auditor's recommendation.

The county should not have provided the health insurance in the first place, but he said if the court decides in Phelps' favor, the county should reinstate it.

Walker said the council thought it was righting a wrong in the eyes of the law.

"If you've ever dealt with two attorneys, you rarely get the same advice from both," he said.

Staff writer Brandi Bottalico contributed to this article.