RANK CANDIDATE PARTY

1 JEB BUSH ON IRAQ It wasn't just what he said, it was how many circumlocutions he went through to arrive we're still not sure where. We all mocked George W. when he called himself the decider -- now we know what an indecisive Bush looks like. Republican

2 HILLARY CLINTON: 'WE WERE DEAD BROKE' The oblivious chutzpah is a classic sort of gaffe: the one where a politician inadvertently confirms their critics’ narrative. The GOP plans to counter Clinton’s populist economic moves by tagging her as elitist, out-of-touch and entitled. When she insisted that she and Bill were “broke,” after his White House tenure ended, she sure sounded that way. And she knows it. Democrat

3 SCOTT WALKER ON LEGAL IMMIGRATION Nearly every GOP candidate is going to speak out against illegal immigration. But Walker took things a step too far when he suggested that something needs to be done about legal immigration. A fearmongering appeal (in an interview with Glenn Beck, natch!) to tea party xenophobes that misjudged where the GOP is now, and is headed. A classic Kinsley gaffe, in which he apparently said what he really thinks. Bad move. Republican

4 RAND PAUL ON BALTIMORE “I came through the train on Baltimore,” Rand Paul said to Laura Ingraham, “I’m glad it didn’t stop.” First, the train always stops in Baltimore. Second, this is not the right thing for a guy who is staking a large part of his candidacy on reforming the criminal justice system to say. Finally, isn’t Paul supposed to be self-styled “anti-elite?” If so, the image of him pearl-clutching his way through Baltimore while traveling to more esteemed locales is not a good look. Republican

5 BEN CARSON COMPARING OBAMACARE TO SLAVERY Just some general rules. Don't compare things to slavery . Don’t compare them to the Holocaust. Don’t compare them to 9/11, Hurricane Katrina, or Nazi Germany. If you want to stay on the safe side, leave the My Lai massacre, the Rwandan genocide, and the movie “Ishtar” alone, too. No matter how bad Obamacare is, it can be repealed legislatively. Would that slavery had been the same! Republican

6 CHRIS CHRISTIE KNOWS BETTER THAN CIVIL RIGHTS LEADERS In an attempt to convey his preference for a New Jersey citizen referendum on marriage equality, Christie quipped, "I think people would have been happy to have a referendum on civil rights rather than fighting and dying in the streets in the South. ” Which, no. Think about how that referendum would have gone. Hey dude, you may know South Orange, but ditch the sweeping historical rhetoric about race and the South. We know it’s not the Jersey way, but don’t talk about something you don’t know anything about. Republican

7 RICK SANTORUM ON GAY WEDDINGS been to a wedding? The most important function of the ceremony is to allow those gathered to proclaim that they will "love and support" the couple. Clever Rick is, essentially, just cheating himself of some canapes and dancing. Asked if he’d attend the same-sex wedding of a dear friend, Santorum said, "I would love them and support them, but I would not participate in that ceremony." Has he notto a wedding? The most important function of the ceremony is to allow those gathered to proclaim that they will "love and support" the couple. Clever Rick is, essentially, just cheating himself of some canapes and dancing. Republican

8 LINDSEY GRAHAM'S NONEXISTENT COUP GAFFE Pour some Twitter on an innocent, tongue-in-cheek statement , and you have yourself a gaffe. In this case, Graham was victimized after he quipped, "I would literally use the military to keep them in if I had to. We’re not leaving town until we restore these defense cuts." It was meant to be a ha-ha, but all it took was one crank taking it way too seriously to turn it into a thing. Republican

9 BERNIE SANDERS' LOVE FOR SCANDINAVIA Bernie Sanders has fair points to make about the Scandinavian nations and their high level of voter participation and low levels of economic inequities. But when you’re running for president of the United States, you’re sort of required to hew to a comic book notion of “American exceptionalism.” Democrat