Buy Photo Photos of the three teens who died two weeks ago when their car was struck by a train were on display at a memorial service Saturday. (Photo: JAMES BRUGGERS/THE COURIER-JOURNAL)Buy Photo

Friends and family came to Seneca High School Saturday to celebrate the lives of the three teenagers who were killed two weeks earlier at a railroad crossing.

They came to the United States as children from refugee camps in Nepal just a few years ago. At a community memorial service, they were remembered as students, brothers, sons, friends, soccer players, and citizens of Louisville who made contributions to the community, and were preparing to make their marks on the world.

"These were fine young men with promising futures," said Seneca High School Principal Kim Harbolt.

Their car on March 14 had collided with a train at Crawford and Buechel avenues. Months earlier, public officials had flagged the crossing as needing safety improvements and had planned to build crossing gates there.

The three were current and former Jefferson County Public Schools high school students: Chita Chuwan, 16; Suk Man Rai, 19; and Nagin Thapa, 17. One other occupant of the vehicle, Kismat Mishra, a student at Waggener High, survived but remains in the hospital.

They had attended different schools, including Seneca, Fern Creek and Iroqois high schools.

Prayers of recovery were sent to Mishra by several speakers, including Basanta Phuyel, a Fern Creek High School student.

"Everyone is thinking about you in the hospital," he said.

The crash brought great grief to the local Bhutanese and school communities and organizations like Catholic Charities and Kentucky Refugee Ministries that welcomed the boys and their families to Louisville.

More than 150 people attended the memorial service, which was led by the Bhutanese Society of Kentucky in English and Nepali languages. The society formed in 2009, as more Bhutanese families settled in the area.

"We miss you our brothers," said Prem Sunuwar, vice president of the society. "We are very saddened. There is nothing to mend our broken hearts, other than to say goodbye forever."

Bhim Koirala, public relations coordinator for the society, told the gathering that the accident rate for refugee communities in the United States is high. He said a new life in the United States brings many opportunities, but functioning in a new environment isn't easy.

Darko Mihaylovich, a Catholic Charities program director, said he would welcome new discussions with city and other local officials on how to improve safety for resettled teenagers.

Adrienne Eisenmenger with Kentucky Refugee Ministries said all four had been playing soccer together the night before the fatal crash.

Mihaylovich said work has begun on organizing a memorial soccer tournament next year to remember the three players who died.

Devi Subedi, founder of the Bhutan-American Sports Council, described all four as great team players who exhibited good sportsmanship.

"Our hearts go out to these departed souls," he said.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1bFpflj