Express your opinion on any subject you wish. Not all comments are published. Call 304-348-1775 or email readersvent@wvgazettemail.com.

Anyone voting needs to sit down and think first before voting for any incumbent. Did they do anything for the taxpayers while they were in office? Did they vote themselves in for a raise? How many of their friends and family members did they create jobs for? All things to consider.

Be a little smarter voters. That pretty face isn’t cutting it for me.

To all you Obama lovers, the world been laughing for the last seven years now.

Why is Europe the epicenter of Muslim extremist’s attacks right now? One single fact. They have tried to be so politically correct and allow just anyone to enter Europe at any time. Belgium’s liberal views and laws help terrorists hide and flourish. Views like that are the problem that Europe faces. They are weak.

You know that if Hillary Clinton wins the election in November, she could be the first president to ever pardon themself. As the FBI offers more and more of her staff immunity, they will start to save their own skins and tell all that she has done. I can’t wait.

In an attempt to get at least one positive comment in the Readers’ Vent column, may I commend the folks who did the new sidewalk and fencing around our Governor’s Mansion? Good work, a good classy look in keeping with the Georgian mansion. I was a skeptic. I was wrong. Nice job.

You’re proud of how Obama has stood strong against his opponents. Yay. While he stood up against the GOP, ISIS has spread their reign of terror across Europe.

Oh, yes! Definitely allow guns at the Republican National Convention. Nothing could go wrong there.

I live in a small five-room garage apartment-like house. I have gas heat, water heater and range. My electric budget bill just went from $92.00 per month to $103.00 per month. Thanks AEP and PSC!

How many of our legislators voted themselves in for a raise this term? And where did that money come from? Most of these folks have another full-time job. Maybe they should ask for a raise from that job — not the taxpayers. And if they succeed in raising PEIA I will not vote for any incumbents again.

Why fight terrorism in smaller countries? It’s like a cancer that spreads if not stopped. We almost had it contained when your beloved Obama stopped treatments. In seven years it has spread across Europe and now heading to the U.S.

Over 25,000 signed a petition to allow guns to be carried inside the Republican National Convention meeting hall. Not gonna happen. When it comes right down to it, the Republicans on a national level are as afraid of fools with guns as are West Virginia legislators. They all talk the talk, but don’t walk the walk.

Who does Uncle Joe think he’s fooling? Hillary is notorious for telling an audience exactly what they want to hear. In fact, if we could have heard her response to Joe regarding coal, I’m sure we could’ve heard the strong Appalachian dialect that she possesses.

Hey Joe, you’re no friend of coal, you’re no friend of guns, and you’re no friend of West Virginia.

This is in response to the Attorney General’s offices warning of a health care scam. The biggest health care scam in history is the Affordable Care Act. It is bankrupting this state and country by subsidizing health care for tens of millions of people that refuse to work.

Have you noticed the same people who didn’t care about Obama’s past being locked up and hidden or Hillary being able to remember most of hers, are now upset about Trump’s.

How can Joe Manchin look the people of West Virginia in the eye after endorsing Hillary Clinton after what Obama has done to us and our state?

When you purchase a new set of windshield wiper blades from car parts stores, they come to the parking lot with you and install them. Not to be outdone, I’m told that the big gun stores will go to the parking lot with you and load your new pistol for you so as to avoid folks getting shot in the store.

We would be so much better off if the Democrat agenda would have been passed by the obstructionist GOP. We hear how they could do so much better, but they have done nothing while in power, blocking help the 99 percent in favor of their rich masters.

The science camp for brilliant students from across the country needs to be moved out of West Virginia this summer and in the future. Those forward-thinking young men and women need to go somewhere that is not heading backward in science.

I enjoy listening to the intellect and thought process used in voting for candidates. “I’m voting for him because he’s a Republican” or “I’m voting for her because she’s a Democrat.” As someone once said, “You can’t fix stupid!”

The GOP members of the U.S. Senate saying they won’t consider Obama’s nominee for the Supreme Court keep using their lock-step talking point, “Let the people decide.” The people did decide; Obama was elected twice and it is his job to select a nominee. It is the U.S. Senate who are not doing their job.

At the beginning of the election process I was hopeful that someone would stand tall and rally the country in the way President Reagan did. Well, so much for that thought. It’s sad seeing our country go down the path it’s presently on.

Under the Obama administration, ISIS’s second in command died in a U.S. raid this week. Also under his administration, Osama Bin Laden was killed. And conservatives are saying Obama has no backbone? He not only has a backbone, but a brain — something Trump lacks.

Thanks to the Legislature the lady in front of you at the Wal-Mart check out counter rummaging through her purse looking for her coupons might well have a loaded Glock 9mm pistol in there with zero training how it even works. Be very afraid.

It seems the Republican party doesn’t want anyone to vote. After years of trying to suppress the voting rights of the poor, blacks and Latinos, they now want to suppress the votes of Trump supporters. This leads one to believe that the Republican party is the biggest threat to democracy in the history of our country.

All you Republicans that keep saying that Trump tells it like it is. I would like to know what he tells like it is because every second word he utters is a lie and a proven lie. Can you imagine that hothead with a finger on the button.

Isn’t it terrible that you believe in a politician and what he promises you and you vote for him to represent you and just as soon as he or she gets into office they completely forget about you and their promises and become just as crooked like all the others that are there with them.

It was hard to watch Joe Manchin try to talk his way out of the mess he is in with Obama and then endorsing Hillary Clinton for president. Hillary just recently said all the coal mines will be closed and more miners will lose their jobs in West Virginia. I wonder if Joe knew that when he endorsed her because very few who voted for Joe will vote for Hillary or Joe. The next time around, I know I will not.