Perth Amboy Deputy Police Chief Lawrence Cattano (Photo: ~Courtesy City of Perth Amboy) Story Highlights Deputy Chief Lawrence Cattano has worked in the Perth Amboy Police Department since 1991

He is a licensed paramedic and certified as an instruction in police, fire, emergency management and medical services

He is the third generation of his family to work for the city

PERTH AMBOY Lawrence Cattano was sworn in as deputy chief, the top sworn officer of the Perth Amboy Police Department, on Friday during a ceremony in the auditorium at the Public Safety Municipal Complex on New Brunswick Avenue.

At the same ceremony, Sgt. Eddie Padilla was promoted to lieutenant.

Cattano, a 24-year veteran of the department, has served as acting deputy chief since December.

Mayor Wilda Diaz congratulated Cattano for his commitment to his new responsibility.

“To help carry out our mission of a successful civic-oriented department, we have built a diverse police force that reflects the residents of our community. Our Police Department is now employing more staff than it did just eight short years ago. We are that much more capable of serving our residents," Diaz said.

Cattano became acting deputy chief when Police Chief Benjamin Ruiz was arrested on theft and officials misconduct charges after being accused of ordering municipal mechanics to repair vehicles belonging to him and a friend. Ruiz was suspended without pay.

Cattano became a police officer in January 1991 and served in patrol until he was selected to oversee the city’s migration into the enhanced 911 emergency network, being named as the city’s 911 coordinator. During that time, he supervised and established the city’s Emergency Central Communications Center as well as designing and implementing the radio communications network and infrastructure for all city agencies.

In 1993, he was promoted to detective and continued to serve as a supervisor in the communications division, and shortly afterward was named as the city’s deputy coordinator of emergency management. Cattano also has been an internationally certified emergency manager since 1995.

Cattano was promoted to sergeant in 1999 and asked to “change hats” and move to the Perth Amboy Fire Department as the city’s first paid chief and director of that department, where he served until 2008. During his tenure with the Fire Department, he implemented a reorganization, revitalization and modernization.

That work was recognized when a national organization responsible for rating fire departments listed Perth Amboy among the top 3 percent in the country.

In December 2000, he was appointed as the city’s emergency management coordinator, requiring him to be responsible for public safety during times of a declared state of emergency. He continues to serve in that capacity.

He was promoted to lieutenant in 2002 and assigned to the patrol division until his promotion in 2013 to captain, responsible for operations and support services divisions, where he served until being named acting deputy chief on Dec. 15.

Over the years, Cattano has received numerous lifesaving and meritorious service awards and accolades from the city, Police Benevolent Association, Fraternal Order of Police and outside agencies.

He is a state licensed paramedic and serves as chief of emergency services for the Middlesex County Office of Emergency Management. He also holds state certifications as an instructor in police, fire, emergency medical service and emergency management fields, as well as a management degree from Thomas Edison State College in emergency and disaster management.

He is a third-generation public servant. His grandfather previously worked for the city, as well as his father, who dedicated 27 years as a police officer. Cattano lives in Perth Amboy with his fiancée, Denise, and her son, Nikolas.

Padilla, a graduate of Perth Amboy High School, was became a city police officer in 1999 after working at the Middlesex County Juvenile Detention Center.

Lt. Eddie Padilla (Photo: ~Courtesy City of Perth Amboy)

A graduate of the New Jersey State Police Academy, he served as a patrolman in the patrol division, before being transferred to the community policing unit in 2000. In 2002, he was reassigned as a detective to the Internal Affairs Bureau, now called the Office of Professional Standards.

In 2007, Padilla was promoted to sergeant and served as patrol supervisor in the patrol division. Padilla is certified in many specialized courses, including methods of instruction, horizontal gaze nystagmus, a field sobriety test and internal affairs policies and procedures.

He has received a number of commendations, but is most proud of a Middlesex County Board of Chosen Freeholders award he received for assisting in the rescue and recovery efforts after the collapse of the Twin Towers on Sept. 11, 2001.

Since 2008, Padilla has served as union delegate to the Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge 80 and serves as the liaison to the state board of directors. He is chairman of the FOP Grievance Committee and serves as a member of the FOP Contract Committee. Padilla and his wife, Rosa, have a son, E.J.

Staff Writer Suzanne Russell: 732-565-7335; srussell@mycentraljersey.com

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1LmiVgY