Pope Francis (Photo: Alessandra Tarantino, AP)

The Paris attacks prompted a debate on whether insulting a religion should be protected speech. Pope Francis defended free speech but said people should show restraint. Comments from Facebook are edited for clarity and grammar:

We do have the right to insult others and their religion. Freedom of speech has no meaning if it protects only speech with which everyone agrees. The Supreme Court does not exempt insults from the First Amendment. It does exempt speech that advocates violence.

— Barry Koval

The pope means that freedom of speech is a fundamental right, but that individuals have the responsibility to exercise it in a civil manner. I don't see him advocating that governments should suppress offensive speech about religions. Advocating that people have decent manners is not the same as suppressing speech.

— Jennifer Lapsner

These radicals can have different opinions about what is insulting the prophet. Where does it end? I stand with freedom of religion, and freedom from religion.

— Rick Phalen

I agree with the pope. You can't bully or insult someone's faith without the possibility of retaliation. After the Paris attack at the newspaper, its editors insulted again by showing the prophet on its cover. Free speech, yes. Was that a smart move? Absolutely not.

— Lorenzo Ferguson

A cartoon is ink on paper. It's the imagination of an idiot. Killing that idiot makes you worse than he is.

— Justin Darling

Letter to the editor:

It is good to know that Pope Francis is against offending other religions ("Pope on Paris: 'You cannot insult the faith of others.'").

I did not have a chance to read his entire comment, but I would hope that he is also uncomfortable about offending the Catholic religion (his and mine). We believe it contains the fullness of truth, which he, as pope, and we, as rank-and-file-Catholics, should invite all people in the world to follow.

Radomysl Twardowski; Fargo, N.D.

Encourage civil discourse

We asked our followers on Twitter whether free speech should be limited when it affects religion. Comments are edited for clarity and grammar:

Free speech should be limited when it comes to faith. We shouldn't use it as an excuse to insult other faiths.

— @SaimaGSheikh

No, limits are not necessary. But, like other free speech, be prepared to accept the consequences.

— @bfielderobx

Each country regulates freedom of expression; there is no single standard.

— @lavriple

For more of the conversation, follow @USATOpinion or #tellusatoday on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1BqvrYR