The Republican-friendly 11th Congressional District takes in 16 WNC counties, from Caldwell and Burke all the way west to Cherokee County in the western tip of the state, and part of Buncombe County.

Buy Photo Eleventh District U.S. Rep Mark Meadows offers a contribution to a student’s plan for a business at the Franklin School of Innovation during the Republican’s recent visit to the new charter school in South Asheville. (Photo: Bill Rhodes/Citizen-Times)Buy Photo

Eleventh District U.S. Rep. Mark Meadows and his challenger, Henderson County Democrat Tom Hill, are dissatisfied with the Affordable Care Act but for entirely different reasons.

Meadows, a Jackson County Republican, helped shut the federal government down for more than two weeks last October in an unsuccessful effort to defund the program commonly known as Obamacare because he sees it as too much government intrusion into health care.

Hill said he supports the ACA for now but would eventually like to see it altered by the creation of a national health insurance plan similar to Medicare that people could choose instead of private insurance.

The distance between the candidates for the House seat representing most of Western North Carolina on the ACA is no anomaly. In fact, it is difficult to find much that they do agree on.

Hill says the federal government should raise taxes on corporations to fund a significant increase in public works spending, backs an increase in the minimum wage and favors federal regulation of hydraulic fracturing, or fracking.

Meadows says the federal government should decrease spending to balance the budget, opposes raising the minimum wage because he says it would put people out of work and says fracking is a state issue.

The Republican-friendly 11th takes in 16 WNC counties, from Caldwell and Burke all the way west to Cherokee County in the western tip of the state, and part of Buncombe County.

It excludes a third or more of Buncombe, including Asheville, the Swannanoa Valley, Fairview and part of Arden, a piece of map-making that puts many of the city's predominantly Democratic voters in another district.

Meadows won 57 percent of the vote during his first run for the House in 2012 against Hayden Rogers, the former chief of staff for former U.S. Rep. Heath Shuler.

Hill, a 76-year-old retired physicist, is much less well known than Rogers and much more poorly financed. Hill hadn't even reported raising any money for his campaign as of mid-summer, and Meadows was confident enough of victory that his campaign committee made contributions to 14 other congressional campaigns during the second quarter of this year.

Meadows got the most attention in his first term so far for his role in the October 2013 government shutdown. He circulated a letter, eventually signed by about 80 other congressmen, demanding that House Speaker John Boehner defund Obamacare.

CNN called Meadows "architect of the brink," although he said at the time that that was an exaggeration.

Among other impacts, a Western Carolina University economist estimated that the first 10 days of the shutdown cost areas in WNC and east Tennessee near Great Smoky Mountains National Park $33 million in lost visitor spending because tourists stayed home.

Meadows said this year that counties in his district generally saw an increase in retail sales from October 2012 to October 2013. However, the data do not indicate how much higher sales would have been had the shutdown not occurred.

He said in August that he regrets his role in the shutdown: "Should I have maybe gotten another strategy to address that? I think history shows us the answer to that is yes."

Meadows generally supports a diminished federal role in the economy, and that philosophy informs his position on the minimum wage.

If it were increased above $10 an hour, businessmen would be forced to lay off workers, he said in an interview.

He said he wants to avoid "a scenario where I fire (one worker) to give a raise" to three others.

Meadows has pushed for more American efforts to battle Islamic State/ISIS fighters in the Middle East, criticizing President Barack Obama for not taking a tougher stance.

"It's our inaction that's created this," he said. "Most of the (foreign) ambassadors say privately they want us to be involved. They want us to lead."

He and Hill differed over budgetary issues during a Sept. 4 debate.

Hill said the way to balance the federal budget is "to make corporations pay their taxes ... We're not taking in enough money, and it's not going to happen as long as we have these right-wing extremists in charge of the government."

Meadows said Hill's solution "is to take the hard-working taxpayer's money. ... The problem is not a revenue problem, it's a spending problem, and we've got to get it under control."

Hill says corporations don't pay their fair share.

"You make money in the United States, you pay taxes in the United States. I don't care if your home office is ... in the Cayman Islands or Timbuktu," he said in an interview.

He says Supreme Court Justices Clarence Thomas and Antonin Scalia should be impeached and that the United States should take more of a hands off approach to problems in the Middle East.

He favored handing over U.S. assets in or near Afghanistan to Russia to let it deal with problems there.

"We think we can go in and change everything. We think we can kick a few butts and everything will be all right," but experience proves otherwise, Hill said.

An increase in the minimum wage would put more money in the hands of people who would spend it, helping them and the national economy, he said.

Because of the effects of inflation, "It takes a little over $10 an hour to equal what the minimum wage was under Dwight Eisenhower in the '50s," he said.

"What nonsense!" he said in response to Meadows's concerns about resulting job loss. "You hire four people because you need four people to run your business."

Tom Hill

Age: 76

Lives: Zirconia

Party: Democrat

Occupation: Retired aerospace engineer

Mark Meadows

Age: 55

Lives: Glenville

Party: Republican

Occupation: Congressman in his first term. Formerly was a restaurateur and real estate developer.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1tLcSfb