CONWAY — White Mountain Community Health Center received over $110,000 in operations funding from grantors, town appropriations and individuals during its annual appeal this year. These funds are crucial in allowing the health center to continue to provide health care to any Mount Washington Valley resident who needs it, regardless of ability to pay.

Grants for operational support included $20,000 from the New Hampshire Charitable Foundation, $7,000 from the Robert and Dorothy Goldberg Charitable Foundation and $7,500 from the Clarence E. Mulford Foundation. Conway, Jackson, Chatham, Bartlett, Albany, Eaton, Madison, Tamworth, Ossipee, Freedom, Effingham, Brownfield and Lovell all voted to support the health center in 2016. Memorial Hospital also contributes operations funding annually (not included in total for the annual appeal).

Since the Affordable Care Act went into effect, a portion of White Mountain Community Health Center's patients have become insured. However, there are still gaps in coverage that create a financial barrier to getting needed health care.

Maine adults making less than the federal poverty level ($11,880 for an individual or $24,250 for a family of four) are not eligible for any financial help with health insurance. Federal Medicaid money is available to cover these patients, but so far Maine has not expanded coverage. Health center patients who fall into this gap are eligible for a sliding fee scale, which at this income level means that each visit costs only $10.

Lowering the financial barrier to care makes a real difference in the lives of Mount Washington Valley residents.

One Maine patient has a job but still falls into this Medicaid gap, and suffers from anxiety that makes it difficult to function. He sees an outside therapist, but only a medical provider can prescribe anxiety medication. Through the sliding fee scale, this patient is able to afford visits to a nurse practitioner at the health center, who prescribes the needed medication while also treating any other health issues he may face.

Most people purchasing insurance individually today have high deductibles, and the health center's sliding fee scale can help with this as well. Some are eligible for health insurance plans with lower deductibles based on income, but any deductible means difficult choices on a limited income. Insured patients with any level of deductible can apply for the health center's sliding fee scale. The health center also has a number of private funds that can help fill financial holes in coverage at the provider's discretion.

Health center patients, new and existing, can meet with a navigator to apply for the sliding fee scale. Appointments can be scheduled by calling (603) 447-8900. Navigators work with patients to look at their options for obtaining health coverage. If there is no affordable health coverage option currently available, or if the patient is insured but has a deductible, the navigator signs the patient up for the sliding fee scale. The discount ranges from $10 per visit to a 30 percent discount, depending on income.

Operational support allows White Mountain Community Health Center to offer these discounts for patients who would otherwise not be able to access health care. It also supports many programs that improve patient health beyond the scope of primary care. For example, social workers help patients solve problems such as substance abuse, family issues and homelessness. The health center also has a dietician, a mental health counselor, smoking cessation counseling, a food pantry and more.

White Mountain Community Health Center is still accepting donations to the annual appeal. The health center also accepts donations for a variety of private funds, which cover expenses such as transportation, pharmaceuticals and miscellaneous medical needs. A full list of funds is available online at www.whitemountainhealth.org by clicking the green "Donate" button at the top right. Donations can be made online from that page, or by mailing a check to White Mountain Community Health Center, P.O. Box 2800, Conway, NH 03818.