Campus aims to award more degrees, increase non-traditional revenues

Phil DiStefano

SILVERTHORNE — Leaders at the University of Colorado's Boulder campus are setting lofty goals for themselves, including a dream to more than double the amount of revenue it brings in from sources other than in-state tuition and state funding allocations.

Chancellor Phil DiStefano presented a set of aggressive goals he wants to reach by 2019-2020 to CU's Board of Regents at their two-day retreat which concluded Friday.

Among them, a desire to increase so-called non-traditional revenues by $372 million by offering online degrees and courses, creating new professional master's degrees, improving fundraising, growing international student enrollment and other means.

"That's an aggressive goal, just so you know," CU-Boulder chief financial officer Kelly Fox told the board. "I don't know that we're going to hit it, but we're going to try hard."

DiStefano added that he thinks it's healthy to have some "stretch goals."

That high mark reflects the Boulder campus's commitment to keeping resident tuition low in the face of projected funding cuts from the state.

Already state funding makes up just 5 percent of CU's overall budget and the campus has focused heavily on revenue diversification in recent years.

Advertisement

The campus also unveiled other goals, such as increasing the overall number of degrees awarded by 12 percent and increasing the number of degrees awarded to minority students by 40 percent.

The campus also wants to increase the total number of transfer students by 10.7 percent and increase sponsored research awards by $192 million.

Another goal is to increase institutional financial aid for low-income students by $7 million.

DiStefano also said he wants to improve fundraising efforts to increase private support to the campus to $100 million or $120 million a year.

In 2013-2014, the campus raised $67.1 million.

Numbers are not yet available for the 2014-2015 fiscal year that ended June 30, but DiStefano hinted that the campus did not meet its fundraising goals.

Still, he was confident in CU's ability to solicit gifts.

"I believe we can do that, I believe we have the right staff in place now to work to get that accomplished," DiStefano told the board. "We didn't do as well this year as we did the year before, but we're fixing that."

The chancellor reiterated his previously stated goal of improving the six-year graduation rate from 70 percent to 80 percent by 2020 and outlined a number of steps campus leaders are taking to improve retention.

Those efforts include a mandatory placement test to ensure that first-year students succeed in math classes, a revamped new-student orientation process underway this summer and changes to the academic advising system.

"Why do students leave the university?" DiStefano said. "A lot of times we think it's for financial reasons, homesickness.

" But the No. 1 reason that a student leaves the university is that he or she doesn't feel connected to anyone. We're trying to fix that very early on by getting students interacting with faculty and advisers from the day they commit."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta