The expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act went nowhere the past two legislative sessions in Tallahassee.

This year, Central Florida leaders are working behind the scenes to craft bipartisan support for expansion.

"There is no question that Orange County's citizens would benefit from an expansion of Medicaid," said Orange County's Republican Mayor Teresa Jacobs. "Each year we leave millions of federal dollars on the table, which deserve to be used here in Orange County."

If adopted, it would mean the infusion of $52 billion in federal money for coverage of about 1 million working-age Floridians who make too much to qualify for Medicaid but not enough to get subsidies under the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

"There is an important momentum that we are seeing in this part of this state, and we are looking forward to hearing bipartisan support with a particular focus on the business community speaking out," said Deirdre Macnab, president of the Florida League of Women Voters.

"What we are seeing for the first time is that the business community is finally saying, 'Let's take this money and put it to work in this state,'" added Macnab, who lives in Winter Park. "It's here to cover our cost of the lowest-income working people, and right now we're paying for that."

The CEOs of both Florida Hospital and Orlando Health have lined up in support. The issue is of particular urgency for the hospitals this year because the federal government plans to stop funding the LIP program, or Low Income Pool, which pays hospitals for the care they provide to low-income patients.

That would leave the two systems, combined, looking at a budget hole of $140 million to $150 million.

Orlando Mayor Buddy Dyer, a Democrat, said he has "been talking with our local business leaders and hospital partners to understand this complex issue and the proposals in the Legislature" and hopes to reach a solution "that ensures both access to health care for our most vulnerable residents and financial stability for our state."

Republican leaders in the state Senate have been receptive to discussing the idea of expansion. On Tuesday, a Senate committee will take up an alternative known as the Florida Health Insurance Affordability Exchange Program, or FHIX.

Rather than expanding Medicaid in its current form, that proposal would set up a state exchange that relies heavily on federal money to buy private insurance for uninsured Floridians. But it would also place additional conditions on people seeking coverage.

The state House leadership remains opposed.

But in Orlando, with Dyer and Jacobs on board, advocates of expansion see a unique opportunity.

"The important thing ... is, for the first time businesses have lined up in favor of expansion," said Mike Griffin, vice president of public affairs for Florida Hospital. "For the first time, Associated Industries of Florida, the Florida Chamber and the Senate have all got proposals out there."

Florida Hospital's Griffin is hopeful a proposal can be crafted to win bipartisan support and eventually get Gov. Rick Scott's signature.

"The legislative process will have fits and starts to it, but to have the Senate at this point put forth a thoughtful piece of legislation, that's a good sign," he said.

dbreen@orlandosentinel.com or 407-420-5189