Annual one-stop resource for homeless and near homeless residents was rescheduled to Nov. 24

If you go What: Loveland Connect. When: 8 a.m.-noon, Tuesday, Nov. 24. Where: Truscott Elementary School, 211 W. Sixth St. To volunteer: Register at http://honservice.org/get-involved/2015-loveland-connect/.

Despite a date change to Nov. 24, Loveland Connect kept nearly all of the same vendors for the fourth annual event that provides resources for homeless and near homeless residents.

Only one of the vendors, an educational hair salon, wasn't able to participate because the four-hour event falls during the school's break. To be able to provide free haircuts, the city of Loveland's Community Partnership Office, event organizer, asked independent stylists to donate their time and has had 10 agree so far but is looking for another five.

"It's amazing. It's one of the longest lines at the event year after year," said Alison Hade, administrator of the Community Partnership Office, about the free haircut service. "It makes people happy. It makes people feel good."

The Community Partnership Office also could use an additional 25 to 30 volunteers to join the 173 that signed up for three-hour shifts — just for the morning because the afternoon slots are full. Last year, 185 volunteers helped the 289 guests at the event, held every year at Truscott Elementary School when school isn't in session.

Advertisement

"It's very relevant to the Thanksgiving holiday as far as helping others in need," said Deb Callies, administrative technician with the Community Partnership Office. "The experience of helping someone else and seeing what other people are going through and struggling with is an experience you shouldn't miss. You're doing it to help someone else, and you walk away with an amazing sense of gratitude and a good feeling of being able to help."

The timing of the event, changed from Oct. 23 due to a scheduling conflict with the school's parent-teacher conferences, falls two days before Thanksgiving Day.

The event is based on the national best practice model called Project Homeless Connect and is replicated in more than 260 communities nationwide. It will offer booths of approximately 40 services in one place to allow for easier access to community resources.

To navigate the booths, guests are paired with volunteers that will help them gather information about housing, access dental or medical health screenings and get bike repairs or haircuts.

The event needs a large number of volunteers to allow for the one-on-one matches, Callies said.

"We won't cancel the event if we have less than that," Callies said.

She estimated there will be 300 guests at the event.

"It's important for the people who need the services to be able to do all of this in one stop," Hade said, adding that guests can follow up with the agencies later on for additional resources and services.

"It gives residents who are not homeless an opportunity to understand what happens in people's lives that result in homelessness. And it helps to break some of the myths about why somebody becomes homeless," Hade said.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm