Builder in mask putting in pink batts for insulation.

Between October 2009 and February 2010, four young men lost their lives while at work.

On Monday, a Royal Commission of Inquiry hopes to begin to find out why.

The three Queenslanders and one New South Welshman had been working on the insulation installation scheme, established by the Rudd government in 2009 to help stimulate the national economy during the global financial crisis.

Advertisement

The $2.8 billion program has been criticised for being poorly implemented and rushed in its roll out and blamed for the deaths of the four installers as well as extensive property damage, including up to 220 house fires.

In one of the first moves of the Abbott government, a Royal Commission was established to find out what went wrong.

Ian Hanger, QC, who has been chosen to head it, has been set a June 30 deadline to work out what went wrong and why.

But the father of 16-year-old Rueben Barnes, who was electrocuted and died while installing pink batts in a home in Stanwell, believes he already has his answers.

Now, Murray Barnes just wants to see someone held accountable.

Earlier this month, his lawyer, Bill Potts said his client ''simply wants to know what the former prime minister [Kevin Rudd] and former minister [Peter Garrett] knew and when they knew it''.

''And particularly, if they had warnings, why did they not act upon them,'' Mr Potts said.

Mr Potts said the royal commission was not just about inquiring into the deaths of the installers, ''but the circumstances that surrounded the deaths, the government decisions, the ministerial input''.

This inquiry is not the first – in July, in what was one of his last acts as Queensland coroner, Michael Barnes ruled the speed with which the scheme had been rolled out was a ''significant'' factor in the deaths of the young men.

Many installers were found have been given little, if any, safety training and were sent into ceiling cavities with little knowledge or equipment to protect them.

Following Mr Barnes findings, Mr Rudd apologised.

''I cannot as a parent begin to understand the grief which the parents will be feeling under these circumstances,'' he said in July.

''As the Prime Minister of the country, I am deeply sorry for what has occurred and of course I apologise for these deaths given that it was a government program.''

ACTU assistant secretary Michael Borowick said the inquiry’s sole focus should be worker safety.

''The community has no appetite for a costly political witch hunt at the expense of constructive outcomes on safety for workers,'' he said on Monday.

''The ACTU calls on the Royal Commission to recommend the introduction of industrial manslaughter legislation, tougher penalties for employers that breach existing legislation and increased resources for regulators.''

He believes industrial manslaughter laws - making it a crime when an employer's action or inaction causes a worker's death - could change community attitudes to reckless negligence in workplaces.

Opposition Leader Bill Shorten has also written to the government asking that the royal commission focus on workplace safety.

The first Royal Commission hearing is to open in Brisbane on December 23. Former government staff and ministers are expected to be called.

Deaths arising from Labor's home insulation scheme:

• October 14, 2009: Matthew Fuller, 25, is electrocuted laying insulation sheeting in the ceiling cavity of a house in Meadowbrook (Qld). He had started work with company 12 days earlier.

• November 18, 2009: Rueben Barnes, 16, electrocuted laying batts in the ceiling cavity of a house at Stanwell (Qld). He had started with the company 21 days earlier.

• November 21, 2009: Marcus Wilson, 19, dies from hyperthermia complications after installing batts in a St Clair (NSW) home in 40 degree heat.

• February 4, 2010: Mitchell Sweeney, 22, is electrocuted laying insulation sheeting in the ceiling cavity of a home at Millaa Millaa (Qld). He had started at a new company a week earlier.

With Marissa Calligeros and AAP