By Bobby Harrison

Daily Journal Jackson Bureau

JACKSON – The Mississippi Department of Education says more than 250 scholarships or vouchers remain available for special-needs children to use to pursue private education options.

A news release from the state Department of Education said that 166 families have qualified to receive an annual subsidy of $6,500 under the Equal Opportunity for Students with Special Needs Act.

In addition to the 166 who were approved for subsides, 12 applicants still are pending review and 83 were rejected primarily because the special-needs children did not have an Individualized Education Plan, according to the news release. Under the new state law, a student must have had an IEP within the last 18 months to qualify for the program. Federal law mandates that IEPs only can be issued by a public school.

It is likely the students who did not qualify for the program were not in the public schools.

The state department news release said it would continue to accept applications for the program as long as funds remain available.

The Legislature passed the controversial legislation during the 2015 session to create a five-year pilot program to provide the public funds to allow special-needs children to leave the public schools to pursue private education options.

Sen. Nancy Collins, R-Tupelo, was the primary author of the legislation. She said the public schools were not meeting the needs of many special-needs children.

“Special-needs students deserve the opportunity to succeed, and this bill gives parents the power to provide additional resources to help their children obtain the education and support they need,” Gov. Phil Bryant said when the Legislature passed the bill.

But others argued the bill was more about taking funds out of the public schools and would do little to help the about 65,000 special-needs students in public schools.

“If you care about students with special needs, this bill doesn’t do much for them. If you want to establish a voucher program, this is your bill,” Sen. Hob Bryan, D-Amory said at the time.

The Legislature appropriated $3 million for the program during the current fiscal year. This will cover 434 students, plus the administrative costs for the state Department of Education to administer the program.

At the time the bill was passed, the estimates were that when fully enacted in five years, it would cost $16.3 million in state funds to provide the subsidies for less than 2,500 students.

Bryan said the money in the program would not be enough to pay for the education of many of the special-needs children who require services costing $20,000 or more. He said the fact that half of the students would be selected on a first-come, first-serve basis, indicates “a group of parents wants to send their children to private schools at the public’s expense.”

bobby.harrison@journalinc.com

Twitter: @BobbyHarrison9