Mark Costa points enthusiastically out the fifth-floor window of his Anaheim office to the Santa Ana River Trail below.



“I’m planning on doing that,” he says.



The new executive director of Kaiser Permanente in Orange County will be leading by example if he takes the 30-mile road bike excursion along that trail, which runs from Prado Dam to the crest of the Pacific Ocean. Kaiser, known for its emphasis on prevention, considers itself to be in the business of helping people stay healthy.



A UCLA graduate who spent eight years as the executive director of Kaiser Permanente’s Los Angeles Medical Center, Costa took the reins of the health care giant’s Orange County operations on January 5.



In the new post, he will oversee an organization with 6,973 staff members and 758 physicians, who provide care for more than 495,100 insured members. Kaiser has hospitals in Anaheim and Irvine, and medical offices throughout the county.



REVIEWS ARE (MOSTLY) GOOD



While Kaiser often wins top honors in health care report cards, it is hardly immune to criticism.



In 2014, for the seventh consecutive year, Kaiser’s health plans were recognized as the highest quality in the state by the Office of the Patient Advocate. Its Medicare plans also earned 5 stars for 2015 – the top rating in the state – from the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services.



But Kaiser has been under fire a lot in recent years, especially from its mental health workers, who staged a strike in January, and from state regulators, who fined it in 2013 for mental health care lapses.



At the same time, Kaiser – like all other insurers, hospitals and medical groups – is adapting quickly to the changes brought about by the federal Affordable Care Act and structuring its programs to remain competitive.



But Kaiser’s integrated model – with insurance, hospitals and doctors all under one umbrella – sets it apart in the U.S. health care landscape, and many industry observers say it best embodies the future of health care envisioned by the proponents of the ACA, also known as Obamacare.



Some of Obamacare’s key objectives include coordinated and preventive care, and improvement in the continuity of care.



“Our whole mission is to keep people well,” Costa says. “We think that is best done when the system is coordinated and integrated. The health care reform is providing incentives and guidance, and we advise everyone in health care to do that.”



He notes that Kaiser has many long-term members, which enables it to maintain a database on their medical histories to help provide better care.



“In the era of consumerism and health care reform, people have more choices allowing for selection based on quality, service and affordability,” Costa says. “And those are all the things that the health care providers will compete on.”



Nationally, Kaiser’s membership grew by 510,000 last year to 9.6 million. Of that total, close to 7.5 million are in California.



For the second year in a row, Kaiser Permanente hospitals in Orange County have received special certification for their focus on geriatric care issues. “We are training our caregivers at a much higher level to be sensitive to the unique needs of the elderly,” Costa says.



MENTAL HEALTH, STRIKES AND THE ER



The quality of mental health care provided by Kaiser Permanente has not been similarly celebrated. It came into serious question in 2013 when the state fined Kaiser $4 million for long wait times, under-staffing, errors in educational materials and other problems in its behavioral health services.



Although Kaiser Permanente said the ruling was unfair, it announced a series of measures last year to address the red flags that were raised. In addition to more mental health service locations, more convenient office hours and a focus on improving customer service, Kaiser will allow patients to choose their therapists.



“We are placing more emphasis on behavioral health than we have in the past, and we are proud of the work we have done,” Costa says. “Much of it has been focused on the improvement of the access to care.”



The January strike by about 2,600 mental health clinicians in California, led by the National Union Of Healthcare Workers, refocused attention on the claims that Kaiser Permanente’s mental health departments were understaffed and the workers underpaid.



Bargaining with the union began after the five-day strike, and it is still underway.



“We are at the table negotiating a contract with that group of workers,” Costa says. “Unfortunately, they selected (the strike) versus remaining at the table and working with us to come to a fair agreement. Again, good work has been done. Resources have been given to be responsive to the needs of behavioral health, and we know there have been improvements.”



Union spokesman Justin DeFreitas said that despite the fine levied by the state, “Kaiser continues to fail to staff its psychiatric services with enough clinicians to care for its current membership, much less the quarter-million new patients it added to its rolls last year under the Affordable Care Act.”



He said Costa should “use his new position to fix these urgent problems that affect Kaiser’s patients every day.” And, “we know Kaiser has the resources,” he says, noting that it recently announced a profit of $3.1 billion last year – a 15 percent increase from the previous year.



Another issue that has plagued hospitals is emergency room crowding. Proponents of the Affordable Care Act said that if more people had health insurance, they would be less likely to visit the ER for medical issues that could be resolved in a doctor’s office. But many hospitals are reporting larger patient volumes in their ERs.



Last year, Kaiser Permanente’s Orange County ERs admitted 97,000 patients – up from 89,337 in 2013.



Costa attributes the rise to Kaiser’s swelled membership ranks and notes that demand for all Kaiser services has grown.



“The question about whether ER use should go down or up with health care reform – I think it’s still too early to tell,” he says.



Contact the writer: JLJones@ocregister.com or on Twitter @JLJonesOCR