Legendary singer, songwriter and guitarist B.B. King, who spent decades thrilling listeners and bringing his mix of blues, jazz and swing into mainstream American music, died Thursday at 89.

King, whose greatest hits include “The Thrill is Gone,” “Sweet Little Angel” and “Three O’Clock Blues,” recorded more than 50 albums over his roughly 70-year career. He took home 15 Grammy awards, received the President Medal of Freedom and was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Even well into his 70s, the singer toured relentlessly, averaging more than 250 concerts a year around the world.

His guitar, Lucille, was nearly as famous as he was, best known as a black Gibson ES-355–style guitar and widely considered to represent an extension of his voice. “The minute I stop singing orally,” King said, according to a biography on his website. “I start to sing by playing Lucille.”

Rolling Stone magazine ranks King as the sixth greatest guitarist in history on its Top 100 list, behind Jimi Hendrix, Eric Clapton, Jimmy Page, Keith Richards and Jeff Beck.

His precise, “every note counts” guitar style influenced generations of musicians from Clapton to U2.

“When he hit the note to bring the band in, my whole life was changed,’’ Carlos Santana said in the 2005 book “The B.B. King Treasuries,” reprinted by USA Today. “I could see what Michael Bloomfield and Eric Clapton and everybody else saw in him. ... When you play like that, you heal yourself and you heal other people.’’

BB, anyone could play a thousand notes and never say what you said in one. #RIP #BBKing pic.twitter.com/YvZYH8hyJE — Lenny Kravitz (@LennyKravitz) May 15, 2015

The thrill is gone . Long live the king. pic.twitter.com/W9YD4vxBiE — Chris Rock (@chrisrock) May 15, 2015

What a brilliant man you were. One who will forever be noted as such an inspiration to millions globally, RIP #BBKing http://t.co/9G8NEYTmBT — Gladys Knight (@MsGladysKnight) May 15, 2015

Such sad news on the passing of Blues legend, BB King – he performed @Whitehouse 2012 (& persuaded POTUS to join in!) pic.twitter.com/WTqZ77cMaw — U.S. Embassy London (@USAinUK) May 15, 2015

Curious fact that any time we lose a person who sings the Blues, as we just did in #BBKing, the World becomes a sadder place. — Neil deGrasse Tyson (@neiltyson) May 15, 2015

Play a BB King song today & remember him! RIP Mr King & thanks for all the Great Music!! — Samuel L. Jackson (@SamuelLJackson) May 15, 2015

More from MarketWatch