Forward has been in 94 career fights during regular season

Vancouver Canucks right wing Derek Dorsett, right, fights with Colorado Avalanche left wing Cody McLeod in the first period on Friday in Denver. ( David Zalubowski / Associated Press )

DENVER — Jessy Hill knew what she was getting into in 2003 when she began dating Cody McLeod in Portland, Ore., during McLeod's final season with the Portland Winterhawks. McLeod, who was 19 at the time, led the major-junior team in playoff scoring, but the bigger number that would later become his NHL identity was his 227 penalty minutes in the regular season, second on the team behind a guy named Robin Big Snake (230).

Big Snake is one of the few teammates to ever outdo McLeod in time spent in the sin bin, but Big Snake has zero career NHL penalty minutes — 1,004 fewer than McLeod, the first Avalanche player to reach 1,000.

Avs captain Gabe Landeskog said McLeod, one of his two alternate captains, is "the ultimate teammate, the ultimate team player."

McLeod's wife and mother of the couple's two young daughters concurs.

"Since Day One, he's always done that. He's been that way since I met him, always stood up for his teammates," said Jessy (Hill) McLeod, who married Cody in 2010. "So instead of closing my eyes every time it happens, I've taken the role of cheering him on. I'm definitely the wife that is standing up and kind of punching along with him, because that's all I can really do."

In the Avs' 7-3 win over the Vancouver Canucks on Friday, McLeod's fight with Derek Dorsett and ensuing roughing minor, also with Dorsett, pushed McLeod over 1,000 minutes.

McLeod, who is undoubtedly one of Colorado's most popular players among teammates, is also one of the best undrafted players in Avs history.

Advertisement

"It's always your dream to make it to the NHL, and once you get a taste of it, you just want to keep playing as long as you can," said McLeod, who is listed at 6-foot-2 and 210 pounds. "It's the way I've always played, all the way up — be physical and bring energy. That's what's kept me in the league, and I have to continue to do that to stay in the league.

"There's so many kids in the minors and stuff, trying to take your job. I take pride on myself to be one of the top fourth-line guys in the league, and to do that you have to bring it consistently and on a nightly basis."

Jessy has learned to tolerate her husband's 94 career NHL regular-season fights — plus more than that in the preseason, minor-leagues and major junior — because Cody is one of the Avs' best-conditioned players and always prepared for a fight.

"It's easier because I know how he is. It is definitely an art form to him. He studies those players. He knows who is going to try to fight him, so it's not something I worry about too much," she said.