As the esteemed essayist and philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson once wrote in an essay titled “Intellect,” “God offers to every mind its choice between truth and repose. Take which you please. You can never have both.”

Rarely in our nation’s recent political history has Emerson’s instructive insight seemed more apropos. The country faces, on the one hand, a sense of self-satisfaction, having twice elected a Black president who remains extremely popular among a large cross-section of the electorate.

Those opposing the Obama legacy have found themselves locked into a stalemate of both anger and resentment that has found its expression in deep internal conflicts within the Republican Party. House Speaker Paul Ryan, who currently serves as chair of the Republican Convention, to take place this July in Cleveland, has gone as far as to express publicly his doubt about supporting the party’s putative nominee. Trump’s supporters, including former Alaska Governor Sarah Palin, have bitterly chastised Ryan (and others who have expressed similar doubts) and promised retribution at the polls.

Democrats looking across the aisle at the acrimonious debate have hardly restrained their expressions of smug glee. As commenters on the various social media sites have noted, it is the Republican Party’s own fault for failing to stop the rise of such a controversial and potentially divisive candidate.

The nominee himself has no such reservations about challenging not only Republican dogma but also settled American foreign policy and economic policy. He has openly flirted with restructuring the U.S. debt, saying, in essence, that if America enters an economic downturn, it would be an opportunity to “make a deal.” Trump has also challenged long-standing U.S. policy towards NATO, questioning the ongoing need for such a defense pact with Europe in light of the demise of the Soviet Union, citing the fact that the U.S. is footing the military cost of commitments in far-flung regions with little or no discernible benefit to Americans. He has both opposed and supported raising the nation’s minimum wage, before most recently punting the issue off to the states themselves, saying, “Let the states decide.”

The likely Democrat nominee, Hilary Clinton, has largely campaigned on solidifying and extending the Obama legacy on Obamacare, NATO, the minimum wage and social issues—i.e., more of the same. Trump has offered something that sounds different but that at times lacks coherency or any decipherable set of unifying principles. His message thus far has been largely aimed at a Republican establishment that has not only upheld Obamacare twice (under a conservative supreme court) but also, more importantly, failed to advance a pro-conservative legislative agenda, despite holding majorities in both the House and Senate.

And so here we are as a nation at this juncture, caught in a maelstrom between truth and repose. Liberals find creature comfort in a party that continues to advance a social agenda that squares with liberal orthodoxy—homosexual marriage, transgender rights and a legislated minimum wage. Republicans are dealing with a potential nominee who seems to believe that everything, even core conservative principles, is up for renegotiation.