(Editor's note: This report was updated at 3:35 p.m. with additional comments and financial information.)

State Senate President Stephen Sweeney on Friday took another step in the ongoing controversy over insurance plans in the state.

The debate over the effect of tiered plans on the state's health care industry — in particular, hospitals operating on razor-thin margins — has spurred an interest in digging deeper into available financial data.

After a Senate Commerce Committee hearing Monday, Sweeney (D-West Deptford) said he would call on all hospitals to reveal financial data for the past 10 years.

On Friday, he asked the same of insurers.

Hospitals would have until March 18 to comply, and insurers would have until March 25.

"I am grateful the Senate president has taken my suggestion to require financial transparency from both insurers and providers," said Sister Patricia Codey, who represents the state’s Catholic hospitals. "New Jersey consumers deserve to see the whole picture when it comes to the high cost of health care, not just one side of the equation. I look forward to working with him to ensure greater transparency and competition in New Jersey's health care market."

Related Story Sweeney wants financial data from hospitals, which seem eager to comply

Codey previously said she asked Sweeney to include insurers in the call for transparency.

Ward Sanders, president of the New Jersey Association of Health Plans, said:

"We are sure carriers will review the Senate president’s letters and provide information responsive to his requests. Insurers already are required to provide detailed financial reporting to state (Department of Banking and Insurance) and federal (Internal Revenue Service and Securities and Exchange Commission) regulators, and some of this information is already available publicly.

"And, unlike other health care stakeholders, insurers are held to value standards under state and federal laws through what is called a 'minimum loss ratio requirement' — whereby an insurer must demonstrate that it paid at least 80 or 85 cents (depending on the market) of the overall premium dollar in claim payments to hospitals, providers and for other direct services or must provide refunds to policyholders. This acts as an effective cap on insurance profits, caps which do not exist for hospitals, physicians, pharmaceutical companies or others in health care.

"We hope that this dialogue will result in greater value standards for all participants in health care and greater transparency for consumers."

Health Republic of New Jersey, one of few health insurance companies that does 100 percent of its business in the state, agreed to comply with Sweeney's request.

“The financial state of affairs of health care in the U.S. is so fragmented that it gets out of balance from time to time,” said CEO Robert Meehan. “The state is now challenged to bring it back to focus.

“It deserves a rich and robust conversation in Trenton,” he said, adding that the controversy is forcing the focus onto issues stemming from the fragmentation in the industry.

Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey, whose OMNIA plan is at the root of the sudden push for transparency, immediately responded to a request for information.

"Net income for 2014 decreased to $147.5 million from $214.1 million in 2013," according to information provided by Horizon.

“We will absolutely be providing the Senate president with everything he has requested and we welcome greater financial transparency for everyone involved with health care," said Kevin McArdle, public affairs manager at Horizon. "Unlike some hospitals, Horizon BCBSNJ operated on less than a 1.5 percent operating profit margin in 2014. Horizon paid $427.1 million total federal, state and local taxes and insurance assessments in 2014. Detailed financial information about Horizon has been published in our annual reports for years and is available online at http://www.horizonblue.com/sites/default/files/2014_annual_report_042415.pdf.”

Cigna also provided information on its loss ratios:

For the small business segment:

Cigna Health and Life Insurance Co. had a ratio of 0.898 (compared with a minimum standard of 0.80);

Connecticut General Life Insurance Co. had an MLR of 0.986 (compared with a minimum standard of 0.80).

For the large business segment:

CHLIC had an MLR of 0.875 (compared with a minimum standard of 0.85);

CGLIC had an MLR of 0.876 (compared with a minimum standard of .85);

Cigna Health Care of New Jersey had an MLR of 0.850 (compared with a minimum standard of .85).

"UnitedHealthcare will review and respond to the request sent out today by Senate President Sweeney," the insurer said in a statement. "As required by the Department of Banking and Insurance, we file detailed financial information annually, complying with all federal and state laws and regulations, including the Affordable Care Act and minimum loss ratio requirements. All information is publicly available.”

Public filings for AmeriHealth show the insurer saw a net loss of $46 million in 2015, compared with a gain of $15 million in 2014.

Aetna declined to comment.