USATF awards are a highlight

Jenny Simpson, center, receives her USATF Athlete of the Year award from Jackie Joyner-Kersee, left, with Lauryn Williams, a three-time Olympian and the first American woman to win medals in both Summer and Winter Olympics. ( Courtesy USATF )

Mike Sandrock (Courtesy USATF)

Mark Wetmore is not one to toss around praise unless it is warranted, and so when the longtime University of Colorado head cross country and track coach summed up the 2014 season with, "It was a pretty good year," it was heady kudos indeed.

And well-warranted, I think you'll agree, starting with the CU men's cross country team's successful fall defense of its NCAA championship, to go along with its fourth-straight Pac 12 conference crown.

With mature leadership by seniors Blake Theroux and Jake Hurysz, Colorado handled the pressure of its season-long No. 1 ranking to give Wetmore and CU their seventh team title in school history.

Then there was CU grad Emma Coburn, who clocked 9 minutes, 11.4 seconds for the 3,000 meter steeplechase, breaking New Balance teammate Jenny Simpson's American record. Including that record run in Glasgow, on July 12, Coburn has now run five of the six fastest U.S. times ever, and ranks 11th on the all-time world list.

Coburn, a two-time NCAA champ at CU, also won the 2014 U.S. national steeplechase title. For all that, she was a finalist for the 2014 USATF Jackie Joyner-Kersee Female Athlete of the Year award. And Coburn might have won, except that the honor went to training partner and fellow CU volunteer coach Jenny Simpson.

Advertisement

Simpson finished what USATF termed a "dream 2014" by winning the prestigious Diamond league 1500 meter title, to go along with her U.S. national title, the eighth of her career. Simpson's 1500 meter time of 3:57.2 was just off the U.S record, held by CU alum Mary Decker.

Simpson and Coburn are both coached by Wetmore and Burroughs, which USATF — the governing body of track and field in the U.S. — recognized by naming the pair USATF Nike Coach of the Year.

Emma Coburn, left, and CU coaches Mark Wetmore and Heather Burroughs, were honored by the USATF on Dec. 4. At right is Rob Lotwis, global business federations manager at Nike, which sponsors the Coach of the Year award. (Courtesy USATF)

Burroughs, Wetmore, Coburn and Simpson were honored Dec. 4 at the USATF's annual meeting and awards ceremony in Anaheim, Calif.

"Honestly, we were surprised and flattered by it, so much so that I got dressed up for it," Wetmore said during finals week, as he and Burroughs took their lone break of the year from their exigent coaching demands. "We were very happy for it."

Added Wetmore, in his 23rd year at Colorado: "Jenny and Emma's summer, and then this fall, we will all remember this for a long time. We didn't expect it to happen, but we planned for it."

That planning started way back last winter for Coburn and Simpson, and already, Wetmore and Burroughs are working with their athletes on the 2015 season that will culminate in August at the IAAF World Championships for the professional runners, and next November for the Buffs cross country teams.

"From December to August is a long time, and so much can happen," said Wetmore. "That is why when it comes together, we can all celebrate. We were happy with the year; it was one of our best."

As the last sands of 2014's hourglass run out, other highlights worth celebrating come to mind, including Jeff Eggleston's 2:10:52 marathon, second-fastest of the year by an American, behind only Boston Marathon winner Meb Keflezighi.

Another fast marathon was turned in by Newton Running's Fernando Cabada, whose 2:11:36 at Berlin was the fifth-fastest U.S. time of the year. Look for both Eggleston and Cabada to make a run for the 2016 U.S. Olympic team.

The ultra and trail scene continued to boom, headlined by Sage Canaday picking up $10,000 by winning the North Face Endurance Challenge 50 miler.

"Sage had an amazing year," said Peter Jones, trail writer for boulderunning.com, also pointing out Anton Krupicka's win at the North Face Laredo Ultra Trail 119K race in Italy.

On Dec. 13, Laura Thweatt of the Boulder Track Club, another former Buff, won her second USATF national club championship, with the Boulder Running Company placing second in the team competition.

The vibrancy of the local running scene was shown by Boulder Running Co. alums Kevin Aker and Jeff Boele opening up Shoes & Brews in Longmont, and Henry Guzman opening Flatirons Running in south Boulder. Guzman also brought his Heart & Sole half marathon and 10K to downtown Boulder.

The venerable Bolder Boulder 10K once again packed Boulder streets on Memorial Day, and the inaugural Boulder Ironman Triathlon on Aug. 2 was a huge success. Finally, Boulder hosted the U.S. national cross country championships in February, and will do so again on Feb. 7.

Whew. A full year. As local marathoner Terzah Becker put it: "It is an honor and a pleasure to be a runner in Boulder."