JACKSONVILLE, Fla. - More than 16,000 uninsured children in Duval County alone currently qualify for insurance through the state of Florida's Healthy Kids (KidCare) program. Many parents, however, are not aware that their children are eligible, or don't know where to go to get their children health coverage.

In July, the city of Jacksonville in conjunction with the Jacksonville Children's Commission was one of eight cities selected by the National League of Cities to receive a grant to launch "Cover Jacksonville" to help expand healthcare coverage for uninsured children in the community.

Cover Jacksonville is a health campaign that builds on existing enrollment efforts and leverages community resources in order to reduce the number of uninsured Duval County children by 20 percent by December 2015.

Who is eligible for coverage and what age can your child be to still qualify for coverage?

With KidCare, every child, birth thought 18 years old is eligible, thus, no children has to be left uncovered.

What are the qualifications for coverage?

Children must be:

Under age 19

Have had no health insurance for the last 60 days

Be a Florida resident Be a U.S. citizen or qualified non-citizen.





Plus, if household income exceeds 200% Federal Poverty Level, families may qualify for the Florida KidCare Full Payment option.

What is the cost to parents to enroll their children?

The programs affords parents 12-months of continuous low-cost or free children's health care cover. Typically, parents would pay between $15-20 per month for all children for coverage, depending on family size and income level. Plus, some families will qualify for the Full Pay option. There are no deductible and minimal co-pays.

Where can parents find information about the program and/or get enrollment help?

Parents can dial 211 or visit CoverJax211.com.

Is there any cost to get enrollment assistant?

No, personalized enrollment assistance is free.

What documents do I need to bring to the appointment?

Parents will need to bring the following documents to their appointment:

Your family's most recent tax return (Form 1040) or your wage and earning statement (W-2 Form) or current pay stubs (covering the last 4 weeks)

Your children's Social Security numbers or the date applied for if you have not received a Social Security card. Proof of Citizenship and Identity





What is the open enrollment period for this program?

Unlike other programs there is no open enrollment period as this program is open year-round, 365 days a year. Plus, with KidCare, coverage for your child is continuous for a full 12 months.

There will be a Jacksonville Gets Covered Health Insurance Enrollment Event Saturday, Nov. 15 from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. at Regency Square Mall. Not only will children be able get signed up for insurance, adults will also be able to enroll for health insurance through the Affordable Care Act.

Cover Jacksonville Core Partners:

National League of Cities



City of Jacksonville (Mayor's Health Commissioner)

Jacksonville Children's Commission

Health Planning Council

United Way of Northeast Florida

The Players Center for Child Health at Wolfson Children's Hospital

Duval County Public Schools

Florida Department of Health Duval County



Enroll America



Copyright 2014 by News4Jax.com. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.