Yesterday Bernie Sanders won the first Democratic primary of the 2016 election beating Hillary Clinton by over 20%.

What has become the rally phrase for Mr. Sanders supporters is “Feel the Bern”.

I reached out to the owner of the domain name FeelTheBern.com last night who confirmed the domain name was for sale, which was just registered in February of 2015.

“”To start off I never intended to speculate with this domain and had acquired it a good time before “Feel The Bern” was even a thing. You really can’t plan for your domain to be a rallying cry of a presidential candidates grassroots base. Through this domain I have been in contact with the Sanders team, Martin Shkreli, and some notable Wall Street names. In terms of traffic, Last month saw a high of about 18,000 visitors. I know it would be higher if I put up some content but didn’t want to. I don’t really have an asking price but I am getting offers right now of around 8k which I still think is a bargain given the political importance. In addition, it would make a good strategic political play if one of the opponents picked it up for their digital efforts. Just a imagine an army or people chanting “Feel The Bern” and then you go to FeelTheBern.com and you get __INSERT WHATEVER__! I get so many passionate emails of people asking for me to donate it. I tell them if it is that important then why don’t you crowdfund it or something and to no surprise they don’t.”

The domain name has an Alexa ranking of 342,000 in the US over the last 30 days.

The domain, FeelTheBurn.com which of course is normally the “right spelling” but not in the case of Mr Sanders’ supporters, is even getting traffic, and has an Alexa Ranking of 18 Million worldwide.

For me the question of who would be the buyer of the domain?

The candidate, owns and uses the domain name BernieSanders.com as his official site, asking people to go to his site to make contributions last night in his victory speech, coupled with the fact that he also once again stated in his speech that he does not have, nor does he want, a Political Action Committee (PAC or Super PAC) to support his candidacy.

There is a Facebook page using the name “Feel The Bern ” which has over 82K followers.

So it’s either Sanders or Hillary Clinton who uses the domain name HillaryClinton.com for her website, or one of the PAC’s or Super Pac’s that support her, that would be the most likely buyer of the domain, to use against Bernie or the owner of the Facebook page that is selling Bernie Sanders merchandise.

If you have an interest in buying the domain you can just visit FeelTheBern.com and fill out the inquiry form.

We will keep you updated.