April 8 was Equal Pay Day, which represents how far women had to work into 2013 to earn what men earned in 2012, according to the National Committee on Pay Equity. Equal Pay Day is a date chosen each year to symbolize the period of time it takes for women’s wages to equal that of men’s from the year before, according to the National Women’s History Museum. The fact that this day even exists is embarrassing for the whole country and should anger women.

The very next day, Senate Republicans added insult to this day by filibustering the Paycheck Fairness Act. This act would’ve forced employers to show that the wages they set aren’t based on a person’s sex and ensure that people could openly talk about their wages or ask employers about their pay. Yet, it was struck down.

President Barack Obama took the initiative on Equal Pay Day to sign an executive order that sets the mandates in the Paycheck Fairness Act in place with government contractors, which is a good start, but more needs to be done.

According to the New York Times, lawmakers who filibustered the act claimed it was redundant because of legislation in place, such as the Equal Pay Act of 1963. However, it is absolutely necessary to pass the act because women still aren’t being paid the same as their fellow male employees.

Forbes reported U.S. Census Bureau found that women were paid 77 percent of what men made during this decade. The U.S. Department of Labor also reported the pay gap between men and women is causing “hundreds of thousands of dollars in lost wages.”

If a woman has a job in which she is putting in the same amount of time and effort as her male counterpart, there’s no question that their pay should be equal. There are obviously still loopholes to previous legislation that must be fixed with the passing of the Paycheck Fairness Act to ensure women are paid equally.

Of course it’s not surprising it was shot down with this Congress being so unproductive and partisan and also with midterm elections approaching. It’s disappointing and embarrassing that Congress can’t even agree on an issue that should be a no-brainer, politics aside.

I’m ashamed that women are still being wronged in the workplace in 2014.

Because this has been made into a political issue, doesn’t it also backfire on Republicans who opposed it by giving them a bad image? With midterm elections approaching, I don’t see why they think it’s smart to block this act with a filibuster when it will most likely deter female voters.

According to CBS News, GOP Congresswoman Cathy McMorris Rodgers talked in her weekly address about how her party believes it’s wrong if a woman is wrongly being paid less.

She then said, “But for women across America, it’s not just about equal pay. It’s about achieving a better life. And the Republicans are acting on solutions to make that happen.”

How are they “acting on solutions to make that happen” when they’re filibustering an act that would greatly benefit women? It’s contradictory, and it doesn’t make sense to me. I just don’t understand how a congresswoman would oppose this act.

It’s sad to think this couldn’t be passed in today’s modern society because of partisan opposition, especially when statistics show there’s a disparity in pay. The fact that Equal Pay Day exists proves more needs to be done.

I expect opposition and debate regarding issues such as the Affordable Care Act, but not for equal pay for women. I’m embarrassed for and disappointed with Congress for being so unproductive and divided on an issue that obviously needs addressing.

Send your thoughts to Jacqueline at technician-viewpoint@ncsu.edu.