Longmont man focuses on recovery to win custody of only son

Lonnie Smith kisses his dog Knucklehead on Tuesday at his apartment in Longmont. Go to timescall.com for more photos. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call) Tips for individuals or families in early recovery • Have a plan for holidays and other times outside of your routine that might require more support through mutual aid meetings and calls to a sponsor, mentor, recovering peer, counselor clergy, or others central to your recovery. • Identify risk factors that should be avoided, and know how you will respond if you encounter them. • Know your signs of potential relapse, and take steps to address them. • Stay in touch with your key supports, such as counselors, sponsors, mentors, or recovering peers. • Keep it all in perspective. Nothing that happens, no matter how painful or unpleasant, is worth giving up one's recovery. • If relapse does occur, do not allow shame or guilt to delay you from getting help immediately. There is still an opportunity to build on the progress you have made. Source: whitehouse.gov When his ex-girlfriend told him she miscarried their baby during her first trimester, Lonnie Smith believed her. Then, as he tinkered under hoods as a mechanic at a shop in Weld County, the Longmont resident got the shock of his life. Smith, 47, opened a court summons hand-delivered to him June 14 that confirmed that his son — his only child — had been born April 19. The mother placed him with a private, metro Denver adoption agency, which later dispatched a staff member to visit Smith at his workplace with a pen, parental rights termination paperwork, and a pitch: If he signed on the dotted line, he would never pay a dime in child support, Smith recalled. "The mom just gave him away like something out of a cereal box," he said. "... And she made me out to be this drug guy that wasn't going to put up a fight. The agency figured I was cut-and-dried case. They figured I'd never even show up to court, that I'm a piece of crap. They were wrong." Thus began Smith's good fight, the fight of his life to get fit in the court's eyes to parent his baby boy. He is a dark horse. No court would put a child in the arms of someone like Smith as he was: a man with a methamphetamine addiction and an extensive criminal record — albeit misdemeanors but for one felony, which was dismissed. So far, though, Smith has surprised everyone and, perhaps, even himself in this long shot. Twice a week he undergoes a court ordered urine analysis at Life Recovery Center in Longmont, one supervised by certified addiction counselor Diane Sweeney. "He has gotten 18 of them done here so far since Oct. 21, and absolutely every one has been excellent," she said just before Christmas. "He is one of the few who is actually doing what he is supposed to be doing." Babycare 101 People without name tags and official roles in Smith's custody quest see him taking initiative in other ways. For instance, in preparation for his initial two-hour supervised visit on Oct. 25 that he now keeps every Tuesday with his son, Smith asked a buddy's sister to teach him how to bottle feed, burp and diaper a baby. "He didn't know the first thing about babies. I don't think he had ever held a baby before," Willa Flores, 54, said. So, the Longmont grandmother of 13 let him practice on her youngest grandson in early October when she babysat the infant. "Lonnie was just really eager to learn, and I told him, 'If you look at changing a diaper the way you look at changing the transmission fluid on a vehicle, you'll be all right,'" Flores said. Lonnie Smith takes his dog Knucklehead for a walk on Tuesday at his apartment in Longmont. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call) An acquaintance of Smith's for about eight years, she remembers him when he abused drugs. She mentioned his short temper and habit of couch surfing or sleeping in his car with his black American pit bull, Knucklehead, during bouts of homelessness. The OUR Center, a Longmont basic needs provider, feeds him during financially tight times, Smith said. But Flores also has noticed how the hope of winning custody motivates him to do whatever it takes to stay drug-free and maintain the two-bedroom apartment that he has shared with a roommate for three years. "He's more positive now, more level-headed. He seems to know his boundaries better," she said. "... And I'm not trying to be prejudiced, but for a man to make so many changes for a baby — he didn't bond with the baby in his womb or deliver the baby, but he's feels that bond — that is awesome. He is that baby's father, and they should be together." Round by round This explains why Smith jumped in the ring to duke it out against his addiction to meth — a highly addictive stimulant he has abused for about 10 years — and all of the related guilt, shame and self-loathing that can poison recovery. "Before my son, I didn't really have a reason to stop. He's my reason," Smith said. At Life Recovery Center, where he undergoes urine analysis, staff personally understand the fight Smith has on his hands. Sweeney and Jimmy Monaghan — her boss who co-owns the center with his wife — all lost custody of their children due to drug addiction. Sweeney's parents became the legal guardians of her two sons when they were ages 9 and 11 due to her cocaine addiction, she said. Monaghan and his wife lost custody of their newborn daughter for nine months as they struggled to recover from alcohol and crack cocaine addictions. All three not only recovered from their addictions but earned certifications, licensures and advanced education to help others live without dependence on drugs and alcohol, Monaghan said. "But this is a fight, and when you're a fighter, you don't fight alone," he continued. "You have cornermen, cutmen, trainers and a manager. . .He needs to just keeping fighting the round he is in, and stay with the natural progression of recovery." To bolster recovery success, the center strongly recommends changing "play people, playthings and playplaces." "That means that you basically have to get a new sandbox to gain more positive experiences with how not to use," Monaghan said. A new sandbox Smith found a good patch of that sandbox when Hopewell Baptist Church's hispanic pastor, the Rev. Gerry Aguilar, knocked on his apartment door one morning. On the pastor's invitation, Smith began attending church services about two months ago and soon joined Hopewell's Reformers Unanimous group, a free, Bible-based addictions recovery program headquartered in Rockford, Ill., with roughly 1,000 chapters internationally, according to Hopewell's RU director, Chad Favor. The program works off of a "talk, talk, talk" platform, he said. "We start (meetings) by talking about the positive things happening in our lives and giving God the credit for them. Then, we talk to each other in our challenge groups. And finally we let God talk to us through the message," Favor, who ministered to drug addicts and gang members in Chicago before joining Hopewell, explained. Smith said pastors as well as bikers he knows have prayed for him to press on, and he appreciates their good faith so much. His court appointed lawyer, with whom he has exchanged 1,947 texts as of Tuesday, reminds him that he is the golfer, and she is his caddy — that it is up to him to keep making the kind of good choices that make him a good parent. Both remain focused on Smith's upcoming court date Jan. 30. The court determines custody then, and the case may go to trial. If Smith wins, his son will go home with him and with the support and accountability of a social worker, Smith said. Choices toward that end have come at a cost. When Smith found coworkers first thing in the morning still high from doing drugs overnight at the shop, he packed up his toolbox and quit on the spot. Fleeing temptation outweighed the uncertainty of unemployment, even though unemployment undermines his ability to continue paying $50 a week in child support and to build stability at home, he explained. To Smith's great relief, a ranch hired him a week later to fix farm trucks. Socially, some of his friends disappeared into the woodwork when he got serious about recovery and God. "I think it scared them off," Smith said. Staying the course Still, he continues staying the course on his recovery road, though the hurdles be many along the way. They include taking lots of extra time off work. Appointments related to his custody case have included daylong mental evaluations most memorable for questions about if he wears women's clothing, or if he lights fires for sexual gratification though neither have crossed his mind, he said. Just keeping his supervised visitations require him to take a day off to drive his 2000 Plymouth Breeze to Wheat Ridge and pay $60 per visit. But when he arrives and holds his boy — a baby he now calls "Mr. Crabbyapples" due to teething discomfort — those cares melt. "I start off every visit with the same saying, 'I don't call you son cuz you shine. I call you son cuz you mine," Smith said. "And I say the same thing every time they take him away: 'I sure do love you, son.'" Pam Mellskog can be reached at p.mellskog@gmail.com or at 303-746-0942.