By of the

Happily, I achieved my goal of reading at least 100 books during 2014, the second consecutive year I've been able to do so.

(There are people who read many more books in a year than I do. Next time you visit Boswell Book Company, ask Jason Kennedy how many books he reads in a year.)

I either reviewed or wrote in a substantial way about 41 of them. For Journal Sentinel readers, I read and write about many different kinds of books. When it comes to recreational reading, as you'll see below, I'm often drawn to science fiction and fantasy.

Here are capsule summaries of the books I read in 2014, in reverse chronological order, with the books read most recently on top. Books I've written about for the Journal Sentinel include links to those stories. For books published before 2014, I've included publication dates.

"If Women Have Courage...: Among Shepherds, Sheiks, and Scientists in Algeria," by Dorothy L. Pond. The entertaining memoir of a young Wisconsin woman who joined her husband on several archeological digs in the late 1920s.

"Ancillary Justice" (2013), by Ann Leckie. The artificial intelligence that once controlled a spaceship and dozens of soldiers is down to a single body, but nonetheless seeks revenge against the ruler of its empire. A worthy winner of the Hugo, Nebula and Arthur C. Clarke awards.

"Star Trek: Department of Temporal Investigations — The Collectors," by Christopher L. Bennett. Time cops (first seen in "Star Trek: Deep Space Nine") rescue the Federation from timeline mayhem, and get to see dinosaurs. too.

"Information Doesn't Want to Be Free: Laws for the Internet Age," by Cory Doctorow. The sci-fi novelist and electronic rights activist sums up his thoughts on copyright and making a creative living. Review.

"Notes on a Cowardly Lion: The Biography of Bert Lahr" (1969), by John Lahr. Excellent biography of the elder Lahr, a star of both "The Wizard of Oz" and the first American production of "Waiting for Godot," by his son, a noted theater critic.

"The Rose Rent" (1986), by Ellis Peters. In this Brother Cadfael mystery, Cadfael must solve the murder of a fellow brother and the mysteries swirling around a young widow. While I wouldn't want to have lived in the 1100s, I love how Peters brings that time to life.

"Pioneer Girl: The Annotated Autobiography," by Laura Ingalls Wilder, edited by Pamela Smith Hill. The autobiography that Laura Ingalls Wilder wrote before she wrote the "Little House" novels, annotated in detail and surrounded by photos and images. Review.

"Act of God: A Novel," by Jill Ciment. Excellent, hard-to-classify novel about four New Yorkers whose lives are thrown askew by a mold infestation. Scheduled for March 2015 publication.

"Citizens of the Green Room: Profiles in Courage and Self-Delusion," by Mark Leibovich. Snarky yet sympathetic collection of newspaper profiles of politicos and media heavyweights, including John McCain, Chris Christie, Hillary Clinton and Glenn Beck.

"Morgue Drawer: Do Not Enter!," by Jutta Profijt. The most recent in a German novelist's series of humorous crime novels starring the ghost of a petty crook, who works with a nebbishy coroner to solve crimes.

"The Spy and the Thief: A Jeffery Rand and Nick Velvet Collection" (1971), by Edward D. Hoch. Short stories from one of crime fiction masters that tend to involve the solution of fiendishly difficult puzzles.

"Bryant & May and the Bleeding Heart: A Peculiar Crimes Unit Mystery," by Christopher Fowler. In the new installment of a lively, often wacky crime series, the detectives of London's Peculiar Crimes Unit tackle grave robbing, necromancy, crossbow murders and possible treason.

"Stories of Art and Artists," by Diana Secker Tesdell. A lively anthology of fiction about artists, from such writers as Penelope Fitzgerald, Albert Camus, Aimee Bender and A.S. Byatt. Review.

"Quozl" (1989), by Alan Dean Foster. In this comic sci-fi novel, feisty aliens land on our planet ready to take over. And they look like rabbits.

"The Three-Body Problem," by Liu Cixin, translated by Ken Liu. Liu's novel combines fascinating extrapolations from astronomy and physics with a compelling first-contact story and a remarkable gaming / virtual reality tale — and sets the whole thing in contemporary China, among characters profoundly shaped by the notorious Cultural Revolution. Review.

"A Bunch of Pretty Things I Did Not Buy," by Sarah Lazarovic. An engaging, often humorous visual essay on the art, ethics and seductive power of shopping. Review.

"Everything I Need to Know About Christmas I Learned From a Little Golden Book," by Diane Muldrow. A mash-up of pages from many previously published Little Golden Books.

"Neil Patrick Harris: Choose Your Own Autobiography," by Neil Patrick Harris with David Javerbaum. Harris and a comedy writing bro pour the actor's reminiscences into the mold of the Choose Your Own Adventure books for children, with mostly scrupulous fidelity to the format, including dead ends where you, the reader choosing in the guise of NPH, meet your glorious demise. Review.

"When Mystical Creatures Attack!," by Kathleen Founds. A delightful novel-in-stories featuring a young English teacher and daughter of a suicide, hurtling toward her own breakdown; a rebellious yet smart teen who works as an aide in a nursing home; and her classmate, a highly imaginative lad with a massive, unrequited crush on the rebel. Review.

"Down the Stream of Stars" (1990), by Jeffrey A. Carver. Space colonists traveling away from a supernova, including a special child and an AI, encounter shadowy danger and unexpected friends.

"The Best American Comics 2014," edited by Scott McCloud. This worthy annual anthology of comics, graphic novel excerpts and illustrated stories seems ever stronger than usual, thanks to McCloud's thoughtful groupings.

"On Immunity: An Inoculation," by Eula Biss. Drawing on both science and literature, essayist Biss probes the vexing question of why many determined people oppose the vaccination of children and blame vaccines for autism and other conditions. Review.

"The Galaxy Game," by Karen Lord. Psi powers and a game of speed and agility feature in this sci-fi novel schedule for publication Jan. 6.

"Positive: A Memoir," by Paige Rawl. Born with HIV, Rawl experienced horrific bullying in middle school and later tried to kill herself. But she found new sources of strength and has become an AIDS educator and anti-bullying activist. Interview.

"If the Tabloids Are True What Are You?: Poems and Artwork," by Matthea Harvey. An entertaining, whimsical and often challenging new collection from a Whitefish Bay High School grad. It pairs her poetry with her own photos, silhouettes and other images. Review.

"Masterful Marks: Cartoonists Who Changed the World," edited by Monte Beauchamp. Contemporary cartoonists and illustrators (such as Drew Friedman and Denis Kitchen) portray legends of their field, including R. Crumb and Dr. Seuss. Review.

"Alternate Gerrolds: An Assortment of Fictitious Lives" (2004), by David Gerrold. A collection of stories, many of them alternate history tales with a sense of humor, from a sci-fi great.

"Penelope Fitzgerald: A Life," by Hermione Lee. Excellent biography of the English writer, who weathered many tough times and even a homeless spell. She didn't publish her first book until she was 58, but won the Booker Prize for "Offshore" and has been widely praised for her final novel, "The Blue Flower" (1995), published when she was 79.

"How to Speak Money: What the Money People Say — And What It Really Means," by John Lanchester. Novelist Lanchester tries to narrow the gap "between the people who understand money and economics and the rest of us" with intelligence, wit and the occasional barb. Review.

"Carved in Bone" (2006), by Jefferson Bass. So-so novel about a forensic anthropologist in Tennessee drawn into a criminal investigation of a mummified corpse.

"Yesterday's Kin," by Nancy Kress. Aliens arrive in New York and set up a research station to help humans cure a destructive plague. A human geneticist works frantically on the cure, while members of her own family question the aliens' motives.

"Dawn" (1997), by Octavia E. Butler. Following a nuclear catastrophe, a human woman wakes up on an alien spaceship. The aliens want to help humans live on Earth again, but they also want to make deep changes in what it means to be human.

"Fledgling" (2005), by Octavia E. Butler. The last novel sci-fi master Butler published before her death, a tale of vampires and genetic modification. Entertaining and occasionally thought-provoking, but not on a par for me with her earlier novels.

"Old Man's War" (2005), by John Scalzi. In the first novel of an ongoing series, elderly humans gain a new, though likely short, life as genetically enhanced soldiers who protect human colonists.

"Farthing" (2006), by Jo Walton. An alternate history novel set circa 1949, with England on friendly terms with the Nazi regime that still runs Germany. The mystery around a politician's murder leads to dark conspiracies.

"Dear Committee Members," by Julie Schumacher. Schumacher's novel, a satire with heart, consists entirely of letters of recommendation and other encomia from a middle-aged professor of creative writing. Review.

"Imager" (2009), by L.E. Modesitt Jr. In the first novel of a fantasy series, Rhennthy discovers his talent for visualizing objects into existence, begins training to use that talent, finds love and fends off evil.

"What We See When We Read," by Peter Mendelsund. Book-jacket designer and art director Mendelsund investigates, through words and pictures, what we see when we read text and where those images come from. The liveliest, most entertaining and best illustrated work of phenomenology you'll pick up this year. Review.

" 'Literchoor Is My Beat': A Life of James Laughlin, Publisher of New Directions," by Ian S. MacNiven. James Laughlin lobbied and schemed to keep Ezra Pound from being put to death for treason, saw the opening night of Tennessee Williams' "The Glass Menagerie," and drank bourbon with Thomas Merton in Kentucky roadside bars — then helped the Trappist climb over the wall and back into the monastery after curfew. A smart, fair-minded, thoughtful and entertaining book about this striking man of letters. Review.

"Broken Monsters: A Novel," by Lauren Beukes. Amid the ruins of Detroit and the incessant clatter of social media, a detective pursues an insane serial killer who creates horrifying hybrids with human corpses. Review.

"Lock In," by John Scalzi. Scalzi's entertaining novel imagines a future world where a viral plague has left five million people locked in their bodies, unable to move or respond to stimuli. Through neural surgery, however, these locked-in victims of Haden syndrome can project their consciousness into threeps — android-type bodies — and move and work in the public world. Review.

"My Family and Other Hazards: A Memoir," by June Melby. The author recounts growing up in the family that owned and operated a miniature golf course outside Waupaca. Review.

"Colorless Tsukuru and His Years of Pilgrimage," by Haruki Murakami. Two decades after his friends cut him out of their lives, a man tries to find out why. Like many of his best novels, this Murakami book is rooted in music, too.

"The Novel: A Biography," by Michael E.C. Schmidt. Longer than "Moby-Dick," Schmidt's book first develops the history of the novel and then, reaching the modern era, tackles clusters of novelists grouped by affinities. In the book's distinguishing feature, Schmidt taps the opinions of novelists about each other, rather than leaning on professional critics. Virginia Woolf, Ford Madox Ford and Jonathan Lethem offer insight and argument alongside Schmidt. Review.

"Booktaker" (2011), by Bill Pronzini. Pronzini's Nameless Detective goes undercover in an antiquarian bookshop to try to discover who is stealing rare books and maps.

"The Story of Classical Music" (2004), by Darren Henley. I listened to the audiobook version of this survey, featuring the narration of conductor Marin Alsop and many musical excerpts.

"Patton's Spaceship" (1997), by John Barnes. In the first of a series, a one-time art historian turned bodyguard becomes involved in a war fought across multiple alternate Earths.

"Tooth and Claw" (2003), by Jo Walton. A fantasy novel a la Trollope that begins with the death of a patriarch — of a family of dragons.

"Close Your Eyes, Hold Hands," by Chris Bohjalian. A Vermont teenager on the run after a nuclear plant meltdown tries to survive on the street while caring for a young boy. She leans on Emily Dickinson's poetry and life story the way other teens might rely on rap music or the Bible. Review.

"Blindsight" (2006), by Peter Watts. Hugo-nominated, hard-edged sci-fi novel about an enhanced human crew, a vampire and an AI, sent to investigate an alien vessel. Strongly preoccupied with the nature and limitations of consciousness.

"Chu's First Day of School," by Neil Gaiman, illustrated by Adam Rex. In this children's picture book, a little panda worries about what the first day of school will be like. Review.

"The Cosmobiography of Sun Ra: The Sound of Joy Is Enlightening," by Chris Raschka. An illustrated biography of the great, eccentric jazz bandleader for children, diminished some by the lack of an actual photo on Sun Ra. Review.

"Eighty Million Eyes" (1966), by Ed McBain. The 87th precinct detectives investigate the death of a TV comedian who keels over dead during a live broadcast.

"The Mote in God's Eye" (1974), by Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle. In the distant future, humans make contact with an old alien species that seems programmed to self-destruct.

"Dance of Death: The Life of John Fahey, American Guitarist," by Steve Lowenthal. Biography of the man who wove a style of acoustic guitar playing out of strands of classical, country, folk and blues, but alienated people with his odd personality and self-destructive behavior. Review.

"Another Great Day at Sea: Like Aboard the USS George H.W. Bush," by Geoff Dyer. Dyer deftly blends two stories into one short book: a closely observed, respectful account of life and work aboard an aircraft carrier, and the comic adventure of being "the oldest and tallest person on ship," ducking and stooping his head constantly, struggling with the food and the noise of jets. Review.

"Radix" (1981), by A.A. Attanasio. Complicated far-future novel of a young man's development into a powerful superbeing.

"Do or Die" (2000), by Barbara Fradkin. First in a series by a Canadian mystery writer, about an Ottawa police inspector who balances crime solving with his thorny family life.

"Glaciers" (2012), by Alexis M. Smith. One day in the life of Isabel, a Seattle 20-something library conservator, clearly influenced by Virginia Woolf's "Mrs. Dalloway" but with plenty of charm and lovely writing of its own. Blog post.

"Killer's Choice" (1957), by Ed McBain. The 87th precinct detectives struggle to solve the murders of a woman in a liquor store and of one of their fellow detectives.

"The Scraps Book: Notes From a Colorful Life," by Lois Ehlert. Milwaukee artist Ehlert takes readers inside her studio and explains show she works, using the same collage methods she uses to create her beloved picture books. Video review.

"Fool's Assassin," by Robin Hobb. The back story of FitzChivalry Farseer, a former king's assassin.

"Midnight in Europe," by Alan Furst. In Paris, 1937, a Spanish lawyer collaborates with organized crime against the Nazis.

"The Dirty Duck" (1984), by Martha Grimes. On a visit to Stratford, Scotland Yard's Richard Jury investigates a crime with Shakespearean implications.

"The Crack in Space" (1966), by Philip K. Dick. On a future Earth troubled by overpopulation, a seemingly uninhabited alternative Earth is discovered. Notable, given the year it was published, for Dick writing about the election of the United States' first African-American president.

"Reboots" (2013), by Mercedes Lackey and Cody Martin. Vampires, zombies and werewolves are hard to handle on Earth, so they're sent into space to explore the galaxy.

"The Shelf: From LEQ to LES: Adventures in Extreme Reading," by Phyllis Rose. Scholar-writer Rose chose a shelf of fiction at her favorite library that had a mix of classic and contemporary works. She then read 23 books by 11 authors; each book seemed to lead her on an adventure. Review.

"Can't We Talk About Something More Pleasant?," by Roz Chast. New Yorker cartoonist Chast's memoir about the decline and death of her elderly parents is both gut wrenching and laugh-aloud funny. Review.

"Italian Folktales" (1980), by Italo Calvino. Mammoth collection of traditional tales retold by the Italian novelist.

"The Greek Coffin Mystery" (1932), by Ellery Queen. Tedious early mystery by the Queen team of Frederic Dannay and Manfred Bennington Lee.

"The Storied Life of A.J. Fikry," by Gabrielle Zevin. A crabby indie bookstore owner raises an orphaned girl, and falls in love with a publisher's rep. In case you haven't already figured it out, this novel is a big wet kiss to readers and bookstore people. Review.

"Casebook," by Mona Simpson. In the new novel from Green Bay native Simpson, a boy spies on his mother for years, learning things he doesn't want to know about her troubles. Review.

"The Compleat Guth Bandar," by Matthew Hughes. Fantasies stories about a young academic who explores and maps the collective unconsciousness, and gets into all manner of scrapes doing so.

"Six Against the Stars" (1999), by Stephen Hunt. In a far-future Earth, a lazy, cowardly courtier gets pressed into some unwelcome and possibly fatal universe saving.

"The Sacrifice" (1995), by Kristine Kathryn Rusch. First novel in a fantasy series about the conflict between humans and warlike elves wielding powerful magic.

"Fuzz" (1968), by Ed McBain. The 87th precinct detectives battle their greatest antagonist, the Deaf Man, while trying to prevent the murder of city officials and the torching of homeless people.

"The Dragonriders of Pern" (1978), by Anne McCaffrey. An omnibus edition of the first three novels in McCaffrey's fantasy series about human-dragon pairs who protect their people from an alien threat.

"The Sleeve Waves," by Angela Sorby. Wisconsin names and places, including Kochanski's and Mary Nohl's house, dot this Milwaukee poet's collection. Review.

"Dead Funny: Humor in Hitler's Germany" (2011), by Rudolph Herzog. Herzog recounts and analyzes the kinds of jokes and humor on display in Nazi Germany, and the consequences that sometimes followed.

"The Bohr Maker" (1996), by Linda Nagata. The Commonwealth maintains strict control over nanotechnology in a future Earth, but illegal technology that alters physiology at a cellular level threatens its power.

"The Goblin Emperor," by Katherine Addison. In a Madison novelist's compelling fantasy, the young, nearly-forgotten son of an emperor is thrust into the most difficult job in his world, with only his sense of compassion and the memory of his mother to guide him. Review.

"Stella! Mother of Modern Acting," by Sheana Ochoa. Biography of Stella Adler, a child star of the Yiddish stage who became of America's great acting teachers.

"Fifth Son" (2004), by Barbara Fradkin. Ottawa police inspector Michael Green tries to determine if a stranger's fall from an abandoned church tower was an accident, suicide or murder.

"Breakfast of Champions" (1973), by Kurt Vonnegut. Nearly every year I listen to Stanley Tucci's wonderful narration of Vonnegut's metafictional novel about the "meeting of two lonesome, skinny, fairly old white men on a planet which was dying fast." Blog post.

"The Silence of the Lambs" (1988), by Thomas Harris. Harris' second novel about genius psychiatrist and serial killer Hannibal Lecter.

"Slapstick, or Lonesome No More" (1976), by Kurt Vonnegut. My first reading of this Vonnegut novel about loneliness and genius siblings who are like two halves of a single brain.

"Lost for Words," by Edward St. Aubyn. A biting satirical novel about novelists vying for a prize quite like the Man Booker. Review.

"Absent Enemies," by John Jackson Miller. A Star Trek: Titan novel in which Admiral Riker and his crew must find aliens who've gone missing from a crucial peace party.

"The Chase," by Janet Evanovich and Lee Goldberg. The second in a series of thrilling, humorous caper novels that pair FBI agent Kate O'Hara and con artist Nicolas Fox. Review.

"The Golem and the Jinni" (2013), by Helene Wecker. Two mythological creatures struggle to fit in and make lives for themselves in late 19th century New York.

"Jailbird" (1979), by Kurt Vonnegut. A minor member of the Nixon administration, awaiting his release from his prison, relates his life story and meets with surprising kindness.

"The String Diaries," by Stephen Lloyd Jones. A vividly written tale about a contemporary woman trying to escape a shape-changing monster who has pursued members of her family for generations.

"The Who FAQ: All That's Left to Know About Fifty Years of Maximum R&B," by Mike Segretto. Lots and lots of trivia about one of rock's greatest bands.

"What Makes This Book So Great," by Jo Walton. Lively essays on sci-fi, fantasy and other books from a masterful writer and enthusiastic reader. Review.

"Unmentionables," by Laurie Loewenstein. An a historical, feminist romance in the positive senses of all three terms: a realistic evocation of small-town America circa 1917, including its racial tensions; a tale about standing up for the equitable treatment of women; and a story about two lonely people who overcome obstacles, including their own character defects, to find love together. Review.

"Charity and Sylvia: A Same-Sex Marriage in Early America," by Rachel Hope Cleves. Historian Cleves meticulously reconstructs the lives of two women who lived together for decades in a small Vermont town in a relationship described by people who knew them as a marriage. Ironically, in an era when women had few legal rights, Charity and Sylvia enjoyed more independence being bonded to each other than they would have if each had been married to a man. Review.

"101 Things to Do in Milwaukee Parks: A Guide to the Green Spaces in Milwaukee" (2013), by Barbara J. Ali. A local mom, often accompanied by her son, explored close to 70% of the green spaces in Milwaukee County and chronicled her experiences. Story.

"Updike," by Adam Begley. An excellent biography that closely connects Updike's fiction to his real life. Review.

"David and Goliath: Underdogs, Misfits, and the Art of Battling Giants" (2013), by Malcom Gladwell. Profiles of underdogs from the entertaining — the dad who coached a team of ordinary girls to basketball success by making them run a full-court press all the time — to the deadly serious — a French village that openly defied the Vichy regime by not turning over any Jews. Story.

"Junky" (1953), by William S. Burroughs. Burroughs' first published novel, a straightforward, low-affect, semi-autobiographical chronicle of addiction.

"Waiting for the Man" (1994), by Jeremy Reed. A critical study of Lou Reed's music.

"I'll Take You There: Mavis Staples, the Staple Singers, and the March up Freedom's Highway," by Greg Kot. A biography of the gospel singing Staples with plenty of context about their role in the Civil Rights movement.

"Mrs. Lincoln's Rival," by Jennifer Chiaverini. Madison writer Chiaverini fictionalizes the life of Kate Chase Sprague, who served her thrice-widowed father, a member of President Lincoln's cabinet, openly as his social hostess, and behind the scenes as a political adviser. Review.