Photo

St. John’s Baptist Church, in the Sugar Hill section of Harlem, is a modest redbrick building, discernible from the buildings on its block by two white Corinthian columns and a large, illuminated plastic cross hanging from the second story. Back in the civil rights era, the church housed a thriving congregation, many of them African-Americans who had fled the South. Its rolls have since dwindled to about 250, but Harlem is a neighborhood eternally preoccupied with its past, and St. John’s remains a place where local power brokers — and former power brokers and aspiring ones, too — gather to debate issues and anoint leaders.

In mid-April, the Rev. Calvin O. Butts III, a civil rights advocate who has also raised hundreds of millions of dollars to develop the neighborhood’s real-estate market, summoned the Rev. Michael A. Walrond Jr. for a community meeting. Walrond, the bookish pastor of the nearby First Corinthian Baptist Church, remains a relative outsider by Harlem standards. He grew up on Long Island and attended Morehouse, the historically black college in Atlanta, before enrolling in Duke Divinity School. When he was recruited to lead First Corinthian in 2004, he eschewed Upper Manhattan and settled with his wife and two kids just across the Hudson in Edgewater, N.J. But within a few years, Walrond began asserting himself in the neighborhood, organizing community members around issues like affordable housing, a living wage and education. Within a decade, as other churches were losing members, he built First Corinthian’s congregation from 300 to nearly 9,000. In 2012, the Rev. Al Sharpton made him a director of the National Action Network, a nonprofit civil rights group. Last year, Bill de Blasio called him “one of the single most powerful voices in the city of New York.” And in January, Walrond, 43, moved into an apartment on upper Fifth Avenue and announced his intention to represent New York’s 13th District in Congress. He would be running against Representative Charles B. Rangel. That’s what Butts wanted to talk about.

Despite Walrond’s large congregation, his decision seemed to some like a form of betrayal. Rangel, who was born in Harlem, has represented the district since 1971. And the congressman, who is 84, had recently announced that he was seeking his final term. Butts had already signaled his disapproval of Walrond’s candidacy. Now he had a convened a makeshift tribunal composed of neighborhood political figures, quasi-political figures, influential pastors, members of the N.A.A.C.P. and a former Manhattan borough president.

At 11:30 a.m. sharp, Walrond, who normally preaches in jeans, arrived at St. John’s in a dark suit and tie, his bald head cleanly shaved. As the 30 or so people took their seats and the smell of waffles, bacon and salmon croquettes wafted in from the kitchen, Butts introduced his guest. Then, for 15 minutes, Walrond spoke about the various efforts he began at his church — an educational and wellness center, a program that feeds children before school, a food pantry that sought to serve 20,000 families a year — that he would like to expand, if elected to the House. He talked about his concerns with the local schools, particularly co-location, the disputed practice of housing several schools in one building. Then he threw open the floor to questions.

The first one came, not unexpectedly, from Butts: Why did the pastor not choose to wait two years, until after Rangel’s retirement, to run? Wouldn’t he be better off entering politics at the local level, anyway, perhaps as a state assemblyman or city councilman? As the crowd looked on silently, Walrond said he feared that Harlem’s shrinking political base was eroding the neighborhood’s representation in Washington. As someone who had expanded a congregation, he might be able to reverse this tide. And there wasn’t time to waste. In 2012, the House district was redrawn to include part of the Bronx. The 13th now had a Latino majority, and for the first time since World War II, it seemed possible that Harlem might not be represented in Congress by an African-American.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Another audience member wondered aloud whether Walrond could offer better leadership than Rangel, a former chairman of the Ways and Means Committee and an established voice in Washington. Walrond, who was decades younger than most of the people at the meeting, tried to remain calm, but the message was clear. “The sentiment was that we wished he would withdraw his candidacy,” the Rev. John Scott, the pastor of St. John’s, told me. “It’s the wrong time.”

Harlem may now be home to million-dollar condos (Neil Patrick Harris just bought a place for $3.6 million) and nationally recognized restaurants (Marcus Samuelsson’s Red Rooster among them), not to mention all manner of ramen places and coffee bars, but in many other ways, it is still definitively old-school. Its politics are still largely rooted in the civil rights era, when churches served as social havens and pastors exerted influence over large congregations. During the 1950s and ‘60s, a group of young community leaders began to leverage this power. By the ‘80s, they had organized the Coalition for a Just New York, which rallied minority voters and African-American and Latino candidates. The intention was to increase representation on the city’s now-defunct Board of Estimate, which was composed of the mayor, the comptroller, the City Council president and the five borough presidents. The “Gang of Four,” the most prominent among the coalition, would eventually reach the very top echelons of power: David N. Dinkins became the first black mayor of New York; Basil Paterson was a state senator and deputy mayor (his son, David A. Paterson, would eventually serve as governor); and Percy Sutton, who was largely credited with saving the Apollo Theater, was Manhattan borough president.

The most successful, however, was Charlie Rangel. The upstart state assemblyman ousted the legendary Adam Clayton Powell Jr., who represented the district from 1945 to 1971 and had been increasingly portrayed as out-of-touch and scandal-plagued. (In 1967, the House voted to exclude him. He was re-elected in 1968.) By 1972, Powell was dead, and Rangel had become a founding member of the Congressional Black Caucus. He would become the first African-American member of the Ways and Means Committee, which oversees the nation’s tax policy, and would play an instrumental role in establishing economic sanctions against apartheid South Africa. His success helped usher in unprecedented African-American political accomplishment, much of which benefited his district.

For decades, the Gang of Four’s influence went virtually unchallenged. But Dinkins left the mayor’s office in 1993; Sutton died in 2009; and Paterson, whose reputation was diminished by the scandals surrounding his son, died this spring. Rangel, meanwhile, has held on tenuously. In 2010, he was found guilty of 11 House ethics charges, including failure to pay taxes on a Caribbean villa, and censured by his colleagues. In 2012, he came within 1,000 votes of a defeat to State Senator Adriano Espaillat, a Dominican immigrant from Washington Heights who is immensely popular among the district’s Latino population.

Espaillat, a vocal advocate for tenants’ rights and the Dream Act, is again a Democratic challenger to Rangel this year. And while Walrond is a long shot in the June 24 primary — according to the most recent poll, he trails by more than 20 points — his candidacy could siphon off African-American votes, giving the election to Espaillat and ending nearly 70 years of black representation. If that happens, Rangel won’t be simply an old politician who gives way to a younger one; he won’t be simply the end of a legacy; for various businessmen and politicians and leaders like Butts, he’ll be the end of an entire power structure. “These guys and people like them made Harlem into a beachhead of black power and clout,” Luther A. Smith, the vice president of Bill Lynch Associates, a Harlem lobbying firm, told me. Smith was looking out the window of a Starbucks near Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard. “That clout is now being diminished to the point of disappearing,” he continued. “The question is, will we ever see it again? Many of us believe that we won’t. At least not in the same way.”

Photo

Plenty of black candidates have tried to unseat Rangel during his 43 years in office. Adam Clayton Powell IV, who ran in 1994 and again in 2010, was perhaps the most notable, but he never came close to winning. Walrond, however, already has a considerable built-in base. In March, I watched him enter a campaign fund-raiser at Park 112, a dimly lit restaurant on Frederick Douglass Boulevard, in a gingham shirt and a gray sports jacket, as dozens of young professionals crowded around holding martinis and napkin-wrapped beer bottles. (Others complained that the restaurant’s high-tech wine dispenser was out of order.) As the D.J. turned down the music, a young lawyer and First Corinthian congregant named Adeola Adejobi walked to the back to introduce the candidate.

“One thing I appreciate about Mike is that he’s always been doing the work in our community,” she said. “He has been someone who has been working from the ground up, as opposed to the top down.” Her voice cracked momentarily; she fought back tears. After a pause, Adejobi suggested that the attendees take advantage of the free yoga and Zumba classes offered at the Dream Center, a First Corinthian initiative, because “it’s a very expensive habit.” Then she introduced Walrond, the “next congressman of the 13th District.”

It was Walrond’s third event of the night, and he looked exhausted. “I wanted to make sure I got here after y’all had a few drinks anyway, so I wouldn’t have to talk too long,” he said to some laughter. “You’d just be focused on drinking.” Then he dove into a well-rehearsed if somewhat stilted speech that coalesced around the idea that returning Rangel to Washington after his censure would undermine the district. If elected, Walrond promised, he would work to stem juvenile crime, increase collaboration between the neighborhood’s schools and local colleges and, notably, clear a path to leadership for those outside the Harlem political machine. As ever, he brought the conversation back to his work as a pastor. “We know [First Corinthian] has not been a church so much as it has been a movement to help people understand their true calling as visionaries and dreamers,” he said. The crowd hummed in agreement and said “amen.” The D.J. hastily put on Pharrell Williams’s “Happy.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Walrond often uses his natural speaking talent (he recently taught a seminar, “The Art of Improvisational Preaching,” at Union Theological Seminary) and age (he was born around the same time as hip-hop) to appeal to Harlem’s younger voters. He also likes to explain that he and his wife, LaKeesha, herself a preacher at First Corinthian, had their first child as unmarried teenage students at Morehouse and Spelman. But it doesn’t take much time with Walrond to get the impression that he sees himself, in part, as Harlem’s version of Barack Obama — an articulate, young outsider offering a hopeful message against an establishment figure. “I cannot compare to the legislative experience of the congressman or even the senator,” Walrond told me a couple of days later at Double Dutch Espresso on Frederick Douglass Boulevard. “But in that same way, they cannot compare to the level of engagement and the kind of community organizing and activism that has been my calling for the last 18 years.”

Like Obama, Walrond had a relatively itinerant early life. He grew up largely in Freeport on Long Island’s South Shore, the child of immigrants from Barbados. He was an underachieving student, so his guidance counselor recommended that he enlist in the Navy. Instead, he sought the advice of his mentor, the Rev. Gregory Groover, a Freeport native, who steered him to Morehouse. During his first semester, Walrond decided he wanted to be a preacher. He began studying black-liberation theology and was soon chosen as the president of the Martin Luther King Jr. International Chapel Assistants Program, which trains future seminarians. Membership quadrupled under his tenure.

“I can’t remember any chapel president who commanded the respect that he did,” the Rev. Lawrence E. Carter, the chapel’s dean, told me. “When he spoke, people listened.” Walrond was accepted to Harvard Divinity School but was persuaded by Samuel DeWitt Proctor, the civil rights leader and friend of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., to attend Duke instead. While in Durham, N.C., he built the small congregation of the Zion Temple United Church of Christ to 600 members. In 2004, an offer arrived to be pastor at First Corinthian.

According to many people who knew him at the time, Walrond sensed a larger opportunity in Harlem as, in a phrase he often repeats, “an agent of transformation.” As a young and energetic preacher, he could carry on the neighborhood’s tradition of leveraging the pulpit into a leading role, albeit with a modern sensibility. But he may have underestimated how entrenched the district was. As Walrond’s efforts at First Corinthian thrived, his name was mentioned among local power brokers, including the types with ties to St. John’s, for lower-level political positions — state assemblyman, city councilman — where he could bide his time and wait his turn. And so when Walrond signaled his larger ambitions by filing with the Board of Elections in November, the machine went into action. In January, Rangel invited him to Sylvia’s, the famous soul-food restaurant, and tried to talk him out of running. When word spread that Linara Davidson, the daughter of a well-connected Harlem family, was going to help oversee his campaign, she received a call from someone close to Rangel dangling an opportunity. On two different occasions, Walrond says, he was asked by political consultants to quit the race, with the insinuation of their support in 2016. This month, at the jazz club Minton’s, he told me, Rangel once again asked him to step aside. (Rangel acknowledges the conversation but says he never asked Walrond to withdraw.)

Walrond is upbeat by professional necessity, but by spring, his frustration was beginning to show. After a sparsely attended breakfast speech at a restaurant called Settepani, an older woman told him that a prominent local businessman was fuming that Walrond had snubbed him on the trail. “They don’t care if nobody in their crew can lead this district,” he later told me, pulling his black Land Rover into his pastor’s parking spot at the church. “The fact is, they’re saying, ‘Well, we know if you get in, we know we’re going to lose out in some way, and we’re fearful of losing access, losing connections.’ ”