Vicente Feliciano’s recent contribution on the Puerto Rican debt situation (“Time to negotiate Puerto Rico's debt”) includes some major factual inaccuracies regarding the PREPA bondholder proposal. First, our plan would result in a rate decrease for citizens of Puerto Rico — not an increase, as Feliciano writes. Second, far from placing PREPA at the mercy of interest rate increases, the bondholder plan results in a marked decrease in debt service costs using a fixed rate.

Feliciano’s contention that the PREPA bondholder plan results in a 15 percent electricity rate increase demonstrates a failure to grasp the facts of our proposal. Ironically, the reality is almost the exact opposite of his claim. As outlined in the version of our plan that we released publicly in late July, our proposal would result in Puerto Rican electricity rates being roughly 15 percent lower than PREPA’s “status quo” rate. We used the average August 2014 electricity rate because this was when we started negotiations, so it’s the benchmark we have been using throughout this process.

ADVERTISEMENT

To explain further, consider that there are three primary factors that determine the rate a utility has to charge: Debt service (which our plan addresses), operating expenses and fuel costs.

Let’s start with debt service cost. We are voluntarily offering permanent, material reductions in the cost of debt service, with the average interest rate going from 5.45 percent (which is what it would be under PREPA’s proposal) to 4.11 percent. Our plan also includes more than three years of additional liquidity relief than PREPA’s previous proposal.

In terms of operating expenses, one way for PREPA to reduce operating expenses is by investing in and upgrading its antiquated and inefficient generation capacity. By accepting a delay in principal repayments, the bondholder plan frees up $2.5 billion for capital investments to improve generation efficiency without the need for external financing. Ultimately, these investments benefit consumers with a more modern and reliable utility.

Fuel cost is the third variable. Contrary to Feliciano’s assertions, our plan is not based on using rate increases to pay the debt. The simple fact is that fuel costs are presently far lower than they were when we prepared our original projections (again, based on August of 2014). Using today’s fuel costs coupled with the interest rate and efficiency savings previously mentioned, electric rates for PREPA customers will be even lower than previously projected.

Now, turning to the claim that the bond structure we would propose would mean “Puerto Rico takes the risk of future changes in interest rates.” Simply not true. Our plan assumes fixed interest rates. While these rates vary from bond to bond based on the year of the maturity, they are set at the date of issuance and would not change — no matter what interest rates do.

The bottom line is that the bondholders’ plan is good for PREPA, and good for the people of Puerto Rico. We have put a workable solution on the table — the question now is whether PREPA will agree to a mutually beneficial way forward.

Spencer is a managing director at Houlihan Lokey and is the financial advisor to the PREPA bondholders.