BRENTWOOD — A Newton man accused of kidnapping and raping a 15-year-old girl at his home before taking her on a series of drug deliveries in Massachusetts was indicted on three charges by a grand jury, prosecutors said...Benjamin Huson, 24, is facing charges of aggravated felonious sexual assault, kidnapping and misdemeanor sexual assault in Rockingham County Superior Court.Huson’s indictment comes roughly two months after a judge revoked his bail pending trial. The sexual assault charge returned by the grand jury is punishable by up to 10 to 30 years in state prison...Police began looking for the Tewksbury, Mass., girl on April 3 after her parents reported her missing. Her cellphone records indicated that she was with Huson the night before, police said. Huson allegedly picked up the girl at a playground...A Newton police officer found the missing teen standing in a driveway with Huson outside his home. The girl at first claimed that her parents knew where she was, but then gradually changed her story, according to police...She later told police that Huson had containers of marijuana in his bedroom “along with acid, pills and mushrooms,” police Officer Leanne Wancheck said in a sworn affidavit.She admitted to smoking marijuana with Huson, but initially denied having any sexual contact with him, police said. The next day, the girl told a family member that Huson “slapped her and told her to take off her clothes,” Wancheck said in the affidavit. Huson then allegedly forced the girl perform a sexual act, police said...Prosecutors say Huson allegedly slapped the girl in the face sometime between April 2 and 3. “After this, they left the residence and delivered drugs to numerous people,” according to Wancheck’s affidavit...Prosecutors say that Huson ignored the girl’s requests to be taken home after he picked her up. The girl told police that she was with Huson as he allegedly made several marijuana deliveries throughout the North Shore area of Massachusetts...Huson was arrested on Aug. 21 by Newton police.Judge N. William Delker ordered Huson held without bail on Sept. 25 because evidence suggested he violated his bail conditions for being in possession of drugs while being held at the Rockingham County jail. A sheriff’s department investigation concluded that Huson was in possession of a substance believed to be methadone...jkimble@newstote.com..