Love a runway fashion show? September is loaded with opportunities to catch one in Denver as the fall schedule fills with benefits and shopping events.

There are even fashion shows promoting fashion shows, as guests found out recently when the Cherry Creek North luxury retailer Lawrence Covell hosted the kickoff of the fifth annual Be Beautiful Be Yourself Fashion Show to benefit the Global Down Syndrome Foundation. Kids who serve as GDSF ambassadors paraded on an in-store runway and were joined by professional models and supporters. More details on the Sept. 28 benefit, below.

Here is what comes earlier on the schedule:

Sept. 12: Celebrate Fashion takes over Fillmore Plaza in Cherry Creek North. The event starts with in-store events from 5-7 p.m. and then at 8 p.m., a runway show will feature children’s clothing. A second show follows with 20 retailers of everything from men’s and women’s apparel to lingerie, eyewear and furs. The event is a benefit for Denver Health and tickets start at $60. 200 Fillmore St.; cherrycreeknorth.com

Sept. 13: Pret-a-Porter, a runway show and design competition sponsored by the The International Interior Design Association, Rocky Mountain Chapter, will be held at the Ellie Caulkins Opera House. The theme for the eighth annual show is Art Deco and teams using a variety of architectural materials will create outfits. Tickets start at $20 for student members and go up to $60 for non-IIDA member premiere seats: pretaporter2013.brownpapertickets.com; iidarmc.org

Sept. 20: The Flight To Luxury Couture Fashion Show benefit for Boys & Girls Clubs of Metro Denver takes over the XJet and Signature hangars at Centennial airport beginning at 6 p.m. The show will feature looks from a selection of specialty stores including Andrisen Morton, Alicia the Boutique, Mariel, Cry Baby Ranch, Goldyn, Scruples, Oster Jewelers, Mark Lloyd Furs, and Swim ‘n Sport. Tickets are $250 per person. Flightoluxury.com; more from Laura Cisco, 720-833-4575 or Laura@cuveeventures.com

Sept. 28: Be Beautiful, Be Yourself Fashion Show, reception, auction, dinner, fashion show and entertainment by Todd Park Mohr, beginning at 5 p.m. Tickets start at $250 per person for young professionals and family members of a person with Down Syndrome; individual tickets are $500 per person. Sheraton Downtown Denver Hotel, 1550 Court Place, bebeautifulbeyourself.org

Suzanne S. Brown: 303-954-1697, sbrown@denverpost.com or twitter.com/suzannebro