By William Patrick | Florida Watchodg

TALLAHASSEE, Fla. – Too often lawmakers jump at the chance to spend taxpayer money without actually delivering a solid return on the public’s investment. That seems to be the case with a pet project in one Florida county and perhaps also with an inconclusive, but expensive, state gambling study. Here’s a look at those stories and more.

Air tax-and-spend: The controversy over whether a new air traffic control tower was needed has some people enraged and accusing Hernanado County officials of using the project and taxpayer money for political jockeying. A year after it was built the numbers of take offs and landings are roughly half of what was actually reported to the public. Read More

Nothing to see here: A state legislative committee adopted rules Monday for auditing lobbyist financial reports. The audits are supposed to give the public a more accurate accounting of who is influencing and being paid to advocate to lawmakers. The rules won’t go into effect until 2015. Read More

Wild card: Despite a 708-page study (costing taxpayers $400,000) and two public workshops, state senators are mostly undecided about the future of gambling in Florida. Years of doing nothing led to the “internet cafe” debacle, so now lawmakers say they’re considering a number of options, including allowing Las Vegas-style destination casino-resorts. A major gambling bill could come out of the 2014 legislative session, which starts in March. Read More

Boo-hiss, Charlie Crist: Former governor Charlie Crist may have announced his run for governor Monday, but a chorus of criticism from Crist’s former Tallahassee governing partners also accompanied the Republican turned Independent turned Democratic candidate’s debut. Read More

Medicaid fraud: For those who believe Obamacare can’t get any worse can, think again. A relatively new provision in the Affordable Care Act that requires states to accept temporary eligibility determinations from Medicaid-enrolled hospitals is opening up the Medicaid program to even more fraud. Read More

Contact William Patrick at wpatrick@watchdog.org or follow Florida Watchdog on Twitter at @watchdogfla Like Watchdog.org? Click HERE to get breaking news alerts in YOUR state!