Fairhope resident and former vice president of human resources at Ohio State University Linda Tom said the rate increases are among "the most astronomical I have ever seen."





One of the checks on health insurance sticker shock under the Affordable Care Act was new requirements for premium rate review by states.

All rate hikes of more than 10 percent are supposed to "be scrutinized by independent experts to make sure it is justified," according to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS).

In 2010, the Alabama Department of Insurance received a $1 million grant to expand and improve the rate review process.

Despite that money, Alabama remains one of six states deemed to have an ineffective system as determined by the U.S.Department of Health and Human Services.

"Alabama does not have an effective rate review process," an HHS official said on condition their name not be used. "That means that the federal government will review all rate increases of 10 percent or more and determine whether or not those increases are reasonable."

Federal reviewers at HHS, however, do not have the authority to disapprove rate increases they determine to be unreasonable -- that's still in the state's hands, according to the law.

Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Alabama, the state's dominant insurer, raised the rates of "the majority" of its 87,000 indvidual and family policies, and they have been reviewed and approved, according to spokeswoman Koko Mackin.

"We automatically enrolled the 87,000 policyholders in a new ACA-compliant plan comparable with their current coverage," she said in an email. "These policyholders can stay in the assigned plan or choose from any of our new ACA-compliant individual health plans. The premiums of all of our ACA-compliant individual plans have been reviewed and approved by HHS and ADOI."

Mackin did not provide a figure for the average BCBS rate hike, but there have been numerous anecdotal reports of premiums doubling or more.

Fairhope resident Linda Tom, a human resources executive for more than two decades and former vice president of human resources at Ohio State University, said the rate increases are among "the most astronomical I have ever seen."

"I talked with a friend who had her insurance increased 150 percent," she said. "Another couple we know had their premium increased close to 200 percent."

Alabama Department of Insurance governmental affairs manager Mark Fowler said the department did review premiums for compliance with the health reform law -- but not for rates.

"After that we were pretty much out of it," Fowler said. "The federal government totally runs the exchange in Alabama."

Alabama received $1 million on Aug. 16, 2010, from HHS to improve its rate review process.

HHS allows states that did not set up their own exchanges to use ACA grant money for other defined purposes.

In total, the Alabama Department of Insurance received more than $10 million in three different HHS grants, including the rate review grant, to implement various aspects health care reform.

The department has not responded to questions posed Friday and Monday about how the money has been spent.

Despite this infusion of federal dollars, Alabama's review process has been determined to be ineffective, joining Louisiana, Missouri, Oklahoma, Texas and Wyoming in that category.

An effective rate review program must be able to consider a host of factors during a review, including changes in benefits, changes in utilization of services and the impact of geographic factors and variations. An effective program must also provide a way for receiving public comments on rate hikes and make a determination of reasonableness under a standard set by state statute, according to the CMS website.

The law also requires insurers to spend at least 80 percent of their premium dollars on direct medical care or improving quality instead of such things as advertising, executive salaries and bonuses. Consumers could get a rebate if the insurer fails to meet this threshold.

A Kaiser Family Foundation report last year said evidence showed insurers made fewer requests to raise rates by 10 percent or more after the new rate review provisions when into effect on Sept. 1, 2011.

An American Medical Association study last year found Alabama to be the least competitive commercial health insurance market in the country with Blue Cross accounting for 88 percent of that market.