And then there was linen.

Veterans Affairs hospital officials in Shreveport, La., stocked the cabinets with linen, pajamas and towels cabinets after an investigation exposed that the hospital routinely did not have enough of these items to meet patient needs.

Three employees at the Overton Brooks VA Medical Center said linens were plentiful at the 10-story facility beginning Friday morning, one day after a story about the investigation was published.

>>> VA Hospital Lacks Amenities for Patients, Yet Spends Millions on Solar Panels

This is reportedly in stark contrast to the norm, where linen cupboards are bare on weekends while the hospital awaits its regular Tuesday laundry delivery truck, which travels 125 miles from another VA facility in Pineville, La., employees said.

“I was just shocked that this happened so fast. I believed something would change when the story came out, I just didn’t think it would happen so soon,” one employee said. “It’s amazing to open a door and see linen stacked there. Even after the truck comes, it’s stocked more than that.”

Another employee offered: “I was surprised to see a cart going down the hall with linen. You never see that this late in the week.”

Overton Brooks’ linen supply apparently also is a hot topic at the Department of Veterans Affairs as investigators from its Office of Inspector General showed up Sept. 25 after receiving a call requesting comment.

“This is ongoing and we have no comment at this time,” said spokeswoman Cathy Gromek of VA’s inspector general office in an email. “This is being worked by our office of Healthcare Inspections.”

Employees said the sheets, blankets, towels and pajamas didn’t look new, so they’re unsure where they came from. The American Legion, which has promised to deliver toiletries and other supplies to overcome shortfalls, said it was not responsible for the linen either.

On Friday, the American Legion blasted the hospital, saying it was angered over poor treatment of veterans.

Read more at Watchdog.org.