I can totally see this happening: Eric Decker, Super Bowl receiver, and his wife Jessie James both on “Dancing With The Stars.”

Not just because this would be the ultimate “them” thing to do, but also because of this tidbit I procured from Decker’s high school teacher, Mark Johnson.

“Something a lot of people don’t know is that I started a ballroom dance class at the high school, and Eric was in my very first ballroom dance class,” said Johnson, who taught at Rocori High School in Cold Spring, Minn. “So you get some of the athletes in there, and man, I tell you, everybody came out (to join the class). The class is still going on today. He was good – he was physical, he would flip the girls. We did a little swinging, we did the waltz, a little tango, a little rumba. So he’s a well-rounded individual, you can put it that way.”

(I mentioned this tidbit on Twitter, and the fans quickly pondered: how could someone trained to have such graceful footwork trip twice in games against San Diego, ruining sure touchdowns?)

Johnson gushed about his former student’s work ethic. For all the glamour of Decker’s life, seen on their reality show on E!, he’s really a hard-working small-town guy. Orange-and-blue-collar.

“Being in a smaller community, you see the kids in activities, and even in elementary, you knew that he had something special,” Johnson said. “I mean, my God. He was just so talented that you knew things would look pretty good for him later in the future. But I don’t think people really understood how hard he worked. He worked extremely hard to get to the level that he’s playing. He had great ability, but man, he put in the time. And it’s paying off for him.”

Johnson remembered one anecdote that summed up Decker’s persona — all-star, yet grounded.

“He played in the all-star football game here in Minnesota, and when there was a stoppage of play, he’d run out there with water for his players,” Johnson said. “Just a good leader, and an all-around good kid. I’m really proud of him — the whole community is proud of him. It’s fun to watch him. Hopefully the Broncos can get past Tom Brady.”

I thanked Johnson on the phone for his time, and he said before hanging up: “Hey, give him a little grief about that dance class.”

Done.

Benjamin Hochman: bhochman@denverpost.com or on Twitter @hochman