"New Jersey is not alone in having its costs all over the map."

When a consulting firm looked at how much standard medical tests cost in 30 cities around the country, they expected to see some variation in fees.

But when NJ Advance Media asked the company to determine prices specific to New Jersey, it produced a surprise:

Northern New Jersey has the most expensive mammograms in the nation for those who have health insurance through their employer.

The company, Castlight Health, advises companies on their health insurance options. The data it looked at was from claims of the 180-plus companies nationwide that are its clients. That means it doesn't include people who aren't insured, pay directly for their own insurance, or are covered by Medicaid or Medicare.

Those employees were charged an average of $637 in northern New Jersey for a mammogram - far above Sacramento, which had topped the first version of Castlight's list at $485. The cheapest place to get a mammogram? Cincinnati, Ohio, at $159.

Additionally, the data show a huge range of what New Jersey companies pay for their employees' mammograms - from a minimum of $201 to a maximum of $1,898.

"It's a high cost and a wide range, and it's unclear what exactly is going on," said Kirsten Torres Mowat, with Castlight. "That's the big thing to call out here: the fact there is no rhyme or reason for what's charged. New Jersey is not alone in having its costs all over the map."

The state's high cost is not a function of supply-and-demand in which a scarcity of facilities might drive up prices: New Jersey has 236 accredited mammogram facilities, according to the N.J. Department of Environmental Protection.

The mammogram they looked at was a straight-forward annual screening mammogram, not a diagnostic one that might require extra steps. Under the Affordable Care Act, screening mammograms are covered as part of preventive care.

That said, a costly screening mammogram most likely indicates that other, more complicated mammograms are equally costly, Mowat said. And even if the employee/patient has no out-of-pocket expenses for that procedure, its high cost is pushing up the expense for her company. That cost may trickle back in next year's premiums.

While the employees in the study all had insurance, its data shows New Jersey patients who might not have insurance face a daunting task when trying to find an affordable mammogram. Facilities are reluctant to state prices in advance, wary that a patient might require extra time or extra images, Mowat said.

Adding to the mystery of the state's costly mammograms is New Jersey's rank when it came to other basic tests. In those areas, it is in the middle or the bottom of the pack for cost. It ranked 27th for thep price of an OB/GYN follow-up visit, 9th for a lipid panel test, and 7th for a lower back MRI.

The counties included in Castlight's New Jersey analysis are Bergen, Essex, Hunterdon, Hudson, Mercer, Monmouth, Middlesex, Morris, Passaic, Somerset, Sussex, Warren and Union.

The mammogram fees in the study were what the facility charged to do the test, not what the radiologist charged to read the film.

Mitchell Miller, president of the Radiological Society of New Jersey, said he, too, was bewildered by the large range of costs. He speculated that New Jersey's fees might be higher because facilities were buying more expensive equipment in order to offer digital mammograms along with tomosynthesis, which takes a three-dimensional image of the breast. They might be hiking fees on all types of tests to cover the cost of that new equipment, he said.

The big range in mammogram prices - from $200 to nearly $1,900 - is further proof that the health care market "doesn't function like a normal market," Mowat said. What's missing in health care is a sense of value, some common sense of what you pay for and what you get."

Kathleen O'Brien may be reached at kobrien@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @OBrienLedger. Find NJ.com on Facebook.