Martin Reaves, 2009 New Vista alum, raising money online for project

To donate to the Skate Ray online kck.st/1suyw22

Before he was the founder of a startup, Martin Reaves was a slalom skateboard world champion.

He practiced constantly. The only problem was, when darkness fell each night, his options for riding were limited.

Reaves, a 2009 New Vista High graduate, believes he has found a solution.

He has created the Skate Ray, a waterproof, LED light that attaches permanently to the front a skateboard or longboard so that skaters can ride all night long.

He's raising money for the Skate Ray online through a Kickstarter campaign that will help get his business off the ground.

Reaves, 23, raced longboards professionally throughout high school, most notably winning a slalom skateboard world title in 2009. He left Boulder for college at Montana State in Bozeman, and has since graduated with a degree in mechanical engineering.

Throughout his time in Bozeman, Reaves tweaked the design for the Skate Ray and solicited help from other engineering students. Last summer, he finished the Skate Ray prototype, attached it to his board and set off riding in the dark.

"People were pretty into it," he said. "That was when I figured that maybe it was worth trying to pursue (the Skate Ray) further."

The Skate Ray is compact at less than one centimeter tall, and fits in between the bottom of the board and the trucks, the component that attaches the wheels to the board.

It's waterproof and has an on and off switch, so Reaves recommends leaving it on the board at all times. Users can recharge the Skate Ray battery with a micro-USB cable, he said.

Reaves and his team designed their own lens for Skate Ray so that the light is focused directly in front of the board in a V shape. The light shines for between 30 and 40 feet ahead of the rider, he said.

His team also has created a red Skate Ray for the back of a skateboard, much like how cyclists often ride with two lights at night.

New Vista High alum Martin Reaves has designed the Skate Ray, a light that attaches to the front of a skateboard for riding in the dark. (Courtesy Photo / Daily Camera)

In the past, people have worn headlamps when riding in the dark, but Reaves said that isn't ideal.

"The problem is you have to remember to bring a headlamp when you go skateboard," he said. "A lot of people are using longboards for transportation now, so riding to class or to work or the store. You might not remember to bring one and then it gets dark."

One of Reaves' partners is Justin Hogan, who recently finished his doctoral degree at Montana State in electrical engineering. Hogan decided to join Reaves' team when he learned that the Skate Ray could help encourage people to drive their cars less.

"I'm a big fan of alternative transportation and anything that legitimizes other means of transportation is always intriguing to me," Hogan, 29, said. "Adding a light to a skateboard would enhance safety and usability and maybe get other people to use it."

The team designed the Skate Ray so that it's easy to take apart and reassemble at home. Reaves said he fully expects the technologies used in the Skate Ray to evolve, and he doesn't want the product to be obsolete in a few years.

"That's a trend in general we need to be doing with our technology," he said. "Just how many cell phones and computers and printers are sitting in landfills right now because that wasn't a priority."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Sarah Kuta at 303-473-1106 or kutas@dailycamera.com