Terry Branstad (Photo: Special to the Register)

Gov. Terry Branstad is not joining some of his Republican colleagues in asking the U.S. Supreme Court to toss out a key part of the Affordable Care Act.

Iowa’s governor joined a 2011 lawsuit that sought to have the court throw out the entire law, also known as Obamacare. But Branstad is not adding his name to the current challenge, which seeks to shut down part of the law.

The challenge, called King vs. Burwell, asks the court to declare that the Affordable Care Act doesn’t allow people to obtain public subsidies for health insurance purchased on the federal online marketplace, called healthcare.gov. The lawsuit contends that such subsidies are only allowed for insurance purchased on state-run systems.

Most states, including Iowa, decided not to set up their own marketplaces, and are instead relying on the federal system. About 30,000 moderate-income Iowans obtained subsidized health insurance that way last year. If the Burwell challenge succeeds, those people could lose their subsidies, which often amount to hundreds of dollars per month.

Branstad spokesman Jimmy Centers said Monday that the governor has not fully reviewed the current lawsuit’s arguments, which the Supreme Court is expected to hear in March. “Though Gov. Branstad has not joined in this particular lawsuit, he continues to believe Obamacare is unaffordable, unsustainable and creates too much uncertainty for Iowans. The implementation of this law has been flawed from the very beginning,” Centers wrote in an email to the Register.

Centers alluded to Branstad’s 2013 choice to accept a modified version of Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act. Under that plan, some poor Iowans are receiving private coverage with federal money paying the premiums. Many others are receiving public insurance, similar to Medicaid but with some conditions, including that they participate in health screenings. Branstad “remains focused on health care reforms that improve care, lower costs and, most of all, empower people to take ownership over their health care outcomes,” Centers wrote.

State Sen. Joe Bolkcom, an Iowa City Democrat who is one of his party’s top leaders on health care issues, said he was “pleasantly surprised” that Branstad has not offered formal support to the current legal challenge.

Bolkcom said the governor’s position suggests Branstad understands the value of the subsidized insurance. “If we’re going to become the healthiest state, it’s pretty important that people have health insurance when they get sick,” Bolkcom said, referring to Branstad’s stated goal of making Iowa the healthiest state in the nation.

Fourteen states have their own insurance marketplaces, also known as exchanges. They would not be affected if the Supreme Court agrees with the current legal challenge. Iowa accepted millions of dollars under the 2010 Affordable Care Act to work toward having its own exchange, but Branstad decided in 2012 that it would be better to use the federal government’s system.

A New York Times article Saturday indicated that numerous Republican governors have not formally endorsed the current legal challenge to health-insurance subsidies obtained on the federal marketplace.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1BVjXeH