John Stossel (Mediaite)

Fox News’ John Stossel thinks LGBT people should be protected from discrimination – but not when Christian business owners don’t want to serve them.

“I think this movement has moved from tolerance to totalitarianism – the totalitarianism of the left,” Stossel argued.

The libertarian pundit appeared Wednesday on “The O’Reilly Factor,” where he and host Bill O’Reilly discussed Indiana’s controversial Religious Freedom Restoration Act, reported Mediaite.

O’Reilly and his guest agreed that a Christian baker should not be able to “stop two people from getting married to anybody they want,” although neither of them called for marriage equality.

“This is not about religious rights — it’s about individual freedom,” Stossel said, arguing that Christian bakers should not be obligated to bake wedding cakes for same-sex unions. “You shouldn’t have to prove that you’ve got this religion.”

O’Reilly disagreed, saying that religious objectors must prove a reason for denying service or they risked breaking the law.

“Look, if a black couple comes in and the baker says, ‘I’m not going to bake the cake because you’re black,’ that’s a crime,” O’Reilly said.

Stossel wasn’t so sure that should apply to LGBT customers.

“Given America’s history, blacks are a special case, but your point was good about exclusivity.” Stossel argued.

Stossel argued that Hobby Lobby’s corporate religious rights were infringed by the Affordable Care Act’s contraception mandate, but O’Reilly said the U.S Supreme Court ruling on the case showed “the system actually worked there.”

“But they had to spend a gazillion dollars to prove they were religious?” Stossel said.

O’Reilly steered his guest back to liberal “fascism,” and Stossel suggested that anti-discrimination laws covering LGBT people could violate Christians’ constitutional right to freedom of association.

“A bigot ought to be allowed to be a bigot, and the way to fight it is to not patronize that store,” Stossel argued. “I wouldn’t go to (that) baker.”

O’Reilly agreed that the marketplace would encourage businesses to welcome all customers.

“The marketplace will dictate,” O’Reilly said. “All right, if you want to be a bigot, you have a right to be a bigot, but you don’t have a right to hurt someone in the process or bully them.”

Stossel said refusing to bake a wedding cake for a same-sex couple didn’t rise to that level.

“It’s not the same thing, but there has to be legal protections for homosexuals in this country – there has to be,” O’Reilly said.

Stossel said he agreed, but he argued that LGBT people were already protected under the law.

Watch this video posted online by Mediaite: