Fourteen Republicans running for President did their best to nail the job interview during the “Voters First Forum” Monday night.Each cast themselves as the most qualified candidate to grow the economy, protect the nation and fulfill the promise of America...The candidates took turns answering questions about pressing domestic and foreign policy issues. They criticized the Iran nuclear deal, funding for Planned Parenthood, and the Affordable Care Act.“Obamacare has been a manifest disaster,” Texas Sen. Ted Cruz said...Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, former Texas Gov. Rick Perry, and former New York Gov. George Pataki were among those calling for a more limited federal bureaucracy.Each sought to stand out in the crowded field during the forum at Saint Anselm College...Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker touted himself as a proven leader, based in part on winning three elections in four years. “I’m a new, fresh face,” he said.“I’m a different kind of Republican,” said Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul, calling himself a constitutional conservative who would do what it takes to defend the nation and protect liberties...Dr. Ben Carson and former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina underscored their status as Washington outsiders.Carson said “Obamacare” should be repealed in favor of a system that empowers consumers and gives them flexibility and choice. He touted the value of health savings accounts...Carly Fiorina also took aim at Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton. “We need a nominee on our side who is going to throw every punch,” she said.Ohio Gov. John Kasich called for eliminating “sanctuary cities” for illegal immigrants. He said his No. 1 priority is balancing the budget to foster economic growth...Kasich, a former congressman, noted he had a deep grasp of national security issues.South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham promised a muscular foreign policy. He described his policy as a global leader as “a clenched fist or an open hand: you choose.”..Rick Santorum touted his work on welfare reform as a former U.S. senator from Pennsylvania. Creating a better economic climate will help give incentives for people to work, he said.Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal said Washington needs to be more frugal...“We have a bunch of math deniers in both parties,” Jindal said about the need for fiscal belt-tightening.Florida Sen. Marco Rubio said 2016 is a pivotal time to address economic insecurity to ensure that future generations can achieve the American Dream...Perry said immigration reform must begin by securing the border. He, along with other current and past governors, boasted of gubernatorial successes.Walker said steps to protect the environment need to be balanced with economic concerns...“It’d be like a buzz saw to America’s economy,” he said of President Barack Obama’s clean power policies.“I think we’ve let our guard down a little bit,” Bush responded, when asked if the U.S. is doing enough to prevent another terrorist attack...N.J. Gov. Chris Christie said America must keep its promises to veterans for timely health care, even if it is an insurance card that allows them to get care wherever they want.Christie also called for treatment of drug abuse, in the face of the heroin scourge in New Hampshire and around the country...“The war on drugs has been a failure. Well-intentioned, but a failure,” Christie said.Cruz called the Iran nuclear deal a “catastrophic deal,” which would flow money into Iran, and on to terrorist organizations...Christie, Pataki and Walker pointed to accomplishments they have made while working in “blue states.”The first-in-the-nation primary event — the first of its kind during an election season with a slew of big-name candidates — aimed at giving all of the major candidates prime-time exposure...The New Hampshire Union Leader, a co-sponsor, first announced the forum following the Fox News decision that its debate criteria for the first televised debate Thursday would be limited to the top 10 candidates based on national polls...The two-hour forum was live on C-SPAN, and broadcast in New Hampshire on WMUR, NH1, NECN, WGIR and NHPR. WGIR’s Jack Heath served as moderator, with candidates joining him one at a time.Co-sponsors included media partners in Iowa, which holds the first caucuses, and in South Carolina, which holds the “First in the South” primary...The 14 participating candidates were: former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, Dr. Ben Carson, N.J. Gov. Chris Christie, Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina, South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, Ohio Gov. John Kasich, former N.Y. George Pataki, Sen. Rand Paul, former Texas Gov. Rick Perry, Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum, and Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker...Cruz, Paul and Rubio participated via satellite link from Washington, where the three were present for a vote in the U.S. Senate to defund Planned Parenthood.Billionaire real estate mogul Donald J. Trump declined to participate. Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee did not respond to an invitation to the event. Former Virginia Gov. Jim Gilmore, who just announced to become the 17th Republican candidate, did not make the deadline to confirm participation...dtuohy@unionleader.com..