Marquette High soccer players celebrate their fourth state title in the past five years. Credit: Michael McLoone

SHARE Arrowhead senior Emily Kolbow, who finished second at the state tournament, helped lead the team to its first title. Dave Kallmann

By of the

After winning its 14th-straight Journal Sentinel School of the Year honor, Arrowhead athletic director Kevin Flegner summed up what he thinks are the biggest keys to his school's success.

"The weight program that we have, which is one of the best in the state. I'd put it up against any in the country," he said. "Besides that, participation. I think those are the two that really stand out in my mind that separate us."

This year another component could be added: a strong contingent of fall sports.

Look at the biggest winners in the standings this year, Arrowhead and Milwaukee Marquette, and each was well on the way to its respective title before Thanksgiving.

Arrowhead, which won the overall and girls titles, got 21 of its 35 points from its fall sports.

Marquette had 13 of its 19 points in the fall. This is the boys-only school's first title since 2012 when it completed a run of five straight.

"We have really dedicated, smart student-athletes," Hilltoppers athletic director Bob Herman said. "The kids love to play. They love to compete. This year maybe there was more success, but that's the good thing about our program. We got kids that love to learn, love to compete and coaches who really enjoy what they do."

The honor is determined by a point system based on a school's performance in WIAA tournaments.

Schools received five points for a state championship and three for a second-place finish. Schools earned two points for reaching the state semifinals or for a third- through fifth-place finish. One point was given for reaching the state quarterfinals or a sixth- through eighth-place finish.

Arrowhead had an area-best four state titles. Up next was Marquette, DSHA and University School with three and Whitefish Bay, Wisconsin Lutheran and Catholic Memorial with two.

In the overall standings, Arrowhead was the clear-cut winner with 35 points. Next were Marquette and Whitefish Bay, which tied for second. The Warhawks took the girls standings with 22 points, five better than second-place Whitefish Bay.

Arrowhead could have won the overall title by its performance in the fall alone. It won titles in girls tennis and girls swimming and was runner-up in football and girls golf. Of the nine boys and girls fall sports, Arrowhead scored in seven.

"It was an exciting fall," Flegner said. "It got us off and running,"

Though Arrowhead is used to winning state titles, it was a breakthrough of sorts for the program. The girls swimming title came after three straight second-place finishes. Its gymnastics crown came after fifth-, fourth- and third-place finishes at state the past three years. The girls tennis title was its first championship.

"Tennis was definitely exciting for us," Flegner said. "Any time a sport wins it for the first time, that is truly a breakthrough and truly exciting for that team. And I think it was (extra) sweet to see an Arrowhead graduate (Gina Resch) come back as head coach and win it. That is something very special."

Marquette scored in each fall sport, winning titles in soccer and volleyball, reaching the semifinals in football and taking eighth in cross country.

Marquette won state titles in three of its most successful sports. Its state soccer title was its fourth in five seasons. Boys volleyball claimed its third crown in the last your years. The tennis team's title in the spring was its eighth in nine seasons. (The school also won the state boys wheelchair track and field title).

The football team enjoyed its deepest playoff run in five years. The basketball team reached the sectional final, its best tournament run since reaching the 2010 state semifinals.

The coaches for four of those five sports are Marquette grads — football's Jeff Mazurczak, basketball Casey Kowalewski, tennis David Frank and soccer's Steve Lawrence. Overall, more than half of the program's coaches attended school there.

"I think athletes are an important part of the high school experience," Herman said. "They're a great way to learn life lessons, but honestly athletes are a piece of a bigger puzzle at Marquette High of developing the whole person.... We want to develop a kid in all ways, not just athletics."

GIRLS/BOYS

Arrowhead 35

Milw. Marquette 19

Whitefish Bay 19

Wis. Lutheran 17

Catholic Memorial 16

Cedarburg 16

DSHA 15

University School 15

Shorewood 14

Nicolet 11

GIRLS

Arrowhead 22

Whitefish Bay 17

DSHA 15

University School 10

Catholic Memorial 10

BOYS

Milw. Marquette 19

Wis. Lutheran 15

Arrowhead 13

Cedarburg 9

Milw. Lutheran 8