ENLARGE Ron ‘Stray Dog’ Hall and Alicia Soriano Hall in director Debra Granik’s documentary ‘StrayDog.’ Photo: Eric Phillips-Horst

‘Stray Dog’

Elinor Bunin Munroe Film Center

144 W. 65th St.

(212) 875-5610

Friday–July 9

In 2010, “Winter’s Bone” made Jennifer Lawrence a star. Director Debra Granik didn’t follow up with another fictional feature, but instead made this documentary, latching onto a charismatic Vietnam War veteran who had a small role in her Appalachian drama. Ron “Stray Dog” Hall, a grizzled 60-something biker and Missouri RV park manager, commands the screen as much as any Hollywood ingénue. Ms. Granik leans back and takes in the complex tensions and joys of her thorny and endearing subject’s life.

‘Visions’

Anthology Film Archives

32 Second Ave.

(212) 505-5181

Sunday

A 1998 documentary celebrates New York’s avant-garde jazz scene, buzzing with protean sounds and passionate intellects onstage and off at the Lower East Side’s Vision Festival. The film was made by Susan Littenberg, a film editor whose nonfiction credits include Steven Soderbergh’s “And Everything Is Going Fine.” Its revival tops a program of films screened as part of the artist-run festival’s 20th anniversary, with documentaries about the late violinist Billy Bang and the prolific partnership of bassist William Parker and drummer Hamid Drake.

ENLARGE Queen Bee Ho in ‘Mala Mala,’ about Puerto Rico’s transgender culture. Photo: Strand Releasing

‘Mala Mala’

IFC Center

323 Sixth Ave.

(212) 924-7771

Through July 9

Among the audience favorites at the 2014 Tribeca Film Festival, this documentary explores a cross-section of lives in Puerto Rico’s transgender community. The filmmakers, Dan Sickles and Antonio Santini, connect with sex workers and stage performers whose colorful attitudes and anecdotes buoy a struggle to get by. They also get a bigger picture of the island’s LGBT culture, whether from Soraya, a 65-year-old sex-change pioneer, or Ivana, a high-profile activist. The cinematography evokes a seductive tropical noir. The filmmakers join one of the stars, April Carrion, for a Q&A after the 8:25 p.m. Friday show.

ImageNation Outdoors Festival

Multiple venues

imagenation.us

Through Aug. 22

A series of eight films in six city parks across four boroughs continues Monday at Marcus Garvey Park in Harlem with “Half of a Yellow Sun,” a 2013 historical drama about two sisters (Thandie Newton, Anika Noni Rose) set during the Nigerian Civil War. A performance by the sibling vocalists Les Nubians precedes the screening. There are more cinematic and musical pairings to come, including the Nas documentary “Time Is Illmatic” with Pete Rock, July 19 in Queensbridge.

ENLARGE Leon Russell in ‘A Poem Is a Naked Person.’ Photo: Janus Films

‘A Poem is a Naked Person’

Film Forum

209 W. Houston St.

(212) 727-8110

Through July 14

A posthumous gift from the great American filmmaker Les Blank (1935–2013) materializes on screen four decades after it might have, transporting audiences back to the early 1970s as if it were a boogie-woogie wayback machine. The film’s subject and patron is Leon Russell, a laid-back fusion of Hank Williams and Jerry Lee Lewis from Oklahoma, once called “The Master of Space and Time.” Mr. Blank disorders those dimensions, cutting from jocular performances (anyone you’d want to see at a Willie Nelson barbecue) to recurring interludes with hungry snakes and glass-eating eccentrics.