Most people spent their Sunday afternoon showing their mothers how much they appreciate them, but hundreds of area residents took a stand instead.

"It is amazing we got about 400 people here on Mother's Day and it shows how much mothers care about what's going on on the beach for their own families that live here," said local, Pauline Barnhale.

Members of the group, "Citizens For a New Panama City Beach" marched across the Hathaway Bridge to promote their cause.

"To show lots of community support for Frank McKeithen and his proposals that should be adopted by the beach city council," said Citizens for a New Panama City Beach organizer Wes Pittman.

Members of Citizens for a New Panama City Beach say they're holding this walk to rally the community before Tuesday night's city council meeting. They plan on attending it in full force and say they're not gonna take no for an answer when it comes to banning alcohol on the beach during spring break.

"If they don't vote the proper way this year, then we'll be back next year and there will be more national publicity and we're gonna drive this thing into the ground until we restore the community values, until we restore the reputation of our beach," said Pittman.

The controversy surrounding spring break has the community divided. "Citizens For a New Panama City Beach" was formed with the hopes of transitioning from a spring break party spot into a year round family tourist destination.

Another group called, "Citizens United For PCB" was formed and is made up largely of local business owners and service industry employees who say their livelihood depends on spring break, and they think changes need to be made without killing it.

"The bar I work at generates half a year's income in a months time and I get paid two or three times what a regular job would start at down here," said service industry employee, John Latham.

The main issue the groups differ on is banning alcohol on the beach. "Citizens For a New Panama City Beach" want alcohol to be banned on all beaches during spring break, but "Citizens United For PCB" think alcohol should only be banned in the hot zones during spring break.

"Once we ban the alcohol we'll lose 50-70 percent of the hard party people that come here, families will then see that it's okay to come here, we'll start to get the families and we'll actually start to get the good college kids back," said Citizens for a New Panama City Beach organizer, Hector Solis.

Both groups are expected to attend Tuesday's city council meeting, which was moved to Arnold High School since previous meetings on spring break were so crowded.