Ambulance rides in Tuolumne County are expected to increase 18 percent this year.

Manteca District Ambulance paramedic and Tuolumne County Ambulance Services chief operating officer Bill Caldera gave a presentation on local ambulance services to a group of senior citizens at the Elks Lodge. It was part of Sonora Regional Medical Center’s outreach program called Oak Plus.

Ambulances in Tuolumne County responded to more than 8,000 calls in 2015, the highest number in the county’s ambulance history, Caldera said.

This month, the ambulance calls are up 119 over last April, Caldera said.

Much of that can be attributed to increased insurance coverage of local residents through the Affordable Care Act.

The number of people enrolled in Medi-Cal doubled from the rollout of the ACA in 2014 to the end of 2015 in Tuolumne County, according to the Tuolumne County Department of Social Services. About 23 percent of the county was enrolled in Medi-Cal at the end of 2015.

That is good news for the people getting medical coverage, but it means low reimbursement rates for service providers.

An ambulance ride typically gets covered by Medicare at 80 percent, Caldera said. People with supplemental insurance usually don’t have to pay a balance, he said.

For a $3,000 ambulance ride, Medi-Cal will pay about $142. It’s illegal to bill Medi-Cal recipients for the balance, so the rest has to be written off, Caldera said.

About 20 percent of calls the ambulances in Tuolumne County respond to are “dry runs,” where the patient either doesn’t need to go to the hospital, doesn’t want to go to the hospital or is past the point of going.

People aren’t charged for “dry runs,” Caldera said.

This summer, the ambulance service will get another half-time ambulance. There are 11 ambulances in the fleet, and four of those are new Mercedes Benz ambulances under warranty. They arrived in 2015. The Mercedes ambulances were $2,000 cheaper than the Chevy one’s, and the maintenance costs are 40 percent less, Caldera said.

A new ambulance is $125,000; a gurney is $15,000; a heart machine is $36,000; and a medical bag with supplies is about $8,000.

The fleet drives an average of 259,000 miles a year.

EMTs start out making $11 per hour and work their way up in salary. Paramedics make $20 an hour and can make more than $72,000 a year plus benefits and retirement, Caldera said.

When Caldera started out as a paramedic in the late 1970s, he made $3.27 an hour.

Paramedics work 24-hour shifts.

There are five ambulances in service at any given time in Tuolumne County and, come July, there will be one more operating halftime. The ambulances serve a 2,200-mile area from the top of Sonora Pass to Knights Ferry, and from the Calaveras County line to Groveland.

In the 1970s, when formal ambulance services started, there was no state licensing, and paramedics in Tuolumne County were Search and Rescue members trained by a doctor.

Caldera worked at the lumber mill before going to paramedic school in Modesto. Before private organizations took over ambulance services, the ambulances in Tuolumne County were driven by funeral home employees.

The funeral directors had first-aid training, and the hearses had a double-sided sign with one side that said “Ambulance” and the other side said “Funeral home.”

“They never had a dry run. Everybody went somewhere,” Caldera said.