U.S. Rep. Greg Walden, R-Ore., has good news to deliver at Saturday’s town hall in The Dalles about progress to rename the local veterans’ clinic after a soldier who earned the Medal of Honor for heroism in Korea.

The town hall will be held in Wasco County will be held at 8:30 a.m. on May 21 at the Fort Dalles Readiness Center, 402 E. Scenic Drive.

Earlier this year, Walden introduced a bill to change the name of The Dalles Community Based Outpatient Clinic at 704 Veterans Drive to the Loren Kaufman Clinic.

Kaufman was killed in action on Feb. 10, 1951, and laid to rest at the Willamette National Cemetery.

He was born and raised in The Dalles and spent three years in combat during World War II before serving in Korea.

In 1950, Kaufman twice charged enemy lines while firing his rifle, throwing grenades, using his bayonet and seizing an unmanned machine gun to fight off the enemy.

For those actions, he was posthumously awarded the nation’s highest military honor.

This is Walden’s third try at getting a bill to rename the clinic through Congress, an effort that is supported by the entire Oregon delegation and major veterans’ organizations, such as the American Legion and Veterans of Foreign Wars.

“We’ve been working hard on this plan to honor a local hero and we’re looking forward to getting this done so he can be properly recognized,” said Andrew Malcolm, press secretary for Walden.

At the town hall, Walden will also provide an update about legislation that forces the U.S. Forest Service to complete a land exchange on Mount Hood. He is also striving to combat the growing opioid epidemic and obtain job-creating grants to grow rural economies. Walden, whose Second Congressional District spans 70,000 square miles and 20 of Oregon’s 36 counties, has held 10 town halls in 2016.

“I rely on these visits as one way to help me stay in close touch with local communities, and they’re where I get my ‘to do’ list to take back to our nation’s capital,” he stated in an announcement about the town hall.

Also on his discussion list is last week’s judicial ruling in favor of the House in a lawsuit against the Obama Administration’s alleged improper use of taxpayer dollars under Obamacare.

In November 2014, the suit was filed in response to the administration’s use of taxpayer dollars to make payments to insurance companies on the exchanges created by the Affordable Care Act.

GOP leaders believe that is an over-reach of the president’s authority as the constitution gives Congress the responsibility of making budget decisions.

“This administration has repeatedly expanded executive power and flouted basic constitutional principles,” said Walden following that ruling.

“This decision sends a clear message to the administration: they must follow the constitution and respect the role of Congress. This is a big step forward toward reining in the administration and protecting Congress’ power to decide how federal tax dollars should be spent. I am pleased that the court followed the plain meaning of the constitution and upheld the rule of law.”