Wednesday, January 20, 2016

The Southside and Dodson Avenue Community Health Centers, operated by the Erlanger Health System, have received a favorable operations report from the Health Resources & Services Administration (HRSA).

At last night’s board meeting, health center trustees learned that HRSA representatives were very impressed with recent progress in operations and have lifted all conditions on grant funding. The HRSA has requested another progress report The HRSA has requested another progress report

in 120 days

.

“I am pleased to say that the two Health Centers operated by the Erlanger Health System have made tremendous progress in recent months in providing services to the uninsured and underinsured in our community,” announced Henry Hoss, CPA, Chairman of the Board of the Community Health Centers.

Primary care utilization of the Community Health Centers over the last six months has increased 40%. Patient visits for dental services increased 69%. Beginning

July 1

, dental services will be expanded under a new agreement with the UT College of Dentistry. The dental college will bring the first dental training program in the region to the Health Centers, training dentists and providing dental services to underserved populations. The center currently has three dentists.

“The Southside and Dodson Avenue Community Health Centers have a new strategic plan and a new board representing the community,” said Joseph M. Winick, FACHE, Erlanger Senior Vice President of Planning, Analytics, and Business Development and Interim Executive Director of the Health Centers.

Rosemary Geiger noted, “As a new board member and a user of the Health Centers, I’m proud to have a voice in the development of programs and services to help improve our services to the community.”

To care for more patients at the Health Centers, new staff members have been added, including 7 new physicians. In addition, 30 residents from the University of Tennessee College of Medicine Chattanooga are now seeing patients at the health centers as part of their clinical rotations. Erlanger is seeking to retain residents in the community after they complete their clinical training, particularly residents with strong interests in working with underserved populations.

The Health Centers also provide assistance in enrolling area residents in insurance programs via the insurance exchange offered through the Affordable Care Act. In the last quarter of 2015, more than 500 individuals received assistance in insurance exchange enrollment.