Self-funded health plans: A new frontier for small businesses?

Small businesses have another option this year to potentially lower their spending on health insurance and increase control over their decision-making: self-funded employee group health plans.



Once solely a mechanism for larger employers to fund their health insurance costs out of operations, insurers in Southeast Michigan — including Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan, Priority Health and Health Alliance Plan — now are offering self-funded plans to small businesses with as few as 25 employees.



Executives say the response so far has been slow and represents less than 1 percent of small-group policies. But the insurers predict substantial growth over the next several years, especially in businesses with younger and healthier employees.



A 2011 Rand Health study found that the percentage of self-funding among companies with 100 or fewer employees could increase from 4 percent to 33 percent.



Aaron MacDonald, Blue Cross sales manager, said those double-digit numbers are probably high for Michigan. "That is a big move to self-funding," he said at a recent Blue Cross seminar on self-funding health benefit plans. "We expect those numbers to be lower in Michigan."



For small businesses, Blue Cross offers self-funded plans for companies with as few as 25 employees.



"Self-funding is not a cure-all, but it is one solution for small businesses that are interested in taking on more control," MacDonald said.



Other reasons companies are exploring self-funded health benefit options:

To avoid taxes and fees mandated by the Affordable Care Act that could add 1 percent to 3 percent to premium costs. For example, the comparative effectiveness fee adds $2 per member per month, and reinsurance fees add $5.25 per member per month.

To avoid a member-level rating in which employees and their dependents are charged based on their ages. Before Obamacare, companies could offer single, two-person and family rates.

To avoid complying with 10 essential benefits mandated by Obamacare. Self-funded plan designs can be flexible and less comprehensive.

Self-funded health plans have been increasing for all sizes of employer groups since 1999, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation.



Companies with 5,000 or more employees, however, have moved to self-funded plans the most, rising from about 62 percent of companies to about 95 percent. Smaller companies with three to 199 workers also increased self-funded plans to about 18 percent from about 16 percent of companies.





Bruce Marwil, president of Farmington Hills-based Marwil Associates, said he has advised several companies with 35 or more covered lives that are considering self-funded or partially self-funded plans.



"It is a discussion about risk, what their appetite is and what their long-term game plan is for employee benefits," Marwil said.



"A lot depends on the financial situation of the employer group. If cash flow is good and the workforce is younger and healthier, self-funding becomes a viable option."



For example, Marwil said, a 200-employee company was facing a 12 percent rate increase for 2014 and came to him for another option.



"The worst-case self-funded option was 4 percent less than the renewal, so they took it," Marwil said. "Six months into it, it is still too early to tell" whether the company saved money in its first year.



While some insurers are offering self-funded plans to employers of all sizes, Flint-based HealthPlus of Michigan prefers to offer self-funding options to employers with more than 100 workers.



HealthPlus views self-funding "as more of a strategy and less of a product," Kathy Bilitzke, manager of public relations, said in a statement.



"Our guideline for businesses considering self-funding is size, and we like to start with at least 100 employees," she said.



"That said, if our discussion with a smaller employer reveals that self-funding is viable, then we may suggest it. We take a group-by-group approach to developing each customer's best way forward."



Jay Greene: (313) 446-0325, jgreene@crain.com. Twitter: @jaybgreene

Related Links