First Church Of Cannabis To Open, Challenging Drug War And Religious Freedom Law

In addition to treating cannabis as a sacrament, the church’s commandments include respecting one’s body, other people, and nature, and opposing trolls and bullying on the Internet.

INDIANAPOLIS — On July 1, the same day Indiana’s controversial Religious Freedom Restoration Act, or RFRA, goes into effect, the First Church Of Cannabis will open its doors in the state.

RFRA is a state law that prevents residents, churches and businesses from being prosecuted for actions relating to a sincerely held religious belief. Critics of the law say it is meant to legalize discrimination against LGBT individuals, overruling laws that ban discrimination against them in business decisions.

Republican supporters of RFRA defended themselves against these accusations by pointing out that the law does not mention any specific groups or religions. And it’s precisely this loophole that Bill Levin, a resident of Indianapolis, hopes to exploit with his new enterprise: the First Church of Cannabis.



official MintPress sponsor official MintPress sponsor

By claiming that smoking marijuana is a sacrament, Levin, the church’s founder, hopes to circumvent state and federal laws banning its use by allowing members to smoke pot during services. Under RFRA, the state can only take actions which “substantially burden” a person’s religious expression “if it can demonstrate that it is the least restrictive means of furthering a compelling governmental interest.”

Levin and his flock are renting space in an abandoned church, using funds raised through an Internet crowdfunding site, and plan to hold their first services next month.

“Some neighbors said they aren’t too sure about the new church and think it is just a place to smoke dope,” wrote Jade Hindmon and Derrik Thomas for The Indy Channel.

For his part, Levin insists the church is based on genuine religious faith.

“This is what I live by, and I have more faith in this religion than any other,” Levin told the Indianapolis Star. “This is my lifestyle. This is millions of people’s lifestyle.”

According to Levin, the church does not worship cannabis, but uses it as a way to spread love. The church has outlined 12 commandments for worship, including a directive to never be a troll on the Internet. Worshippers are also told: “Don’t be an asshole. Treat everyone with love, as an equal.”

The IRS seems to agree that the Church of Cannabis is legitimate, at least enough to qualify for nonprofit status. “Our NOT FOR PROFIT 501 C3 status came in today… WE ARE 100 % a LEGAL CHURCH… All say HALLELUJAH and SMILE REAL BIG!… We are OFFICIAL!” announced Levin on the church’s Facebook page on May 26.

Earlier this month, Levin told Yahoo! News that while members will not be allowed to “buy, sell or trade” the plant, the church will be a “safe zone” for its use. He also described his plans for opening day:

“Levin, who has crafted titles for himself like Grand Pooh-bah and Minister of Love, described the upcoming service as a beautiful and moving ‘celebration of life’s great adventure.’

‘We’re going to do all the good things that churches do. Celebrate life, love, compassion and good health,’ Levin said. ‘Everyone is going to leave in a happy, spiritual, healthy way.’”

Watch the local RTV6 news report on the First Church Of Cannabis’ opening: