A man holds a Sony PlayStation 4 after he purchased it at the Lincoln Park Best Buy store in Chicago on Friday, Nov. 15, 2013. The PlayStation 4, which launched Friday, and the Xbox One, which goes on sale next week, face a much-changed gaming and entertainment landscape than their predecessors. (AP Photo/Nam Y. Huh)

3979914

Obama could learn a few lessons in marketing from the evil capitalists.

Sony seems to have found the recipe for selling products. Their rollout of the PlayStation 4 (and all the previous PlayStations) has been practically flawless. In light of the Obamacare rollout debacle and my expertise as a management consultant, I figured I could give America’s president a lesson in capitalism.

Here’s a short list of six things Obama could learn from the Sony PlayStation 4 debut:

1. Have a good product

It should go without saying, but step one to capitalist success is to have a product that people actually want. Apparently people want Playstations. They also want iPhones and they like using Travelocity and Amazon, all things Obama has mentioned in his speeches in comparison to Obamacare. Unlike Obamacare, when ordering from these organizations, you get what you pay for.

No matter how much Obama tries to associate Obamacare with highly sought-after products, it remains a pig on ice. High costs, higher deductibles and co-pays make Obamacare the black sheep, pun intended, of universal healthcare.

Out of the 308 million Americans, Obamacare debuted with a whopping 100 thousand enrollees in six weeks. The administration admits they were expecting five times that amount.

Let’s compare ObamaCare’s coming out to the iPhone, as reported in the Guardian.

The new iPhone 5S and iPhone 5 made Apple the top smartphone seller in the U.S. in September, despite only being on sale for 10 days of the month.

New data from Counterpoint Research provided exclusively to the Guardian shows that Apple sold 4.8m phones there in September, jumping to a 38 percent share of the entire U.S. smartphone market for the month. The figures include sales of the new iPhone 5S and 5C, which went on sale on September 20th.

Too bad Obamacare could not be marketed with a free iPhone.

Obamacare compares just as dismally to other consumer products, and people are not forced to buy them. The lesson here is the majority of the people did NOT want ObamaCare. 85 percent of the population were insured. Obama unilaterally deemed these existing policies “junk insurance” plans, apparently based on his extensive knowledge of sports.

2. Know your market

It’s good to know your market when you launch a product. Sony had an embedded market, but they didn’t presume they would necessarily maintain their market share.

Sony test-marketed their PlayStation 4, and correctly anticipated the reaction, reported CNN.

Shoppers lined up outside many stores across the country for a special midnight debut of the system, hoping to grab up one of the limited supply. Analysts expect the demand for the system to outstrip supply through Christmas. Sony’s forecast is that it will sell 5 million of the PlayStation 4s by the end of March.

Obamacare had no market. The plan was to pilfer the existing market in the style of a drug dealer taking over a new territory — by force. Obama and his minions got the polling data, which were lethargic to say the least. They disregarded reality, and launched a product whose only hope of survival was to mandate that people buy it.