Indianapolis Colts quarterback Andrew Luck (12) passes as tackle Anthony Castonzo (74) provides protection on his blind side. Credit: Associated Press

By ,

Indianapolis — Andrew Luck and Andy Dalton have similar achievements listed on their résumés — and similar glaring holes.

Each made the Pro Bowl as a rookie. Each has three straight seasons with double-digit wins. Neither has missed the playoffs, and both understand their legacies will be determined by postseason successes and failures.

On Sunday, the two young quarterbacks get another chance to fill in some of those gaps when the Indianapolis Colts and Cincinnati Bengals meet in a wild-card game.

"I don't think just getting to the playoffs has ever been good enough in this building," Luck said.

The Colts' franchise quarterback learned his lesson the hard way.

After directing one of the greatest one-season turnarounds in National Football League history in 2012, Luck came up short against eventual Super Bowl champion Baltimore in the first round of the playoffs.

Last year, after engineering the second-biggest comeback in postseason history, Luck spent the off-season pondering how to reduce turnovers. He blamed himself for throwing three interceptions that helped put Indy in a 28-point deficit against Kansas City, and then threw four more picks the next week in a 43-22 loss at New England.

Now Luck is eager to prove two-time AFC South champion Indianapolis (11-5) is ready to take another big step.

Dalton's postseason problems are just as obvious.

In three playoff games, all losses, he's thrown one touchdown pass, six interceptions and accumulated a passer rating of 56.2. Another defeat would put Dalton in a tie with Warren Moon for most consecutive opening-round playoff losses by a quarterback.

History is not on the Bengals' side, either. Cincinnati (10-5-1) is 0-6 in road playoff games, has lost seven straight in Indy and hasn't won in the playoffs since January 1991.

If Dalton ends that misery, he might finally silence the critics.

"Winning in general is how quarterbacks are judged," Dalton said. "If you win a lot in the regular season but you haven't won a lot in the postseason, then they're going to say that you couldn't do something."