Antonio Nieto

The trial for a man accused of sexually assaulting two women in a Broomfield nursing home is slated to start Monday.

The case against Antonio Nieto, a former nursing assistant at Broomfield Skilled Nursing, involves two victims who were patients during Nieto's employment at the facility. The two victims, who were 59 and 73 years old, reported Nieto sexually assaulted them while he was assigned to their care.

The trial could take about a week, because of the high number of jurors that will be called for the trial, according to the Broomfield court clerk's office.

Between 80 and 85 potential jurors will be called for the trial.

In July, when the trial was last scheduled, Judge Francis Wasserman said the high number of jurors was "in an abundance of caution" because of the high profile nature of the case.

The trial was supposed to start on July 7, but was delayed because of a motion for discovery violation, according to the court clerk's office.

Nieto has pleaded not guilty to four counts of sexual assault on an at-risk victim and two counts of unlawful sexual contact on an at-risk victim.

Lawyers in the case were looking into whether a possible third victim, a 93-year-old woman, would be part of the trial, but agreed in July there was not enough evidence to include her in the case, in part because she has dementia and did not make an official report to police.

Advertisement

Nieto started at Broomfield Skilled Nursing in January 2013, and was working there when he was arrested on Aug. 15, 2013, according to an arrest affidavit.

The first assault was reported to nursing home staff in July 2013, but Nieto was allowed to continue working at the facility after an internal investigation determined the incident was "unfounded," according to the arrest affidavit.

The nursing home contacted police when the second victim came forward on Aug. 14, 2013, the affidavit states, and Nieto was arrested.

Megan Quinn: 303-410-2649, quinnm@broomfieldenterprise.com or twitter.com/meganquinn2