Betty Noel (Photo: Contributed)

The Wausau Community Development Authority's mission is twofold: to promote adequate, affordable housing, economic opportunity and a suitable living environment free from discrimination; and carry out blight elimination, slum clearance, and urban renewal programs and projects.

The WCDA is a quasi-governmental entity governed by a 7-member board appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the City Council. It is not included in the city budget and receives no city tax dollars to operate but rather receives its funding from HUD and rents collected each month from WCDA-owned housing.

The Authority owns 46 Public Housing units located throughout the City of Wausau. These units, also referred to as Scattered Sites, consist of 10 duplexes, 20 single family homes and 1 six-unit structure. These units range from 1-4 bedrooms with rent based on 30% of the family's monthly adjusted income.

Riverview Terrace Assisted Living is a 36-unit Residential Care Apartment Complex located near Wausau's downtown and licensed to provide each resident up to 28 hours per week of supportive, personal and nursing services. A midday meal is provided seven days a week and supportive service staff is onsite and available daily from 7:30am–9:00 pm. Our caring staff and professionals will always see to it that you or your loved one is well taken care of and daily needs are met.

Riverview Towers is a ten-story, 149-unit housing development also located near downtown with a view of Rib Mountain and the Wisconsin River. Originally built in 1969, Riverview Towers underwent an $11 million renovation in 2013, financed with WHEDA tax credits, Federal Home Loan Bank funding and WCDA reserves. The WCDA partnered with Gorman & Company to facilitate the project which provided jobs for many local contractors. This newly renovated smoke-free apartment complex offers high-quality, affordable rent based on household income for 55+ and disabled adults.

The WCDA also administers the Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) Program. A family that is issued a voucher is responsible for finding a suitable housing unit from the private rental market that meets the requirements of the program. A housing assistance payment (HAP) is paid directly to the landlord by the WCDA on behalf of the participating family. The family then pays the difference between the actual rent charged by the landlord and the amount subsidized by the program. The WCDA currently administers vouchers providing monthly rental assistance to approximately 220 low income families in the Wausau area. Unfortunately, due to funding limitations and the high demand for this program, this waiting list is currently closed.

If you have an interest in any of our programs or would like more information you may visit us on the City of Wausau's website or call the WCDA office at 715-261-6687. Although this article addresses only the housing side of the WCDA's mission, a subsequent article will address the redevelopment side.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1FMIZxu