Bernie Sanders addresses the crowd Tuesday during the “Future to Believe In” rally at Big Sandy Superstore Arena in Huntington. Thousands listened to him speak about his policy views before the upcoming primary election on May 10. See video at wvgazettemail.com.

Just as polls closed in Connecticut, Delaware, Maryland, Pennsylvania and Rhode Island, Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders took the stage at Big Sandy Superstore Arena to a roar from West Virginians.

While Sanders drew a large crowd, voters in Pennsylvania dealt him a loss in what some considered a must-win state.

The self-professed Democratic-Socialist spoke for almost an hour on the core issue of his campaign­ — the economy­­ —specifically referencing West Virginia in examples of income inequality, the opioid epidemic and the fight against climate change.

Around halfway through his speech, Sanders mentioned a West Virginia county for the first time — McDowell County.

“McDowell County here in West Virginia is one of the poorest counties in the United States of America,” Sanders said. “In McDowell County, 77 percent of the children under 18 are living under poverty. In McDowell County many can only expect to live to the age of 63.”

Sanders used McDowell to talk about income inequality, the basis of his campaign. He said that America, as the richest country in the world, should not have counties as poor as McDowell.

To solve the problem, he talked about raising the minimum wage, making college tuition free, corporate tax reform and creating jobs through investing in infrastructure — solutions that brought the roughly 6,000 Sanders supporters to the arena.

He also addressed the opioid crisis, the topic on which he elicited the biggest cheers of the night.

“We have reached the conclusion that we must deal with the issue of drug addiction as a health issue and not a criminal issue,” he said.

Instead of treating drug addiction as a criminal problem, Sanders said it should be treated as a public health crisis.

“We have got to revolutionize mental health treatment in America,” Sanders said. “We have got to provide treatment when they need it, not six months from then.”

He used the crisis to talk about how he felt that the Affordable Care Act didn’t do enough and that America should move to a single payer system.

He also used the opioid crisis to talk about how marijuana should be decriminalized, which caused the crowd to cheer loudly.

When addressing climate change, Sanders acknowledged that it was a divisive issue in the state. He didn’t back down from the position that climate change is real and that the United States needs to put in place a carbon tax.

But he did say that coal miners and natural gas workers who are put out of work deserve jobs, which mirrors proposals from former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and President Barack Obama.

“We have a moral obligation to protect those workers in the fossil fuel industries,” Sanders said.

For the most part, Sanders did not attack Clinton. The only thing he challenged her on was her support of trade agreements. Sanders said that trade deals sent American jobs overseas, putting many people out of work.

“Our message to corporate America is, ‘You want us to buy the products you make? Then make those products here in West Virginia,’” he said.

Speaking a few minutes away from the Marshall University campus, Sanders stressed his free tuition program. In Scandinavian countries and Germany, he said, people are able to go to college for free.

“They understand that investing in the young people is investing in the future of their country,” Sanders said.

He added that student loan debt should be forgiven, because too many Americans are paying too much in student loans.

“They can’t afford to buy a car — to buy a car, to get married, to have kids, because they are paying off that debt,” he said. “For what crime did they commit? Getting an education? That is nuts.”

Sanders did not talk about the polls that closed Tuesday night — by the time he had finished speaking, Pennsylvania, Maryland and Delaware had been called for Clinton, while Sanders led in Connecticut and Rhode Island. But Connecticut was called for Clinton shortly after he finished speaking. Even with some upset victories Sanders still trails Clinton in the delegate count.

“I hope that on May 10, West Virginia will have the largest voter turnout in the history of the state.”

In the 2012 primary election, West Virginia had a record low voter turnout of 20 percent, the lowest since 1972.

“I hope very much that West Virginia will join the political revolution,” Sanders said.

Reach Andrew Brown at andrew.brown@wvgazettemail.com, 304-348-4814 or follow @andy_ed_brown on Twitter.

Reach Daniel Desrochers at dan.desrochers@wvgazettemail.com, 304-348-4886 or follow @drdesrochers on Twitter.