WSIL --The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services is telling people who sign up for health coverage under the Affordable Care Act to expect higher premiums in 2016.

In Illinois, the average increase is expected to be just over 6 percent.

"Healthcare costs continue to rise and increase at alarming rates," said Jamie Simmons, a Carterville-based health insurance broker.

How much, and if, a premium on a plan changes will vary person to person. Government subsidies could balance out the cost for some people who qualify.

"I received about a 23 percent increase personally," Simmons said.

He received a letter this week informing him he will pay $100 more a month for his Blue Cross Blue Shield health plan.

"It basically says, 'Your basic plan will be discontinued on December 31st,'" Simmons said.

He's being transferred to a new plan that costs more. Blue Cross Blue Shield blames the change on the cost of health care and changes in the makeup of their membership.

Simmons is one of hundreds of thousands in Illinois who will see changes when they sign up for insurance under the Affordable Care Act, starting November 1.

"They are going to see a plan change, a rate increase, a network change in some cases. So it's going to be quite an interesting three months," Simmons said, referring to the time frame people have to enroll.

Shawnee Health Alliance Outreach Director Nancy Muzzarelli says price and coverage changes will vary from person to person, with some seeing only a slight increase.

"There's so many variables to this that people shouldn't make any assumptions," Muzzarelli said.

Although the federal government is predicting rate increases across the board, Muzzarelli points out the subsidies some people qualify for under Obamacare should also increase.

"The whole purpose is to make this affordable and people shouldn't assume that it's not," Muzzarelli said.

There are multiple factors that are prompting insurance companies is to ask for rate increases, including changing technology, Muzzarelli said, and it's a trend that will continue in the future.

"Healthcare costs continue to rise worldwide," Muzzarelli said.

Muzzarelli encourages people to check on their plans and see if rates, coverage and what they pay as a deductible, have changed.

Open enrollment under the Affordable Care Act starts November 1 and runs through January 31.

If you have questions about your insurance coverage, and what changes might be ins tore, Shawnee Health Alliance provides free consultations.

The Simmons group, a Carterville insurance company, will host a free "breakfast with a broker" on Thursday, November 5. The event will go from 9 a.m. to 12 p.m. at the Pavilion in Marion. The group will answer questions about getting health coverage.