Photo

Readers react to a call for better coverage for psychiatric care.

To the Editor:

It has been a decade of tragedy. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports increasing suicide rates since 2000. News articles about mass shootings and extreme violence are routine.

The urgency for enhanced mental health services could not be more compelling. Congress responded with the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008, intended to end longstanding insurance practices that discriminated against people with mental illness and drug and alcohol addictions.

Beginning in 2014, the parity law’s reach will become even broader as millions more Americans gain mental health coverage under the Affordable Care Act. But it won’t be good enough. Many consumers will still face impossible barriers to getting needed mental health and substance abuse services.

Insurance programs can pick and choose which services to approve. A significant number don’t cover residential services, partial hospitalization or intensive outpatient care for people who need it.

Not to mention that many outpatient psychiatrists do not even accept insurance, requiring patients to pay out of pocket, as your article “Fewer Psychiatrists Seen Taking Health Insurance” pointed out. It cites a study showing that a mere 55 percent of psychiatrists accept private insurance and Medicare, while only 43 percent accept Medicaid, far less than other doctors. This is not likely to change, as the demand for psychiatric care far exceeds the supply of physicians.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

There are numerous reasons for this disparity, although they mostly boil down to the fact that insurance companies, with their poor psychiatric reimbursements and intrusive reviews, provide little incentive for solo practitioners to accept them.

To really improve access to mental health care, insurance companies need to reform their policies. Otherwise, millions of Americans will continue to go without a diagnosis and without treatment, leading to more decades of tragedy.

HELEN M. FARRELL

Boston, Dec. 30, 2013

The writer is a psychiatrist at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and an instructor at Harvard Medical School.

Readers React

Dr. Farrell notes a number of barriers to mental health care, but does not acknowledge that much of the problem has been self-inflicted by psychiatry and the mental health profession, which have been co-opted by Big Pharma and its push to increase the diagnoses of both minor and major disorders to new heights.

This is the only explanation for a 40-fold increase in the diagnosis of bipolar disorder among youth and a doubling in adults. Rates of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder have tripled in some studies, while rates in Denmark have gone up fivefold. Naturally, these increases have resulted in an enormous increase in prescriptions for stimulants in both youth and adults. These figures undercut Dr. Farrell’s claim that “millions” are going without a diagnosis or treatment.

It seems to me that the evidence indicates that we are in fact overdiagnosing and overtreating, thus adding to the shortage of psychiatrists and other mental health professionals. The evidence further suggests that psychiatrists are prescribing simply on the basis of symptoms rather than on formal diagnoses, which may or may not be a good development given our flawed manual of mental disorders, but nevertheless further opens the treatment floodgates.

CHARLES E. DEAN

Apple Valley, Minn., Jan. 1, 2014

The writer is a psychiatrist.

While it is true that psychiatric services are poorly paid in general by insurance companies and particularly by Medicare and Medicaid, I am embarrassed by and disappointed in my colleagues who feel the solution is to accept only private-pay patients. With the median household income at about $52,000, it seems highly unlikely that most people could afford $100 to $200 a visit to a psychiatrist.

I believe that our professional organizations need to take a much more vigorous and insistent position with insurance companies and the government. Citizens deserve to have their psychiatric illnesses covered as well as their medical problems. And psychiatrists should be as well paid as other physicians.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

For psychiatrists to decide not to be involved in any insurance plans because of poor reimbursement and intrusive practices is simply to abandon multitudes of patients to their misery.

MARYALICE HOUGHTON

Milwaukee, Jan. 1, 2014

The writer is a psychiatrist.

Those of us who for years lobbied Congress to ban discriminatory mental health coverage practices understood that enactment of parity legislation was only a first step. As Dr. Farrell rightly observes, insurers still maintain practices that deny people access to needed behavioral health care. Most notably, those companies reimburse so poorly for psychiatric care that many practitioners do not accept insurance.

Shall we blame the psychiatrist? Consider that managing patients’ often life-threatening illnesses is rarely a 9-to-5 job. Yet after nine or 10 years of post-college professional training, and with at least $40,000 annually in overhead costs, psychiatrists can expect to receive insurance reimbursements no greater than what one might pay for an hour of a plumber’s time.

Mental health is integral to overall health. Insurers should be required to pay adequately for it.

RALPH IBSON

Washington, Jan. 1, 2014

The writer is a former vice president for government affairs of Mental Health America.

Dr. Farrell is on point regarding mental health insurance coverage. As a child and adolescent psychiatrist, I was once told by an insurance company representative that the $25-per-visit reimbursement rate was reasonable because I was expected to see six patients an hour: 10-minute visits with children and adolescents with complex mental health and developmental challenges.