First Choice Medical Group Features Unique Business Model

By Space Coast Medicine & Active Living // April 3, 2014

THE BUSINESS OF MEDICINE

BREVARD COUNTY • MELBOURNE, FLORIDA – First Choice Medical Group is reinventing the way Orthopedic medicine is delivered.

The brainchild of Brevard entrepreneur Chris Romandetti, President and CEO of publicly listed First Choice Healthcare Solutions, Inc. (FCHS), the Melbourne medical center of excellence is operated as a multi-specialty medical group strictly focused on the delivery of clinically superior musculoskeletal medicine and rehabilitative care through a patient centered approach that optimizes both medical outcomes and the patients’ care experience.

Offering one-stop shop for both state-of-the-art diagnostic and therapeutic services, First Choice Medical Group will serve as a model its management expects to replicate throughout the U.S.

“We have a very unique business model that delivers high quality service through cost-efficient operations,” said Romandetti.

“We are currently looking at other potential expansion sites in Florida with an ultimate goal of going national within the next 24-36 months.”

A keystone of the practice is its multidisciplinary team comprised of the “crème de la crème” of board certified physicians and care specialists. Moreover, First Choice Medical Group’s operations have been meticulously designed to address patient care, comfort and convenience.

“Our care experience starts the very moment a patient walks in the door,” said Romandetti, and went on to say:

“You don’t walk into a claustrophobic little office, nor will you see those impersonal sliding windows we have all come to expect at doctors’ offices. The design and décor of First Choice Medical Group’s lobby and diagnostic and treatment areas define and reinforce a strong and relevant image of quality, patient-centric care. We have worked very hard to create an inviting, easily accessible and peaceful environment that helps to allay patient fear, anxiety and discomfort.”

Capitalizing on sweeping views of the Indian River, First Choice’s spa-like color palette provides a seamless connection to nature and promotes a palpable sense of good health and wellness. Located on U.S. 1 within Marina Towers, a six-story, 78,000 square foot building owned by FCHS, the medical center is distinguished through its engagement of advanced diagnostic technologies coupled with the latest in individualized care.

“Everyone on the First Choice team, from the receptionists to the doctors, is considered a caregiver who puts our patients first,” emphasizes Kris Jones, Vice President of Medical Operations.

“Our team cooperates with one another through a common focus on the best interests and personal goals of the patient. In fact, care is customized to ensure that each patient’s needs, values and choices are always considered. Our patients are cared for from the moment they call for an appointment until their treatment is completed.

“Everything we do, we endeavor to do in a timely and efficient manner. We have minimized typical inconveniences of medical treatment by combining diagnostics, outpatient surgery and physical therapy as part of our services – all under one roof,” Jones added.

By having the full treatment “arsenal” at one location, First Choice can improve the odds that each patient will receive an early diagnosis and immediate treatment, thus helping to prevent chronic pain syndrome, minimize permanent disability and/or avoid dependency on pain medications.

“I have not heard of any medical practice in this area which has a patient advocate on site dedicated to helping patients resolve virtually any issue, concern or frustration they may have,” said Kris Jones, First Choice Medical Group Vice President of Medical Operations. “After all, patient-centric, clinically superior care is not simply a slogan for First Choice, it is our promise each and every day.”

An additional benefit of being a First Choice patient is the patient advocate service provided to all of its patients.

“I have not heard of any medical practice in this area which has a patient advocate on site dedicated to helping patients resolve virtually any issue, concern or frustration they may have,” said Jones.

“After all, patient-centric, clinically superior care is not simply a slogan for First Choice, it is our promise each and every day.”

HEALTHCARE IN AMERICA AT THE CROSSROADS

Healthcare in America, as we all know, is at a crossroads. While the Affordable Care Act will enable more consumers to access healthcare, it may also create an overburdened medical system that could result in a more negative experience for patients and physicians, alike.

“Over the next two years, it is expected that 40 percent of physicians in the U.S. are going to leave private practice to join the staffs of hospitals, where they will likely become a ‘number’ and lose their ability to deliver personalized patient care,” said Romandetti.

“Many believe that it will be very, very difficult to remain as a stand-alone physician in the future, particularly considering the realities of today’s fast evolving healthcare environment, which include decreasing reimbursements and higher costs of complying with increasing regulatory reform and practice restrictions. First Choice has pioneered an innovative approach to medical group operations by adapting a retail services model that capitalizes on the changing dynamics of the medical services industry. Through this model, we provide patients with access to high-quality medical services with a human touch; and allow physicians to focus their full attention on practicing medicine by freeing them from the burden of nonclinical, administrative functions.”

EMPOWERING PHYSICIANS

Since First Choice handles all daily administrative functions, i.e. billing and collections, personnel credentialing, purchasing, advertising and compliance issues, its physicians are relieved of these time- and attention-consuming activities, which in turn allows doctors to be a doctors and focus exclusively on healing their patients.

“We liberate our physicians and empower them to do what they were trained to do,” added Jones.

It was freedom to focus on practicing medicine that led Dr. Richard Harrison to join First Choice Medical Group of Brevard.

“I wanted transparency, integrity, growth opportunities and the ability to be a doctor,” said the orthopedic surgeon.

“First Choice has delivered all of these requirements and more. I feel that I’m now an even better physician, because I am not distracted by business concerns and can be fully present with my patients.”

First Choice Medical Group physicians have been selected to be part of the trauma team at Health First’s Level 2 Trauma Center at Holmes Regional Medical Center. They also participate in other local hospital medical staff functions and are active members of local and national medical societies.

Currently, Romandetti and his management team are identifying key target markets with multi-specialty clinics or physician-owned practices that could benefit from the First Choice approach.

“Because we appreciate that patients and physicians, alike, always have a choice, it is our intent to ensure that our medical centers of excellence are always the obvious first choice,” said Romandetti.

TO CONTACT First Choice Medical Group call 321-725-2225 or log on to MYFCMG.com

Click here to contribute your news or announcements Free