Kiz: The Broncos are trying to keep the band together. But in the NFL’s salary cap era it’s a nearly impossible task, especially for the Super Bowl champion. Yes, guys play for the ring. But after hoisting the Vince Lombardi Trophy, a man wants to get paid. So is there any way Denver can retain Brock Osweiler and Malik Jackson? If not, which player should be the team’s top priority?

Renck: Osweiler. Everything in the NFL starts with a functional quarterback. The Broncos won last year with mediocre play at the quarterback position, but they aren’t repeating without improvement there. Osweiler represents the smoothest transition for the offense — and a chance to revive Demaryius Thomas, who slumped when Peyton Manning took the snaps. Thomas caught five touchdown passes from Osweiler and one from Manning last season. Google “best free agents available” and Jackson ranks as the top available or in the first three. With Jacksonville, Chicago and Oakland flush in salary cap space, the Broncos face a difficult challenge in persuading Jackson not to test the free-agent waters.

Kiz: In every season since John Elway took over as architect of the Broncos, there have been significant changes to the roster. He has said goodbye to popular players such as Elvis Dumervil, Eric Decker and Terrance Knighton. The NFL is all about roster churn. I think it would be a mistake to overpay for Osweiler or Jackson out of sentiment to keep the championship core together.

Renck: Elway has a breathtaking résumé as an executive because of discipline. He identifies a money number for a player, and will walk away if the player wants more. The problem with Osweiler is that his value covers a broad range. It will take more than Nick Foles’ $12.27 million annually, and I am sure the Broncos’ competitive offer to Osweiler reflected as much. But is Osweiler worth the $16 million that Cincinnati’s Andy Dalton receives? Given the bump in the salary cap, and the Texans and Rams needing a quarterback, he might be. It only takes one team to set the market.

Kiz: I know it all begins with the quarterback in the NFL. I also believe Jackson has more Pro Bowl potential than Osweiler does. So, call me crazy, but my approach to prioritizing between these two Denver free agents would be very straightforward: Put an annual salary of $12 million on the table. Haggle about specifics of the term and guaranteed money. See whether Osweiler or Jackson bites. Keep the first player to say yes. Let the other guy walk.

Renck: What if neither player bites? That is a real possibility, given the expected suitors for both. I am more confident in the Broncos keeping Osweiler than Jackson. But $12 million won’t get it done for Osweiler. Would $13 million or $14 million? Jackson is believed to be seeking $14 million to $15 million per season. He is not getting $15 million from the Broncos. He deserves to get paid, but the Broncos can’t give him elite money. Here’s why: He is the league’s top free agent, but arguably is the fifth- or sixth-best player on Denver’s defense.