The reconstructed Pike Stockade is a National Historic Landmark and is located 15 miles southeast of Alamosa in the San Luis Valley on the north bank of the Conejos River. The original fort was constructed in 1807. ( Kenneth Jessen / Special to the Reporter-Herald )

If you go The Pike Stockade is located 15 miles southeast of Alamosa near the intersection of County Roads Y and 24. The closest town is Sanford. The reach the stockade, travel south on 24 then follow the road east to its end. The entrance is marked by a sign. The area has parking, restrooms and a picnic shelter plus the reconstructed stockade. There are plaques that tell of the importance of the site. It is a pleasant location for a picnic, provided adequate mosquito repellant is kept handy.

In 1803, the United States negotiated with France for the Louisiana Purchase, but its extent was unknown. Presumably it included all of the rivers that drained into the Mississippi along with the Red River.

Some early maps showed its headwaters in the Rocky Mountains where in reality, the Red River starts in the Panhandle of Texas.

In 1806, Lt. Zebulon Pike led an expedition into what would eventually become the southern part of Colorado, but at the time, it was Spanish Territory.

Pike sought to find the headwaters of the Red River, made a number of blunders, first thinking that it was the Arkansas River, then seeing the Rio Grande also thought it was the Red River.

Some historians, however, speculate that his real mission was to determine the military strength of the Spanish army. The expedition consisted of a volunteer doctor plus 22 men including two lieutenants, a sergeant and a couple of corporals.

Advertisement

As he progressed south through the San Luis Valley, he elected to construct a stockade near the Conejos River in February 1807. Several men, who had received frostbite in crossing the mountains, were transported to the stockade to recover. Also, the fortress-like stockade was to ward off a potential attack by Indians or by the Spanish should Pike be discovered.

The log stockade was 36 feet square with walls 12 feet high. To maximize its defensive nature, entry required crawling over a plank through a small hole below the lower course of logs. Fastened to the inside of the walls were platforms to allow soldiers to shoot through holes located about 8 feet above the ground.

Although unimpressive, the stockade was the first building set up by Americans in Spanish territory and the first time an American flag was flown in what would become the state of Colorado.

During a hunting trip to supply meat for the stockade, the discharge of a rifle by Pike alerted a Spaniard and his Indian scout. As the Spaniard approached Pike, the lieutenant played dumb and explained that he was simply out hunting. His story did not make sense and although it is hard to understand, Pike invited the two of them into the stockade. The Spaniard reported back to his commander, and it wasn't long before the stockade was surrounded by soldiers.

Pike invited the two lieutenants into his stockade for breakfast and stuck to his story about the Red River. Acting surprised, Pike struck the American flag when told he was in Spanish territory.

Pike and his men were captured and taken first to Santa Fe then to Chihuahua, Mexico. They were released in July 1807.

The stockade was abandoned and rotted away, however, Pike had taken good notes as to its size and location. In 1926, the state of Colorado purchased the land, and in 1952, the stockade was reconstructed by History Colorado (formerly the Colorado Historical Society). It is a National Historic Landmark.

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years.