Boys Hockey: Faribault edges Red Wing in overtime

Red Wing's Dylan Goggin (front) gets past the Faribault defense for a shot attempt in the third period of Saturday's Big Nine Conference game at Prairie Island Arena. (Republican Eagle photo by Joe Brown)

The good work the Red Wing boys hockey team put in over the first 50 minutes of Saturday’s season-opener came unraveled in the final minute of regulation.

Up 2-1 on Faribault at Prairie Island Arena, the Wingers were caught off-guard when they were called for too many men on the ice with 1:01 left to play.

“There was a communication error,” said Red Wing head coach Bob Rajanen. “It was late in the power play and we told the guys on the bench that we wanted to go with a regular five-on-five line because there was only five seconds left. One of the power-play guys jumped out and that was that.”

The mistake proved costly as the Falcons tied the game up when Austin Lewis fired a shot in traffic for his second goal of the game to tie it at 2-2 with 42.3 seconds remaining.

Still hoping to sneak away with a win, the Wingers needed to get past the mental gaffe and play the same hockey that got them the lead in the first place.

“We just needed to do what we were doing: getting the puck deep and fore-checking hard and try and outwork ‘em,” Rajanen said.

Like they had played all game long, Red Wing and Faribault played an even overtime period before Lewis took a pass from Christan Von Ruden and got the puck in the net to complete the hat trick and the 3-2 come-from-behind win at 5:28 in overtime.

With both teams trying to gain traction in the 2014-15 opener, Lewis put the Falcons on the board first, scoring a power-play goal at the 9:15 mark of the first period. Tyler Becker collected an assist on the play.

The second period resulted in no scores for either team, but some frustration was mounting for the Wingers’ offense. They were down 1-0 despite staying within one shot on goal with Faribault (24-23 after two periods) and having a total of five power-play opportunities.

“We saw that every time we shot, the goalie had a good save, so we knew we had to put more shots on net and see what the goalie’s weaknesses were,” said Wingers senior forward Tristan Rehder. “In the locker room between that first and second period, we told each other that we needed more chances and hopefully one will go in at some time.”

Then early in the third, Rehder finally gave Red Wing the sorely-needed offensive lift with an unassisted goal at 4:35 of the third period.

“Their (defenseman) decided to pass it up to a weak-side wing, so I came up and intercepted the pass,” Rehder said about the buildup to his goal. “I went down and saw a guy in front of me and pulled a toe drag through his stick, took a rip and it actually went in.”

With the game tied and the pressure off, the Wingers were able to relax a little and put up more quality opportunities. And thanks to a hustle play by junior Sam Hanson, they were finally able to take a lead.

With Jamie Nevitt in the box for roughing, Red Wing was set to kill the penalty. But Hanson got a takeaway at center ice and proceeded to put in a short-handed goal just past the kick pad of Falcons goalie Chase Batchelder for the go-ahead goal.

“That was a hard-work goal,” Rajanen said of Hanson’s score. “He beat the defenseman clean on that and beat him to the spot. That’s the stuff we need to do to compete.”

Ultimately, special teams proved to be Red Wing’s undoing as Faribault converted on two of its five power-play chances while Red Wing was 0-for-5 with the extra man. Despite the loss, Wingers goalie Adam Defore put in a strong outing with 35 saves.

While Saturday’s game ended in heartbreak, it did give the Wingers (0-1-0) a better idea of the level of competition in the Big Nine. Red Wing’s next game will be on the road Tuesday against Rochester Century.

“That’s one of our most competitive games that I’ve ever played,” Rehder said. “Now we know we can compete with Big Nine Conference teams.”