Buy Photo Landgrab (Photo: Mark Marturello/Register illustration)Buy Photo

This is a piece about takings — the power of the government to appropriate or acquire private property for a public use or purpose — and politics.

It does not necessarily take any particular side as to whether any particular taking is right or wrong, appropriate or not. Rather, it is intended to say that contrary to some public outcry, it isn't some autonomous, big, bad, mischievous, out of control "Government" that effectuates takings. Instead, it is we the people who are, through our elected officials, the ones who actually effectuate takings.

We've been hearing more about the controversy relating to takings for just short of a decade now. But even more recently, as we potentially look forward to the construction of significant state and national public and quasi-public/private development and infrastructure projects, it has become even more of a major political hot-button issue. Almost no day goes by where there isn't some media mention about a private property rights matter in which the words "misuse," "abuse," "exploitation," etc., are used with respect to whatever government's eminent domain action might be.

For example, in Iowa, we know about controversial eminent domain projects like the Keystone pipeline; the Clarke County reservoir project at Squaw Lake; the Bakken pipeline across Iowa, and the Rock Island Clean Line direct-current transmission line. Less known statewide, but well known here in the prairie pothole region of northern Iowa, public and private agricultural projects are at issue, too.

Earlier this spring, we heard about Cliven Bundy's Nevada grazing controversy. It was mistakenly characterized as a takings issue. (It was the government's land he was on, not his own private property.)

Constitutional terms are short and sweet

The constitutional language of takings is short, simple and to the point. Federal: "nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation;" Iowa: "Eminent Domain Private property shall not be taken for public use without just compensation first being made ..."

Nevertheless, the controversy that the clauses engender is deeply dividing and can lead to strange bedfellows.

There are two general theories as to how the constitutionally enumerated power of eminent domain is vested in governments. The first is that it is an inherent power. A government that exists automatically has the power. The second is that it is a conferred power. That is to say, it has specifically been granted or conferred to the government by the people, through the people's adoption of a constitutional provision. In at least one instance, the Iowa Supreme Court has stated it is an inherent power as "being an inseparable attribute of sovereignty."

In either circumstance, however, the affirmative use of the power by government can almost always be controlled by elected officials in one of two constitutional ways: A lack of delegation of the specific authority to subordinate or quasi-governmental units; or through use of the legislative branch's powers relating to the "purse strings."

Eminent domain is one of the few situations where government isn't allowed to "gladly pay on Tuesday for a hamburger today." It has to pay for what it takes, almost universally right at the time it does so. Thus, the government can't take when there isn't any money for the taking purpose.

What officials are not supposed to do in trying to limit an affirmative act of eminent domain is to stand language on its head to create definitions of what does and does not qualify as private property or what does or does not constitute a public use or purpose.

Those determinations, being purely constitutional questions, sit solely within the purview of the courts. And the courts have been, are, and likely will continue to be protective of that interpretive authority when such questions are brought to their attention in individual cases.

As our Iowa Supreme Court said: "Inasmuch as the question of public use, in its last analysis, is judicial, the Legislature may not by a sweeping declaration, as was instantly attempted, foreclose such a question."

Tighter Iowa definitions result from 'Kelso' case

Nevertheless, as a result of the U.S. Supreme Court's decision in the Kelo case in 2005, which held permissible the taking of private property for a redevelopment project to be undertaken by a private developer, many elected bodies immediately reacted with such sweeping declarations. Iowa's Legislature was no exception.

Led by the Iowa Farm Bureau, with other interest groups on board, our Legislature adopted statutes in 2006 that attempt to limit or redefine the terms private property, public use, public purpose and public benefit.

In his veto message, Gov. Tom Vilsack noted: "Today, Iowa property owners are protected from eminent domain abuse by the United States Constitution and several statutes in the Iowa Code. Nonetheless, eminent domain should always be a last resort for governmental entities needing private property for a public purpose. In those very limited circumstances where the use of eminent domain is necessary, Iowa's existing laws lay out a very long and detailed set of steps and procedures that must be followed to protect landowners."

His veto was overwhelmingly overridden just two weeks later in a special legislative session. It was the first Iowa veto override since the 1960s.

Elected officials will remain in control

The likely judicial fallibility of much of the 2006 legislation aside, elected officials will still, and always should be, in complete control of affirmative acts of eminent domain. Even though the Legislature's newer limitations and definitions are ultimately subject to judicial constitutional interpretation (possibly in a manner contrary to that of what was drafted), all that has to happen is for the Legislature to revert to one of the two powers over which it has complete control: delegation of authority for use of the power or funding for any particular taking.

So, who am I having taken the time to write this piece? Some of you who've been reading this newspaper for the past 15 to 20 years may remember my name. Starting in the mid-1990s, I represented two Iowa farm families in Kossuth County, the Bormanns and the McGuires. I was the attorney for their successful inverse condemnation (a regulatory takings) challenge to an Iowa statute that had given certain nuisance lawsuit protection to large-scale hog lots.

In the end, the case's ultimate result probably has been more akin to the proverbial tempest in a teapot. I believe that has probably been a good thing for Iowa and Iowans all the way around. Some may disagree, but in my opinion it gave neighbors an additional tool to work with, while at the same time it did not have a drastic impact on the swine production industry.

Serendipity leads out-of-stater to Iowa

I sometimes wonder what dumb luck, serendipity or whatever you want to call it brought me to that place in the '90s when I met the Bormanns and the McGuires in rural Kossuth County. I'm not a native-born Iowan, but I have proudly considered myself one for the past 27 or so years.

I have an undergraduate degree in urban planning; served initially as a city planning and zoning officer; came to Iowa and Drake University for law school; worked summers during law school, first at a land use planning and engineering consulting firm and, then at a national land use law firm; moved to Algona to serve as a law clerk for an Iowa Supreme Court justice; and finally decided to stay in small-town Iowa, get married, raise a family and practice law.

I sometimes also like to look at the lives of those others who were involved in the case other than the Bormanns and McGuires.

There were my law school classmates, Eldon McAffee and Christina Gruenhagen, the primary attorneys on the other side of the case. All of us were students of Neil Hamilton's at the ag law center at Drake.

Eldon is now perhaps the most well-known, respected and interviewed practicing Iowa agricultural lawyer. Christina is now the Iowa Farm Bureau's government relations counsel and is its point person on most public policy issues.

Key players are still in prominent roles

Tom Vilsack, a primary drafter of the original protective nuisance legislation as a member of the Legislature, was elected governor for two terms shortly after the law was declared unconstitutional. He is now our United States secretary of agriculture.

Terry Branstad, who originally signed the nuisance protection law into effect as governor during one of his first terms, is now governor, once again.

Finally there is the lawyer John Roberts. He was brought in as lead counsel to appeal the Iowa decision to the U.S. Supreme Court. He is now the chief justice of that court, having been appointed by President George W. Bush.

So, here I am, about 20 years from the start of the Bormann case, writing that affirmative acts of eminent domain are ultimately political questions. As a result, we all need to ask political candidates, officeholders and their supporting interest groups where they stand on specific uses of the power for specific projects.

In doing so, we should recognize that is disingenuous for a group, entity, politician or anyone else to indict someone or the "Government" itself, for the use of the specific power or authority granted to it by the electorate. The electorate has the specific power and authority to make change.

THE AUTHOR:

MICHAEL GABOR is a lawyer in Algona. Contact: mgabor@buchlaw.com.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1uz1bqk