Operating loss widens at Highmark parent

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Highmark Health's operating loss expanded last year as the company failed to turn profits from either its health insurance business or hospital and doctor network in a highly competitive market in Western Pennsylvania.

The nonprofit, formed in 2013 as the parent of health insurer Highmark Inc. and hospital system Allegheny Health Network, on Wednesday reported a loss from operations of $178 million last year, up from $126 million the year before.

Investments in Allegheny Health Network and negative results from selling Affordable Care Act health plans contributed to the widening loss, the nonprofit organization said.

The health insurance subsidiary would have turned a profit if it had recorded $155 million it expects to recoup through a federal government program set up under President Obama's health law to reduce the risk of selling policies through federal and state marketplaces, officials said.

Highmark attracted the most subscribers in the state through HealthCare.gov last year, and signed up a total of 162,000 members in Pennsylvania, Delaware and West Virginia.

“With most insurance companies in this sector, the insurance business brought on by Affordable Care Act has led to minor to moderate losses in its first year,” said Anthony Beato, an analyst with Standard and Poor's.

“We expect earnings to rebound” at Highmark in coming years, he said.

Highmark's health insurance business, under pressure from UPMC Health Plan and three large, national insurers, produced what it called “break-even” results in 2014, a significant decline from the previous year's operating income of $309 million.

Highmark Health invested $500 million across its businesses last year, partly to bolster Allegheny Health for competition with UPMC by recruiting new physicians, adding medical services and building outpatient centers.

It also is expanding its retail vision business, Vision Works, and started HM Health Solutions, a company that provides technology and other services to 11 Blue Cross health plans in seven states.

Its surplus dropped to $5.4 billion, down from $5.8 billion.

Highmark Health last month asked state regulators to allow it to infuse $175 million into Allegheny Health, saying the region's second-largest hospital network needed cash to pay bills and make capital improvements. A state decision is pending.

Last year, the hospital network narrowed its operating loss to $37 million, down from a $402 million loss the previous year. The 2013 loss was made worse by a one-time non-cash accounting charge of $311 million.

“Allegheny Health Network continues to deliver on its turnaround,” said Karen Hanlon, Highmark Health's chief financial officer.

Beato said the network is making progress on returning to profitability, though he cautioned that success is dependent on Highmark's convincing its members to choose Allegheny Health hospitals over those of rival UPMC, the biggest health system in Western Pennsylvania.

“We're beginning to see that Allegheny Health Network has improved its earnings; however, it's still a very early stage,” he said.

Highmark's diversified insurance businesses, which include for-profit vision, dental and reinsurance subsidiaries, provided a bright spot for the company, reporting operating income of $243 million, up 3 percent from the previous year.

“The breadth of our diversified businesses is what sets us apart from our competitors,” CEO David Holmberg said.

Total revenue last year increased 6 percent to $16.8 billion.

“We remain financially strong and stable, and we are pleased with our top line growth given the increasingly competitive environment we faced last year,” Holmberg said.

Adding in investment gains and other non-operating income, the company posted a net loss of $83 million last year, an improvement over the previous year's net loss of $134 million.

Alex Nixon is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at 412-320-7928 or anixon@tribweb.com.