No surprise here: the Philadelphia Transportation Authority is suing Gilead, maker of the expensive new hepatitis C drugs Sovaldi and Harvoni, over the cost of those drugs. A course of Sovaldi, not including drugs you might have to take in combination with it, as some patients do, costs $84,000. Harvoni, which won FDA approval more recently, costs $94,000.

According to the Philadelphia Star Tribune:

The complaint was filed in federal court. It says Sovaldi's cost prohibits many patients from getting treatment and accuses Gilead of "unjust enrichment" that violates antitrust law.

I would not be surprised if we start seeing more suits over the drugs' pricing, including patient groups suing insurers over access to the drugs, and groups with even less leverage when it comes to getting the drugs, like the incarcerated.

The drugs are indeed expensive. I've reported on that in my series "At the Crossroads," both in this story about why the drugs represent such a breakthrough for patients but such a conundrum for payers like Medicaid, and in this one about how health economists determine not just whether a treatment costs too much but whether it's cost effective.

And there's news on the effectiveness front. PCORI, or the Patient Centered Outcomes Research Institute, is a nonprofit created under the Affordable Care Act to fund research that examines which health care options work best. It announced this week $50 million dollars in funding available to researchers who want to study the comparative clinical effectiveness of hepatitis C treatments.

Here's why this is significant: when the FDA approves drugs, its main goal is to determine whether that drug is safe and does what its makers say it will do. The agency is not necessarily saying a particular drug works better than another drug for the same condition. It's not asking whether a drug delivers more benefits or value than a previously available treatment.

Other countries, like the UK, pay closer attention to that kind of information because they have a single payer health care system with a limited pool of money. As researcher James Chambers, PhD, from Tufts University recently told me, if the UK approves a new treatment for use in its health care system, that means an old treatment probably has to go - they can't afford both.

What they find could affect patients living with chronic hepatitis C and the extent to which insurers and other payers decide to offer these drugs, when, and to whom.

So now, PCORI will fund research that asks whether new treatments have any long term side effects, and whether it's better to start taking these new drugs as soon as you're diagnosed with hepatitis C or to wait until your liver shows signs of the disease.

What they find could affect patients living with chronic hepatitis C and the extent to which insurers and other payers decide to offer these drugs, when, and to whom.