Republican Senator John McCain again may face a primary challenge from the right.

State Senator Kelli Ward of Lake Havasu City sent an e-mail to supporters saying she's going to "test the waters" to see if she can drum up enough support to be a viable challenger to McCain.

"As I look to the future, I am receiving huge support from the grassroots, encouraging me to consider a run for the U.S. Senate in 2016," Ward's e-mail says. "Because of the outcry for a new, positive, principled voice for Arizona in Washington, I am moving to test the waters in regard to this challenging opportunity to determine if the financial and political paths to victory really do exist."

See also: -"Chemtrail" Believers Meet With Arizona Environmental-Quality Workers

McCain also got a challenge from the right in 2010 from former Congressman J.D. Hayworth, though McCain won that by a wide margin, getting more than 56 percent of the vote, compared to Hayworth's 32 percent.

McCain recently announced his plans to run for re-election in 2016, though a bit has changed since 2010. His effort to spearhead immigration reform failed, and he was subject to censure by the Arizona Republican Party for his various departures from the party platform.

Ward has been a strong Tea Party type in her time at the Arizona Legislature, making attempts to nullify federal laws and to pick a fight with the NSA. She also helped assemble a community forum last year on "chemtrails," as some of Ward's constituents believed the government was trying to poison them with the condensation left behind by airplanes, or something close to that.

Ward's letter to supporters asking for money mentions her opposition to Obamacare and her support of a border fence and the Constitution in general.

Read Ward's entire letter on the next page:

Dear Friends and Supporters: I am pleased to announce that I am exploring a run for the U.S. Senate in 2016! I've started the Ward Exploratory Committee in order to test the waters and I hope you will help me make my decision. As I look to the future, I am receiving huge support from the grassroots, encouraging me to consider a run for the U.S. Senate in 2016. Because of the outcry for a new, positive, principled voice for Arizona in Washington, I am moving to test the waters in regard to this challenging opportunity to determine if the financial and political paths to victory really do exist. If, during this period, it is revealed that the support exists for a US Senate run, I would run to give Arizona a powerful voice in the fight against Obamacare. I would run to stand up for the enforcement of our immigration laws and to secure the border. I would run to support the Constitution, smaller government and individual liberty. I would run as a positive, passionate, principled non-career politician. I would run to join a fresh, new generation of leaders in D.C. and end the stronghold that career politicians have had on our government for decades. I would run to be the voice that so many Arizonans long for from their representation in the U.S. Senate. I would run to be your voice. I appreciate your continued prayers, comments, and advice as I explore the possibilities. I will continue to travel the state to meet and listen to voters and look forward to making new friendships with people from all over our great state. If you would like to have me visit your group, please let me know. As I explore this challenging opportunity, I will need more than just words backing a run - I will need funding. Frankly, I need your financial support to help me reach a decision. Informed, motivated voters lead the way to restore government of, for, and by the people. If we want Arizona represented in D.C. and not D.C. represented in Arizona, it is up to all of us. Success will take time, motivation, hard work, and money. Financial support is imperative in a David and Goliath battle. That is why I am counting on you for a contribution of $100 today. It is a lot to ask, I know, but I need your help right now, if I cannot raise money, I can't run! If $100 is simply not possible, please consider a contribution of $75, $50, $25, or $10. Sincerely, Kelli

Got a tip? Send it to: Matthew Hendley.

Follow Valley Fever on Twitter at @ValleyFeverPHX. Follow Matthew Hendley at @MatthewHendley.