The past 48 hours for Peyton Manning were expected to be spent behind closed doors, in the Broncos’ indoor practice facility, as he continued his rehabilitation from a partially torn plantar fascia in his left foot. His time was expected to be secluded from the media, the cameras and the questioning.

It was anything but that Sunday as he responded to an al-Jazeera investigative documentary, ” The Dark Side,” which alleged that Manning, the Broncos’ veteran quarterback, received human growth hormone (HGH) from an anti-aging clinic in Indianapolis in 2011 when he was a member of the Colts and recovering from four neck surgeries.

A discrepency in the allegations is the time of work and the role of al-Jazeera’s primary source, Charles Sly, in the claims against Manning.

Sly, a man labeled in the documentary as a former pharmacist at The Guyer Institute, was recorded in the undercover investigation saying he mailed HGH to Manning’s wife, Ashley, to avoid any link to the quarterback. Sly was a licensed pharmacy intern from April 27, 2010 to May 1, 2013, according to Indiana state records. The al-Jazeera report alleges he worked at the institute in 2011, when Manning was a patient at the clinic during his rehabilitation from the neck surgeries.

But The Guyer Institute; Manning’s adviser, Ari Fleischer; and Sly, in comments made after the report’s publication, said Sly was an intern at the clinic in 2013, not in 2011.

Sly recanted his comments in the documentary via a video statement published Saturday night, and he later told ESPN that he was not an employee of The Guyer Institute in 2011, as the report said, but was instead a pharmacy intern there in 2013.

Fleischer, a former White House press secretary and the head of a sports communications agency, told The Denver Post on Saturday that Sly was an unpaid intern of the clinic in 2013, from February to May.

Dr. Dale Guyer released two statements since the publication of the al-Jazeera report, disputing its claims of Sly’s time of work and corroborating the dates provided by Fleischer.

“Charles Sly was never an employee of The Guyer Institute,” Guyer said in a statement released Monday. “At the time in question, Mr. Sly was a pharmacy student in Nevada who emailed my office a request for an internship. Arrangements for his internship, including the specific start and end dates, were made through his school adviser.

“Mr. Sly began his unpaid student internship with us on February 18th, 2013. He had no patient responsibilities at any time. Further, he had no affiliation with our office prior to February 18th, 2013 and has had none subsequent to the conclusion of his internship in May of 2013.”

Sly’s internship, according to the institute, was arranged through Roseman University of Health Sciences College of Pharmacy in Henderson, Nev.

Since the al-Jazeera report, Manning has vehemently denied taking HGH, has said he’s contemplated suing for defamation, and has denied knowing or ever meeting Sly.

al-Jazeera reporter Deborah Davies has stood by her team’s findings, telling al-Jazeera America’s David Shuster, as well as Sports Illustrated’s Peter King, that they have confirmation of Sly’s work at the clinic in 2011.

“We have confirmed absolutely Charlie Sly worked in the Guyer clinic,” Davies told Shuster. “I rang them directly before the program went out, and they gave me the precise start date that he worked there in 2011. We know that for sure growth hormone was shipped to Ashley Manning in Florida.”

Manning told ESPN on Sunday that he was “sick” and “disgusted” by the report when he first learned of it, then went on to call it “fabricated” and ” a freaking joke.”

Manning said he was a patient of the institute in 2011, but his treatments — use of a hyperbaric chamber, intravenous nutrient treatments and enhanced external counterpulsation (EECP), a non-surgical treatment that aims to increase blood flow — were under the supervision of the Indianapolis Colts.

“Any medical treatments that my wife received, that’s her business,” Manning told ESPN’s Lisa Salters in a television interview Sunday. “That has nothing to do with me. Nothing that’s ever been sent to her or my wife has used have I ever taken. Absolutely not. I have my treatments that I do. She may have hers, and that’s her business. There is no connection between the two. I would love to understand why this guy is saying this, why he’s making it up, and then he admits that he makes it up, yet it still becomes a story. I’d like to be told and explained that.”

The NFL on Monday said it is reviewing the matter and that it is league procedure to follow up on any information that potentially involves a violation. The NFL Players Association has declined to comment.

Nicki Jhabvala: njhabvala@denverpost.com or @NickiJhabvala