Iran Votes Pile Up Bill Clark/CQ Roll Call What Happened:



The vote commitments from Democrats have been rolling in as Congress prepares to consider the deal struck between the Iran, the U.S., and five other world powers to prevent the Islamic Republic from obtaining a nuclear weapon.



On the Senate side, Tom Carper of Delaware announced his decision to support the deal Friday, bringing the total number of pro-deal senators to 30. Chuck Schumer of New York and Robert Menendez of New Jersey, meanwhile, remain the only Democrats who have broken ranks and will vote with the (likely) unanimous Republican majority in favor of a resolution of disapproval of the deal.



In the House, a few more Democrats declared themselves against the deal, bringing the total up to 14.



Why It Matters:



For weeks, those counting votes have been watching for two numbers: 34 Senate Democrats (including independents Bernie Sanders of Vermont and Angus King of Maine) and 43 House Democrats. In the Senate, getting the support of 34 members would be enough to block the upper chamber from overriding a presidential veto, and in the House, they can do the same as long as no more than 43 Democrats oppose the agreement.



But as support gains momentum in the Senate, the White House is hoping it could get the backing of 41 members -- which would prevent the upper chamber from passing the resolution of disapproval in the first place by blocking the bill from moving to the floor on the first procedural vote it faces.



Republicans are already bashing the suggestion of a filibuster, including outspoken freshman Tom Cotton of Arkansas, who made waves earlier this year by penning a letter to Iran’s leaders that dismissed the negotiations.



"Harry Reid wants to deny the American people a voice entirely by blocking an up-or-down vote on this terrible deal," Cotton wrote in a statement. "He is obstructing because he is scared. He knows that a majority of Americans and senators oppose this dangerous deal, and that its only chance for survival is if he and the president ram it down the throats of the American people."



But from the White House’s perspective, a veto, which would be just the fifth in Barack Obama’s presidency, would demonstrate shaky commitment to upholding the U.S. end of the bargain. Preventing the disapproval resolution from passing at all, meanwhile, would send a much stronger signal to the world community.

Obama Seeks to Pacify Jewish Americans' Concerns

Obama Seeks to Pacify Jewish Americans' Concerns Andrew Harnik/AP What Happened:



In a conversation about the Iran deal with representatives from two major American Jewish groups Friday, Obama sought to both keep pressure on undecided members of Congress while at the same time taking some of the heat out of the rhetoric.



The president devoted much of his time to dismantling the arguments that lawmakers have used in defense of their decision to oppose the deal, including that it allows Iran access to billions of dollars that have been frozen by sanctions and that parts of the agreement expire in a matter of years.



“At that point, we really don’t have options,” the president said. “We’re kind of flying blind.”



After 15 years, he said, even if Iran decided to try to go for a bomb, the U.S. would have vast amounts of information gathered on its nuclear program to be able to effectively stop it.



Why it Matters:



How the deal would affect Israel, and Israeli leaders’ strong opposition to it, has featured heavily in the debate, which has often strayed from the merits of the agreement and into emotional hyperbole, and both supporters and opponents of the agreement have been visciously attacked. The first question leveled at Obama seemingly referenced a speech in which he said “many of the same people who argued against the war in Iraq are now making the case against the Iran deal.”



“At no point have I ever suggested, for example, that somebody is a warmonger, meaning they want war,” he said. “What I have said – and this I don’t apologize for – is that if this deal is rejected, if we do not have this mechanism that nuclear experts around the world have said is unprecedented and severely constrains Iran’s program, then there have to be alternatives.”



Obama acknowledged that both sides had stepped over the line, but said the attacks on supporters had been far more fierce. He also promised the disagreements between his administration and Israel would do no lasting damage to the close relationship between the two countries.



"Like all families, sometimes there are going to be disagreements," he said. "And sometimes people get angrier about disagreements in families than with folks that aren't family."

Virginia Shooting Won't Lead to New Gun Laws

Virginia Shooting Won't Lead to New Gun Laws (Courtesy of WDBJ-TV via AP) What Happened:



The country awoke to the horrifying news Wednesday that two Virginia journalists had been fatally shot on live television, and later, that the man who pulled the trigger was their former colleague and he had filmed the shooting and posted it online.



WDBJ-TV reporter Alison Parker, 24, and cameraman Adam Ward, 27, were interviewing local chamber of commerce director Vicky Parker when they were approached by the gunman, identified by police as Vester Lee Flanagan, 41, who had been fired from the station more than two years ago.



Why it Matters:



If it seems like gun tragedies seem to occur every week, that’s because mass shootings have, in fact, increased from 1.1 times a year to 4.5 times a year since the 1970s, according to a report released earlier this month from the Congressional Research Service.



Each time in recent years – from the attempted assassination of former Rep. Gabby Giffords that killed six others in 2011 to the nine worshipers left dead in Charleston this summer – Obama has called on Congress and the nation to have a serious dialogue on gun violence.



Republicans, meanwhile, have focused on ensuring that guns don't get in the hands of people with mental illnesses. And amid disclosures that Flanagan purchased the gun used in the attack legally despite apparent emotional problems, the debate is unlikely to be resolved anytime soon.

Shutdown Drumbeat Continues Despite GOP Leaders' Efforts

Shutdown Drumbeat Continues Despite GOP Leaders' Efforts The Associated Press What Happened:



Despite promises from Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell that there would be no government shutdown over funding this fall, conservatives have so far refused to back down from their insistence that Congress cut off federal funds to Planned Parenthood.



The charge has been led by Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, a presidential candidate and the senator who single-handedly engineered the 2013 government shutdown over funding to the Affordable Care Act.



“It will be a decision of the president's and the president's alone whether he would veto funding for the federal government because of a commitment to ensuring taxpayer dollars continue to flow to what appears to be a national criminal organization,” Cruz told religious leaders Tuesday.



In a revealing moment Wednesday, House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, exposed some of the leadership's frustrations with Cruz, calling him a "jackass" at a fundraiser in Colorado, according to the Daily Caller.



Why it Matters:



Cruz and other conservatives, including Rep. Jim Jordan, R-Ohio, and Jordan’s House Freedom Caucus, will seek to shift the blame to Democrats and Obama for blocking any government funding legislation that includes measures to defund Planned Parenthood. But after the 2013 shutdown, voters overwhelmingly blamed Republicans for what they saw as party leadership allowing extreme ideas to take precedence over basic government functionality.



Amid comments acknowledging the 10th anniversary of Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans on Thursday, Obama took a moment to warn Republicans that budget shenanigans would come at a price, especially as the U.S. economy picks up steam.



“Eventually we’re going to do it anyways, so let’s just do it without too much drama,” Obama said. “Let’s do it without another round of threats to shut down the government. Let’s not introduce unrelated partisan issues. Nobody gets to hold the American economy hostage over their own ideological demands.”

EPA's Expansion of Water Protections Blocked