French President Francois Hollande, center, flanked by several professors, takes part in a meeting on the upcoming climate summit on Monday at the College de France in Paris. (Pool photo by Stephane De Sakutin/Agence France-Presse via Getty Images)

Your Insider here, reporting to you from Dubai, United Arab Emirates. Believe it or not, I just defended President Obama to a gathering of foreign nationals. Even though I’m no fan of his, it still stings when non-Americans run down our president. To be fair, I also got a lot of heat about President George W. Bush in his final year in office when I traveled abroad, and I defended him as well. But trying to defend your president from angry charges that he is too tough is easier than defending your president to foreigners who are worried and anxious about him being too weak. Actually, I travel a lot, and these days, no one in any foreign capitals I visit will defend Obama’s foreign policy. Based on what I see, when it comes to the president’s foreign policy, the Democratic national security elite don’t defend him, his former advisers don’t defend him and even current U.S. ambassadors don’t really know what to say. There are a lot of awkward pauses and attempts to change the subject.

Anyway, at home and abroad, Obama’s quest for a legacy isn’t going so well. By any measure, peace and prosperity have eluded the Obama presidency. As has been pointed out, despite touting his “accomplishment” in “ending two wars,” Obama “faces the prospect that he will leave office with ground troops deployed” with unclear missions in “at least three combat zones.”

As for prosperity, Investor’s Business Daily rightly points out that the president’s economic policies have resulted in an 8 percent drop in the average income of families in the bottom fifth of households between 2009 and 2014; and real median household income dropped by more than $1,000 during that same time frame. Not to mention, third-quarter GDP growth was a meager 1.5 percent, and only an average of 2 percent for the year. And all this is despite the accumulation of unprecedented debt and the unexpected gift of lower-than-anticipated oil prices. Even the low unemployment rate comes with a footnote explaining that we are experiencing the lowest labor participation rate in 37 years, staggering numbers of people who are not in the labor force at all and food stamp reliance that is at an all-time high. As for Obamacare, enrollment is lagging, premiums and deductibles are skyrocketing and there are still several looming fights over key provisions in the law. That’s not much of a legacy.

So what is the president’s plan to make his mark? Well, he may have foreshadowed his endgame strategy in a recent interview he did with CBS’s “60 Minutes.” “60 Minutes” is a reliable, friendly forum for the president, and I’m sure interviewer Steve Kroft didn’t mean to put Obama on the spot, but one of the president’s answers to a fairly predictable question was revealing. Kroft, in questioning Obama’s foreign policy, pointed out that Russian President Vladimir Putin was “challenging” U.S. leadership with regard to Syria. Obama denied that Putin’s actions in Syria showed leadership, then said, “My definition of leadership would be leading on climate change, an international accord that potentially we’ll get in Paris.” What? Does anyone think an accord won’t be reached in Paris? Is there anything the president won’t give away in the name of fighting climate change? Does anyone believe that he will refuse whatever plan is offered up to save the planet?

His comment reminded me of Bill Murray’s character in “Caddyshack,” Carl Spackler, who tells a story explaining that he didn’t get paid for caddying for the Dalai Lama, recounting how the Dalai Lama told him, “Oh, uh, there won’t be any money, but when you die, on your deathbed, you will receive total consciousness.” Spackler ends his story by exclaiming, “So I got that goin’ for me, which is nice.” So while his presidency has misfired on so many fronts, Obama has virtually nothing positive to show for his time in office, much of the world burns, the economy is stalled and race relations at home are smoldering, at least Obama will have “an international accord” on global warming going for him.

Of course, combating climate change is a bottomless pit of fantasy that lends itself to every cliche liberal program ever imagined, and best of all, there isn’t really ever a day of reckoning. The way the liberals play the game, the fight against climate change can’t fail — even if it can’t succeed — because after all, in the future, no matter what the weather does, liberals can always make the argument that without Obama, it could have been worse. And nice, sunny days will always be thanks to him. It’s a unquantifiable, lame excuse for a legacy that suits this president. He doesn’t really have to do anything, because nothing agreed to in Paris could ever pass Congress. And of course, none of the expense or changes that he will want to impose on us will ever affect him.

So where does this leave us for 2016? The president’s promotion of his legacy will have to coexist with the race to replace him. The Republican nominee will have no problem highlighting the failures of the past seven years, but the Democrats on the ticket — from Hillary Clinton all the way to the bottom of the ballot — will have to navigate between voters who want change and an Obama who will be declaring victory. No Democrat will pledge to deliver more of the same, but every Democrat will have to be careful not to alienate core Obama constituencies. It won’t be easy, but the dance is going to be fun to watch.