Canceled policies don't cover ACA mandates

Early renewal allows policy holders to keep existing plans for another year

As a healthy man with no pre-existing conditions, Newport News resident Deck Hankins had no complaints with the insurance policy he'd carried for five years. When he received notice from his insurance company that his policy had been canceled for failure to meet the minimum standards mandated by the Affordable Care Act, he was angry and fired off a letter to the editor.

"President Obama promised that if we liked our insurance and doctor we could keep them. … To say I am upset is an understatement. I did not ask, nor seek, any changes from my insurance company but the government, in its infinite wisdom, deemed the changes were necessary," he wrote. Asked about the details, he said, "I loved my plan. It was perfect for me."

However, there's still a small window to work around giving up a health insurance policy "canceled" for non-compliance with Affordable Care Act standards effective Jan. 1, 2014.

By renewing early, Hankins was able to extend his existing policy effectively postponing buying into the extra benefits required by the ACA for another year. (The original Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield deadline was Nov. 15, but on Wednesday the company announced an extension to Nov. 30 for early renewals effective in 2013; Optima Health cut off its early renewal offer on Oct. 15.) Others with "grandfathered" policies, those purchased before March 2010 that have not changed, also have a year's reprieve.

Otherwise, according to the ACA's dictates, all policies that take effect on Jan. 1, 2014 must include 10 essential health benefits, EHBs, which include mental health coverage and maternity care, and preventive services without cost-sharing; they also cannot discriminate against those with pre-existing conditions. The inevitable result is higher premium costs for those who don't qualify for subsidies through the state marketplace.

"Clearly everyone knew this was going to be a major evolution of health insurance industry dynamics. Just the fact that people with pre-existing conditions can get coverage is a major market shift," said Ken Schrad, spokesman for the State Corporation Commission's Bureau of Insurance that regulates the industry. The fallout — millions of canceled insurance policies nationwide for the approximately 5 percent who buy health insurance on the individual market — doesn't jibe with the promise made by the administration: "If you like your health care plan, you can keep your health care plan."

However, Schrad sees it more as a matter of semantics. "Cancellations occur constantly. All policies are year-to-year contracts. The provider and the consumer can each drop the other. That, in itself, isn't unusual," he said. He attributed the public push back to a potential misunderstanding of what their policies covered and what the federal and state laws require. He also noted that the Virginia Bureau recommended that insurance companies file all-new policy forms to accommodate the ACA requirements rather than adding multiple amendments to existing policies.

Anyone receiving a cancellation letter is automatically offered access to a similar plan. "You are not being dropped from coverage, you are being asked to select a new plan," explained Bobby Pearson, spokesman for Optima Health.