Tesla looks to its Michigan suppliers to rally against pending legislation

With the fate of Tesla Motors Inc. sales in Michigan on the desk of Gov. Rick Snyder, the electric carmaker is looking for a jolt from its supply base.

Tesla reached out to its largest suppliers in the state to rally against House Bill 5606, which would bar the California automaker from direct sales to customers in the state.

Several suppliers have since penned letters to Snyder asking him to not put his John Hancock on the bill.

Inteva Products LLC sent a letter to the governor opposing any legislation that prevents Tesla from direct sales, confirmed Karen Manardo, global marketing and communications director for the Troy-based supplier.

“Obviously, if they (Tesla) are unable to grow their market here in Michigan, that affects us, so we oppose (the bill),” said Manardo.

Inteva supplies instrument panels for the Tesla Model S sedan. It’s one of 56 suppliers the California carmaker uses in Michigan.

In 2014, Tesla will procure $170 million in parts and services from suppliers in the state, Alexis Georgeson, communications manager for Tesla, told Crain’s.

A spokesman for a supplier in Macomb County told Crain’s that it hired as many as 50 people to work on its Tesla contract. The spokesman, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said the jobs could be affected if Tesla is prohibited from direct sales.

The bill, first introduced in May, initially addressed whether automakers could stop affiliated franchised dealers from charging customers certain types of fees, Daniel Crane, a University of Michigan law professor, wrote in a letter sent to Snyder’s office last week.

The bill sponsor, Michigan Rep. Aric Nesbitt, a Republican, said that the bill first passed in the House in mid-September and that it had nothing to do with Tesla, which was correct at that time.

However, once the bill was sent to the Senate on Oct. 1, the anti-Tesla language was added, and there was no debate or public attention brought to the changed language. The amended bill passed the Senate 38-0 on Oct. 2 and was sent back to the House, where that afternoon it was approved 106-1 with the new anti-Tesla language.

In essence, the bill sailed through the Legislature, largely because lawmakers may not have known what was in it.

Despite strong opposition from Michigan's supply base, the bill is supported by the Michigan Automobile Dealers Association and the National Automobile Dealers Association.

“States are fully within their rights to protect consumers by choosing the way cars are sold and serviced,” Charles Cyrill, a spokesman for NADA told Bloomberg News last week. “Fierce competition between local dealers in any given market drives down prices both in and across brands. While if a factory owned all of its stores, it could set prices and buyers would lose virtually all bargaining power.”

Automotive News and Crain’s reporter Chris Gautz contributed to this report.

Related Links