In a move that further lays the groundwork for a potential 2016 presidential campaign, Jeb Bush on Tuesday announced the formation of a political action committee that will allow him to begin raking in money from donors.

The announcement of Bush's PAC -- named "Right to Rise" -- comes after the former Republican Florida governor announced last month that he would "actively explore" a presidential run. A super PAC, separate from Bush, was also established Tuesday by supporters and carries the same name.

Bush, donning a black pea coat as he walked down a Manhattan street, said the PAC supports candidates "who believe in conservative principles to allow all Americans to rise up," in a video posted in both English and Spanish to his Facebook page.

The New York Times noted that the announcement video from Bush was taped outside the midtown Manhattan offices of BlackRock, an investment management firm that often bankrolls political campaigns.

The move from Bush to create the PAC is similar to those already created by other potential 2016 presidential candidates, including Republican Sens. Rand Paul of Kentucky and Marco Rubio of Florida.

On the committee's website, Bush writes "we will celebrate success and risk-taking, protect liberty, cherish free enterprise, strengthen our national defense, embrace the energy revolution, fix our broken and obsolete immigration system."

In what's likely to be a crowded 2016 GOP primary, Bush, a favorite among mainstream Republicans, has drawn anger from some in the party for his calls for comprehensive immigration reform and his support of Common Core, the national education standards for K-12 students that is being implemented in dozens of states.

Since late last year, Bush has made a host of moves to make a potential candidacy more visible, such as announcing that he planned to write an e-book on his governorship and the release of 250,000 emails from his tenure as Florida’s chief executive. He's also severed tied from several organizations, including his own education foundation.

A spokeswoman for Bush on Tuesday said there's no timetable for when he will make any official decision.

Twitter: @kurtisalee