Power urges GOP Congress not to pursue Iran sanctions

The Obama administration is stepping up its push to stave off a bipartisan congressional effort to enact new economic sanctions on Iran as the United States tries to secure a permanent deal to wind down the country’s nuclear program.

At a University of Louisville event alongside new Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.), whose chamber is expected to pursue new sanctions in the coming weeks, U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Samantha Power argued that new congressional sanctions will upset ongoing negotiations with Iran and turn off a multilateral international coalition that has worked together to isolate Iran politically and economically.

Story Continued Below

Power’s remarks carry new urgency: Senate Democratic Leader Harry Reid held off a bipartisan Iran sanctions push during the last Congress, but Republicans have taken the Senate and are much less inclined to heed President Barack Obama’s requests for delays on new sanctions votes. And though Republicans have moved quickly on other policy changes that Obama opposes, like approving the Keystone XL Pipeline and changing Obamacare, Iran sanctions legislation stands a reasonable chance of garnering a veto-proof majority in Congress given the multitude of Iran hawks on Capitol Hill.

“Some members of Congress believe that the time has come to ratchet up sanctions on Iran. They argue that this is the most effective way to achieve the goal of getting Iran to give up its nuclear program. We in the administration believe that, at this time, increasing sanctions would dramatically undermine our efforts to reach this shared goal,” said Power on Monday morning, the first senior Obama administration official to appear with McConnell since he became majority leader last week.

McConnell and other congressional leaders in both parties will visit the White House on Tuesday together to meet Obama, with foreign policy one of the expected topics.

The most widely supported sanctions bill in the Senate would ratchet up sanctions on Iran if the country steps away from the negotiating table or reneges on an interim agreement to freeze some enrichment programs in return for temporary loosening of some sanctions. Though the legislation’s language is conditional, the White House has argued it would still rattle ongoing negotiations.

The House passed a sanctions bill overwhelmingly in 2013 that struck at Iran’s petroleum industry.

While Power on Monday praised McConnell’s past leadership on Iran sanctions and his commitment to “keeping Americans safe,” she argued that further isolating Iran with economic penalties now would tank ongoing diplomatic negotiations and give leaders in Tehran rhetorical leverage to blame the United States for scuttling talks. And she warned against the U.S. going alone on sanctions and breaking from an international coalition that has worked together to impose global, crippling penalties on Iran.

There will always be an opportunity for Congress to punish Iran if negotiations fall through, Power said.

“If Iran cannot agree to a solution and we have remained united with our negotiating partners, we will have even greater international support and urgency in beefing up the sanctions-based approach,” Power said. “Sanctions did indeed help to bring Iran to the negotiating table. But sanctions did not stop the advance of Iran’s nuclear program. Negotiations have done that, and it is in our interest not to deny ourselves the chance to achieve a long-term, comprehensive solution that would deny Iran a nuclear weapon.”

Manu Raju contributed to this story.