Jean-Marie Zeitouni is "ecstatic" to be the third music director in the 38-year history of the Colorado Music Festival. ( Courtesy photo )

Jean-Marie Zeitouni is busy doing his homework.

The Montreal native, whom the Colorado Music Festival announced last month as its new music director, has been studying the entire 38-year history of the festival.

In his first interview since being hired for the position, Zeitouni shared his personal and artistic goals with the Camera.

"I'm looking at every piece that was performed and every guest artist who appeared from 1976 to the present," he said during a telephone interview. "I feel that I need to be in tune with the significance of it all, and I'm completely immersing myself in the philosophy of this festival from its foundation and how it evolved."

He is the third music director of the annual six-week summer classical music program, following founder Giora Bernstein, whose mark remains indelible on the festival's structure and ideals, and Michael Christie, whose 13-year tenure revitalized the organization in countless ways.

Zeitouni, 40, said his primary goal is to respect and continue those philosophies and traditions. Part of that involves looking at statistics involving the frequency of various composers on CMF programs and deciding who might have been underrepresented or who has been a consistent favorite of festival audiences.

"The past and the recent past will inform how we move into the future," he said. He specifically mentioned the frequency of new music on festival programs.

"I am honestly surprised by how many world premieres and American premieres there have been," he said. "Even in the first 10 years (under Bernstein) there was a lot of action bringing forward works that were more recent. That was pretty bold and inventive 30 years ago."

Zeitouni also had praise for an annual commission — with the audience playing a role in choosing the composer — that was instituted in Christie's later years. That program resulted in a new overture-length piece each season.

Jean-Marie Zeitouni promises the CMF will offer an apporpriate blend of old and new compositions. (Courtesy photo)

Both Zeitouni and new CMF executive director Andrew Bradford concede that the 2014 season, whose youngest work was written in 1974, was a necessary deviation from that aesthetic as the festival conducted its search and the programs were split between seven guest conductors, including Zeitouni.

The new conductor stressed there will be the right balance of old and new on the menu.

"We need the programs to be both varied and consistent, adapted to the taste of the audience and the growth of the orchestra," he said.

Zeitouni and Bradford both emphasized the need to bring in more prominent guest artists.

Zeitouni also stressed that the two programs he conducted to close the season should not be seen as an indication of an entire artistic direction.

"Those were just two programs, and they were kind of a shot in the dark," he said.

His large concert included two big tone poems by Richard Strauss, including the monumental "Ein Heldenleben." While acknowledging that Strauss might not be to everyone's taste, Zeitouni said he believed the 150th anniversary of the composer's birth needed to be celebrated in 2014 and noted that the pieces are a showcase for the conductor and the orchestra, something vital for what was essentially an audition.

"I consider myself an extremely multifaceted musician," Zeitouni said, citing his other current directorship, of the chamber group I Musici de Montreal.

"We perform the entire spectrum of baroque music, not just Bach, Handel and Vivaldi," he said. "I am not a specialist and want to be informed on a wide variety of musical styles and genres."

His other CMF program, an unusual chamber orchestra pairing of works with strings and percussion, but no winds, expressed another of his ideals.

"I like programs that make sense," he said, noting that the chamber program had not only instrumentation but that the theme of love was common between the two pieces.

He emphasized that guest conductors, rare in Christie's final years, are important for the orchestra and the audience.

Speaking to his reaction upon being offered the CMF position, Zeitouni was effusive.

"I was ecstatic," he said. "I had such a good time there, better than I could have imagined. I did not really know what it was all about until I arrived.

"The setting is so beautiful, the orchestra is fantastic, and my breath was taken away by Boulder, Chautauqua, the mountains and everything."

Zeitouni also will oversee programs at the CMF organization's Center for Musical Arts in Lafayette.

"My presence will be significant from the start," he said, explaining that he feared previous commitments might limit his presence next summer. "I was able to move some things, and now I'll be there for at least 80 percent of the festival, and hopefully more than that in the future."

Zeitouni said he will be in Boulder three times before the summer, including his first visit later in October for initial planning. Montreal will remain his primary home. His tenure as music director of the Columbus Symphony Orchestra in Ohio concluded this year as he completed his contract.

Although the native French speaker's English is excellent, he admitted being self-conscious about it and asked the audience for patience in that regard.

"I want to tell the audience that I fell in love with their city, their setting at Chautauqua, and their orchestra, Zeitouni said. "I consider this responsibility with great care."