LAKEWOOD, Ohio – With another key deadline looming for getting health insurance under the Affordable Care Act, it's no surprise that the Obama administration once again dispatched a high-level representative to Northeast Ohio to help sell uninsured people on the idea of choosing a plan on the federal exchange.

In her second visit to Ohio in less than two months as Health and Human Services Secretary, Sylvia Burwell on Thursday stopped at a CVS pharmacy on Clifton Boulevard in Lakewood.

Burwell's visit was designed not only to encourage consumers to sign up for health insurance by the Jan. 15 deadline in order to get health coverage activated on Feb. 1., but also to highlight a new collaboration the government has with the country's largest pharmacy chains to help educate people about their health care coverage options.

CVS, along with Rite Aid, Walgreens, Wal-mart and several other small pharmacy chains, are holding insurance education and outreach events throughout the country.

"We've focused deeply this open enrollment on the customer, the consumer," Burwell said shortly after taking a quick tour of the CVS pharmacy. Partnering with pharmacy chains, she said, will allow them to go where the consumer is.

As of Dec. 15 – the deadline for coverage beginning Jan. 1 – more than 4 million people, including nearly 89,000 in Ohio, had selected insurance plans through the federal marketplace, according to the Obama administration.

Forty-eight percent of Ohio residents who signed up for Obamacare in the first month of open enrollment were new consumers, with 52 percent of people re-enrolling in their plans or choosing a different plan from 2014.

The administration's stated enrollment goal for 2015 is just over 9 million people.

"We think there's a lot of opportunity, with a number of uninsured to make progress," Burwell said. "We want to continue to focus here in the state."

The collaboration with pharmacies is the Obama administration's latest in a series of efforts to reach out to consumers who need to buy – or switch – health insurance plans.

Shortly before the second enrollment period began, an administrator with HHS's Health Resources and Services Administration spent the day in Cleveland to promote Obamacare.

During the holiday season, health insurance sign-up events were held at shopping malls in a handful of states.

CVS is holding a series of Project Health events at the following area CVS locations (all are from 2 to 6 p.m.): Friday, Jan. 9 at 424 Pearl Rd., Cleveland; Saturday, Jan. 10 at 2007 Brookpark Rd., Cleveland; Jan. 15 at 11223 Granger Rd., Garfield Heights; and Jan. 17 at 13215 Shaker Square, Cleveland. Go to cvs.com/project-health for more information.

Majority of people who get Obamacare get financial help, government says

The administration continues to emphasize that financial assistance is available, and the majority of people who are signing up for private insurance qualify.

"Last year, 85 percent of folks who came to the marketplace received financial assistance," Burwell said. Similar numbers are being seen during the current enrollment period, she said.

Also, some pharmacy chains this month started offering up to a 30-day "transitional" supply of prescription medications for people who have signed up for insurance but who don't yet have an insurance card with their plan identification number. Once the consumers have received their card, they will be billed for any co-pays that apply.

Open enrollment ends Feb. 15; local sign-up help available

If you haven't heard by now, the deadline to get health insurance during the open enrollment period is Feb. 15. People who were automatically re-enrolled in the plan they had in 2014 can still change plans until then as well.

Get Covered America, the nonprofit, nonpartisan campaign of the pro-ACA group Enroll America, will have enrollment assisters available at its Cleveland Enroll America office, 13437 Cedar Road, Cleveland Heights, from 11 a.m. to 7 p.m. Monday, Jan. 12 through Thursday, Jan. 15. People also can go to the Get Covered Connector at getcoveredamerica.org/connector/​to make an appointment in advance.

You can also schedule an appointment for help at areyoucoveredohio.org or find a location with enroller assistance near you at the 2-1-1 website at 211cleveland.org, which has information on 15 counties in northern Ohio.

If you're getting in-person assistance, remember to bring a photo ID, proof of income, W-2, and/or immigration cards/papers, and your Social Security card or number.

You can also call the consumer assistance center at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services at 800-318-2596.

Health insurance law comes with new tax implications

If you don't have insurance – either private insurance or coverage through Medicaid or Medicare – you could be facing a tax penalty.

Starting this year, taxpayers will see a new item on their tax return. The majority of people will just need to check a box on their tax return indicating they had health coverage in 2014. For those who decided not to buy health insurance, online tools and other resources will soon be available to help see if they qualify for claiming an exemption – such as a religious objection or an approved hardship.

The penalty for not having health insurance is currently $95 for the year, or 1 percent of your household income, whichever is higher. If you don't have health insurance in 2015 the penalty will go up to $325, or up to 2 percent of your household income.

Those with Marketplace coverage will receive a new form in the mail – Form 1095-A – to use to deal with any subsidy they received to help pay for insurance.