Ask three people to name their favorite pizza toppings, and you’ll likely hear three very different versions of topping combinations.

While traditional toppings such as pepperoni, sausage, mushrooms, onions and green peppers have always been pizza-lover favorites, anchovies, pineapple and black or green olives top other people’s lists.

Still other customers yearn to try something different each time they order, which is the inspiration behind why pizza joints often offer unique, limited-time-only toppings. They are a great way for pizzerias to test new toppings and give their customers variety without getting stuck with a load of product that won't sell.

That's what's happened with several items at Pie Five Pizza Co., said Patty Scheibmeir, vice president of R&D and innovation.

"Many of the new items start out as a topping on an LTO pizza and then earn their way on to the make table as a permanent item like meatballs, ricotta cheese and kalamata olives," she said

Some LTO toppings, though, sell just as well as regular toppings.

"We introduced roasted garlic as an LTO originally, but now it is a standard topping offering due to positive consumer feedback," said Brian Figler, culinary manager for MOD Pizza.

New toppings can excite customers and bring them in to a pizza restaurant more frequently. Foodies are always on the lookout to try new things, and pizza toppings give them millions of combinations from which to sample.

"Trying a new topping on your pizza is a safe way to experiment with new flavors," Scheibmeir said. "A few years ago we offered a Hatch Chile Pie that was very popular, and right now we have the Magic Mushroom pizza, which gives our guests interesting new toppings to try."

'Tis the season

Some pizza restaurant operators try LTO toppings seasonally or quarterly.

"We feature a seasonal pizza every quarter that often includes LTO toppings," Figler said. "Our newest pizza will be the Kasey — featuring LTO item roasted Brussels sprouts. The full pizza recipe is olive oil, roasted Brussels sprouts, bacon, gorgonzola, red onion and balsamic fig glaze."

Other MOD Pizza LTO toppings on past seasonal pizzas include the "Gus" pizza, which featured a garlic rub, white sauce, Canadian bacon, mozzarella and parmesan cheeses, and roasted asparagus, a LTO vegetable topping. The "Valencia" came with white sauce, Chorizo, diced tomato, red onion, feta and mozzarella cheeses, cilantro and Chorizo, an LTO meat topping. The pie was finished with a wedge of lemon and a swirl of Sriracha. Roasted broccolini was another MOD Pizza LTO vegetable topping.

"We typically introduce LTO toppings quarterly through the launch of new seasonal pizzas that allow our culinary team to experiment and feature new toppings and flavor profiles," Figler said. "Our seasonal pizzas are very popular and provide guests the opportunity to eat more adventurously, whether trying the new pizza or mixing and matching the LTO ingredient offerings to craft their own pizza creation. At MOD, our mission is to serve guests simple food for complex times, and that means a customized pizza experience, including unlimited toppings, all for one price."

Pie Five takes a different approach, offering six LTO pizzas a year.

"We try to offer interesting flavor profiles to give our customers a chance to experiment a bit with their pizza toppings," Scheibmeir said. "You have to keep things fresh and exciting on the make table."