For several years, the block of Washington Street just north of Michigan Avenue in downtown Ypsilanti functioned as the city's unofficial "entertainment district."

At different times over a span of several years, Pub 13, Savoy, Club Divine, J Neil's Mongolian Barbecue, the Key Stone Club and Déjà Vu operated on the block's west side. However, each establishment, except Déjà Vu, closed, and the two buildings that housed Club Divine, Savoy and Pub 13 - a combined 25,000 square feet - have sat vacant since 2010.

But in early December Real Estate One agent Tyler Weston announced an unnamed client is proposing converting into office space the 9,000-square foot former Pub 13 at 13 N. Washington, and a deal could be done within weeks.

However, in the discussion following the announcement, some said they didn't feel new office space is an exciting option for filling a void in the heart of the former "entertainment district," and questioned that use in a city actively redefining itself as one of the arts and entertainment.

But when business owners, planners and others city officials involved in downtown were asked by The Ann Arbor News if the conversion from a bar to office space is good for downtown, all were emphatic that there is no downside.

Ypsilanti Downtown Development Authority Director Tim Colbeck is among those who says it's unquestionably a positive and he believes Ypsilanti is well-positioned to attract more companies and expand the number of offices as Ann Arbor rents rise and waiting lists for office and commercial spaces there lengthen.

"It's a number of things. The more people downtown in the day means more people you have shopping at stores or getting their hair cut," he says. "It's great if you have 15, 20, 25 more employees during the day, then they're going to be eating at Beezy's, Bona Sera, running into the hardware store.

"In all likelihood (office tenants) are increasing property values by taking and renovating those vacant second and third floors in disrepair. And if you increase value, then you increase tax revenue, so it's one of those win-win-win things."

Kevin Hill, chair of DDA and director of the Downtown Association of Ypsilanti, owns the Wolverine Restaurant just around the corner from the former Pub 13. He says having office space downtown is essential to developing a well-rounded core where people can not only dine and drink, but also live, work, buy homes and provide a significant boost to the entire area with their income.

"If we are going to secure the downtown community and move forward on livability, then jobs are critical, and filling the largest spaces that are empty - really important," Hill says. "Whether or not the best use is a bar or restaurant, people need to have some daytime access to downtown, and I think it's just really important to have a good mix. A little more office and little more business is really a positive."

City Planner Bonnie Wessler echoed that, stating that in order to have a downtown thriving 24 hours per day, "you can't just have a dinner through bar rush."

Colbeck said there aren't any figures on how much downtown space is used for offices, but around 30,000 square feet of potential office space is currently available and ranging in price from $200 a month to $2,500 per month, depending on the size and quality.

With downtown Ypsilanti's office space all below $20 per square foot and as low as $6 per square foot, it's far more economical than downtown Ann Arbor.

Keeping all that in mind, the city is pushing to improve and fill more of its office space and convert properties like Pub 13 into offices. It, the Eastern Leaders Group, Weston, the DDA and the Michigan Economic Development Corporation have all partnered with a goal of upgrading the city's office stock, promoting the options and finding investors willing to sink money into downtown properties to attract more companies.

Colbeck and Wessler highlighted downtown's two main selling points - downtown Ypsilanti has ample office available immediately, and the price point is much lower.

"We know we are going to come in at a lower price point than Ann Arbor and we know we're more affordable, so we want to market to people priced out of Ann Arbor and say 'Come to Ypsilanti,'" Colbeck said. "They don't have a lot of room left to grow in Ann Arbor and there are waiting lists, so that's where we have an opportunity."

Because there are only two major office buildings in downtown Ypsilanti in the Key Building and Centennial Plaza, Colbeck said the city is concentrating on filling spaces on second and third stories or converting spaces from other uses - even those that were once beloved watering holes.



Like other leaders, Mayor Amanda Edmonds says the conversion seen at Pub 13 is a "win" for downtown, stating, "part of the balance to downtown's revitalization is getting not only entertainment and food venues for people to visit, but also higher concentrations of people working downtown who will then frequent our retail, service, food, and entertainment venues."

Council Member Brian Robb runs the AM 1300 radio station out of a storefront next door to Déjà Vu. He noted that Pub 13, which closed following a dispute between the former building owner and DTE Energy over a utility bill, was always full. But he said he remains for new office space.

"It would be great if it were an entertainment venue, but it has been empty for so long that it will be good to see it put back to use, have someone move there and take care of it before it deteriorates any further.

"And if 20 people work at this company, then that's 20 more people working downtown, and that's a positive for all downtown businesses during the day."

Others pointed to new restaurants that have opened downtown over the last several and questioned the need or viability of several super size bars and clubs.

"If the business model was so good, how did it get empty?" Hill asked. "If it was so great, how come nobody jumped to get in there? I've been advocating for a different use like an office for years. We need people downtown in the daytime."