Fascinating: Tomodachi Life.

Tomodachi Life

Runs on: Nintendo 3DS

Price: $59.95

Classification: PG

Rating: 5/10

Like an aquarium in which you deposit the Mii characters of your choice, Tomodachi Life certainly has novelty appeal. Endearing caricatures of friends and family can share an apartment block with celebrities, comic-book characters and historical figures, and maybe even fall in love.

Although largely a passive, voyeuristic experience, it can be fascinating watching your characters build friendships, resolve conflict and enjoy various island activities. But if Tomodachi Life was a television soap opera, it would soon be cancelled as there's not enough drama or substance to keep you coming back.

The quirky Japanese humour is the biggest attraction as you start importing Mii characters from your collection or create them from scratch. Each character has one of 16 distinct personality types that dictate how they act, react, and interact with other islanders, and it's particularly amusing when unlikely partnerships are formed.

Advertisement

My island includes the likes of Woody Allen, Star Wars characters, Charles Dickens, Nintendo heroes, the cast of Seinfeld, Charlie Brown, and bemused family members. According to the game's love tester my wife and I are forever incompatible and doomed to constant friction, but other more fortunate islanders have their pick of potential suitors.

Unfortunately, having to constantly service each needy character's demands for food, clothing and furnishing becomes dull. You earn money by catering to their whims, but the cash is simply used to purchase even more frippery.

Tomodachi means friend in Japanese, yet the game often feels like a Tamagotchi digital pet, with each visit's mundane shopping duties becoming even more tedious as the appeal of the small collection of repetitive mini-games wears thin.

It's an eccentric and humorous toy, but disposable. Tomodachi Life is vastly inferior to Nintendo's other life simulator Animal Crossing, which has much more substance to keep you engaged.