Print Email Font Resize Font Resize Full court press leads 'Diggers to 72-57 Patriot League win over Eaton

Beetdigger junior Noah Lechman moves by Eaton sophomore Jaxon Hobbs during Friday night action. A full court press by the 'Diggers paid off for a 72-57 win over the Eaton Reds. (John La Porte/News-Tribune)

The Beetdiggers pulled away from a 12-12 first-quarter deadlock with an 8-0 scoring run and never looked back.

By halftime, Brush was up 34-21, and the lead stayed in double figures much of the second half.

The lead was maintained despite a stretch in the third quarter of nearly 4 1/2 minutes without a point and nearly five minutes without a field goal for Brush.

Two Erik Barfuss free throws and a Niko Guzman three-pointer broke the 'Diggers' dry spell.

Brush worked all week on breaking the press, coach Bob Held said, and got the Reds out of the press by leaking guards behind the press and getting layups.

A major beneficiary of that tactic was Guzman, who led all scorers with 21 points.

When he and his teammates were not shredding the Eaton press, Guzman was hot from the perimeter, burying four three-pointers.

Kyle Rosenbrock added 10 points, Grayson Simmons 9, Noah Lechman 8 and Erik Barfuss 7 for the 'Diggers.

For Eaton, Casey Edens scored 18, Gavin Ledall 14 and Joe Mondragon and Jaxon Hobbs 6 each.

Lechman exited the game early in the fourth quarter when he inadvertently stepped on someone's foot and rolled his ankle. Held said Lechman should not miss much if any playing time.

There was cause for concern when Lechman went down; he has come back from problems with both knees. Advertisement

"No one's worked harder than him to get back playing basketball again," Held said.

Several Eaton players went over to the Brush bench, where Lechman was icing the ankle, for post-game handshakes.

Lechman, Rosenbrock and Guzman all hit the boards hard, the coach noted, Austin Garcia provided floor leadership and Clay Shaver hard play off the bench.

Once the early third quarter scoring drought ended, Brush pulled away to a 50-32 advantage going into the final stanza.

With Eaton not hitting well from the perimter, the 'Diggers spent much of the game playing zone defense - and hammering the boards to deny, for the most part, repeat shots for the Reds.

Toward the end of the game, Eaton found the range and buried several treys to close the gap a bit. Two of those bombs came from Ledall.

Held said that was simply good shooting by the Reds, "We had good defense on."

The Beetdiggers traveled to Estes Park on Saturday, January 10 and will take on Valley on Friday, January 16 at Valley.







Brush's preparation for Eaton's full court press paid big dividends Friday in a 72-57 Patriot League boys basketball home win.The Beetdiggers pulled away from a 12-12 first-quarter deadlock with an 8-0 scoring run and never looked back.By halftime, Brush was up 34-21, and the lead stayed in double figures much of the second half.The lead was maintained despite a stretch in the third quarter of nearly 4 1/2 minutes without a point and nearly five minutes without a field goal for Brush.Two Erik Barfuss free throws and a Niko Guzman three-pointer broke the 'Diggers' dry spell.Brush worked all week on breaking the press, coach Bob Held said, and got the Reds out of the press by leaking guards behind the press and getting layups.A major beneficiary of that tactic was Guzman, who led all scorers with 21 points.When he and his teammates were not shredding the Eaton press, Guzman was hot from the perimeter, burying four three-pointers.Kyle Rosenbrock added 10 points, Grayson Simmons 9, Noah Lechman 8 and Erik Barfuss 7 for the 'Diggers.For Eaton, Casey Edens scored 18, Gavin Ledall 14 and Joe Mondragon and Jaxon Hobbs 6 each.Lechman exited the game early in the fourth quarter when he inadvertently stepped on someone's foot and rolled his ankle. Held said Lechman should not miss much if any playing time.There was cause for concern when Lechman went down; he has come back from problems with both knees."No one's worked harder than him to get back playing basketball again," Held said.Several Eaton players went over to the Brush bench, where Lechman was icing the ankle, for post-game handshakes.Lechman, Rosenbrock and Guzman all hit the boards hard, the coach noted, Austin Garcia provided floor leadership and Clay Shaver hard play off the bench.Once the early third quarter scoring drought ended, Brush pulled away to a 50-32 advantage going into the final stanza.With Eaton not hitting well from the perimter, the 'Diggers spent much of the game playing zone defense - and hammering the boards to deny, for the most part, repeat shots for the Reds.Toward the end of the game, Eaton found the range and buried several treys to close the gap a bit. Two of those bombs came from Ledall.Held said that was simply good shooting by the Reds, "We had good defense on."The Beetdiggers traveled to Estes Park on Saturday, January 10 and will take on Valley on Friday, January 16 at Valley.