The Milwaukee Repertory Theater performs its annual “Rep Lab,” featuring its interns. Credit: Michael Brosilow

By ,

Appropriately enough, this year's "Rep Lab" — the annual program of short plays showcasing the actors, designers and directors now finishing a year as Milwaukee Repertory Theater interns — begins by recalling how they arrived where they are now.

Embedded within the audience, this year's seven acting interns pose various questions that prompt memories of the shows we've loved and those we didn't — all of them contributing in some way to who we've become as we sit there in the dark, drawn once more to the theater to discover ourselves.

Devised by the interns, the last of the night's eight plays finishes this thought: Now on stage peering back at us, the interns suggest how the past's experiences — theatrical and otherwise — have not only shaped who they are but also prepared them for the future, as they ready themselves to play on life's stages in the years to come.

This framework dramatizes the importance of the choices we make in determining the parts we'll play, while also underscoring what's true in both theater and life: Our roles will be more expansive and satisfying if the way we act honestly recognizes where we are and who we could be, ensuring that we make every line count.

Easier said than done, as is clear from four of the remaining six pieces, each dramatizing how our lives shrink — and how readily we get stuck — when our lives go unexamined.

In "Tape," a man (Josiah Laubenstein) faces an eternity in which he is condemned to listen to tapes — 10,000 boxes of them — recording every lie he told in life. In "The Cowboy," three women relive the sobering consequences of their initially intoxicating but ultimately debilitating fantasies regarding what a man might be.

Both of these overly contrived pieces can be as arid as the cloistered room in "Tape." The remaining two variations on this theme fare better.

In "hysterical," Katherine Duffy plays a recently dumped woman who downs Jägermeister like it's water, inducing hazy visits from a wryly funny but not-so-nice visitor (Nick Narcisi), who calls her on her lousy life's choices.

In James Fletcher's truly hysterical "Give Until It Hurts," a man mired in a comfortable rut (Chris O'Reilly) gets an unwelcome visit from two thugs (Kristina Loy and Leeanna Rubin), who call him on how much he takes for granted while challenging him to give — and ask — more of himself.

The program's two remaining pieces explore what this might mean — and cost — by focusing on relationships at a crossroads.

In the first, two primordial swamp-dwellers (O'Reilly and Jennifer Latimore) face a classic relationship crisis: He has evolved and she has not.

Immediately thereafter, a moving musical features a couple who meet cute in Venice (Duffy and Laubenstein). They now must decide whether to call it a fling or bet on a future — staking the sort of claim these interns have made, in choosing their passion and sharing it this year with us.

IF YOU GO

"The Rep Lab" continues through Monday at the Stiemke Studio, 108 E. Wells St. For tickets, visit milwaukeerep.com or call (414) 224-9490.