St. Joseph Mercy projects aim for healthier community

Other hospitals' community health efforts Over the past two years, many hospitals in metro Detroit have increased efforts to improve community health. Beyond St. Joseph Mercy Health System, here's a rundown of other efforts:



Oakwood Healthcare has focused on decreasing numbers of uninsured patients with diabetes, heart disease and obesity.



Beaumont Health provides monthly health education and screening events in Brightmoor, one of the most medically underserved neighborhoods in northwest Detroit.



Henry Ford Health System is using a $2.2 million grant to fund community health workers to help young pregnant women in Detroit reduce infant mortality rates.



Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute has expanded its prostate cancer education outreach program with community events.

Is a hospital's role to treat sick people or help forge healthier communities?



Increasingly, the answer is both. And efforts by the St. Joseph Mercy Health System show the system is doubling down on its funding for community improvement projects — with an eye on the bottom line, government mandates and a commitment to local population health management.



St. Joseph Mercy, a six-hospital system based in Ann Arbor, has added $3 million this year to its $12 million budget for community improvement projects primarily because charity care has declined from Healthy Michigan Medicaid expansion and the system finished fiscal year 2015 in June on a financially strong footing.



Another broader reason for expanding community projects — which will focus on obesity prevention and behavioral health care — is that the Roman Catholic system believes its mission goes beyond hospital walls, said Rob Casalou, CEO of St. Joseph Mercy.



"St. Joe's is a health and wellness company with true community health improvement as part of its mission," said Casalou, who also is chairman of the Michigan Health and Hospital Association.



Casalou told Crain's he delivered this message to fellow hospital CEOs at the association's recent annual meeting to encourage others to increase their efforts because it's the right thing to do.



"It is not good enough to say our health system made a lot of money and did great things with the patients we treated," Casalou said. "We need to be able to say health improved in our community."

Tracking member costs

Casalou said some hospitals give lip service to population health management. Population health is an effort to manage the health outcomes of a group of individuals in a geographic market.



If population health measurements of such chronic illnesses as diabetes, heart disease and hypertension are increasing in the community your hospital serves, Casalou said, more needs to be done to reverse those trends.



"We are talking about the total cost of care imposed on society. We need to lower per-member-per-month costs overall," and working on public health improvements can accomplish that, said Casalou, noting that St. Joseph is cooperating with local organizations in Southeast Michigan on community improvement projects.



Some St. Joseph projects in the area of community health:





Mandated push

Historically, most hospitals have invested money on community improvement projects to improve overall public health and fulfill requirements under 501(c)(3) tax-exemption laws.



However, new IRS rules that went into effect in 2012 under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 mandate hospitals identify and fund projects that address significant health needs.



The law also requires hospitals to develop an implementation strategy to address those needs and report the projects and expenditures on Schedule H on the annual Form 990 to the IRS.



Cynthia Taueg, vice president of community health with Warren-based St. John Providence Health System, said the five-hospital system expects to complete its second, three-year community health needs assessment by next June 30 when its 2016 fiscal year ends.



Taueg said St. John's priorities continue to focus on reducing infant mortality rates, diabetes prevention and management and improving access to care for the underserved.



In fiscal year 2015, St. John's spent $103.2 million, or about 6 percent of net revenue, on health system community benefit projects. St. John focused on increasing dollars spent on taking care of the poor and vulnerable, increasing from $2.7 million in 2014 to more than $3.6 million this year.



Of that amount, St. John provided more than $700,000 in sponsorships and grants to nonprofit community agencies serving area residents, Taueg said.



In June, St. Joseph Mercy's board approved the system's second community benefit report since the Affordable Care Act was approved. The report indentified obesity prevention and behavioral health issues as the top two needs.

Michael Miller, St. Joseph's chief mission officer, said the system will continue to fund a variety of community projects, but decided to increase funding in the obesity and behavioral health areas as a result of its 2015 report.