NEW YORK, Oct. 3, 2013 /PRNewswire/ -- Solstice Health Insurance Company (SHIC), a New York-based dental benefits carrier, announced that beginning Oct. 1, it is offering pediatric and family dental care plans on the New York State of Health. As New York's official public health care exchange goes live, Solstice is committed to providing comprehensive plans that are competitively priced and to covering essential dental benefits customers will value.

(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20111020/FL90549LOGO )

"The Affordable Care Act's Essential Health Benefit provision requires specific procedures to be covered. Solstice plans go beyond the requirement, covering over 340 procedures," said Solstice COO Carlos Ferrera. "Our plans are affordable with low co-pays and our network of providers covers 39 counties, ensuring customers can find a provider at a location that's convenient and close."

Solstice plans are unique in that the company has developed an open access model in which customers do not have to pre-select a provider and can switch providers at any time. The plans feature no rosters, so there is no wait time for receiving dental care. "Since Solstice began offering this type of plan, we've received positive feedback from satisfied customers who appreciate the flexibility and hassle-free style of our plans," said Ferrera.

Exchange shoppers can now go to New York State of Health and purchase dental benefits for their children, entire family, or employees. To view the exchange, go to https://nystateofhealth.ny.gov. Also visit www.solsticecare.com for additional information on certified Qualified Dental Plans that are available off the New York State of Health exchange.

About Solstice:

Solstice is a privately-held New York corporation based in New York, NY. Solstice offers dental benefit plans in 39 New York counties. For information on Solstice, contact 1.877.760.2247 or visit www.solsticehealthinsurance.com.

CONTACT: Alissa Gavrilescu, 954.370.4338, agavrilescu@solsticebenefits.com

SOURCE Solstice Benefits, Inc.