It’s been 20 years since Tulare County residents have gone to the polls to elect a new sheriff, but on June 3 that is exactly what will happen. After five terms in office, former Sheriff Bill Wittman announced in October 2013 that he would step down for health reasons, making way for a new sheriff in town.

There is no way one could have missed seeing one of the thousands of campaign signs around the county in support of either Acting Sheriff Mike Boudreaux or former Undersheriff Dave Whaley.

The race to permanently fill that office has so far been one of the most exciting races in the county —some would say, one of the most contentious.

But apart from the rancor that emanated from supporters in both camps — when allegations of an illegal raffle and improper reporting of campaign financials surfaced in Boudreaux‘s campaign — the two candidates have had strong, steady and distinguished careers. Both are serious contenders for the role of sheriff and both have the experience and the training to lead the department.

Boudreaux is a 27-year veteran of the department, working his way through specialty units and eventually to sergeant, lieutenant and captain before being named Undersheriff by the Board of Supervisors when Wittman stepped down to take a medical leave. He earned degrees in criminology and administration of justice. He’s also a graduate of the Los Angeles Police Department’s West Point Leadership Academy as well as the FBI’s National Academy.

Whaley spent 34 years in the department also working his way up the ranks before achieving the Undersheriff position under Wittman. He helped lead the department through lean years and flush years, getting hand-on training and mentoring from Wittman in the same way that Boudreaux has.

But what the Tulare County Sheriff’s Department will need most — what any law-enforcement agency today will need — going forward is a sheriff with the ability to master changing technology; to develop and then present the increasingly specialized needs of the department to the residents and taxpayers in a way that will garner support.

He must also be an effective speaker, and must pay close attention to the needs of the agricultural industries who have been hit hard by a growing and sophisticated problem of ag crime.

For those reasons, we urge you to vote for Mike Boudreaux for Tulare County Sheriff.

Make no mistake — each candidate clearly has the ability to lead the department and neither has an overwhelming advantage over the other.

Both, at one time or another in their careers, had the support of their boss, former Sheriff Wittman.

Boudreaux currently has Wittman’s endorsement, but if Wittman had stepped down while Whaley was Undersheriff, we have no doubt Whaley would have likewise earned the endorsement. For Wittman to have thrown his support behind Whaley now would have been an insult to Boudreaux. So Wittman’s endorsement carried relatively little weight.

And while a premature departure does give every “acting” candidate an advantage — some might say an unfair advantage — Boudreaux does have what it takes to lead the department through the 21st century.

Go to the polls on June 3 and cast your vote in support of Boudreaux.

Coming next week

Look for the Times-Delta/Advance-Register editorial board pick for Tulare County District Attorney in the May 30 edition.

Read or Share this story: http://www.visaliatimesdelta.com/story/opinion/2014/05/23/vote-mike-boudreaux-sheriff/9484577/