Quicksilver, the silver-haired speedster in X-Men: Days of Future Past, was one of the standouts of the most ambitious X-Men feature to date — and Fox knows it. That’s why Quicksilver will likely be back for X-Men: Apocalypse, but could he even get his own solo film?

Evan Peters’ quick-witted and even quicker-footed Quicksilver had what’s generally agreed to be the breakout scene in all of X-Men: Days of Future Past. In fact, Quicksilver seemed so useful that fans of the movie have pointed out he should have been used more. As in: he could have solved all of the X-Men’s problems in literally the blink of an eye.

Executives that worked on the film, though, excuse away their underuse of Quicksilver by saying that the thing that really needed saving in Days of Future Past was Mystique’s soul. That’s pretty lame as far as plot-hole patching goes, but Days of Future Past‘s box office haul means nobody really cared.

Quicksilver’s popularity in the most recent X-Men flick may have secured the actor that played him some future work, as well. Speaking this week with Newsarama, Days of Future Past second unit director Brian Smrz confirmed that the mutant speedster will in fact be back on the screen when the X-Men take on their greatest foe to date, the powerful Apocalypse.

“Well, there will be another Quicksilver scene,” Smrz said when asked what he was looking forward to with X-Men: Apocalypse, “which I’m looking forward to; that’ll be fun.”

It’s not a lot to go on, because Fox of course is playing everything close to the vest. It does confirm that Quicksilver will play a role when the X-Men take on Apocalypse, but he’s just one of several characters fans would love to see when the mutants take the screen again.

Meanwhile, the Quicksilver information is one of the only solid details we’ve gotten so far on X-Men: Apocalypse. More recently, there’s been the (frankly awful) rumor that Tom Hardy, who played Bane in The Dark Knight Rises, was in the running to take on the role of millennia-old Egyptian En Sabah Nur, the eponymous Apocalypse for the next X-Men film. One hopes that that rumor doesn’t pan out, but it’s one of the few rumors to hit the web so far.

At the very least, it looks like we’ll be getting another Quicksilver sequence or two for X-Men: Apocalypse, and Smrz said he’d actually be interested in a Quicksilver solo flick if the stars aligned right. Just don’t hold your breath for that one, though.

“We talked about Quicksilver before,” Smrz said, “I’d love to do a Quicksilver as a solo film because there’s a lot to enjoy with that character. But I’m not geared just towards superhero movies; for me it’s about great main characters, and finding movies that have that.”