As politicians gear up for the upcoming 2016 presidential elections, they are all looking for a way to target new voters as they do every four years.

Now many of us may think “inactive voters” but these politicians have taken a more aggressive approach by targeting teenagers around the ages of 16 and 17. This tactic has been deemed controversial and highly intrusive, Politico notes.

White House campaigns are combining census reports, scouring local high schools, pre-register voting information with social media access (Twitter, Instagram, etc.) to reach out to the voters who will be of legal age by the 2016 presidential elections.

These resources give campaigns access to parents’ previous voting, the teen’s opinions on certain topics, a portion of their personal information and direct access to target them through social media platforms.

What’s the point of targeting a crowd that’s more concerned about getting to class than politics? The reasons are much simpler than you may think. Teens are easy access, impressionable and can give any candidate that “edge” while recruiting other teenagers to join. This then makes the politicians’ job easier.

It’s a good way to get citizens involved in the world they live in, but is it fair to target such young minded individuals?

According to Politico, privacy activists and policymakers express deep qualms about letting political campaigns have free rein to target future voters before they’ve become legal adults.

They say teenagers lack the proper context and experience to make sense of so many brass-knuckle attack ads on complicated issues ranging from the federal deficit to terrorism.

Civic-minded efforts to encourage youth turnout can come close to crossing the line too, including a viral video on which rapper Lil Jon said his reason for casting a ballot in 2014 was to legalize marijuana, and a Koch Brothers-affiliated Generation Opportunity commercial that used a frightening Uncle Sam mask to urge young women to opt out of Obamacare.

Making data on young voters publicly available also opens them up not just to messages from Hillary Clinton and Jeb Bush, but from anyone else who wants to contact kids online.

“You want your 16-year-old daughter’s name and address on the web in this world?” said Vicki Berger, a retiring Oregon state representative who has tried to restrict the public release of teenagers’ personal data when they pre-register to vote in her state before they turn 18. She warns that the information could end up in the hands of “pedophiles and people preying on young girls.”

“I don’t want any politician trying to contact my 16-year-old kid. Nor do I want the corporate advertising monoliths to get their hooks into them too early,” said Wally Hicks, a former Oregon state representative who last session joined his fellow Republican Berger on an amendment aimed at shutting down the public disclosure of data on teenagers.

It also raises the question whether the effort is worth it, considering these teenagers will be separating into different areas depending on jobs or college opportunities.

However, the benefits are undeniable. President Barack Obama demonstrated in 2008 and 2012 how the youth vote can be a key ingredient in building a winning coalition. His volunteers set up shop across the street from high school graduation ceremonies to register new voters and used student volunteers to hound classmates.

“We needed to be very deliberate on how we targeted them,” said Valeisha Butterfield-Jones, Obama’s 2012 national youth vote director. To best allocate its resources on teens, the Obama campaign combined voter rolls with other publicly available data and information shared by young people who attended live events and signed up to volunteer.

“I think campaigns are going to have to be very careful if they’re contacting with young people,” Valeisha Butterfield-Jones said. “Civic responsibility is important. But there’s a fine line when you’re talking about minors.”

Republican National Committee is especially excited with this tactic. “This and voter registration are priorities and what we’re already looking to get on voters,” said RNC spokeswoman Kirsten Kukowski. “Frankly, it’s a huge opportunity for us with the youth turning away from Obama and the Democrats the way we’ve seen lately.”

Although it’s a controversial tactic, it is being employed frequently by politicians wanting to snag another vote. On one hand it is beneficial for the “new adults” to become educated on their government and policies, but on the other hand, is it too soon? Are they simply taking advantage of the youth that has yet to decide where they stand on any political issue?