A look back at the people and events that made news the past week. Week-ends is a regular weekly feature of This Just In...





HEROES OF THE WEEK





The Fairy Godmother





Jennifer Jones





Mystery man





Phillip Lucado





And two dozen more







VILLAINS OF THE WEEK





ISIS





Marquette University





Obamacare





Seth Meyers





Chocolate manufacturers in the UK







QUOTES OF THE WEEK





“It’s not easy to tick me off. I don’t get angry often, but you mess with my wife, you mess with my kids, that’ll do it every time. Donald, you’re a sniveling coward. Leave Heidi the hell alone. Let me be absolutely clear: Our spouses and our children are off bounds. It is not acceptable for a big, loud New York bully to attack my wife.”

Ted Cruz after Donald Trump threatened earlier this week to ‘spill the beans” on Heidi Cruz





“This is going to happen in the United States.”

Donald Trump on the TODAY Show following the suicide bombings in Brussels





“I would close up our borders until we figure out what is going on. Look at Brussels, look at Paris, look at so many cities that were great cities. Paris is almost as bad. Paris is no longer the City of Lights, Paris has a lot of problems. All you have to do is speak to the people who live there where the same thing has happened and they are in fear. The city is in fear. And we have to be smart in the United States.” The U.S. is “taking in people without any real documentation. We don't know where they're from, who they are. They could be ISIS. They could be ISIS related. We just don't learn.”

Donald Trump on FOX





“We need to immediately halt the flow of refugees from countries with a significant Al Qaeda or ISIS presence. We need to empower law enforcement to patrol and secure Muslim neighborhoods before they become radicalized.”

Ted Cruz





“Today’s attacks in Brussels underscores this is a war. This is not a lone war. ISIS has declared jihad. It is way past time we have a president who will acknowledge this evil and will call it by its name and use the full force and fury to defeat ISIS. Until they are defeated, these attacks will continue. Their target is each and every one of us. We need a president who sets aside political correctness. We don’t need another lecture about Islamophobia.”

Ted Cruz





“You don't send a picture of yourself laughing while people have just been blown up at a level that...is the equivalent of September 11 to our allies.”

Former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani ripped into President Barack Obama for attending a baseball game in Cuba instead of jumping on his plane and coming home after the Brussels attacks. Republicans are criticizing Obama for staying in Cuba in the wake of the terrorist attacks in Belgium and going about his day as planned.





“This is the time to be the leader. So much of politics and national security is a combination of symbolism and reality. The reality is that we did have that attack. It was unnerving to us, it was devastating in Europe.



“But at the same time, the symbolism is that the president stayed at the baseball game all day long where you would have thought he would have said, ‘Look, we’ve got more business that I have to deal with, I wish you well,’ get on the phone. We’ve got to put together some kind of a bulletproof syndicate to deal with all this. There’s a real urgency about it, and he has got to convey that, not just to the American people but to the world.’

Tom Brokaw, the former anchor of NBC’s “Nightly News,” criticized President Barack Obama for going to a baseball game in Cuba after learning about the Brussels terror attack





Voters should support Hillary Clinton “if you believe we’ve finally come to the point where we can put the awful legacy of the last eight years behind us and the seven years before that.”

Bill Clinton at a campaign stop for his wife provided this gaffe





“The biggest difference today between the Left and Right, when it comes to racial issues, is that liberals tend to take the side of those blacks who are doing the wrong things – hoodlums the Left depicts as martyrs – while the Right defends those blacks more likely to be the victims of those hoodlums.”

Syndicated columnist Thomas Sowell







OUTRAGE OF THE WEEK





Obama dances while the world burns







MOST UNDER-REPORTED STORY OF THE WEEK





Trump isn't inevitable







MOST OVER-HYPED STORY OF THE WEEK





Donald Trump's attacks on Ted Cruz and his wife







STRANGEST, MOST UNUSUAL STORY OF THE WEEK





Kids vs. prison inmates





What money does to men





Pole dancing at 8 1/2 months pregnant