Jill WooChing cleans up in the kitchen of her Berthoud home Thursday. WooChing, who has been battling cancer, was last year's Happy Smackah fundraiser recipient. ( Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer )

EDITOR’S NOTE: The Times-Call’s Take Two series revisits people and things we have written about in the past year. Take Two stories run on Mondays.

It has been a little less than a year since Jill Woo Ching was the 2014 Happy Smackah recipient and a 5K race was held in her honor.

Since the annual Longmont event last May, and a full 16 months since her diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma, life for Woo Ching has been rocky but full of more support than she could've imagined.

"I'm so appreciative," she said of the experience. "There were perfect strangers, people who had never knew me, who didn't need to care about me but did."

Woo Ching said that the day of the 2014 race, it was "doubtful" she could even make the event in her honor, due to chemotherapy-induced sickness, but she did, and she is grateful of both the emotional and monetary support.

Last year's event raised more than $20,000.

If you go What: 2015 Happy Smackah 5k When: 8 a.m. May 9 Where: West end of Dawson Park near Lakeshore Drive, Longmont Cost: Under age 5: $1; ages 6-12: $15; ages 13-17: $25; ages 18-54: $35; above 55: $25 More info: Register at happysmackah.com

Since then, the Berthoud resident has traveled roughly every eight weeks to the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer in Houston, where her primary oncologist is located.

"After 10 rounds of very difficult chemo, like once every three weeks, I would love to be told 'the tumors in your lungs are gone,' but they just aren't at all," she said. "The hope is to prevent more cancer growth."

Leiomyosarcoma is a malignant tumor of smooth muscle tissue.

Woo Ching says at this point she's realized she is "living with cancer" and is working to manage the disease more than fight it. In addition to that reality, she is also in a back brace most of the time due to a tumor in her lower back. She was hoping a surgery would end that ordeal, but that has since become a non-option due to the high-risk involved.

"I have discovered in the last year I had some hope that I could have some specific surgery to relieve the pain down there, and that's been ruled out," Woo Ching said.

But Woo Ching credits Happy Smackah with giving her a constant sense of hope. She said that despite her illness, she is trying to stay involved with the organization to help others.

Jill Woo Ching, of Berthoud, shows her back brace, which she will wear the rest of her life. Woo Ching, who has been battling cancer, was last year's Happy Smackah fundraiser recipient (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

"I keep offering to help and be a volunteer," she said. "I'm just like champing at the bit."

Happy Smackah was founded in 2010. The annual run benefits any student or employee of the St. Vrain Valley School District who has been through a tragedy.

To Woo Ching, Happy Smackah is important not just because of the money raised but because of the community support it provides for every recipient.

"I never even thought about the dollar amount," she said. "The idea I'm trying to get across is the fact that people did that for you. The fact that a board of directors chose me out of other applicants, and quite a few of my St. Vrain Valley friends nominated me."

Woo Ching says she is a "cheerleader" for this year's recipient, Kelly Haley. Haley, a cheer coach from Longmont High School, was diagnosed last month with stage 4 colon cancer, which has since spread to her liver and lungs.

Woo Ching hopes that her story, and Haley's, will show people how much an event like Happy Smackah can help.

"I'll be there, and what I think is so cool is the families come together," she said. "So that people that came out just for me can realize we can together can do this every year."

Isa Jones: 303-684-5274, jonesi@timescall.com or twitter.com/theisajones