WEST DES MOINES – There were two common summations from the 125 people who listened to Carly Fiorina’s speech in West Des Moines over the weekend: It sounded like a speech from presidential candidate, and it was very well delivered.

The event was marketed as an Iowa gathering for the Unlocking Potential Project. That is a nationwide group founded by Fiorina to help Republicans reach more female voters and to get women more engaged in helping conservative candidates win.

Although the event was organized to promote the UP Project, it could easily be construed as a testing ground for a potential presidential campaign by one of the nation’s most successful businesswomen.

Of course, organizers stated Fiorina was in Iowa to help Republican candidates win this November, and she did stress the important of that cause several times. However, this hour-long event was more about Carly Fiorina and her ideas for the future of this country than anything else.

The meeting opened with a slickly produced video showcasing Fiorina’s speeches and TV appearances, espousing her conservative views. Two of Iowa’s most prominent Republican women then spoke to the assembled crowd. Iowa House Majority Leader Linda Upmeyer and former Rep. Annette Sweeney are serving as the Iowa co-chairs for the Unlocking Potential Project.

“I don’t think I’ve ever heard a better story than hers of someone who has broken that glass ceiling,” Upmeyer said. “We’re here today with someone who started as a secretary and ended up being listed as the most powerful woman in business six times by Fortune magazine.”

Sweeney and Upmeyer also heaped praise on the many dignitaries in the room. The crowd included a veritable who’s who of Republican women in Iowa. Along with GOP county chairs and co-chairs and, there was former Lt. Governor Joy Corning, former Ambassador Mary Kramer, Rep. Linda Miller, Rep. Dawn Pettengill, and Iowa Federation of Republican Women President Kim Reem. Senator Chuck Grassley and former (and perhaps future) Secretary of State Paul Pate were also on hand.

Carly Fiorina might not have ever held elected office before, but there is no denying her extremely impressive resume. She is the first woman to lead a Fortune 50 business. During her six years as chair and CEO of Hewlett-Packard, the company’s revenues doubled, reaching $90 billion.

She is also deeply involved in politics. Fiorina currently serves as the chair of the American Conservative Union Foundation, which hosts the annual CPAC, the nation’s largest annual gathering of conservatives. Fiorina ran for the U.S. Senate in 2010, challenging Barbara Boxer in California. Although she was unsuccessful in pulling off the upset in the deeply Democrat-leaning state, Fiorina made a seemingly unwinnable race competitive.

Could all this add up to a bid for the highest office in the land? There is no doubt that Fiorina would be an intriguing candidate. Judging from the reaction her speech received on Saturday in West Des Moines, she would have no trouble garnering support. Fiorina is a highly intelligent, articulate and successful woman who espouses conservative principles, even touching on issues that some Republicans avoid.

“I personally am a proud pro-life woman, but I understand and respect that not everyone agrees with me. And women actually are prepared to disagree on that subject as long as the disagreement is respectful. There’s a lot of common ground among men and women, even in the powder keg, emotional issue of abortion,” Fiorina said.

She then cited statistics that show 85 percent of women believe sex selection abortion is wrong and 63 percent believe abortion after five months is egregious and no one is being denied access to birth control. The former Hewlett-Packard CEO believes Republicans must improve their messaging toward female voters.

“The key to combating the War on Women is to use facts because the facts are on our side,” Fiorina stated. “No one is being denied access to birth control, but women are indeed being denied access to the doctors and their hospitals thanks to Obamacare.”

Fiorina noted that many women are having a much more difficult time getting by in the Obama economy. Meanwhile, female Democrat leaders like Nancy Pelosi and Debbie Wasserman-Schultz are smearing Republicans. Recent comments by them likened Republicans to NFL running back Ray Rice, who was captured on video punching his then-fiancee in an elevator.

“So now, the Democratic Party would like voters to believe that we are the party of wife beaters. Ladies, we cannot take this sitting down,” Fiorina said as the room erupted into applause. “This is an insult to our intelligence. I am sure you will join me when I say, as a proud Republican woman, I am mad as hell now and I am not going to take it anymore,” she added, to another ovation.

Fiorina touched on a wide range of topics during her 41-minute speech, including national security, the economy and reforming the federal government’s bureaucracy .She also laid out a four-point plan for America’s future: Reform the federal government, revitalize Main Street, retrain America’s workforce and restore leadership.

“I think now it is time to realize that we have all the human potential we need to solve every problem, to heal our wounds, to allow every American the opportunity to build a life of dignity and purpose and meaning and fulfill their potential. What we need are different policies and different leaders,” Fiorina stated at the close of her speech.

It was a bold, dynamic oratory that covered a wide range of issues. Everyone TheIowaRepublican.com spoke with afterwards came away impressed, and believed Fiorina sounded “presidential”.

The last two Iowa Caucuses have shown us anything can happen in the Republican presidential field. Even picking a female who has never held elected office is not beyond the realm of possibility.

Photo by Gage Skidmore