More than 100 retirees gathered Tuesday at the Bryant Conference Center to learn more about how recent health-care law changes might affect seniors.

“Because of the changes in health care and change of delivery systems, there have been a lot of questions,” said Carol Wright, vice president for programs for the Tuscaloosa University of Alabama Retirees Association, which helped sponsor the forum. “We've brought together professionals who can give the true facts.”

Although the Affordable Care Act did not affect Medicare for seniors directly, it did expand some of the preventive care that benefits seniors, said Donna Joyner, Public Education Employees' Health Insurance Plan director for Retirement Systems of Alabama.

But with the expansion of services, costs for PEEHIP have risen, Joyner said. Drug costs have also increased, Joyner said. Almost 331,000 people in Alabama are covered under the PEEHIP plan, and 66,000 of them are Medicare eligible, she added.

“The changes we've had to implement have been pretty significant,” Joyner said. “The good news is, most of these changes have been adding additional benefits to our coverage.”

To compensate for the increased costs of expanded care, PEEHIP offers a wellness plan and health counseling. PEEHIP also conducts regular audits to make sure that its members are eligible for coverage — meaning there hasn't been a divorce or a dependent is still younger than 26.

Another change that is affecting senior citizens is not so much related to the ACA, but a change that has been occurring since the 1980s: Fewer companies are offering health insurance coverage as part of their retirement package, said Ashley Adcox of the Area Agency on Aging for West Alabama.

“One day, 30 years from now, you may mention retiree health coverage and people may not know what it is because it won't be around,” Adcox said.

The “Future of Health Care for Seniors” forum was sponsored by the Tuscaloosa University of Alabama Retirees Association, the Osher Lifelong Learning Institute and the Tuscaloosa Alabama Education Retirees Association.

Tuscaloosa retiree Bill Rose said he came to the event Tuesday because he's worried about the changes in health care recently.

“Absolutely, I'm worried,” Rose said. “It may be affordable now, but it won't be affordable for long.”

Civille Brown said she heard about the event through OLLI and came because she wanted to educate herself.

“I'm single and always had to support myself, and I wanted try to educate myself about these things,” Brown said. “My drug costs continually go up.”

Retiree Lynn Zeanah said she also attended to learn more.

“I'm worried about the increase in costs,” Zeanah said. “It seems like co-pays gradually go up.”

Reach Lydia Seabol Avant at 205-722-0222 or lydia.seabolavant@tuscaloosanews.com.