Kiz: I get why the Broncos drafted Ty Sambrailo out of Colorado State. He fits the template of new coach Gary Kubiak’s zone-blocking scheme, where agility and athleticism matter more than size. But the three toughest NFL positions to play as a rookie are: 1) quarterback, 2) cornerback and 3) left offensive tackle. Protecting the blind side of 39-year-old Peyton Manning seems like too much to ask of a rookie. Tell me why Sambrailo has a chance to succeed.

Renck: Intelligence and the scheme represent the reasons. Sambrailo fell in the eyes of scouts in a postseason bowl game because of his body type and poor practice sessions against elite college pass rushers. He has since improved his physique. But it’s brains, not brawn, that will accelerate his development. At CSU, he knew the offense well enough to call out audibles. He recognizes what defenses are trying to do, and remains a quick study. Also, look for the Broncos to protect him early if he needs it with a second tight end flanking him.

Kiz: OK, I admit, I have spent more time watching “Love It or List It” on HGTV than the all-22 video of Sambrailo’s work in Fort Collins. But when I did see him play for the Rams, my biggest concern was a lack of man-strength to wrestle with those beasts that rush the passer in the NFL. Sambrailo seems more suited to play left guard as a young pro. Any chance he could be moved there? And do the Broncos have any good alternatives to him at left tackle?

Renck: He doesn’t possess the body type to anchor and hold off premier edge pass rushers. He will need to rely on technique, but there’s no plans to switch him now. He’s receiving a daily education from Von Miller and DeMarcus Ware. Ware told me he lets Sambrailo know when he reveals a pass play by his stance or looks to be cheating to get a step outside. If Sambrailo isn’t ready to be a starter — a legitimate possibility — the Broncos could shift Chris Clark to left tackle and let Ryan Harris and Michael Schofield battle for the starting job at right tackle.

Kiz: Don’t get me wrong. I think Sambrailo has a chance to be a fine pro. As a rookie left tackle, however, I think he also has a chance to get Manning hurt. The No. 1 job of a coach is to put his players in a position to succeed; asking Sambrailo to start at left tackle seems to be violating that rule. The early line I’ve seen from oddsmakers on the over/under for Denver victories is 10. It’s hard for me to tell you with much conviction the Broncos will win more than 10 regular-season games this year with a 39-year-old QB and a rookie LT.

Renck: Peyton Manning is sack-proof. The issue for the offensive line is preventing hits, not sacks. Let’s be honest. If f Sambrailo isn’t equipped to keep Manning upright, he won’t be in there. The Broncos aren’t going to sacrifice possibly Manning’s last season to develop Sambrailo. Remember, offensive coordinator Rick Dennison is calculated, not emotional. He wants the offensive line ready by the season opener, not the exhibition opener. So why try Sambrailo at left tackle? Because the Broncos have time to experiment.