It's the most magical time of year, and yet again the secularists are busy trying to take Christ out of Christmas. Even Pope Francis has hopped on the bandwagon, calling the celebration of Christmas this year "a farce."

Well, I for one, will be doing my part to keep Christ in Christmas. If someone dares wish me a "Happy holiday" or something similarly generic and offensive to Christianity (aka the real reason for the holidays), I'm going to hit them back with a proverbial holy uppercut — I don't have a "Happy holiday," I have a "Happy Christ's Birthday" and you can either like it or move to another country.

It's not my fault your Hanukkah or Kwanzaa falls in the same month as the realest holiday of all.

As it is the season of Christ's birth, I thought now was as good a time as any to look over some of Jesus Christ's greatest teachings and take stock in our godly, American Christian lives.

'The gays cannot marry'

Christ was pretty clear about how he feels about the gays and gay marriage; just ask Time magazine's Person of the Year nominee, Kim Davis.

And don't go asking me to find the exact quote in the Bible — standard liberal secularist trickery — because Jesus lives in my heart, and my heart tells me that gay marriage is gross and wrong. God made Adam and Eve, not Adam and STEVE. Think about the children!

'Thou shall not be a Welfare Queen'

Jesus made his feelings known about social welfare programs like food stamps, disability and unemployment. He hated going to the supermarket and seeing someone with a fancy new iPhone 6s buying all their groceries with food stamps, when Jesus had to buy his groceries with his own money while stuck with an iPhone 5s. I think we can all agree with Jesus — that isn't fair!

Ergo, if one person cheats the welfare system, it stands to reason everybody is cheating the welfare system ... so welfare needs to be dissolved. Hallelujah, amen — trade in that iPhone for a flip phone and get a job, you lazy thugs, I'm sick of my taxes going toward you. And Jesus is, too!

Thoughts and prayers to all those hardworking taxpayers out there!

'Muslims need to go'

It goes without saying that Jesus is not a fan of Muslims and knows that they are all terrorists who need to be carpet-bombed straight back to hell. Jesus was pretty clear when he said the only good Muslim is a dead Muslim.

Again, don't ask me to look up the exact quote in the Bible — that book has a lot of pages with really tiny print — Jesus lives in my heart and speaks to me every night in my prayers. I don't have to read the book, I get my information from him directly.

'Keep the immigrants out of our country'

Christ knew that America was a godly place made for godly people ... who were born here, of course. The biggest threat to our safety, our economy and our tradition of having English be the only language option on automated answering systems are the foreigners coming into our country.

We don't need any more Muslim terrorists, Syrian terrorists, Mexican rapists, Asians, Indians, South American Mexicans or liberal communist devil worshippers like the French.

'Evolution is a lie. Science is for the stupids. Read the Bible. Or better yet, let other people read the Bible for you and tell you what it says.'

The Internet is full of people who have read the Bible, and Jesus knew that technology was coming because he can see the future. That's why he transcribed his teachings into easy-to-read, easy-to-repost Internet memes that let your Facebook friends know why they are facing eternal damnation and why you aren't.

'Donate to the television preacher'

You will know how holy a man of God is by how nice his clothes are, how white his teeth shine and how spacious his megachurch and mansions are. God wants his servants to be wealthy beyond belief, which is why he invented televangelism.

Keep sending your money to Joel Osteen. God wants him to have another jet. And the more you give to godly people like Osteen, the more money will be given back to you — spiritual seed money — and your blessing will be repaid tenfold.

That means for every jetliner you help a television preacher buy, 10 jetliners will someday be yours. That's God's math.

'Stand with Duck Dynasty'

Jesus said the best way to show your relationship with God was to support Christians who are persecuted, like Uncle Phil from Duck Dynasty, and to buy as much of their merchandise from the Cracker Barrel as you can possibly afford. Go into debt buying the merchandise. Prove your love.

'The government is evil and you should keep a stockpile of guns for when they come for you'

Jesus said you would know the end of the world was near when Satan took over the White House and tried to ban the sale of assault rifles. Every godly Christian should have an arsenal stockpiled in the basement, and a concealed handgun on them at all times.

The devil comes in many forms — and all of them can be taken out with a well-placed bullet.

'Repeal Obamacare'

Jesus hates nothing more than Obamacare. Caps on yearly out-of-pocket expenses? Guaranteed coverage, even for pre-existing conditions? That's the work of Satan, clear as vodka.

Repeal, repeal, repeal.

Republicans have tried to take down Obamacare 50 times since its implementation — and each time they were shot down. But they haven't given up the good fight.

Keep doing God's work, brothers! If somebody's child has cancer, they shouldn't get to have health insurance — it's a privilege, not a right.

Ryan Jackson is aware that Poe's law is in full effect with this week's installment, and he can be reached at thereluctanttownie@hotmail.com.