Arizona Democratic gubernatorial candidate Fred DuVal (right) and Republican candidate Doug Ducey greet each other on Oct 13, 2014, during a debate for the Arizona Women's Forum in Paradise Valley. (Photo: Associated Press) Story Highlights Fred DuVal supports Medicaid expansion, while Doug Ducey has remained silent on the issue but accepts it as set policy.

DuVal said he would veto any bill that would repeal expansion; Ducey is unclear.

The new Department of Child Safety should be shielded from budget cuts as much as possible, both say.

Gov. Jan Brewer took steps in recent years to restore Arizona's safety net by expanding health care for low-income Arizonans and beefing up funding for child welfare.

Whether those key pieces of Brewer's legacy remain intact next year hinges in large part on the next governor, who will face an immediate budget deficit of more than a half-billion dollars when he takes office.

Lawmakers and the next governor, whether Republican Doug Ducey or Democrat Fred DuVal, will have to balance the budget amid competing demands — a court mandate to bolster education funding and campaign vows to cut taxes and secure the border.

Child welfare

A year ago, officials discovered that 6,500 reports of child abuse or neglect had been deliberately shelved without an investigation.

Brewer and the Legislature responded by overhauling the state's child-welfare agency and increasing its funding, saying it was needed to reverse the backlog of complaints and ensure the problem didn't happen again.

Lawmakers overwhelmingly voted to increase general-fund spending on the newly created Department of Child Safety to $361 million, an increase of $48 million. And the new department is seeking $27.8 million in new funding in the coming budget year.

A key question among many advocates is how vulnerable the DCS is to cuts.

DuVal jumped on the Child Protective Services crisis early, urging creation of a new agency before Brewer herself called for it. He said the state is moving in the right direction and said continued financial support for the agency is crucial.

But he can't say how high it ranks among his priorities for programs he would protect from budget cuts.

"This is absolutely top-tier, but education is Number 1," DuVal said.

RELATED: Arizona completes work on child-welfare cases

He said he's encouraged by the strong bipartisan support that the agency overhaul received from the Legislature and said that such a "shared commitment" should help protect funding for the fledgling agency.

Prevention is a key issue for agency funding, DuVal said. But first, he said, the state has to ensure it has enough caseworkers to cover the workload (the agency is seeking $12.6 million next year for growth) and then, it must focus on updating its data system (that's a $15 million request from the agency for the CHILDS database).

Ducey, like DuVal, supports the overhaul of the agency and the leadership of Director Charles Flanagan. And, like DuVal, he lists protecting the new agency's budget as a "top priority" as the state faces the challenges of budget deficits.

"This is more than metrics," he said, saying the agency's mission is to protect some of the state's most-vulnerable citizens. "This is what government does, and nowhere is it more important than with our our children."

A key measurement of the agency's success, he said, would be a reduction in the estimated 16,000 children currently being cared for in settings other than their own family homes.

Medicaid expansion

Last year, lawmakers voted to restore funding for the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System,the state's Medicaid program, and to expand coverage to people who earn up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level. By doing so, they pulled in federal dollars to cover 90 percent of the cost. The remaining 10 percent comes from an assessment paid by Arizona hospitals.

Critics called it an embrace of "Obamacare," the federal Affordable Care Act, while supporters such as Brewer said it restored a program Arizona created that has been lauded as a shining example of managed care. She urged Arizonans to "do the math" because the program would save the state money while serving more people.

A legal challenge from three dozen GOP lawmakers over the way the program was approved continues, but Brewer is trying to shorten the process by going directly to the state Supreme Court. The hearing is set for Nov. 6.

Ducey said he supports the lawmakers' lawsuit, because it goes to the process used to usher in Medicaid expansion.

"I think it's fair to let them have their day in court," he said.

His position on Medicaid expansion is less clear. He was silent as the debate raged in spring 2013; many read that as opposition. When Ducey told reporters last fall that he did not endorse Medicaid expansion, Brewer retorted, "He's not much of a mathematician."

Asked if he would sign a bill to repeal the program, he doesn't answer directly, but has said the state is locked into a three-year agreement with the federal government. During that time, he would look for ways to "improve and reform" the program, he said in a debate.

If, after three years, the federal government reduces its support for Medicaid, Ducey said, he would make whatever moves were necessary to protect Arizona taxpayers. That doesn't mean removing people from the health-care rolls, he said, because reform efforts could find efficiencies.

Ducey has also talked about negotiating a waiver to allow the state to operate its Medicaid program outside federal mandates. Arizona already operates under a waiver, which is up for renewal in September 2016. Ducey said the new Medicaid waiver would focus on innovations. Arizona has been lauded for its existing program, which uses a managed-care model to control costs.

DuVal has been a proponent of the program, which he had a hand in creating. In the early 1980s, he was then-Gov. Bruce Babbitt's legislative liaison as Babbitt and the Legislature designed AHCCCS. DuVal said he would veto a bill to repeal Medicaid as governor.

He backs Brewer's request to the state Supreme Court to toss the lawmakers' suit, saying continued arguments over the program are delay tactics that create doubts about the long-term viability of the health-care program. "These (health care) providers need certainty," he said. "We're not going to get into these situations where there is annual anxiety (about the future of AHCCCS)."

He refuses to say what he would do if the federal government reduced its financial support for the program. The state's expansion contains "triggers" that cut back the program in such circumstances, but DuVal said he doubts that would happen.

Issue Ducey DuVal Medical repeal. Not during first three years of Arizona's expanded program; after that, depends on economic conditions Opooses repeal. Restoration of the state Children's Health Insurance Program Would depend on state budget. Yes. How to measure progress at the new Department of Child Safety? Reduction in the number of children in out-of-home placements. Reductions in cases reported to the agency and faster responses to complaints of child neglect and abuse. The pending Supreme Court case that could cut short a lawmaker challenge to Medicaid expansion. Supports lawmakers' right to have case on the process that ushered in expansion to be heard in court. Supports Brewer's position to dismiss the lawmakers' suit and remove a potential block to expansion. - Mary Jo Pitzl

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1w7Ijio