Do you think companies spend too much time searching for groundbreaking innovations at the expense of incremental advances?

ROBERT PLANT: Many corporate leaders dream of delivering a breakthrough product to market, one that can be a disruptor, propel their firm to the next level, and then go on to sustain their organization for decades. Examples take on legendary status: The Walkman; the iPhone; and Boeing’s 747 are all inventive, groundbreaking, “out-of-the box” innovations. Yet the risk for firms is that by pouring huge resources into developing “groundbreaking innovation,” the yield is ultimately insufficient. CEOs worry that their breakthrough product will fall foul of market forces and end up a dud, joining another legendary list containing products such as Betamax; OS/2, Microsoft’s Kin Phone; and Apple’s Newton.



The alternative is to follow the simpler incremental innovation approach. While less spectacular, incremental innovation operates within a more immediate time frame, maintaining customer loyalty and brand presence.

The preferred strategy, of course, is to do both; incrementally innovate to refresh and extend your firms existing product range, while disrupting the industry at the same time with bold new products. The revenue generated from new products replacing those in decaying categories. The key to success however, is to stay close to the core brand value proposition with the disruptive new products. Forgetting this can be costly, Coke drinkers expect Coca-Cola; while Diet-Coke is incremental and innovative, the ‘New’ Coke of 1985 was too far from the brand’s core value, its taste, it was simply not Coca-Cola to consumers.

The strategy of innovate and disrupt, yet stay close to the core, is one that has been embraced by P&G, whose Tide Pod detergent capsules illustrate true groundbreaking innovation within a product category more associated with decades of incremental innovation. Tide was originally created in 1946, a liquid version followed in 1984; but the Pods launched in February 2012 have been a runaway success with sales in the U.S. and Canada surpassing $500 million in the first year. It is hard to argue that incrementalism, in the form of adding new and improved ingredients, such as bleaches or enzymes to the traditional product forms would have ever had such impact. Tide’s Pods can now begin their incremental journey, with potential for variants such as “sport,” “heavy duty,” “enviro-friendly” and “bleach” over the coming years, which not only will provide brand refresh opportunities but space for the company to pursues its next disruptive breakthrough.

Robert Plant (@drrobertplant) is an associate professor at the School of Business Administration, University of Miami, in Coral Gables, Fla.

Read the latest Leadership Report.