Perhaps you’ve heard of Rick Steves. You know, the guy from those travel books. He also has a travel TV show called “Rick Steves’ Europe: Through the back door” where he shows you how to travel through Europe through, well, the back door. He’s also possibly the biggest fanny-pack and dad-jeans wearing dork on earth. You know, this guy:

Well old Rick Steves has been getting political these days. First he outed himself as a proud pothead with his advocacy for Washington state’s legal marijuana law passed this last November. He became something of a spokesman for New Approach Washington, and was successful at helping get the historic pot legalization bill passed.

Then Rick got political again on Monday, coming out as an Obamacare supporter. Both these moves have angered the more conservative faction of Rick’s travel following, but Rick really doesn’t seem to care—he’s like the Honey Badger of fanny-pack-wearing travel hosts.

Here’s an excerpt of what Rick wrote on his blog this week:

It’s amazing to me that in our great nation, about a fifth of the citizens are unable to afford health insurance, need to go to the emergency room for routine medical needs, and are terrorized by the specter of one serious accident or sickness wiping out their family financially. And, just as amazing, half of our country thinks that’s OK and is fighting mad about the possibility of change. Even more perplexing, many of the people who think this is the best America can afford are the very people who need help the most.

…

Someone recently asked me, “As a businessman and an employer, what do you think of Obamacare?” My response was that, as a businessman, I don’t think of it at all. I employ 80 people. I imagine my health-care costs might go up a bit. But this is a community issue. My response to Obamacare is as an American who wants to be proud of my country. It is an embarrassment that so many Americans are brutalized by health-care costs. Europeans and Canadians — who spend far less per person on health care, like their care, and have options for rich people to get all the private VIP service they like — marvel at how so much of America is hell-bent on maintaining our status quo.

…

Those opposed to Obamacare have a powerful and well-funded voice. I believe it’s the slickest marketing initiative money can buy. Those who need the Affordable Care Act don’t have these special interests speaking out in their favor. Study the issue carefully. Ask yourself what motivates the loudest voices pulling out all the stops to shape your opinion: compassion or greed?

Read the rest here, and visit healthcare.gov, which is now back up and running, to get yourself some health insurance if you need.