PA-13: Arkoosh Expands Staff

Written by Jordan Krom, Contributing Writer

Physician and first-time political candidate Val Arkoosh has decided to expand her campaign staff to make room for new incoming field director, David Madsen.

“Dr. Arkoosh is in the unique position to reach the most voters in this race,” Madsen said. “I’m looking forward to running a robust field and outreach campaign that shows every voter why Dr. Arkoosh is the right candidate to represent the Pennsylvania 13th.”

In addition to his previous position as Chief County Coordinator on the Hanger for Governor campaign, Madsen is the political director for the National Young Democrats Black Caucus and the chair of the Pennsylvania Young Democrats Minority Caucus. Madsen is also the president of the Dauphin County Young Democrats.

“When I worked to help pass the Affordable Care Act, I understood the kind of grassroots-driven campaign that was needed to move major legislation through Congress,” Arkoosh said. “I’m looking forward to using that same neighbor-to-neighbor strategy in my campaign, which is why I’m excited to bring David on board.”

Arkoosh’s expansion in staff follows a great fundraising year for the physician. During 2013, she raised over $935,000, with an impressive $643,000 in cash on hand at the end of the fourth quarter.

Here are the bios for Arkoosh’s staffers directly from her campaign:

Jacob Dusseau, Campaign Manager: Jacob has managed Democratic campaigns and organizing efforts for competitive races across the Midwest and Northeast since 2006. Most recently, Jacob successfully managed a congressional primary campaign in Western New York for Nate Shinagawa (NY-23) who then nearly unseated a well-financed Republican incumbent – the district is now one of the DCCC and EMILY’s List’s top priorities for 2014.

Prior to 2012, Jacob managed the successful coordinated ground operations in Columbus, OH that resulted in a landslide Democratic victory, as well as one of the largest congressional field programs in 2010 for a DCCC Frontline race (OH-1) and numerous other campaigns for all levels of government.

Originally from Ohio, Jacob attended college in Chicago, where he began his political career campaigning to send more progressives to Congress and City Hall.

Bryan Lesswing, Communications Director: Originally from Illinois, Bryan has been working in progressive politics for the last several years. Prior to joining Val Arkoosh’s campaign, he worked for New Partners Consulting on a variety of immigration, labor and trade causes for progressive political organizations and campaigns across the country.

Stephen Rudman, Political Director: Stephen Rudman, an attorney based in Montgomery County, has a background working with local civic and political groups. Positions he holds or has held include: Treasurer for Pennsylvania Young Democrats, Secretary for Montgomery County Young Democrats, Vice-Chair of the Philadelphia chapter of Americans for Democratic Action, and Vice-Chair of the Young Democrats of America’s Jewish Caucus.

Ellen Sun, Finance Director: A Pennsylvania native, Ellen recently worked in Florida’s 10th Congressional District for Chief Val Demings, on her Red to Blue and EMILY’s List endorsed campaign. Prior to that Ellen worked for Stones’ Phones, an organization dedicated to helping their clients reach out to voters nationwide.

A graduate of the University of Pennsylvania, Ellen began her political career in the EMILY’s List Political Department, where she worked with progressive, pro-choice female candidates and campaign staff to help them prepare to run for office.

February 4th, 2014 | Posted in Congress, Front Page Stories, Top Stories | 3 Comments