Angry and anxious.

These two words might best describe the state of politics on the eve of the second Republican presidential debate, held amid the most turbulent times for global markets since the financial crisis.

Anger over what millions of voters perceive to be an unfair and failed political and economic system and anxiety over the future direction of the economy are unexpectedly strong themes as the race for the White House gets underway. Anger and anxiety appear to be fueling powerful outsider challenges from both Donald Trump on the right and Bernie Sanders on the left.

This trend has caught the political establishment by surprise — and stands in defiance of recent economic results that have been quite good. The nation has had five-plus years of continuous GDP growth, with the last quarter clocking up an impressive 3.7 percent gain. Unemployment, at 5.1 percent, is as low as most economists would like to get.

The sharply lower cost of gasoline is helping to hold down consumer prices and thus effectively increasing disposable income — normally reason enough for optimism in the electorate.

But such is not the case. Millions of Americans have been left out of the economic gains of the recovery. Except for the professional classes and tech, most workers have seen their wages stagnate or even fall, a phenomenon dating back to the Clinton administration.

Let’s look at Florida, like Colorado a pivotal state in presidential elections. On Sept. 5, the Orlando Sentinel reported that median annual wages in Central Florida’s tourist hub are just $29,781, the lowest in the nation. Twenty-five percent of all jobs pay $20,220 or less per year; thousands end their work shift and head right for the local food bank.

And, for the first time in American history, the youngest generation may have a lower standard of living than their parents. These realities raise huge questions of generational and income inequality.

Politically, anger over the “rigged” economy and a political system “rigged” by special interests is real, and may well be the dominant theme of the 2016 election. What are the roots of this political anger?

First, there is the extraordinary and continuing use of anger as a political tool against President Obama by the Republican money machine. The appeal to emotions over real or perceived wrongs has legitimized anger as a political currency. Ever the entrepreneur, Donald Trump has found an untapped vein of demand for a candidate willing to channel public anger and use it to fuel his campaign. No other candidate on the Republican side can match his ability to connect with voters on this level.

Whether the topic is immigration, trade, foreign affairs or the other candidates, Trump uses anger to get attention. In this sense, the Republicans may be reaping the whirlwind of the angry wind they sowed against President Obama. But anger is a bipartisan weapon.

For the Democrats, Bernie Sanders has been turning out impressive crowds, including 5,000 in Denver who turned out to see him rail against Wall Street and the political establishment. Sanders lacks the sheer bravado of Trump, and they are at completely opposite poles on immigration and most other policy questions. But his populist rhetoric and plea for more middle class jobs have brought him ahead of Hillary Clinton in New Hampshire and within striking distance of her in Iowa.

Technology is the second root of this new politics of anger. Combine the spark of an angry electorate with the powder keg of social media and the explosion is deafening and disruptive. For Trump, it means free or earned media — carefully orchestrated appearances on national television for which he pays not a dime.

The star of “The Apprentice” is making a mockery of the more than $100 million raised by Jeb Bush and his allied super PAC. For Sanders, it means less earned media on the national level, but a cadre of highly experienced technology volunteers driving his “netroots”- based campaign into cities and towns that lean blue or, like Colorado, purple.

Third, there is anxiety. After the global financial crisis of 2008 spread from subprime housing developments in suburban communities to banks in Iceland to Greeks bearing bonds, only the bravest souls believe an extreme economic crisis in China can be contained.

Meanwhile, the average American family remains at least somewhat dependent on the stock market for pensions, retirement or college savings. Large American employers such as Caterpillar, Boeing, GM and IBM have bet a big part of their future on China and its now stalling growth engine.

A fourth driver of the politics of anger is distrust of government. From the Obama administration’s disastrous rollout of the Obamacare to the excesses of the NSA — and locally from the billion-dollar boondoggle at the new Veterans Affairs hospital to the Environmental Protection Agency’s bright orange poisoning of the Las Animas River — there is much reason to doubt and less reason than ever to trust big government. Distrust in government has gone global and is contributing to European malaise as well as China’s inability to get a grip on its economy.

Finally, the Supreme Court’s surrender of our electoral system to the moneyed oligarchy with the Citizens United decision has made even committed, active citizens skeptical, angry and mistrustful of our political system.

If these are the roots of our current political anger, what can we expect this election cycle? Will Trump and Sanders continue to gather support? Will the anger that fuels their candidacies eventually fizzle out?

It is somehow fitting that the next Republican presidential debate takes place on Sept. 16 at the Ronald Reagan Library in Simi Valley, the city just outside Los Angeles where the 40th president is buried. He was, after all, the sunny optimist whose outlook helped lift the nation out of its 1970s funk. Perhaps candidates will yet emerge on one or both sides that can channel the electorate’s anger with a more sunny, optimistic message for our future.

Our American political system — with its deliberate checks and elaborate structures to balance many varied interests — can succeed only if the people have faith in the system. Without civic faith that our political system is fair and tends toward justice, anger will prevail. Without the counterbalance of optimism, an election driven by the politics of anger and anxiety may usher in a very dark period.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.