As Texas legislators concluded their 2015 session in Austin, protesters gathered Monday in downtown Dallas to call for a special session that would consider a statewide Medicaid expansion.

“Governor Abbott and the Texas Legislature, I’m calling for an expansion of Medicaid so we can cover Texas citizens,” called out Barbara LaToison, pastor of St. Mark AME Zion Church in Dallas.

The rally, called by the Texas Organizing Project, a statewide group that supports health care reform, drew about 50 demonstrators to Ferris Plaza, across from Union Station.

More than a million Texans are falling into the Medicaid gap, LaToison told the group. “Two-thirds are living in households with a working individual, and they cannot afford insurance.”

Texas political leaders have declined to expand Medicaid coverage, saying it would cost the state too much money.

The coverage was part of the federal Affordable Care Act, which pledged $110 billion toward the Texas expansion, or 90 percent of the estimated cost over the next decade.

The gap involves more than 1 million Texans who lack coverage because they earn too little to buy their own insurance or too much to meet Medicaid’s income requirements.

Currently, adult Texans are eligible for Medicaid if they earn less than 20 percent of the federal poverty level but would qualify for federal insurance subsidies only if they earn more than 138 percent of the federal level.

The 2015 poverty level is an $11,720 annual income for an individual or $30,320 for a family of four, according to the federal government.

Also speaking at the rally was Dr. Thomas V. Ripp, an ear, nose and throat specialist in Rockwall and McKinney. He said patients without coverage often delay medical care until their symptoms become serious and cause “staggering financial problems and no chance of ever paying for them.”

Brianna Brown, co-director of the Texas Organizing Project’s Dallas office, estimated 9,000 Texans are dying annually in the Medicaid gap. Asked how such a death toll was determined, she said it was the result of “our group’s research.”

The demonstration featured 25 homemade tombstones, meant to represent a daily “death rate” for Texans in the gap.

DeShawn Bunton, a Dallas woman who said she fell within the Medicaid gap, asked the crowd whether taxpayers were paying to insure Gov. Greg Abbott along with Texas legislators.

Assured those leaders received coverage, she told the crowd, “I don’t understand why, if we pay for theirs, why they can’t help us pay for ours.”