Former U.S. Senator Jim Webb. (AP)

(CNSNews.com) – When asked how his administration would be different than a hypothetical third term for President Obama, Democratic presidential contender Jim Webb said his “use of executive authority” would be different, and stressed that he knows “how our federal system works” as defined in the Constitution.

At the first Democratic presidential debate in Las Vegas on Tuesday, moderator Anderson Cooper asked the candidates to name “the one way that your administration would not be a third term of President Obama.”

When it was his turn, Webb, a former U.S. Senator and former Secretary of the Navy, said, “[I]f there would be a major difference between my administration and the Obama administration, it would be in the use of executive authority.”

Webb, who is also a combat Marine and a former legal counsel in Congress, went on to say, “I came up as a committee counsel in the Congress, used to put dozens of bills through the House floor every year as a committee counsel on the Veterans Committee.”

“I have a very strong feeling about how our federal system works and how we need to lead and energize the congressional process instead of allowing these divisions to continue to paralyze what we're doing,” said Webb.

“So I would lead,” he continued, “working with both parties in the Congress and working through them in the traditional way that our Constitution sets.”

According to the Federal Register, the president “manages the operations of the Executive branch of the Government through Executive orders.”

Since his inauguration in January 2009, President Barack Obama has issued 224 executive orders, according to the Federal Register. Some of those orders have been very controversial.

President Barack Obama. (AP)

The conservative Heritage Foundation noted some of what it calls Obama’s top “abusive executive actions.” These include, for instance, “amending Obamacare’s employer mandate, providing an unauthorized subsidy to congressional staff, and encouraging state insurance commissioners not to enforce certain requirements,” reported Heritage.

Other alleged “abusive executive actions” include “making ‘recess’ appointments in violation of Article II, Section 2 of the Constitution when the Senate was actually in session,” said Heritage. Also, “deciding not to defend the constitutionality of the federal definition of marriage in court … Imposing the DREAM Act by executive fiat under the guide of ‘prosecutorial discretion,” and “refusing to enforce federal drug laws in states that have legalized marijuana.”