Dan’yelle Williamson, Trisha Jeffrey and Nova Y. Payton perform in “Dreamgirls.” Credit: Michael Brosilow

By ,

The answer is an unqualified and enthusiastic yes: Singing the blues as Effie White, the "Dreamgirls" lead who is never out even when she's down, Nova Y. Payton's galvanic rendition of "And I Am Telling You I'm Not Going" is a knockout — prompting the wildest outpouring of love from a smitten audience that I've ever seen at the Milwaukee Repertory Theater.

I'll have more to say about SuperNova — whose performance is itself enough to make this a must-see show — momentarily.

But the prodigiously talented galaxy of predominantly African-American stars assembled here by director Mark Clements throws off plenty of heat and light, even when Payton's explosive, all-consuming energy isn't setting the sky on fire.

They shine like they do because Clements and his design team honor Michael Bennett's original vision — MIA during the Broadway tour that came to Milwaukee in 2010 — that this backstage drama is primarily about showbiz and race.

For all its more conventional subplots about women done wrong by their no-count men — one of the few places where "Dreamgirls" occasionally sags, even in this stellar production — the real story here involves a culture that relentlessly repackages the meaning of black America, lightening and whitening the narrative into a feel-good story celebrating watered-down diversity.

Summoning the ghost of James Brown as James "Thunder" Early, the terrific Cedric Neal refuses to get down with that fairy tale; as he defiantly proclaims in his final, devastating aria, "Jimmy got soul" that refuses to be denied.

Underscoring just how irrepressibly soulful he can be, Neal's Jimmy snorts, gyrates and grinds his way into the audience, in a production that repeatedly treats the orchestra seating area as an extension of the Powerhouse stage — true to this production's boldly meta-theatrical awareness that the Dreams and their cohorts are singing to a real audience, whose hearts and horizons Clements has sought to expand, throughout his tenure as the Rep's artistic director.

But while Jimmy tries to extend his range, handlers like Curtis (a smooth Jared Joseph) are boxing him in. That's already apparent in "Steppin' to the Bad Side," an early number about payola in which Stephen Mear's thrilling choreography — slinky and sinister here — traces the first steps down Jimmy's road to perdition.

Curtis similarly sets out to tame the songwriting C.C. (Richard Crandle) and repurpose the Dreams (Trisha Jeffrey as Deena, Dan'yelle Williamson as Lorrell, and Alina John as Michelle, the Dream replacing Effie). Mear gives them increasingly silky dance routines — much as their outfits take on ever more glitter while losing onetime grit (fabulous costuming by Alexander B. Tecoma).

That makes us long all the more for Payton's Effie.

Matching the poignant vibrato in her exceptional voice, Payton's expressive eyes — initially wary and later sorrowing — belie her defiantly upturned chin. Sure, she's proud and strong. But this Effie is also more vulnerable than either of the great Jennifers who've played her. It makes her ultimate triumph all the sweeter. Ditto this outstanding production.

IF YOU GO

"Dreamgirls" continues through Nov. 1 at the Quadracci Powerhouse Theater, 108 E. Wells St. For tickets, visit milwaukeerep.com.

TAKEAWAYS

Dancing in the Streets: How can it be that a musical with no dedicated, standalone dance numbers still has me wanting to dance, the morning after? Henry Krieger's score — packed with rousing songs — is part of it. But attention must be paid to choreographer Stephen Mear, who impressed me two years ago with his choreography for the Rep's "Ragtime" and who strikes again here.

Early on, one can see the ghost of Motown's Maxine Powell and particularly onetime vaudeville star Cholly Atkins as singers raise and lower their arms in unison, sashay on and off stage, and execute those signature up-tempo pivots. But even before Neal's Jimmy Early takes the stage, we're also seeing dancers who want to do and express more — particularly as we watch a group dubbed the Five Tuxedos (Jonathan Butler-Duplessis, Carl Clemons-Hopkins, Bradley Gibson, Leonard E. Sullivan and Christian Magby) channel Motown's bad boys: The Contours.

Mear hereby sets the tone for the more elaborate numbers to come, through which we'll see repeated examples of this tension — whether expressed in nearly balletic interludes recalling Jerome Robbins or writhing masses suggestive of a disco dance party — between tightly controlled form and individualized expression. Embodying that tension through dance, this cast underscores what it means for an Effie or a Jimmy to go their own way.

Making Room to Dance: What makes all that dancing possible? Scenic designer Todd Edward Ivins, who created the scenic design for the first of Payton's three "Dreamgirls," in Philadelphia ten years ago, deploys the huge, rotating scenic pieces that are his trademark. This non-naturalistic set design — itself true to Bennett's originating vision — allows rapid transitions in a show with nearly two dozen locations. It also frees space on the stage for Mear's big numbers. And it's true to a production which, as noted above, is consistently meta-theatrical — reminding the audience that this is a backstage musical.

Making Room for the Audience: Jimmy Early isn't the only one who pushes that meta-theatrical conceit, whether he's wading into the audience and crawling all over some of its women — or, as he sings his last song, yelling for the Rep pit's conductor by name in calling for a new beat (that would be musical director Dan Kazemi, who also plays keyboard and whose six-piece, upstage band is in top form).

While Clements has previously used the orchestra seating area as an extension of the stage, he's never gone as far with this concept as he does here. The consequent interactions between cast and audience — and no, I am not going to tell you what these surprises entail or how they unfold — are always a lot of fun and often ingenious. They also raise the stakes, making us more conscious of our role — while challenging us to think differently about what we see as well as how and why we see it.

Hail to the Rep's Costume Shop: In taking us from the sheen-free pastels favored by the early 1960s girl groups to elegantly shimmering satin in which the late, great Donna Summer would have loved to disco, Alexander B. Tecoma has given us the best of his many designs that I've seen. But the 200 costumes and 76 pounds of sequins one sees in this show would never have happened without the great work of the Rep's exceptional costume shop, which won national acclaim one year ago for its work on the "Stitching History from the Holocaust" exhibition at the Jewish Museum Milwaukee. The many wow moments in the costuming for "Dreamgirls" include the Dreams' 15-second quick-change between two stunning outfits. And did I mention that cast members wear more than 35 wigs?

Telling a Coherent Story: When I interviewed Clements a few weeks ago about this production, he admitted that efforts to grab hold of a coherent narrative through line — given how many years and locations this show moves through, often quite rapidly — had really "stretched" him.

Well, here's to being stretched. Making the most of musical and thematic echoes and repetitions built into the show by Krieger's music as well as Tom Eyen's lyrics and book, Clements has told this story with exceptional clarity.

Here's an illustrative example. In the first act, a loving circle surrounds Payton's Effie during the song "Family," in which she reluctantly agrees to surrender her status as lead singer. Clements focuses here on the interaction between Effie and Crandle's C.C., her brother; it's he whose earnest face and pleading eyes never leave hers, thereby convincing Effie to give the new arrangement a go.

How different things are when, as Act I draws toward a close, the same characters draw a much more menacing circle around Effie, as she's accused of being a "second-rate diva" and expelled from the Dreams. Effie again locks eyes with C.C.; this time, ashamed, he backs away and flees. It's heartbreaking.