Lindsey Graham has told colleagues he launched his implausible presidential campaign, in part, for two reasons: Rand Paul and Ted Cruz.

The straight-talking South Carolina senator hasn't been able to rebut his two conservative Senate colleagues on a debate stage yet. But he’ll get a chance on the Senate floor later this week when he slugs it out over their hardball legislative tactics to defund Planned Parenthood that have Congress hurtling toward a government shutdown.

Story Continued Below

Graham said in an interview he's prepared to confront Cruz directly as the chamber braces for a rhetorical assault from the Texas senator, with Graham arguing that a shutdown would be futile and politically damaging. It’s an opportunity, Graham says, “to tell my side of the story here.” And, the senator with the syrupy Southern drawl admits, it won’t be because he thinks it’s going to give him a bounce in the polls.

“I’m running to be the president of the United States. And a certain amount of honesty comes with that,” Graham said in an interview. “Shutting down the government, I think it hurts our overall cause and I don't mind telling people that. If I’m going to be a good nominee and a good president, I’ve got to tell you what I believe.”

And he implicitly dinged Cruz, who used the Senate as a political platform during the 2013 shutdown over funding Obamacare: “I’m not trying to do something to get my numbers up or to raise money. I’m trying to advance the cause.”

Still, Graham has little to lose at this point in his campaign. He can’t sink any lower in the polls, and fighting a pitched battle against the conservative wing of the party could help boost him in the eyes of moderate Republicans.

In fact, Graham was thinking about squaring off with Cruz and Paul from the very beginning of his campaign.

In January, a Republican senator was leaving lunch in the Senate dining room when he bumped into Graham, who was still mulling his longshot presidential bid then. Graham pulled his skeptical colleague aside to explain the rationale for a candidacy that had no obvious national constituency: Graham wanted to be on the debate stage, in part, to do battle with Cruz and Paul.

That hasn’t happened as Graham’s poor polling numbers (0.0 percent according to RealClearPolitics rolling average) have kept him off the primary debate stage.

But to hear Graham’s allies tell it, there’s only upside to further embracing the role of GOP straight-talker in a field of candidates that, aside from Ohio Gov. John Kasich, have tried to outflank each other on the right by blaming the GOP Congress for shirking a fight with President Barack Obama over Planned Parenthood.

“This will help him. The question is how much,” said Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.), Graham’s long time mentor and the 2008 GOP nominee. “You either go one way or the other. There’s no such thing as staying static.”

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.), who is planning to pursue a spending bill free of riders after another attempt to defund Planned Parenthood fails Thursday, has almost no support from the massive presidential field for his strategy.

Even Kasich turned on the Senate majority leader by suggesting that McConnell change the rules of the Senate to eliminate the 60-vote threshold, a strategy described as short-sighted by Republicans given the party’s effective use of the filibuster over the past two decades.

So the back-up from Graham is welcome, even if other influential Republicans aren’t sure that taking on Cruz and Paul’s aggressive Planned Parenthood defunding strategies will be helpful to Graham.

“It may not be useful to him, given the environment,“ said Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn (R-Texas). But “having the cooler heads speak up and try to explain why we shouldn't repeat a failed tactic is helpful.”

During that lunchtime encounter this winter, Graham made no secret of his disdain for Cruz and Paul’s foreign policy position, telling his GOP colleague he wanted to be sure someone was on the debate stage "to make sure they don't get away with their dangerous views on national security," according to a person familiar with the conversation.

But Graham’s disdain for their hardline positions extends far beyond foreign policy, and with the possibility of a shutdown seizing Washington’s attention, Graham is set to be the perfect foil to them and Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.), who also seems likely to vote for a hardline strategy.

Cruz and Paul have each taken opposite approaches that lead to the same position: Congress should not fund Planned Parenthood when it tries to fund the rest of the government before Oct. 1. For Cruz, the argument is simple: Republicans should insist on a Planned Parenthood rider and blame a shutdown on Democrats.

“The Democrats support a shutdown. They are radicals,” Cruz told reporters Tuesday. “They are so extreme in their commitment to favoring an organization under criminal investigation that they are willing to hold the rest of the government hostage.”

Paul’s argument is more academic, balancing his need to satisfy the right while differentiating himself from Cruz. The Kentucky senator wants the Senate to hold a vote at a 60-vote threshold to fund the government along with a separate vote at a 60-vote threshold on Planned Parenthood, a gambit Democrats would never accept.

“We have extraordinary power and we’re not using it,” Paul told reporters Tuesday. “People are very frustrated with Congress and they are frustrated with people not taking a stand.”

Paul and Cruz will surely vote against the clean continuing resolution that McConnell will eventually put on the Senate floor this weekend, and Rubio seems likely too as well. Being the one GOP senator running for president to admit defeat on the Planned Parenthood doesn’t sound like a winning primary strategy for any of them.

Then there’s Graham, who’s likely to be one of the Republican senators to back McConnell and support a funding bill that does not attack Planned Parenthood, even though Graham is one of Congress’s most hardline members on social issues. He pushed a federal ban on 20-week abortions to a floor vote after two years of work on the matter, but he will not take a hardline stance on Planned Parenthood if a shutdown is at stake.

His thought process is guided by his military background, aides said: Graham frequently speaks of the Air Force motto of “fly, fight win,” but believes Cruz and Paul's strategy amounts to “fly, fight, crash.”

“A strategy of fighting is perfect. I want to fight. But tell me how you win,” Graham said in the interview. “To the [Republican] Party, I understand your frustration. I want to fight. I want to win. I don’t think there's a scenario possible to defund Planned Parenthood by shutting down the government.”

Unlike his three colleagues running for president, Graham has done little to shift his day-to-day approach in the Capitol other than upping his travel to early states and debate stages. He still holds court with the Capitol Hill press, while Rubio has little interest in the hallway interviews that were once a staple of his Hill rounds. Cruz usually has several aides with him, while Paul misses most GOP lunches but seems intent on missing fewer votes than his competitors.

Meanwhile, Graham moseys through the Senate’s hallway by himself, ready to pan Cruz’s latest hardline tactic and Paul’s non-interventionist foreign policy views. Even his South Carolina colleague Tim Scott (R), who often breaks with Graham, can’t help but praise his moxie.

“Everybody should call things as they see him,” Scott said. Asked if Graham’s stance on Planned Parenthood might help with South Carolina primary voters, however, Scott demurred. “Lindsey’s strength for his presidential run is foreign policy.”

But, Scott noted, that Graham did just easily win reelection to the Senate.