The women who gather at dusk at Nathan Benderson Park don’t talk about cancer. They chat about massages, and where they found their sports gear, about the awful practice that coach Bob Whitford put them through on Saturday, and the new paddling technique they’re trying to incorporate into their stroke before October.

Then they turn to the 40-foot dragon boat that needs to be launched into the water, grab their paddles and life jackets and prepare for practice.

They are of every age, from 71-year old Dana Bauer of Lakewood Ranch to 39-year-old Emily Williams of Sarasota, but there are quiet reminders of the bond they share:

The blue butterfly on Cris Campbell’s forearm that grasps a breast cancer ribbon. Pink everywhere — on the boat, on the paddles, on T-shirts, on water shoes, on sports pants. Even the name of their team, “Survivors in Sync,” which when abbreviated indicates a sisterhood.

“SIS baby, SIS,” Whitford, also the park manager, says as a recent practice gets underway.

The Survivors in Sync dragon boat team comprises about 30 women who have been told they have

breast cancer. As their first year as a team comes to a close, the women are training for the International Breast Cancer Paddlers’ Commission’s Participatory Dragon Boat Festival in October.

More than 2,500 international participants are expected to travel to Sarasota for the three-day event, Oct. 24-26, with a competition, networking events, workshops and parties.

It’s a celebration of the first boat of breast cancer survivors that turned to this sport, after Canadian sports medicine professor Dr. Don McKenzie began pushing patients toward dragon boat racing to boost energy, strength and spirits in 1996. The movement was also meant to challenge a widespread assumption that upper-body exertion put breast cancer survivors at a greater risk of lymphedema — fluid retention and tissue swelling that can be caused by cancer treatments.

Sarasota’s boat weighs almost 600 pounds, and has 10 rows that seat two women each. A drummer sits on a narrow wooden bench perched in the bow, and a steersman stands in the stern.

“Come on, ladies; you are burning daylight!” Whitford calls out as the team stretches in a circle at a recent practice.

Team members Elaine Parnell and Carla “Cookie” Baldwin check their boat assignments on a tiny mock-up sheet. Team captain Angela Long moves them around to make sure people get experience on both sides of the boat.

They are part of a larger network in Florida — and across the country and the world — of breast cancer survivors who have put their mark on this 2,000-year-old Chinese sport, and show no signs of stopping.

There are other dragon boat racing teams in Florida: Miami’s Save Our Sisters, Punta Gorda’s Missin Mammaries, the newly formed Heart and Soul Dragonboat Paddlers in Melbourne.

Long — who founded the online resource guide Breast Investigators after being diagnosed with breast cancer at the age of 35 in 2004 — is connected to a diverse network of women who have survived breast cancer through her work. She remembers being invited to a planning meeting two summers ago for the dragon boat festival.

“We’d really like Sarasota to have a team,” she remembers someone saying — and it was as if all eyes were on her.

She pieced together a team using her contacts. They started with nothing, not even a boat, and hosted the first practices in classrooms.

“We were practicing on chairs and yardsticks,” Camila Garcia, 49, of Bradenton, says — “pretending to be in the water paddling.”

Then the Pink Dragon Ladies of Tampa took the team under their wing, until Benderson Development donated a boat to the team this May named “Nate’s Hope.”

Before, those interested from the Sarasota-Bradenton area would caravan up to Tampa, and practice after the Pink Ladies, sometimes borrowing a few rowers.

“They really are our big sisters,” Long said. “They help us any way they can.”

The Pink Dragon Ladies, as well as the Miami team Save Our Sisters, will co-host this year’s festival at Nathan Benderson Park.

At a recent pre-festival event hosted by the Sarasota Area Sports Alliance, co-chair and Save Our Sisters member Kim Bonomo rallies the crowd about the magnitude of the event that will bring in 105 teams.

Survivors in Sync turn out in pink team shirts, and Bonomo points them out to the crowd.

“I know you are going to love this team,” Bonomo says. “You are going to embrace this team. And I bet they will even beat us one day. Bring it on.”

In the hotel lobby, a woman spots the pink-clad crowd.

“I love your T-shirts,” she says. “I want one.”

Elyse Black looks at her.

“We are wearing these T-shirts because we have to,” Black says. “So hopefully one day you won’t have to.”

And the woman looks like she had never considered the idea at all.

Once the Sarasota team had a boat, membership grew from roughly 15 paddlers to 30.

Campbell joined the team a few months before that. In 2009 her arm came to rest on her breast, and she felt a lump. A scramble of doctors’ appointments followed.

“They called me and told me it was breast cancer,” Campbell said, “And my tumor was larger than they thought.”

She underwent chemotherapy from July to December 2012, then radiation from January to March, and has successfully finished treatments. She had never heard of dragon boat racing until she read an article in Florida Weekly. It was fun and an energy-booster — but it also helped her take in a changed relationship with her body.

Sometimes she still puts her arms in front of the mirror and looks for signs of swelling that might indicate that she has lymphedema. But it hasn’t come.

When life feels like a roulette, the team helps.

“It’s the friendships here,” Campbell says. “We all have something in common, but we don’t just sit there and talk about it. This has really made me feel like I can go on with my life.”

Sometimes the camaraderie inspires new membership.

Like Bauer, whose longtime friend Barb Green encouraged her to come out this year, her seventh year cancer-free.

Or Benita Zarr, 48, who had tried dragon boat racing with some coworkers just weeks before she was diagnosed with cancer. And after enduring surgery and while undergoing radiation, she joined the team.

“I’m so inspired here,” said Zarr, who finished treatment in August. “They are so strong, these women.”

Or Lisa Merck Edwing, who shows up to help coordinate practice for her teammates even though she’s fatigued, has treatment tomorrow, and feels too off to paddle.

“I’m tired, but I push through it,” she says.

Pat Van Stedum and Black are in the stroke seats at a recent practice; the entire boat will follow their lead as they turn their bodies to each other, look each other in the eye and try to to keep their paddles in unison.

“They say you should be boob to boob,” Baldwin, 58, says.

“But I don’t have any,” Black exclaims and the women around her laugh.

But there is something about the set-up that says a lot about the sport, because Van Stedum and Black aren’t looking at each other’s paddles to stay on tempo. They look at each other.

“You can really start to feel a cadence,” Black says.

Whitford, who volunteers his time to coach the ladies three times a week, calls out directions.

“The outer shoulder has to rotate. The shoulder inside must come back. Slight bend of the elbow. Push forward in your feet. Push the boat. Push it. Weird concept, I know.”

And so they paddle, in pieces that get faster and faster.

45 strokes a minute.

49 strokes a minute.

51 strokes a minute.

Two kids playing on the west bank of the park stare for a moment at the sight, before running off after another distraction. At the end, the women sprint. Coming from nothing, the boat jerks, almost as if it is resisting the push forward the women are giving it. Then suddenly it falls into a rhythm and rushes forward.

“The crowd will be roaring for you,” Whitford calls as they pass the sandy beaches that run the race course at Benderson Park. For now, there is just construction equipment, abandoned for the day.

52 strokes a minute.

There is no drum tonight, just the sound of oars cutting through the water and an occasional war whoop from Black that seems to energize everyone. But the beat will come next week, when the team lets a stranger in the bow beat the drum.

When it echoes, it sounds like one big resounding heartbeat.