JONATHAN KARL, ABC NEWS: In terms of the goals you set for this moment in time of the website being functional for the vast majority of users, is it mission accomplished?



JAY CARNEY, WHITE HOUSE: Well as I was saying, Jon, we were working very hard to make the necessary fixes to improve the website so that by December 1st it would function effectively for the vast journey of users. The metric that we use to measure that has to do with response time and stability of the site and the error rate. I know that Jeff [Zients] and others who do the CMS briefings have gone into those metrics.



We believe we made the important progress that we've set out to make by November 30th, but as we said in November, and I have said just now, the work continues to make improvements that still need to be made to the website. And the focus here is not on -- the endgame here isn't the best possible and most effective website that we can build, but a system by which all those millions of Americans who are clearly interested in enrolling and purchasing quality affordable health care insurance are able to do so. That is our goal and that work continues today. We have passed and important milestone in that effort, but the work continues.



KARL: Let me try to crystallize down because we try to pin you down on what vast majority means, and you guys didn't want to quantify it. Very clearly, in terms of the goal that you set for this moment in time, is it mission accomplished? Have you accomplished that goal?



CARNEY: Using that phrase is not one I would employ.



KARL: Have you achieved your goal?



CARNEY: What I would say is what Jeff said, is that we were able to make the necessary improvements to the website so that the vast majority of Americans who use the website have an experience in which the website functions effectively. It does not mean, as I said in November and October, it does not mean that there will be no problems with the website going forward. That does not even occur on the most highly functional private sector websites. What it does mean is that we have made significant progress. We have made the improvements to the system that we hoped we could, and that more work continues.