LETTERS

Under scrutiny: Cardinal George Pell. Photo: Joe Armao

Cardinal George Pell's attempt to compare priests with truck drivers will not be welcomed by the Vatican ("Pell uses trucker analogy as apologies made in hearing", August 22). I find it hard to imagine any truck company spending tens of millions of dollars 'defending strenuously' the known and serial criminal offences of its drivers, after having first sent them on other runs, interstate or overseas.

Even as my garbage waits on the street to be collected, I am grateful that, following one serious accident, thousands of garbage trucks have been taken off the road across Australia until their safety is assured. This is the example we might have expected from Cardinal Pell when he was the Archbishop of Melbourne.

John Bradshaw Carlingford

What would we make of the management of a trucking company which turned a blind eye to one of their drivers who repeatedly picked up children and raped them; and not only failed to report his crimes to the police but moved the driver on to other routes lest his crimes became known and the image of the company compromised? And who, when later approached by the victims entered into compensation agreements designed to minimise payouts, deter the complainants from seeking redress through the courts and which bound the victims to keep the offences a secret.

Advertisement

Paul Hartigan Ainslie (ACT)

Cardinal George Pell states that the Catholic Church is no more culpable for sexual molestation by its priests than a trucking company would be for sexual molestation by one of its drivers. I wonder if Cardinal Pell would also consider the management of the trucking company, once made aware of the sexual abuse, to have discharged its legal and moral responsibilities by re-assigning the truck driver to a different route.

Michael Hocking Dunoon

Trucking priests, 10-four good buddy. Does the Catholic Church have any descent public relations advisers left or does George come up with his own analogies?

The Catholic Church is more like a shipping company caught in the perfect storm. Captain Pell should go down with his sinking ship and stop trying to push everyone else out of the lifeboat so he and his senior officers can squeeze in.

Michael Troy Fairlight

Cardinal Pell's casuistry does no good service to himself, his church or us. In fact, if a trucking company puts flawed drivers or flawed trucks on the road it may well be liable for the consequences of a road accident. If priests who are flawed drivers and/or who have flawed vehicles are involved in a road accident their church will not be liable. Cardinal Pell's public trucking analogy simply draws attention to the concerns of his church to evade responsibility for paedophile priests.

Ian Bowie Bowral

Cardinal George Pell just does not get it. A trucking company boss has not ordained himself a paragon of virtue nor anointed himself his employees' moral guardians seven days a week.

Catherine Botica Terrey Hills

Cardinal Pell's comparison of the Catholic Church to a trucking company uncovers a sad truth. With no more corporate morality than any other business, why does the Church still enjoy tax exempt status? It is time to change arcane laws that treat religion as a community benefit.

Jill Hill Turramurra

It's horrifying to think that Cardinal Pell, who likened the Catholic Church's responsibility for child abuse to that of a "trucking company", was once the spiritual adviser to the captain of Team Australia.

John Bye Elwood (Vic)

I bet Cardinal Pell's superiors wish he had taken a vow of silence.

Joy Wilson Kensington

Suicide attempts are never a form of blackmail

The fact that it has become necessary for our detention centres to employ shift workers to physically prevent inmates from committing suicide is disappointing in itself ("Mental health crisis affects detention staff", August 21).

However, this fact is not as disappointing as Prime Minister Tony Abbott's action of labelling the suicide attempts of mothers on Christmas Island as "moral blackmail".

Suicide attempts are not a method of psychological warfare that suffering and powerless asylum seekers are waging on our politicians. People attempt suicide because they have lost all hope in their lives ever improving.

Indeed, the fact that Australian government policy is reducing individuals to such a state while the creators of these policies completely dismiss their anguish is enough to prompt one to lose all hope for the empathy and humanity of our politicians.

Julia Rheinberger (aged 16) Beecroft

Lifeline: 131 114; beyondblue: 1300 224 636

Islamic State terrorists' barbarism based on doctrinal debate

Waleed Aly is right when he says that the Islamic State needs western intervention to maintain its raison d'etre ("The oldest terrorist tactic: provoke an over-reaction", August 22). It must be acknowledged that what is going on in Syria and Iraq is a deadly battle about doctrine. It is for the world, and I mean the whole world – east, west, north and south – to stand up and say no more to the barbaric and brutal tactics being employed in this conflict. The message must be loud and clear that the world, including the Islamic world, will not tolerate the brutal, barbaric actions of relatively few people.

As for solutions, these rest within the Islamic world itself, not through military intervention by the west alone. Demonstrably such intervention has not worked in the past and will not work in the future.

Greg Loder Springwood

Waleed Aly presents a picture of Islamic State barbarism as tactics but it's really no more than murder. We have seen the horror of our export animals being mistreated and sheep having their throats cut. The idea that there's some intelligence behind this beheading is nonsense. We are dealing with killers who have found a stage.

Anthony Horan Campbelltown

Keep channels open

Your correspondents Carsten Burmeister and Alpheus Williams (Letters, August 22) recoil from the publication of the atrocities of the Islamic State and argue that we should not bear witness to the evil they represent. Indeed, some western governments are moving to deny the Islamic State access to social media.

I believe that this is misguided policy on at least two counts. Firstly, the maxim of "know your enemy" supports the argument that the West needs to fully understand who and what this group represents. Secondly, it is clear that a movement which generates fear through atrocities will only resort to more appalling deeds to claim global attention.

Far better, surely, to recognise the scope of the threat through awareness, than to comfortably ignore the barbarity that is erupting in the Middle East.

Vicki Sanderson Cremorne

Silence still golden

I fail to understand why Opposition Leader Bill Shorten would be lauded by fellow politicians for speaking out about the rape allegation he has recently been exonerated from ("Shorten breaks silence as rape claims are thrown out after investigation", August 22). Is this more of the same closed school in respect to allegations of sexual misconduct in politics?

Has the woman truly been served justly by the court system or has there been a miscarriage of justice because of the high profile of the defendant? Only the two of them, and the Lord above, know what the truth is. It may have been more prudent for Bill Shorten to have said nothing publicly and let the dust settle on the truth. Now, those of us who have been made privy to this situation are left with unanswered questions and concerns for the truth in respect to both parties.

Sue Carlyon Queenstown (Tas)

Barangaroo deals blow to public confidence

It seems there is no end to both corruption and ineptitude in the government of our state. Not enough that secret deals secure a massive casino construction, now we find that the sale of valuable public land at Barangaroo will not reap benefits to the public as originally proposed ("Bair faces $500m bill after losing Barangaroo challenge", August 22). Small wonder community confidence over politicians and their actions is at such a low ebb.

Russell Mills Redfern

Not only will the taxpayers of NSW have to fork out an extra half-billion, one quick look at what is planned by Lend Lease for the Barangaroo site reverses the original design thinking that the heights of the towers at the south end should decrease towards the north. Instead, the height of each tower increases to a final insult – the Packer casino.

This is equivalent to the rudeness of theatregoers in the most expensive front row standing up so they get a better view of the performance while remaining oblivious to the obvious fact they block the view of all those seated to their rear.

What has happened at Barangaroo is not only an affront to urban good manners, it is scandalous in the extreme. The southern towers are much too fat to the point of genuine ugliness. Why have we handed public land over and allowed this to happen only to find a wrecking ball thrown at the city in return?

Philip Drew Annandale

Torch paper profits

Sandra Rowell (Letters, August 22) complains that her property's 99-year lease value has decreased now that public housing at The Rocks is being sold. Why do Australians naively assume that any investment will always appreciate?

Perhaps we need to stop seeing houses as an investment, whose value is after all merely on paper until you sell, and instead treat them as homes and discourage speculation in real estate. Perhaps the limiting and gradual removal of negative gearing, and reinvestment of the proceeds of public housing sales in more public dwellings, would enable the almost 60,000 applicants (plus their dependents) waiting for social housing to have the luxury of not having to move every six to 12 months due to greedy landlords on the private rental market, or being homeless.

And perhaps those people who are complaining about moving out of properties worth $1.9 million for which they have paid $77 per week and in which they have been permitted to stay for generations at taxpayers' expense should consider how many families will be able to be housed (five) for the same cost, and how lucky they are never to have been on a waiting list or in private rental hell ("First Millers Point property sells for $1.9 million", smh.com.au, August 21. Or maybe we should just admit that we don't care about anyone but ourselves and carry on.

Eva Elbourne Normanhurst

Privatised ailment

"Lingering ideology" explains the Coalition's "proposed $7 co-payment" (Letters, August 22), but the overt partisan interests of the doctors' union (AMA) explains its alternative proposal. Both proposals are indistinguishable in any false claims to "ensure the sustainability of the healthcare system" ("No pensioner exemptions from co-payment: PM", August 22), and the absurd economic-speak about sending price signals for a non-commodity. And both proposals target the wrong people for wrong reasons.

Regardless of whether pensioners, children under-16 and concession card holders are exempted, most of those who'd be charged already pay co-payments, much higher than $7 or the AMA's proposed $6.15, because Medicare rebates to GPs have been so chronically inadequate. So, is the $7 added to those charges? The AMA should simply have stated that its proposal for doctors to keep any co-payments is to address this.

Regardless of whether doctors or the government gets the co-payment, the administrative costs of this will likely negate much of it, where a "rise in the Medicare levy" would be a direct means of sustaining the system. Why isn't the AMA calling for this to address sustainability? The AMA should also explain why "chronic disease management" should be exempted, given these frequently result from lifestyle choices, and by the way, generate a considerable and secure income for its members. Both the government and the AMA should answer this: why does the healthy Medicare levy-paying population need a price signal "to appreciate" what they're getting from health services they use as needed only?

The government is merely politicising primary health care towards its agenda of less public and more private funding, and the AMA should squarely reply to this, rather than being complicit in deconstructing Medicare.

Robyn Dalziell Castle Hill

Rewrite money rules

The crisis management response of banks and other financial institutions, proposing increased education to improve standards of behaviour, is hollow and somewhat futile ("Crisis sparks standards rush", August 22). When the over-riding philosophy of any business is maximisation of profit at the least cost, no amount of knowledge from education will improve the moral compass of the operators in the business. The institutionalised greed in the financial world is rewarded in the stock market as justifiable competitive and predatory behaviour.

Until this voracious structural and quasi-legal process, built into the financial system, is tempered by a more equitable and humane distribution of the benefits to all the community, the vultures and "clever" manipulators will remain unscathed and applauded. Morality is irrelevant.

John Ward Bangor

Change must be embraced

Kim Williams marvels at the Murdoch press's refusal to acknowledge the writing is on the wall for traditional media. He foresees the demise of print and wonders what will replace it ("Commentary on financial leaks a festival of vengeance from News Corporation", August 22).. He sees opportunity and hope if only change is embraced. He warns that our way of life and democracy itself are under threat by the changes now occurring in the media and that vested interests are holding innovation and adaptation to the new paradigm back. Sounds like climate change to me.

Murdock and his ilk are at least consistent. Their inflexible old world attitudes as regards climate change are a serious threat to human survival on this planet. Their continued denial that the science is proven and the "debate" is over is holding back innovation and our clean energy future. This business-as-usual attitude will be the death of us.

Philip Comans Potts Point

Yes Prime Minister, of course we want a poll now

"I think the last thing the Australian people want is another election now," Mr Abbott said ("Voters don't want another election, says PM", smh.com.au, August 22). Umm, yes we do. This is clearly another Abbott lie designed to fool the masses, or is he really that out of touch?

Roger Clark Five Dock

Members are reminded

Mike Baird will introduce contracts to guarantee that liberals will abide by donation laws ("Baird halts gravy train", August 22). Did they not understand their obligations already?

Doug Zihrul Chatswood

Nile's discovery myth

Fred Nile's claim to a real and logical link between abortion and breast cancer seems to run with the idea of a direct connection between the strict morality of clergy and the punitive nature of cells ("Nile's breast cancer comment draws ire", August 22). One stops a pregnancy and the wash up is the delivery of natural justice in the breast.

If this is the general disposition of cells, the future maybe best described as a total abortion. As one small extension, one goes to the art gallery and then one stops. Is blindness assured?

Maybe there is a more base logic. I don't think and I start to believe the rubbish of Nile and company.

David Gunter Arncliffe

Clive goes off China

A danger with Clive Palmer's lambasting of the Chinese is that they likely think we all look the same (Letters, August 22).

Max Horton Clarence Park (SA)

Postscript

The new national reality, "Team Australia", offered to us – and to immigrants – in the wake of the latest terrorism threats and the rebranding of the Prime Minister, has unsettled more than a few readers. Amazing as that might seem to those who say, "If you not with us, you're against us", it is a divisive policy that "casts suspicion on all immigrants of Islamic faith as supporters of ISIS", says Bob Eggleton, of Neutral Bay.

"The problem with Tony Abbott Team Australia is that it is not about inclusion and defining who is an Australian," says Bob. "It is all about casting certain groups in our community as non-Australian."

Richard Watson, of Pymble, says Mr Abbott's "truculent attitude and bellicose nature" suggest divisive policies are his driving force: "The government's migration policies, the budget's skew against the most disadvantaged, the almost implemented changes to the Racial Discrimination Act and the proposed changes to Australia's national security and terrorism laws all bear witness to this."

So when Mr Abbott accused Muslim leaders of being "petty" for boycotting his "bridge-building" talks this week, Robert Pallister, of Punchbowl, pointed out that those Muslim leaders "will not be part of Team Australia". And it didn't sound very inspiring when the Prime Minister said the beheading of the American journalist James Foley "could happen in countries like Australia".

Ross Pullbrook, of Wyong, thought that it was unlikely. "Why does Mr Abbott focus overly on fear and the negative? It is overly Orwellian and used for obvious reasons ... While we need a leader who is realistic and up-front, we also need one who radiates vision, optimism and hope."

Marc McEvoy Letters co-editor