Jamie Jackson, a former Capitol Hill aide and TV journalist, joined The Daily Signal this week to oversee the news organization’s multimedia and video content.

Jackson, who most recently worked as a communications director in Congress, began his career in journalism as a teenager at The Pittsburgh Courier. He’s worked as a reporter, producer and anchor for TV news stations in Indiana, Virginia and West Virginia.

For the past two years, Jackson has served as an Emmy judge for the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences. He won several awards himself for his reporting on breaking news and local issues in the communities where he worked.

“We are hyper-focused on establishing The Daily Signal as the leading digital news organization covering policy and politics,” said publisher Geoff Lysaught. “Jamie is a great addition to our news team and will push us to new levels of success as we strive to fully leverage digital and social media to tell important stories.”

At The Daily Signal, Jackson will work with the news team to produce a range of multimedia content, including original video productions and live broadcasts. He will oversee day-to-day news packages and documentary projects.

“I am thrilled to be a part of the great work that is going on here at The Daily Signal,” Jackson said. “I believe this organization, as it continues to grow, will become one of the most influential news teams in the country.”

While on Capitol Hill, Jackson collaborated with The Daily Signal to host the monthly Conversations with Conservatives event, a lively and interactive briefing featuring the House’s top conservatives. He will continue to spearhead that initiative in his new role.

Jackson joins The Daily Signal after working as communications director for Rep. Tim Huelskamp, R-Kan. Before coming to Washington, he was the morning and noon anchor for WLFI, the CBS affiliate in Lafayette, Ind. He also held broadcast journalism jobs at WTPC in Virginia Beach, Va., WTOV in Wheeling, W.Va., and WHSV in Harrisonburg, Va.

Jackson graduated from James Madison University and grew up in Pittsburgh.

The Daily Signal, the multimedia news organization of The Heritage Foundation, provides policy and political news as well as conservative commentary and analysis. It launched in June and most recently had 4.6 million monthly unique visitors in October.