BEGIN TRANSCRIPT

RUSH: The righteous indignation, the "I can't believe he said it." We've gotta stop talking about each other this way. We cannot continue to challenge and question each others' patriotism this way. We must never, ever speak this way. If you ever say "I know I probably shouldn't say this, it's probably a horrible thing to say, then stop, don't say it." That's just a summary of the reaction to Rudy Giuliani today, who said, "I know it's a horrible thing to say, but I don't believe the president loves America."

We've got a bunch of people reacting to that as the program unfolds before your very eyes and ears, and I just wanted to acknowledge, I'm not gonna go to that first, but I wanted to acknowledge I know about it and we're gonna get to it, but it's not the lead thing. I want to go to some other things out there first that will then put Giuliani's comments maybe in a little bit better perspective.

Folks, it's great to have you, Rush Limbaugh, once again three hours of broadcast excellence straight ahead. The telephone number is 800-282-2882 and e-mail address, ElRushbo@eibnet.com.

Well, the president wrapped up a three-day seminar on "don't call 'em terrorists, and don't call it Islam, and let's get 'em jobs" summit that took place actually over -- where is it, the statement, defense department, somewhere? It wasn't at the White House. Was called the White House summit. And we got audio sound bites of the president's remarks and of course some in-depth exclusive only-can-you-get-it-here analysis of what the president said.

But there are other things that are percolating and effervescing out there as well, and I'm not gonna give them short shrift. Let me just run through some of the things. It's gonna take all three hours to get through this today, so I want to run through some of the things coming up on the program today, 'cause it's just impossible to get to all of it in the first segment, and if I don't get to something in the first segment, invariably I check the e-mail, "Aren't you gonna talk about X?"

Yeah, I'm gonna talk about it, but I can't get to everything in the first segment. Well, look, I understand. Everybody wants to know what I think about their pet issue. I understand that and I'm sensitive to it, and I am very responsive to that. It's just I can't get to every subject, certainly not in the detail that I am known for and that I want to get into things with, in the first segment. But just to give you an example of some things out there.

We have a New York Times story, they can't believe it, they're apoplectic. "A Bid for Guns on Campuses to Deter Rape - As gun rights advocates push to legalize firearms on college campuses, an argument is taking shape." And it is delectable. It's delicious. You see, once again we're down to what could be termed dynamic versus static scoring, the way the left looks at things.

Okay, so they've got this War on Women meme that's an umbrella under which much of their political agenda is advanced every day, and one of the subsets under the umbrella is that our colleges have become cultures of rape, that rape's everywhere out there. Even that Rolling Stone story, it might not have been right about the University of Virginia, but it didn't matter because it's still true in so many parts of the country.

Okay, if there's a culture of rape out there and if men are raping women left and right and it's unprecedented levels, we've gotta do something about it. And so a gun rights group said, "Okay, let's arm women."

And the left said, "What are you talking about? You can't do that."

Well, you just said that they're at great risk of being raped left and right. In fact, the sponsor of the bill in Nevada is an assemblywoman named Michele Fiore, and she said in a telephone interview, quote, "If these young, hot little girls on campus have a firearm, I wonder how many men will want to assault them. The sexual assaults that are occurring would go down once these sexual predators get a bullet in their head." Well, all of that's true. None of that's even arguable. But the New York Times and other leftist outlets are in shock. They're apoplectic in reporting it.

Bjorn Lomborg, do you remember him, Snerdley? Bjorn Lomborg, he's an environmentalist. He used to be an environmentalist wacko, and then he left the environmentalist wacko fringe and became one of us. We interviewed him for the Limbaugh Letter back in the nineties after he had made the transition from wackoism to truthful mainstream. And during that interview he automatically on the spot reassumed wackoism, and I had to cancel the interview.

The whole pretext for having Bjorn Lomborg on was that he was a former wacko who had seen the light. He was out there exposing the falsehoods and the mechanisms and the way the wackos were attempting to spread their agenda. For some reason they had gotten to him right before the interview and he just caved. Well, he's gone back and forth. Now he's back to this position, and he's been there quite a while now, so I think he's kind of glued to it, which is good. He's now in this position of explaining how the global warming and the entire environmentalist wacko movement is indeed wackos and fraudulent and a hoax.

He has a column in USA Today: "Electric Car Benefits? Just Myths." I can't wait to give you the details of this 'cause, you know, the electric car, it's one of the left's favorite projects to save the planet and signify modernity and an advanced, forward, progressive kind of thinking, and here comes a former environmentalist wacko exposing the whole project as nothing but a series of myths.

The judge, the Texas judge -- we touched on this a little bit yesterday -- who issued an injunction on Obama's executive amnesty. It looks more and more like -- and knock on Formica here. Well, this is granite actually. Formica, my rear. It's granite. But it looks like it's gonna be really difficult for the Regime to get this reversed. It looks like this judge pulled a really brilliant maneuver. And so it's going to be left to Obama to just ignore him and go ahead and implement executive amnesty anyway.

Then there's the story about how ICE is losing track of illegal immigrants in the country. We don't even know who they are. Sort of like how we can't keep track of the Americans who are joining ISIS overseas.

Some economic news that is not true, either. The economy is roaring back. We've got a great recovery happening out there, man, it's unprecedented. Except one thing: Wages are falling. It's in the news story and they're a little bit perplexed. "The economy, it's so great, man, it's coming back, it's roaring back to life, it's really growing." But wages are falling and they say, "Well, just give the wages time to catch up." No. If wages are falling there is no economic recovery going on. Eleven and a half million Obamacare sign-ups. Investor's Business Daily with an editorial on the continuing disaster that is Obamacare.

Mark Cuban, the owner of the Dallas Mavericks and very much opposed to net neutrality, has just come out both barrels firing, saying that net neutrality will F everything up. And it will. It puts the government in charge of the Internet. It's amazing, I read my little tech blogs and all of these little tech bloggers who hate the NSA, they despise the NSA, they think the NSA is spying on 'em and reading everything that they write, but, man, when Obama comes along and his FCC comes along and wants to totally control the Internet, these little tech bloggers are all for it, because you know why?

They think what the government's gonna do is penalize Comcast and AT&T and T-Mobile and the other providers cause they think the other providers screw them by overcharging them and not giving them fast enough speeds. So they're all for the government coming in and punishing corporate interests that provide access to the Internet under the guise of net neutrality. But on the other hand, here's a government that they hate spying on them. It just goes to show the inconsistency and the dichotomy of these young people. On the one hand good, government, great. On the other hand, good government, we can't trust it, they're spying on us. It's the same government.

"Justice Department could sue Ferguson, Missouri, for racial discrimination." I predicted this to you. This is gonna be a See, I Told You So when we get to it. And the New York Post has a story today asking, "Why are Islamic Jihadists so obsessed with porn?" They don't just ask the question, they assert that they are, and they talk about all the porn that SEAL Team Six recovered during the kill bin Laden operation. And indeed it turns out that Islamic Jihadists do have a fascination with porn.

It's obviously 'cause they can't find jobs. It's obviously because they can't get work. And this is something else that we need to tackle along with finding them jobs. By the way, we know from this summit that Obama in his speech today, we now know that Marie Harf, whether she believes it or not, was ordered to go out and say two days in a row that we can't win the war militarily, that we can't kill our way out of the war, we're going to have to go find them jobs.

So that's some of the stuff that's coming up in addition to Giuliani. I venture to say that vast majority of Americans, whether they would admit it or not, agree with Giuliani. I think that's one of the reasons why the Drive-By Media is so apoplectic and outraged. Okay, brief time-out. We'll come back, and we'll dig deeper into the president's remarks today and other aspects, other people's comments about the War on Terror and how it's not a war on Islam. Islam's got nothing to do with what we're fighting. And you better learn it fast. You better learn it now, and you better never forget it. Nothing to do with Islam. We're not at war with Islam. We're never gonna be at war with Islam. This terrorism is not Islam, has nothing to do with it, and you'd better learn it fast. Meanwhile, keep a sharp eye out on Christians, Crusades, you know the violence they can commit, keep a sharp eye on them, but this isn't about Islam and we better figure it out right now and don't forget it.