Aaron Buie (Photo: Courtesy Office of the New Jersey Attorney General)

One former U.S. Postal Service worker from Piscataway and another from Plainfield are among nine current and former postal workers indicted in connection with allegedly stealing nearly $50,000 in fraudulent unemployment insurance benefits while at work.

Nine separate grand jury indictments were obtained by the state Division of Criminal Justice Specialized Crimes Bureau during the last month charging each person with theft by deception, a third-degree crime, according to acting Attorney General John J. Hoffman.

Each defendant allegedly collected funds ranging in the amount of $2,000 to about $9,000, Hoffman said. If convicted, they each face three to five years in state prison and a fine of up to $15,000.

Aaron J. Buie, 71, of Piscataway, was indicted Monday in connection with allegedly fraudulently filing unemployment insurance claims for six consecutive weeks between March 2 and April 12, 2013, to receive $2,961 which he was not entitled to while working as a postal carrier at the Muhlenberg Station Post Office in Plainfield.

Eboni M. Bush, 35, of Plainfield was indicted Nov. 4 in connection with falsely filing unemployment insurance claims for five consecutive weeks between May 10 and June 13, 2014, to receive $2,247 in unemployment benefits while working as a letter carrier in New Brunswick.

Eboni Bush (Photo: ~Courtesy Office of the New Jersey Attorney General)

The other indicted postal workers live in Newark, Jersey City, Irvington, Paterson and East Orange and worked in Kearny, Jersey City, Elmwood Park and Paramus.

Hoffman said the cases were referred to the New Jersey Attorney General’s Office by the U.S. Postal Service Office of the Inspector General and the U.S. Department of Labor Office of Inspector General after those agencies audited New Jersey Department of Labor unemployment insurance claim records against U.S. Postal Service payroll records.

The nine postal workers allegedly misrepresented their employment status, or their hours worked and income earned, to receive the unemployment benefits. They received a total of about $49,564 in benefits between 2010 and 2015.

"Unemployment insurance provides a financial safety net for New Jersey workers when they fall on hard times, and we won’t tolerate selfish criminals who lie about their employment status and steal from this critical fund,” Hoffman said. “By aggressively prosecuting these defendants, we send a strong deterrent message to make others think twice about filing false claims.”

“These defendants stole thousands of dollars in benefits by falsely certifying, week after week, that they were either unemployed or not earning anything close to what they actually made working for the U.S. Postal Service,” said Director Elie Honig of the Division of Criminal Justice.

Staff Writer Suzanne Russell: 732-565-7335; srussell@mycentraljersey.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search “MyCentralJersey” in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1O08LV2