Dermatologist recommends steps to protect skin from winter sunshine

Dr. Matt Mahlberg and his son, Noah, enjoy a day at Winter Park recently. The doctor, a skin cancer and reconstructive surgeon with Lake Loveland Dermatology, says even in winter Coloradans need to protect their skin from sun exposure. ( Special to the Reporter-Herald )

We live in a beautiful state. Colorado has so much to offer including a preponderance of days filled with sunshine. It's rare for too many days to go by without the sun breaking through. But that abundance of sunshine can come at a cost to our skin and our health — even in the winter.

"We are certainly fortunate to live in Colorado where we have so many days of sunshine. Even a dermatologist has to admit that's a wonderful thing," said Dr. Matt Mahlberg, a skin cancer and reconstructive surgeon with Lake Loveland Dermatology.

In addition to his practice in Loveland, Mahlberg is an assistant clinical professor at the University of Colorado School of Medicine and President of the Colorado Dermatologic Society. He grew up in Loveland and understands the uniqueness of Colorado's climate. "We have more opportunities for ultraviolet (UV) exposure," he shared. "We also have very high altitude.

"The atmosphere protects us, but the higher up we go, the more UV ray exposure you have. For every 1,000 feet of elevation there's a 4 percent increase of UV. For example, on the Panoramic Express lift at Winter Park, (the highest six person lift in North America) or at the top of Hallett Peak, (over 12,000 feet), you're getting a 48 percent increase compared to what you would get at sea level."

He points out that sun protection in some states, such as Colorado, is a year-round endeavor. "Just because it doesn't feel hot on your face or it's cloudy doesn't mean it's not affecting your skin — whether related to skin cancer creation issues or photoaging."

Advertisement

UVA rays cause photoaging. UVB causes redness in the skin. You might not see a sunburn but you can see the reddening. Both have been shown to contribute to the growth of skin cancer.

Awareness of the impact of the sun doesn't mean that individuals should hide out in their homes through the winter. By taking simple steps, protection is possible.

Sunscreen is the first line of defense. "Most dermatologists recommend SPF 30 or greater," said Mahlberg. "You don't get much added benefit beyond 30. Make sure that the sunscreen is broad spectrum and is applied frequently and in the correct amount.

"Most will cover UVA and UVB, but the big thing that I find is that people don't apply it often enough. For most of them that might be every 80 to 120 minutes. When you're sweating and exposed to wind during skiing or snow, it does wear off quickly. Keep a small container with you to reapply. Typically use about one teaspoon for your face."

The Skin Cancer Foundation notes that, "both UVA and UVB penetrate the atmosphere and play an important role in conditions such as premature skin aging, eye damage (including cataracts), and skin cancers. They also suppress the immune system, reducing your ability to fight off these and other maladies."

The American Cancer Society has a simple phrase that can help you remember important steps in skin protection — "Slip! Slop! Slap!® and Wrap." Slip on a shirt. OK, so you probably won't need to be reminded of this in the cold, winter months. Slop on sunscreen. Slap on a hat. And a recent addition, wrap on sunglasses to protect your eyes.

Don't forget your lips. "People forget to apply protection to their lips," said Mahlberg. "Actinic cheilitis can occur. It is a precancerous change that comes from sun exposure to the lips."

Most Coloradans know about the importance of being prepared when going into the high country. Adding lip balm and travel-size sunscreen to your supplies can be a simple preventative step.

Mahlberg stresses protection isn't just for skiers and snowboarders. "There are those who are outside for a job, cross-country skiers, even commuters in their cars. UVA penetrates the glass in normal glass. Just because it's winter or it's cold out, doesn't mean we're not still getting exposure."

The dry climate that exists in Colorado can be a challenge. Mahlberg encourages people to use a moisturizer on skin to keep it from getting too dry. "If you have dry skin, use a lanolin or glycerin-based moisturizer that comes in a jar — pumps contain water, which doesn't moisturize nearly as well."

Another issue of great concern to Mahlberg is the use of artificial tanning beds. "Unfortunately, people want to have that glow all year round. Healthy skin is not tanned skin, and UV rays in tanning booths are extra carcinogenic. They're trying to make themselves beautiful, and yet it causes premature aging."