Mackenzie Marken (Photo: Archive)

Last Oct. 12, Mackenzie Marken left her home. She was not reported missing for three days. For three days, nothing happened. Rumors have gone out suggesting one thing or another. But the truth is this: a freshman girl from Weston, Wisconsin, is missing, and no one knows where she is. Who is Mackenzie Marken?

Mackenzie is a daughter. She has a mom who is missing her.

Mackenzie is a friend. Her friends Fallon, Laina, Julia, Katie and Sarah have not stopped missing her.

Mackenzie is a student. She is a freshman at Mosinee High School.

Mackenzie is a child, with incredible value.

While Mackenzie was never a part of my church, Good News Church of Mosinee, her story is incredibly important to us: We care for all the children and youth of our community. A child’s level of involvement at Good News doesn’t make them more or less valuable. She is created in the image of God, and that alone makes her special and valuable beyond comprehension. James 1:27 tells us that “pure and faultless religion is to look after orphans and widows in their distress," and that is why we are concerned for Mackenzie. Not because of anything she could give us or any merit on her own, but because she is valuable in God’s sight. In some circles, apparently, Mackenzie fell short on the “popular value scale," and she kind of flew under most people’s radar. Can you imagine the national response if a Kardashian went missing? But in our own community a 14-year-old freshman girl has gone missing, which has garnered very little attention.

In our community, kids are in crisis; they are crying out for help. I wish there was a way to make everything right in the many situations that arise: the addictions to drugs, the failed communication in families, the mental illness that some live with. This is not Milwaukee or Chicago; this is Mosinee. A child from our community, Mackenzie, is in crisis, and we cannot let her be forgotten. At some point, losing Mackenzie means we have all lost something: the value of a human.

In response to something that is right at our door, Good News Church is sponsoring an effort to help find Mackenzie Marken. “Bring Mackenzie Marken Home” will be held at 8 p.m. April 6 at Good News Church, 619 Marsh Drive, Mosinee.

Please remember Mackenzie today. But don’t remember just her. Our noticing and seeing those outside our immediate circles is how our community is transformed to a place where everyone matters. It is when we start noticing that life begins.

Joe Carlson is a pastor at Good News Church in Mosinee.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1MHxmPJ