The Saucon Valley teacher contract stalemate is headed to nonbinding arbitration.

The school board unanimously rejected the Saucon Valley Education Association's most recent offer in a closed door session Tuesday. Teachers and the state mediator were notified of the decision Wednesday.

The board unanimously shot down the proposal brought forward May 7 because it is $2.8 million more costly than the board's February offer, district labor attorney Jeffrey Sultanik said in a statement.

Teachers already rejected the board's bottom line proposal after the board withdrew it in April.

"It has become apparent to the school board that the association misrepresented to the community that the parties were 'close' (when the February deal was still on the table)," Sultanik said.

Teachers presented this latest off-the-record proposal during an almost six-hour negotiation session May 7. After the session, both sides announced May 8 they had decided to enter nonbinding arbitration if the board shot down the offer.

Teachers have agreed not to strike this school year and start the process. Union Chief Negotiator Rich Simononis said the association hopes it will finally resolve the impasse.

RELATED: What would nonbinding arbitration mean in Saucon Valley contract dispute?

The full details of the teachers' latest proposal cannot be released, Sultanik said, but he did comment on the terms.

"This proposal is at least 23 percent more in terms of salary/column movement costs than the previously stated bottom line of the board," he said.

A majority of the board voted April 28 to enter nonbinding arbitration if the May 7 negotiating session failed to produce substantial progress.

The two sides are still discussing how they will implement the nonbinding arbitration process. Sultanik claims "the union is currently balking at certain stipulations relating to the negotiated final best offer arbitration process."

The board plans to fall back on an Oct. 8, 2014 six-year contract proposal, Sultanik said. It melds board proposals and recommendations issued by a state fact finder. The school board previously accepted the fact finder's report but teachers voted it down.

The contract would run from 2012 until 2018 and feature two years of salary freezes. The board has always pushed for a freeze in 2012-13 and is now continuing it into 2013-14, citing the union's rejection of the fact finding report.

The district is accepting the salary schedules for 2014-16 that were laid out in the fact finder's report.

"These schedules were proposed by the association and accepted by the board," Sultanik said.

The board is proposing new salary schedules for 2016 through 2018.

The board wants to increase the starting salary and the pay for teachers at the lower range of the salary schedule. The board feels its contract proposal accomplishes that, Sultanik said.

The school board estimates each year about 50 to 60 teachers will receive additional raises of 3 percent for completing graduate course work. Teachers have continued to take courses through the two years of negotiations and those courses have been banked. Teachers can get raises for graduate work in the next four years.

The board admits that focusing on raising the salaries of lower paid members results in slowing the rate of raises for more experiences teachers, especially the top paid ones, Sultanik said. There are 22 teachers on step 14, close to the top of the schedule, currently and there would be 34 there by the end of the deal.

An additional 13 teachers currently area on the very top of the pay scale. Those folks have earned a master's degree, plus 60 additional graduate credits. Those teachers see the same average increases as their peers on step 14 but cannot earn more graduate study raises. The average salary would rise from $93,072 to $95,912 by the end of the board's proposal.

The district has said that its current health plan put its at risk of getting hit with the Affordable Care Act's "Cadillac tax." The proposal tries to avoid that.

Sara K. Satullo may be reached at ssatullo@express-times.com. Follow her on Twitter @sarasatullo. Find Bethlehem news on Facebook.