Following the headlines of international politics these days is akin to watching a multiplayer game of ping pong played out on a large table. The action bounces from Ukraine to Syria to Iraq to Ukraine to Iraq to Ebola to Ukraine, etc. It is quite dizzying. Obviously there are many human dimensions and much suffering attendant to these headlines. But something else interesting seems to be happening in two simultaneous trends.

One trend is the revolutionary nature of international politics, where some states such as Russia, China and the bit of territory controlled by the Islamic State group seem to be expanding, or, at the very least, these entities make no bones that they wish to expand. Vladimir Putin’s Russia appears to be trying to reconstitute a greater Russia through its actions in South Ossetia and Abkhazia in 2008, its annexation of Crimea earlier this year, as well as its moves in eastern Ukraine since. Other areas such as the breakaway Transnistria region of eastern Moldova could be next. China, meanwhile, is unapologetic in its claims of sovereignty over islands in both the East and South China Seas. Lastly, the Islamic State group claims that it has re-established the caliphate and wants to expand control over all of the historic lands of Islam, starting with Syria and Iraq.

[MORE: Cartoons on Vladimir Putin and Russia]

Whether motivated by ethnonationalism or religious beliefs, such revanchist or irredentist aims are in no way new. However, this revolutionary trend in international politics, as in past instances, could make for increasingly antagonistic and potentially belligerent rearrangements of international and regional power dynamics.

Many thought that the end of the Cold War would stop such great power competitions. Secretary of State John Kerry, commenting on Russian behavior in the Ukraine, re-expressed this view back in March when he stated that, "You just don't in the 21st century behave in 19th century fashion by invading another country on completely trumped up pre-text." But as the late Harvey Sicherman wrote back in 1997 in a piece called “The Revenge of Geopolitics,” the notion that the end of the Cold War had led to a new era was overstated. In his words, even more apt today:

…the post-cold war era may be distinguished by the absence of a cold war, but it hardly qualifies as “peace.” Rather, an overarching geopolitical struggle has merely given way to numerous “underarching” struggles. The Kremlin may be emptied of ideologues plotting campaigns against America, her allies, and strategic points around the globe, but the world as a whole teems with as many geopoliticians as ever. One might call them the “meat-eaters,” those to whom power, territorial possession, military action, and pirated wealth matter far more than do the environmental issues, diplomatic niceties, human rights, and other hobbies of the social transformers who comprise the current U.S. foreign policy establishment.



Meat-eaters seem ascendant for the moment.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the Islamic State group]

The other trend is the rise in calls for the devolution of states. This trend is also not fundamentally new. The end of colonialism created scores of new countries from the 1940s through the 1970s and many more schisms since then – the latest being the independence of South Sudan. But events such as today's vote in Scotland could be the watershed moment for many states in Western Europe in particular. Scottish independence would have a massive impact on the decline of British power. It might also lead to Belgium finally splitting and Catalan independence from Spain, etc. (Even fringe groups in the U.S. are rooting for Scotland to split from the United Kingdom.)

In an era where many already think that NATO members are not spending enough on defense due to the nature of today’s threats such Balkanization could drive meager defense budgets even further south. Scottish views on nuclear weapons and the presence of the U.K.’s nuclear deterrent in Scotland also complicates matters.

Undoubtedly the map 20 or 50 or 100 years from now will be different than it is today. A recent article in New Scientist seemingly welcomed this trend, arguing that political communities should be smaller and that there should be a return to a neo-medievalism of microstates. But can the current trends of revolution and devolution coexist? Theoretically, perhaps, but it is also not difficult to imagine revolutionary powers delighted to see devolution set in. In January, for instance, when Putin was asked whether he would invite an independent Scotland to join Russia’s new customs union he reportedly smiled and replied, "I wouldn't rule that out."

[SEE: Cartoons on Chinese Hacking]