2nd district candidates Jared Huffman Age: 52 Residence: San Rafael Occupation: U.S. Representative for California’s 2nd Congressional District, elected 2012 Education: Bachelor’s degree from University of California, Santa Barbara; law degree from Boston College Law School. Experience: State Assemblyman 6th District from 2006 to 2012; 12 years on Marin Municipal Water District board of directors; senior attorney with Natural Resources Defense Council, 2001 to 2006. Political party: Democratic *** Name: Dale Mensing Age: 57 Residence: Garberville Occupation: Cashier at Shop Smart Foods in Redway Education: High school degree from Bob Jones Academy in Greenville, South Carolina Experience: Served three years in U.S. Navy; worked for Post Office for six years, served one year as postmaster for Laytonville; past president of Garberville Lions Club Political party: Republican *** Name: Matthew Robert Wookey Age: 39 Occupation: History teacher at San Jose Middle School in Novato Residence: Petaluma Education: University of Oregon, bachelor’s in anthropology, graduated 1997 Experience: Two years as Peace Corps volunteer, member of Novato Unified School District’s technology mentoring committee Political party: No affiliation *** Name: Erin Schrode Age: 25 Residence: Mill Valley Occupation: Environmentalist and social entrepreneur Education: New York University, bachelor’s in social and cultural analysis, graduated 2013 Experience: Volunteer work during college in Haiti, following the 2010 earthquake, and Ghana. Aided Syrian, Iraqi and Afghan refugees in the Mediterranean. An ecology correspondent with Fusion, a television cable and satellite Hispanic news and satire channel. Political Party: Democrat

Rep. Jared Huffman faces three challengers in the June 7 primary election — one Republican, one Democrat and one independent.

The Republican in the race, Dale Mensing, a cashier at Shop Smart Foods in Redway, was Huffman’s Republican opponent in 2014. In that election, Mensing, 57, garnered 54,400 votes to Huffman’s 163,124 votes.

“I’m running for the purpose of defending the integrity of the Bill of Rights,” Mensing said. “As soon as I did not win the election in 2014, I began my campaign for 2016. I continue to fight for the integrity of the Bill of Rights.”

The Democratic challenger in the race is Erin Schrode of Mill Valley, who graduated three years ago with a bachelor’s degree in social and cultural analysis from New York University. Schrode, 25, said she makes her living “speaking and consulting around environmental sustainability.” She has carved out a niche for herself as a media spokeswoman for the Millennial generation. She also serves as an ecology correspondent with Fusion, a television cable and satellite channel featuring Hispanic news and satire.

Schrode said she is running against Huffman even though she agrees with him on most of the issues.

“I believe that progressive female voices result in better policy and that young people are better equipped to lead the future of the state,” Schrode said. “This is about representative democracy for me. We are in a country where 51 percent of our population is female and 35 percent is under age 30, and yet we’ve never had a woman under 30 elected.”

The third candidate challenging Huffman, Matthew Wookey of Petaluma, teaches history at San Jose Middle School in Novato. Wookey, 39, said he has never been a member of either the Democratic or the Republican party.

“As a student and teacher of history, there are far too many transgressions by both of those parties to ever consider membership,” Wookey said.

Wookey said this is the first time he has ever been a candidate for any office.

“It’s my son’s birth three years ago that made me decide that sitting on the sidelines as our Congress devolves is no longer an option,” Wookey said. “I couldn’t keep hoping and waiting for effective leadership to sprout up on its own. I couldn’t live with myself if I didn’t make the attempt.”

Advertisement

Mensing sees the Bill of Rights under attack on a number of fronts. He said the Second Amendment, which guarantees the right of the people to keep and bear arms, is under constant attack.

“Also the 10th Amendment makes it clear that if something isn’t mentioned in the Constitution then it falls to the states. That certainly includes health care and education,” Mensing said.

And he believes the Affordable Care Act violates the First Amendment’s protection of freedom of religion because it “doesn’t allow a person to refrain from purchasing health care if it is against their religious faith.”

But while Mensing is intent on preserving the traditions of the past, Schrode is advocating dramatic change. She said government needs to do more to prepare the populace for the 21st century workplace.

“We need to change the sort of curriculums that we’re putting into place for students,” Schrode said. “This is a skilled economy towards which we are shifting, and we need to make that a priority of our education system.”

Schrode said, “I have a unique perspective as a young voice, as a female voice, that better understands what is happening. My peer group is actively leading the shift in these industries for which we need to better prepare college graduates.”

Preparing the nation for the economy of the future is also one of Wookey’s main issues.

“We need to start working towards what an economy looks like in the United States when we could lose potentially half of all the jobs in this country to automation in the next 30 years,” Wookey said. “What does that economy look like? That is not even being discussed in Congress.”

And Wookey said, “We are running out of time to reduce the effects of climate change. We need to eliminate fossil fuel usage altogether. There is no reason we need to be continuing to use the fuels of the 19th century in the 21st century.”

Wookey doesn’t see anything getting done in Congress, however, until campaign finance limits are put in place, and he believes an amendment to the Constitution will be necessary for that to happen due to the Supreme Court’s Citizens United decision.

Huffman, who lives in San Rafael, represented the North Bay for six years in the California Assembly before being elected to Congress in 2012. Before going to Sacramento, Huffman served as a senior attorney for the Natural Resources Defense Council. Huffman, 52, serves on the Natural Resources and Budget Committees in the 113th Congress.

As of March 31, 2016, Huffman had received $622,335 in campaign contributions and had $523,320 in cash on hand. During the same period, Mensing received $3,405 in contributions and had $191 in cash on hand. Schrode received $2,251 in contributions and had $2,186 in cash on hand. Wookey raised no money.

Nevertheless, Huffman said, “I take seriously every election, in part because I think elected officials benefit from contests, and because I’m excited to tell my story to voters. I think we’ve been doing a lot of great work in a very difficult political climate.”

Huffman said he attempts to combine idealism with pragmatism.

“On the one hand, I share the values of this district. My constituents see that in the things I fight for every day,” he said. “I’ve got a 100 percent career pro-choice record, 100 percent pro-equality Civil Rights. I am one of the leaders in the Congress on protecting our environment and leading on climate change.

“But I’m also proud that I’m not just drawing a bunch of partisan red lines and fighting and not getting anything done,” Huffman said. “I’m continuously working to find common ground and get as much as I can in a difficult environment.”

As examples, Huffman mentioned his work on legislation to allow Marin County to acquire surplus Coast Guard quarters in Point Reyes Station for affordable housing, a plan that addresses the future of ranches on National Park Service land in West Marin and a parking plan to address gridlock and parking adjacent to Muir Woods.

And Huffman is excited about the possibility of Democrats regaining control of one or possibly both houses of Congress in November.

“I think the window of opportunity is here to do that,” he said. “I’ll be in a position of leadership in the next Congress to chair a major subcommittee on water, power and oceans. And to move forward a lot of legislation that wasn’t able to get a hearing or vote under current management.”