The East San Gabriel Valley, Malibu and Antelope Valley still lack adequate trauma care despite a voter-approved measure granting hundreds of millions in funding in 2002, according to a state audit.

The state audit conducted for the Joint Legislative Audit Committee found Los Angeles County officials could not show they properly used funds from a parcel tax measure because the county “lacks ongoing oversight and analysis of its approach to allocating” funds, the document states.

Voters passed Measure B in 2002 to provide funding to maintain and expand a county-wide system of trauma centers and increase readiness in the event of a biological terrorism attack.

Today, a trauma victim in Pomona could be as much as 28 miles from the designated trauma center at County USC Medical Center in Los Angeles, according to the state auditor. Residents in Malibu and Antelope Valley are more than 20 miles from their designated centers, despite an established center in Antelope Valley.

Less than two percent of the overall $255 million in funds went to expanding trauma access to underserved areas in fiscal year 2011-2012. While the San Gabriel Valley pays approximately 20 percent of the taxes collected, it receives less than 1 percent of the funds, according to Assemblyman Roger Hernandez, D-West Covina.

“There’s been a monstrous inequity in the way dollars have been incorporated,” Hernandez said. “They’re not getting the representation and the services they’re being taxed for.”

Hernandez said the state legislature will use the audit as a road map for future legislation focused on expanding access to trauma centers and emergency rooms.

“Now that the audit has been done in a nonpartisan way, we now have real facts, real figures and a very stark picture of inequity, particularly to the people of the San Gabriel Valley,” he said.

The auditor’s report suggests the current annual reporting system used by the county’s Emergency Medical Services Agency, which oversees the funds, does not account for gaps in coverage and should be replaced by an assessment by the American College of Surgeons.

“Certain geographical areas within Los Angeles remain far removed from existing trauma centers, thus requiring helicopter transport for some of those areas’ trauma patients,” the audit states. “The absence of a nearby trauma center potentially lengthens the time before the trauma victim receives care and may therefore affect the patient’s health outcome.”

Advertisement

The board of supervisors disbanded the Measure B Oversight Committee in 2004 and have not changed the funding model since then, according to the report.

Roxane Marquez, a spokesperson for Supervisor Gloria Molina, said that while the number of trauma incidents have increased, the number of deaths from those incidents has declined.

“This is evidence that the system is working,” she said.

Measure B stabilized the county’s trauma system, which dropped from 22 centers to 12 in 2002, Marquez said. The system now includes 14 hospitals, two of which are run by the county.

She said Molina is hopeful the Affordable Care Act will make trauma centers more sustainable.

Auditors determined the county has made only “minimal efforts to persuade a hospital” in the East San Gabriel Valley to join the trauma system.

Pomona Valley Hospital Medical Center left the county’s trauma system for financial reasons, but stated in a 2005 report that the hospital’s staff believed trauma victims received acceptable treatment, according to the audit.

State auditors found that the EMS Agency has not formally reached out to the Pomona Valley Hospital since that year, but that the agency sent a few informal emails.

Officials from the hospital told the auditors they would be open to discuss adding a trauma center, according to the report.

The Citrus Valley Medical Center once operated a trauma center at its Queen of the Valley campus in West Covina, but also shut it down for financial reasons in the 1980s, according to spokeswoman Annette Macias.

Citrus Valley plans to conduct a study into the potential of adding a trauma center, she said.

“It does come up and we’re always evaluating the needs of our community,” Macias said. “We haven’t officially made a study, but it is something we do see as needed in the area.”