Pakistan leg-spinner Yasir Shah is overjoyed after dismissing Sri Lanka's Rangana Herath. Photo: AFP

Galle Sri Lanka Leg-spinner Yasir Shah claimed a career-best 7-76 as Pakistan stunned Sri Lanka by 10 wickets in the first Test on Sunday to take the lead in the three-match series.

Yasir spun a web around the Sri Lankan batsmen to skittle them for 206 in their second innings just before tea on the fifth and final day.

Set a victory target of 90, Pakistan raced home in 11.2 overs with Mohammad Hafeez unbeaten on 46 and Ahmed Shehzad on 43 at the Galle International Stadium.

Job well done: Pakistan's openers Ahmed Shehzad and Mohammad Hafeez leave the field after knocking off the 90 runs needed to defeat Sri Lanka. Photo: AFP

It was Pakistan's first Test win in Sri Lanka since an eight-wicket triumph in Kandy in 2006. The second Test starts at the P. Sara Oval in Colombo on Thursday.

Advertisement

Pakistan's remarkable recovery from 5-96 in the first innings came after the entire first day's play had been washed out and just 64 overs were bowled on the second day.

Opener Dimuth Karunaratne top-scored with 79 in Sri Lanka's second innings, while Lahiru Thirimanne made 44 and and Dinesh Chandimal was last man out for 38. But the rest of the batsmen folded against Pakistan's incisive bowling.

Sri Lanka lost their last five wickets for 39 runs after being 5-167 at one stage.

The hosts took their overnight score of 2-63 to 4-144 by lunch, before they collapsed in front of some 1000 fans.

Sri Lanka lost nightwatchman Dilruwan Perera off the first ball of the day, clean-bowled by Yasir, but the left-handed pair of Karunaratne and Thirimanne put on 69 runs for the fourth wicket.

With the hosts just 15 runs ahead, left-arm seamer Wahab Riaz had Thirimanne caught low at first slip by Younis Khan to keep the interest alive during the lunch break.

Sri Lanka suffered a massive blow off the second ball after resumption when skipper Angelo Mathews was controversially given out caught at short leg by TV umpire Chris Gaffaney.

The New Zealander upheld a decision made by on-field umpire Richard Illingworth, who had ruled that the batsman was out even though replays proved inconclusive on whether the ball had come off the bat.

Mathews, who had called for a review as soon as the umpire raised his finger, was visibly furious as he returned to the pavilion.

Neither hot-spot or snickometer technology is part of the Decision Review System for the series.

Karunaratne's patience ran out after more than four hours at the crease when he attempted a big hit off Yasir, missed the line and was smartly stumped by an agile Sarfraz Ahmed to make it 6-167.

It soon became 7-175 as Kithuruwan Vithanage swept a flighted ball to Zulfiqar Babar at square-leg, giving Yasir his second haul of five wickets or more in an eight-Test career.

Dhammika Prasad was stumped off Babar and Rangana Herath holed out in the deep off Yasir, before Chandimal was last man out, stumped off Yasir.

AFP