Cheers and Jeers for Wednesday, December 9, 2015

Note: I have a better idea, Donald. Let's deport all the Trumps instead. ---Mgt.

-

By the Numbers:

Opens in 14 days!!!

Days 'til winter: 13

Days 'til the release of Michael Moore's Where to Invade Next: 14

Estimated number of transgender active-duty members in the U.S. military: 15,500

Estimated number of transgender veterans who are alive today: 134,000

Percent of New Hampshire Democrats who think the answer to "What would Jesus do?" when it comes to Syrian refugees is accept them, according to PPP: 73%

Percent of New Hampshire Republicans who believe the same thing: 29%

Number of "ISIS czars" Harry Reid wants President Obama to appoint: 1

-

Mid-week Rapture Index:

181 (including 4 volcanoes and a whole bunch of worthless Republican thoughts and prayers). Soul Protection Factor 24 lotion is recommended if you’ll be walking amongst the heathen today.

-

Puppy Pic of the Day:

Hank the Bernese Mountain Woozle

-

CHEERS to driving the establishment to the brink. Jeb Bush is zoinkin' out of his ever-livin' tree over Donald Trump's primary-season cuckoo-driven steamroller that’s left him (Jeb) at 3 percent in the polls after---in the words of Rachel Maddow---"setting $30 million on fire." And in the wake of Trump's "No Muslims Allowed" pledge, Jeb is goin' over the edge to the tinfoil-hat side:

Jeb Bush suggested Tuesday that Republican presidential rival Donald Trump could be part of a conspiracy to put Hillary Clinton in the White House. “Maybe Donald negotiated a deal with his buddy @HillaryClinton. Continuing this path will put her in the White House,” Mr. Bush tweeted to his 388,000 followers Tuesday afternoon.

Poppy, Bar: time to fire up the Studebaker and come pick up your kid. He's just not cut out for POTUS Camp.

JEERS to whiners in high penthouse suites. Last week Congress passed a long-term transportation bill that should've been larger considering how we've neglected our nation's wheeled, winged and railed infrastructure. Still, it's better than a poke in the eye with an orange construction cone. But some people aren't happy, and for the wrong reasons:

“Oh you poor, poor banksters...” Among the bill's losers are large banks, which would receive lower dividends from the Federal Reserve, with the savings used for transportation programs. Banking officials complained that banks shouldn't be asked to foot the bill for highways and bridges.

Oh, wah. Hey, banks, we bailed your asses out of a death spiral not so long ago, and the Brinks trucks you use to shuttle your moolah hither and yon are pavement crushers. So suck it up and quit living down to your reputation. If it makes you feel any better, here: have a free pen.

JEERS to armchair generals. We live in a country where the biggest threat to our safety and security is us . But introspection is hard, and it's much easier to tell a pollster (in this case CNN/ORC) that a network of drugged-up radicals half a world away is "the" imminent danger to us. Even more ridiculous, nearly 7-in-10 believe that "America's military response to the terrorist group thus far has not been aggressive enough." Yes---our response has been so puny that we bombed them and bombed them until we ran out of gol'durn bombs:

But we still have plenty of fruitcake bombs in reserve. The U.S. Air Force has fired off more than 20,000 missiles and bombs since the U.S. bombing campaign against ISIS began 15 months ago, according to the Air Force, leading to depleted munitions stockpiles and calls to ramp up funding and weapons production. As the U.S. ramps up its campaign against the Islamist terror group in Iraq and Syria, the Air Force is now "expending munitions faster than we can replenish them," Air Force chief of staff Gen. Mark Welsh said in a statement.

Now a majority of Americans want us to send troops into Syria, where Russia is propping up Bashar al-Assad militarily and a hundred different tribal faction are fighting each other. Personally, I think there’s an obvious solution to this problem: we need to stop polling Americans.

CHEERS to the #1 cause of hairy palms and sudden blindness. Speaking of generals, on this date in 1994 Surgeon General Jocelyn Elders---who, at 82, is still active at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences---got triangulated out of her job by President Bill Clinton. Her offense: having the gall to suggest that teaching kids about masturbation might help prevent the spread of AIDS. "Education, education, education," she said. "The only way we are going to get around this disease is with education. We have no vaccine, we have no magic drug. All we've got is education." Clinton should've let her stay. He might've learned that playing with yourself prevents something else: impeachment.

CHEERS to still kicking ass and taking names. He came back from a stroke and survived a helicopter crash in the 90s, but tough guy Kirk Douglas just keeps on keepin' on. Today is the screen legend's 99th birthday, and C&J stands in awe of his longevity, his liberal leanings, and his amazing roster of classics that have kept us entertained for decades. I came upon a column he wrote a few years back for HuffPo, and it rings as true today as ever:

I cannot understand the people who are against some form of gun control. They should be the first to welcome a message on making it more difficult to get a gun. “Poink!” Many of them seem to propose more guns being available to everybody. Why? Are they interested in making more money for the gun manufacturers? Are they politicians who just want to oppose the president in anything he endorses? It's incomprehensible to me. I am 96-years-old. I have many grandchildren. I would hate to leave them a world where guns are easily accessible. Children don't vote, adults do. It's time to do something to make our children safer. America's cowboy days are over.

Now and forever… he is Spartacus.

JEERS to compassionate conservabuttheads. As income inequality unnecessarily continues squeezing more and more Americans (even those with full-time jobs) through the holes in the safety net, we're reminded that on December 9, 1983, Attorney General Ed Meese claimed that people go to soup kitchens "because food is free and that's easier than paying for it." Could Reagan pick 'em or could Reagan pick 'em.

-

Ten years ago in C&J: December 9, 2005

CHEERS to the healing power of Fido. U.S. News reports this week that "pet therapy" helps release natural painkilling endorphins and reduce the stress hormone cortisol in sick people. But if you're in the operating room and your surgeon wags his tail when he asks the nurse for the "Ralpel!"...RUN!

-

And just one more…

CHEERS to sweet sounds. The Grammy Awards were announced this week and you can check out the full list here. For my money, the happiest surprise on the list is Jimmy Carter who, a day after announcing he was cancer-free, snagged another nod (second year in a row) in the Best Spoken Word category for "A Full Life: Reflections at 90." Also in that category…

Blood On Snow (Jo Nesbø) If you play the record backwards it says “Trump’s an asshole.” ---Patti Smith Brief Encounters: Conversations, Magic Moments, And Assorted Hijinks ---Dick Cavett Patience And Sarah (Isabel Miller) ---Janis Ian & Jean Smart Yes Please ---Amy Poehler

Other notables on the Grammy list: Bob Dylan, Tony Bennett, James Taylor, Alabama Shakes, Taylor Swift, Buddy Guy and Louis C.K. The awards are February 16th. And those kids better keep the noise down or I'm calling the police.

-

Today's Shameless C&J Testimonial: Cheers and Jeers kiddie poolers adopted by herd of cattle ---Yahoo! News

-