Nordyke pins Anthony Watt of Meeker to claim 145-pound title

Holly's Ryan Nordyke works against senior Anthony Watt of Meeker in their Class 2A 145-pound state championship match in the 2015 Colorado State Wrestling Championships on Saturday night at the Pepsi Center. The Holly senior registered a pin in 4:19 to capture his second state title. He claimed the 138-pound title in 2014. Nordyke capped his senior season with an outstanding 29-2 record. In his last two years on the mat, Nodyke went 61-3. (Rhonda Uhland/Courtesy photo)

Baca County's J.D. Chenoweth and Holly's Ryan Nordyke took to the mats on Saturday night at the Pepsi Center in their quest for a state championship and the gold medal that goes along with it.

Nordyke already had one state championship under his belt after winning the 138-pound title last year as a junior.

Chenoweth, a senior, was hoping to cap his career on top of the podium but had his work cut out for him against a formidable opponent in undefeated junior Bob Piper of Paonia.

Pipher won the 132-pound state title last year beating Chance Randolph of Dove Creek by a 6-3 decision.

Ironically, Randolph was the wrestler that Chenoweth beat in the championship semifinals on Thursday night by a 7-3 decision to advance to the finals.

In the 138-pound final, Chenoweth fell by a pin in 1:47 as Pipher capped his senior season with a perfect 47-0 record.

Chenoweth finished his senior year with a 34-6 record.

In the 145-pound championship, Nordyke (28-2) faced senior Anthony Watt of Meeker (30-9).

The match was tied at 2-2 when Nordyke scored a reverse near the end of the first quarter.

Holly's Ryan Nordyke celebrates his pin in 4:19 over senior Anthony Watt of Meeker in their Class 2A 145-pound state championship match in the 2015 Colorado State Wrestling Championships on Saturday night at the Pepsi Center. The Holly senior captured his second state title after he won the 138-pound title in 2014. Nordyke capped his senior season with an outstanding 29-2 record. (Rhonda Uhland/Courtesy photo)

In the second period, Nordyke chose the top position and was able to ride out Watt as the match was still deadlocked at 2-all.

Watts then chose the top position to start the third period.

Nordyke went to work and scored a reverse and then put Watt on his back to register two near fall points for a 6-2 lead. Then the Holly wrestler registered a pin in 4:19 to lock up his second state championship.

In the Region 2 Tournament just last week, Nordyke was beaten by senior Blake Denton of Swink by a 1-0 decision for the regional championship.

The match featured a showdown of defending state champions.

In a twist of events, Denton stumbled in the state quarterfinals on Thursday night when he was pinned by Watt in 4:30.

For Nordyke, this was a season where he had to deal with several injuries that kept him off the mat for parts of the season.

He's been competing with a torn ACL in his right leg that he sustained in December but pushed through the pain.

Now with his journey complete, Nordyke will have surgery on his knee in March and will get a chance to rest on his laurels.

In the Class 2A team race, Rocky Ford won the champions to end a three-year reign by Paonia.

It came down to the last match for Rocky Ford to determine the team championship.

Senior Nate Finnell had the weight of his entire team on his shoulders.

Finnell came into the 220-pound title match with the Meloneers trailing Meeker in the standings by one point.

A victory would send Rocky Ford to its first championship in 25 years – a loss would hand the Cowboys the title.

Finnell came through with a 4-2 decision and a state title for the Meloners – the first since the AA crown in 1990.

Rocky Ford finished the three-day tournament with 134 points and two individual champions.

Meeker placed second with 131 points, followed by Paonia (125.5), Centauri (109.5) and Norwood/Nucla (98).

Finnell and sophomore Jacob Rodriguez claimed their first state titles for the Meloneers.

Rodriguez won the 106-pound title with a 5-3 decision over Akron's Tanner Watson.

Finnell competed for 195 state title last year but lost by a 7-3 decision to Johnny Loflin of Baca County.

In all, it was a record-setting night in the 2A ranks.

Paonia's Jesse Reed became the 18th Colorado wrestler to win four state titles with a victory at 126 pounds.

Eagles junior Bo Pipher (138 pounds) and senior Zach Milner (160) each took home a second consecutive title.

Meeker junior T.J. Shelton and Centauri senior Jareb Aziz joined the three-time state champion club.

Shelton pinned Centennial's Jose Cisneros in 50 seconds to claim the 170-pound crown and set himself up for a shot at a fourth title next season.

Swink senior Austin Coy capped a prep career that saw four trips to the state finals finally end with his first championship.

Coy withstood a late reversal for a 3-2 decision at 132 over Highland's Jake Trujillo, who almost took it home with a near fall before time ran out.

Trujillo lost his bid for the 120 state title last year when he lost by a 7-6 decision to Stetson Loader of Baca County.

Buena Vista junior Keegan Wentz landed the 182 title. He lost in the finals a year ago to Aziz of Centauri by an 8-3 decision.

Crowley County senior Bryce McCracken posted a 4-1 decision at 152 over Meeker's Casey Turner, and Limon junior Jayden Hilferty also earned his first state title with a 3-1 victory over Crowley County's Keith Dunnagan in double overtime at heavyweight.