RAND PAUL: We are incredibly generous people, but realize that could slip away from us if we let government grow big enough that it gets between us and the people trying to buy and sell things.



That's what really alarms me about -- not Hillary Clinton, though she would be a disaster, terrible -- but the fact that there's a significant amount of people in this country who think Bernie Sanders would be good for us scares me to death.



Bernie says he's gonna give everyone free education. That would be great, wouldn't it? Free education! There is no free lunch. There is nothing that is truly free. If someone offers you something, realize: Who are the only people who get something for nothing? Theives.



When you steal something is the only way you get something for nothing. If someone offers you a free education, ask them to tell you the truth? Who is really going to pay for it?



Somebody's got to pay. The education will not be free. The professors will be paid, the buildings will be built, there'll be electricity and heat, somebody will pay for the education. Maybe its going to be a carpenter or a plumber who never went to college, or somebody who doesn't have kids. Or maybe you are going to pay for it.



No, no, Bernie says its going to be free.



Maybe we print out money, we have a Federal Reserve and we print out money, and we give everybody money so they can pay for education.



What happens? The value of the dollar shrinks. You know, over the last hundred years, 96% of the value of the dollar has disappeared, so what happens when the value of the dolar shrinks? Prices go up. So if gas costs more or food costs more, who do you think it hurt the most? The rich or the poor?



The poor...



People like Bernie say socialism is gonna be good and we're gonna give you free stuff, realize the people that are hurt the worst are actually the people they are trying to help. Same with Obamacare, it was supposed to help poor people. Guess what, the price of insurance has gone up dramatically under Obamacare for those who pay for it.



But you say, I'm getting it for free, I'm one of the subsidized people.



It isn't free. Somebody is paying for it...



The main reason I oppose Obamacare, and the main reason I oppose Bernie Sanders and everything he represents is he wants to take away my choices.



He says he's not a Stalinistic kind of socilaism, his is a 'democratic' socialism, right? The thing is, if government takes away your choice to make something and sell it to somebody voluntarily, whether they do it with a majority vote or whether an authoritarian does it with a club, it ends up being the same.



It may seem a little kinder and gentler, but if the majority says 'well we should have segregation or slavery again' or we shouldn't have a 2nd or 1st Amendment, if a majority says it would that make it any better?