Advertisement - story continues below

The federal government is demanding a Catholic charity betray its religious integrity and conscience by forcing it to provide insurance coverage for drugs that induce abortion. Since Obamacare became the law of the land in 2010, many charities and businesses have struggled under the weight of the federal government who insist they provide abortifacient drug insurance.

The American people are standing against this, according to a Marist poll released Monday. According to the poll, which was sponsored by the Catholic organization Knights of Columbus, 53 percent of Americans stand with the nuns of the Little Sisters of the Poor and against the government in the Supreme Court case. About 15 percent of respondents were undecided.

“It is not reasonable for the government to demand that some — and only some — religious employers engage in activity that is totally unnecessary to the government’s stated purpose of providing elective and morally problematic drugs to employees,” Knights of Columbus supreme knight Carl Anderson said in a statement.

Advertisement – story continues below

“Such action doesn’t just violate the rights of employers like the Little Sisters, it is also at odds with the American people’s understanding of basic fairness and our long-standing commitment to protecting the deeply-held beliefs of every American — especially when those beliefs are the minority view,” Anderson said.

The U.S. Supreme Court heard oral arguments in the case on March 23. On March 29, it sent out an unusual request, asking both sides in the case how to “avoid forcing religious women to provide services against their faith.”

“This is an excellent development,” said Mark Rienzi of the Becket Fund for Religious Liberty, which is representing the Denver-based nuns of the Little Sisters of the Poor. “Clearly the Supreme Court understood the Sisters’ concern that the government’s current scheme forces them to violate their religion. We look forward to offering alternatives that protect the Little Sisters’ religious liberty while allowing the government to meet its stated goals.”

Advertisement – story continues below

Alliance Defending Freedom Senior Counsel David Cortman, who is supporting the nuns, spoke out strongly against the government position.

“The government is forcing our clients to offer access to abortion-inducing drugs through their insurance plans. That is no accommodation. The government has many other ways to make sure women may access these drugs, but it has chosen the unjust, unlawful, and unnecessary path of forcing people of faith to participate in acts that violate their deepest convictions,” he said.

“There is an easy solution: The government can offer these services to women who want them without forcing Christian schools, nuns, and priests to abandon their belief that life is sacred.”

h/t: TheBlaze

Advertisement – story continues below