Workmen move an ICU hospital bed out of the Boulder Community Health Broadway campus in October. The property is up for sale. ( Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera )

The city of Boulder was praying for an answer to its homeless/affordable housing situation and the solution appeared. They just have to think outside the box!

The Boulder Community Hospital property is up for sale. This would be the answer:

Homeless: Hospital Building

1. The rooms could be "efficiency" apartments. They each have room for one or two beds, furniture, TV, closet, dressers, sink, and bathroom, all handicap-accessible.

2. Nurses' stations can be converted to common areas. The homeless are used to being together, they support each other, and they can go to their apartments if they want privacy.

3. These common areas could also have a small kitchen area.

4. The extra rooms per floor could be used for a library, computers, classrooms, laundry room, exercise equipment, etc.

5. Each floor/wing could be separated into male, female, couples, those who have completed "ready to work," and the first or top floor of rooms could be accessible only to teens from 14-21 years old, keeping them safe and protected.

6. One wing could be used for assisted living/hospice.

7. The main floor as you walk in the front doors could also be open to the public.

The emergency room could be converted to a doctor's office or people's clinic. The lobby could be a dentist's office or dental aid.

Advertisement

The gift shop could remain a gift shop. One of the other rooms could be an optician/eyeglass store, another a radiologist/hearing aid store, another a pharmacy, another a thrift store.

Others could be a beauty shop, barber shop, coffee shop, bakery, flower shop, etc. The cafeteria downstairs could become a restaurant called "The Down Under." The records room could become a library/media center. The upper floors/elevators/stairs could be accessible only by key or key card, just like hotels.

The main floor has a lot of back rooms accessible only by hallways. These could be used as classrooms. You could have on-the-job training in HVAC, plumbing, electrical, computers, landscaping, social media/IT, food service, accounting/secretarial, etc. They could get their diplomas, not GEDs. They would be qualified to get jobs.

Cost: Minimal, $500/apartment.

Furnishing (couches, chairs, microwaves, lights, beds, and stoves, dishes, kitchenware for common areas, etc.) can be purchased from local charities such as Arc, Salvation Army, Goodwill, Resource 2000, Restore, Habitat, Hospice, Birds of Prey, etc. This will also help out these charities financially.

If the homeless had access to shelter and education:

They wouldn't be sleeping outside, getting arrested, going to jail, and appearing in court.

They wouldn't be on the streets. They wouldn't need a day shelter. They would have a place for their belongings. They would have daily access to a shower and a laundry. They would be clean, not smell, and look no different than the rest of us, because they aren't. You wouldn't be able to tell they were homeless, because they no longer are.

They would have pride, self respect, encouragement, and most of all, hope and support to change their lives.

They would have a second chance.

And that is what this place would be called: 2ND CHANCE

Hospice: Medical Pavillion or Brenton Building

This building could become a hospice center. Rooms can be furnished, and a nursing staff would be available.

Affordable housing: Medical Pavillion or Brenton Building

If not a hospice center, it could become "efficiency apartments, or 1-2 bedroom apartments with separate bathrooms or a common/shared bathroom (dormitory style).

Parking garage:

Top floor could be retrofitted to office space, apartments, or left as a parking garage for future growth of the area.

West parking lot:

Build city offices there. Plenty of parking. Easy access off of 9th, Broadway, Alpine, and Balsam. On local bus line. And plenty of parking for bicycles.

Boulder Community Campus includes:

220,000 square-foot hospital building; 48,000 square-foot (four-story) hospital tower; 64,000 square-foot (three-story) medical pavilion; 21,532 square-foot Brenton Building; three-story parking garage, plus west parking lot.

The first part regarding the homeless was sent to the city council members and Boulder Housing in May. The city wants this to be used for more city offices.

Which is more important to the people of Boulder, more city offices or homeless/affordable housing for those in need?

If the city and the three Boulder homeless service providers would pool their resources, who knows what they could accomplish!

Lynn R. Hurst lives in Boulder.