Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan and Priority Health each plan to trim health insurance premiums for small businesses beginning with the third or fourth quarter policy renewals.

On average, employers in Blue Cross Blue Shield’s small group market will see a 3.3 percent decline in their premiums for policies with a July-to-June plan year.

Employers using Blue Cross Blue Shield’s HMO subsidiary, Blue Care Network, will get an nominal average premium increase of less than 1 percent for policies that renew July 1 or Oct. 1, and then a decrease in 2016.

In West Michigan, small business clients of the Blues will see their premiums decline an average of 2.9 percent from the present plan year. Blue Care Network premiums in West Michigan will increase an average of 1.4 percent.

Projected decreases are larger for Jan. 1, 2016 renewals: 2.2 percent on average for Blue Cross Blue Shield clients statewide, and an average of 4.8 percent for Blue Care Network policies. West Michigan small businesses could see premiums decrease 1.35 percent for Blues policies and 3.95 percent for Blue Care Network in 2016.

Blue Cross Blue Shield previously planned to implement a 2 percent rate increase for policies renewing with the second or third quarter.

Actual premium adjustments will vary based on employers’ benefits packages and where they are located in the state. Averages also are calculated prior to employers making any changes in their benefits package when they renew policies.

The small group market affects employers with up to 50 full-time equivalents (FTEs). Blue Cross Blue Shield has 60,941 policies in the small group market covering 131,968 lives, according to the rate filing.

The reductions, albeit small, follow a period of moderating premium increases that have now led to decreases, which Blue Cross Blue Shield attributes to several factors. Among them is a lower-than-expected medical claims trend from when Blue Cross Blue Shield first filed 2015-16 rates with state regulators a year ago.

“We are always monitoring what’s happening with our customers. It’s good news when lower-than-expected costs allow you to pass along lower prices to customers, and that’s exactly what we’re doing now with these midstream rate changes,” said John Dunn, vice president for middle and small group business at Blue Cross Blue Shield.

Priority Health also cites “somewhat better than expected” claims experience for seeking approval to implement a “small rate decrease” for the last half of 2015, according to an actuarial memo filed with the rate request.

Priority Health then proposed to drop rates by a statewide average of 2.1 percent for 2016 for its small group HMO and point-of-service plans, according to its rate filing.

Rick Murdock, executive director of the Michigan Association of Health Plans, suspects the rate proposals from Blue Cross Blue Shield and Priority Health also reflect increased competitiveness that “may be playing a larger role in the individual and small market now than previously,” he wrote in an email to MiBiz.

Cost-control efforts have also helped to moderate medical claims trends at Blue Cross Blue Shield. Just this week, an article in the industry publication Health Affairs highlighted a study on Blue Cross Blue Shield’s patient-centered medical home initiative that’s credited with avoiding $50 million in costs in 2013.

The federal Affordable Care Act, by requiring all health insurers to accept anyone seeking coverage no matter their health status, also has eased adverse selection that Blue Cross Blue Shield says left it with a risk pool that was the costliest to insure. Prior to the ACA’s passage, Blue Cross Blue Shield previously was the only carrier in Michigan required by state law to issue policies to everyone.

“The ACA has definitely put some stability into how the rates are set,” said Nicole Winters-Smith, director of business segment performance for Blue Cross Blue Shield’s middle and small group sales. “There is no longer an opportunity for other carriers to rate based on previous conditions or to even exclude coverage based on pre-existing conditions. Everybody has the same factors to rate with. So that does level the playing field a bit.”