Giora Bernstein, left, original music director of the Colorado Music Festival, practices with guest artist Oswald Lehnert in 1977. ( Carnegie Branch Library for Local History / Daily Camera Collection )

The Colorado Music Festival's new music director, Montreal native Jean-Marie Zeitouni, likes to compare his role to that of a new chef who comes into an existing restaurant and analyze what's there.

He promises to look at the CMF's tradition but also to add what he calls his own spices.

"Overall, change is good, but tradition is important," CMF board member Jack Walker said in a recent interview as he reflected on the festival's new conductor and contrasted him with the former music directors of the renowned concert series held every summer in Boulder.

Zeitouni has big shoes to fill.

The festival's first music director was Viennese violinist and conductor Giora Bernstein. In 1977, while teaching music at the University of Colorado, Bernstein and Boulder resident Chris Brauchli formed the Colorado Chamber Orchestra and held concerts in the First Presbyterian Church.

In 1978, with Bernstein still at the helm, the orchestra was renamed the Colorado Music Festival and began holding concerts in the Chautauqua Auditorium. By 2000, Bernstein had attained his goal of bringing world-class music to Boulder.

Walker, who attended Bernstein's last two concert seasons, noted that the conductor played the classics but relatively few contemporary works.

The CMF's second music director was Michael Christie, who took the baton in 2001 as a 26-year-old. According to Walker, the audience found him bold of spirit and very refreshing. Less formal than Bernstein, Christie talked from the stage and gave intermission interviews.

In addition, Christie enjoyed combining the old with the new. One summer he played all of Beethoven's symphonies while also introducing contemporary music, even bringing in several new composers in person.

After 13 years, Christie announced he would be leaving to concentrate on opera in Minneapolis. A the time, he said he hoped his legacy would be one of "openness and joy."

Walker became part of the search committee for Christie's replacement. Walker and other committee members narrowed 160 applicants to a few finalists, then (with input from members of the orchestra and CMF audience) judged them on musical performance and the qualities they would bring to the festival.

"Zeitouni (who promises to bring in more vocalists) emerged as a charismatic person, and the musicians in particular enjoyed his conducting style," said Walker, who added that the decision was tough but unanimous.

In comparing Bernstein, Christie and Zeitouni, Walker emphasized that each respects tradition but also brings his own slant to his choice of music.

In a YouTube video Zeitouni recorded earlier this year, he said, "If I could pick a piece of music that makes me think of Boulder and of the festival, I would chose Beethoven's Symphony No. 6, the Pastoral, as a testimony to music and nature."

It just so happens that, on July 30-31, the festival orchestra will play Beethoven's 6th along with a choreographed display (on the large overhead screen) of John Fielder's iconic nature photographs. For more information, visit the CMF website, comusic.org.

Silvia Pettem and Carol Taylor write about history for the Daily Camera. Email Silvia at pettem@earthlink.net, Carol at boulderhistorylibrarian@gmail.com or write to the Daily Camera, 5450 Western Ave., Boulder 80301.