President Obama's chief of staff on the White House's critics, the male invincibility complex, and Healthcare.gov's actual load-time.

After years of debate and the embarrassing website fiasco this fall, the White House is now in full salesman mode trying to get people to sign up for Obamacare—especially young men who may not have insurance. When the White House came calling, we jumped at the chance to put our questions about the bill to Chief of Staff Denis McDonough. GQ contributor Reid Cherlin, who worked as a White House spokesman in 2009-10, caught up with McDonough about what went so wrong, and why guys should get covered.

GQ: First I’ll let you make your pitch. I know you guys are trying to get young men’s attention.

We’re underscoring to everybody the promise at the heart of the Affordable Care Act, which is, quality, affordable health care coverage available in a transparent marketplace for the first time ever. It’s March, and open enrollment closes on March 31, and we want to make sure that people take advantage of it now.

We’re also reaching out to young men, because you tend to think as a young man you’re indestructible. In my case I played sports my whole life. I got out of college and I didn’t bother to get health care coverage because I just figured I didn’t need it. But you know that if you blow out your knee on a basketball court or you get in a car accident, and you’re uninsured, it can bankrupt you.

Anything like that ever happen to you?

I taught in Belize for a year, and before I left, my parents were birddogging me to get health care coverage. So what I did was, I reenrolled in college, and then got coverage through my college. One of the guys I went with did not do that. We were playing soccer one night and he busted his leg. I remember thinking at the time, “Holy mackerel. One, I’m glad that I’m not any good at soccer—because I wasn’t playing in the soccer game right then, and two, I’m glad that I got my health care coverage.”

Pinterest Photo: Gettty

I spent a lot of time at the White House trying defend and explain the bill, and I still get a lot of people saying: “You haven’t explained it well enough. No one understands what the bill is.” On top of which, people just generally hate thinking about their health coverage. How do you overcome that?

As to whether we’ve explained the health care bill sufficiently: think about the fact that over three million young people have stayed on their parents’ health insurance, in a way that you don’t have to go reenroll in college, the way I did. And we’ve got 85 percent of the country who already have health care coverage, and that coverage is now much more comprehensive and much less discriminatory than it was during the whole course of history.

But this is Washington, and what Washington does is it doesn’t talk about the positive and good things. It talks about—or makes up, in this case—challenges. And we get that.

We’re not going to listen to the back and forth on this. The experience of what people get when they’re in the system, that’s the most powerful way for us to rebut all the myths and deceptions that are being peddled by folks out there.

Why is it that it’s been so hard in the most developed economy, in the most robust market in the world, why has it been so hard to buy health care until now? The reason it’s been so hard is because it was designed to be hard. And we’re turning that upside down, and over the course of time that’s going to work.

Lots of people are saying, ‘Well, they said if you liked your plan you could keep it, and that turned out not always to be true.’ And the website didn’t work. The merits of the policy aside, there’s a trust issue out there. How do you repair that?

Your readers are very discerning people. So we want them to just try for themselves. Go to Healthcare.gov and check it out. And I think what you’ll see is a transparency in the marketplace such that they’ve never seen before.

The other point is that we’re going to try to find [target enrollees] where they are. So that’s why we’re talking to you. That’s why we’re aggressively working social media. I’ve been talking to sports radio all week—

That must have been a hardship for you.

It’s a nice break, to be honest with you.

What we believe is that people want health care, and that’s true whether you’re a so-called invincible or whether you’re a 44-year-old dude like me. And when you get a clear shot at it, I think people take it.

Young consumers were raised in this marketplace on the internet where they can go shop and and price-compare on anything they buy. When they see this, I think they’ll like it.

And they’ve got your word that the website works as advertised?

The website is working very well. I’ll be the first to acknowledge that we had a rough October and November. You would have seen at that time, obviously, reports of eight-second response times; that’s laughable. Response times today are under half a second. Error rates of around 6 percent in October; error rates today are under half a percent. Over the course of the last couple of weeks we’re seeing more than half a million visitors per day, and those people able to shop, compare, and purchase.

So do you have my word for it? Yeah, you have my word for it.

In 2010, the midterms happened while health care was still up in the air, and those elections didn’t go well for you. The president called it a “shellacking.” Do you have a different prediction this time around?

We think that it’s time for the opponents to find something that they’re for. They’ve established pretty clearly what they’re against. It’s time for them to establish something that they’re for. And you’ll hear the president out there talking about he’s for. There’s no question that these are obviously going to be tough fights, but we’re ready to have them, and I feel really good about it.

When this was being passed, you were running the National Security Council. Most people know you, if they know you, from the Bin Laden photo from the Situation Room photo. Now that you’re White House chief of staff, do you cross-apply any of those skills?

We like to say down in the NSC that no plan survives first contact. And the strength is not in the plan, it’s in the planning. That’s something that General Eisenhower used to say. So I think we demonstrated on October 1 that no plan survives first contact. But we’ve built a team and we’re working this hard.

We think that as with anything else we used to do down the hall at the NSC, nothing’s easy. Especially things that are important and good are not easy.