Meridian plan extends Cotton family vision

A $111 million proposal to consolidate Detroit-based Meridian Health Plan's offices may result in the first major Central Business District tower since 2006 — but it's not the first time the Cotton family has backed high-profile commercial construction.



The Cottons — founder-CEO David Cotton of Meridian, wife Shery, and sons Jon, Sean and Michael — took part in St. John Providence Health System's capital campaign to support $163 million of construction at the hospital campus on Moross Road five years ago.



They also support several ongoing programs at St. John; funded development of a boardwalk at the Cotton Family Wetlands in 2012 at the Detroit Zoo, where Shery Cotton sits on the board of directors; and through St. John will help support a federally qualified health center at the Grace Community Church campus near St. John on Moross later this year.



Grosse Pointe Park also is a focus area of Cotton-funded redevelopment projects. In a few weeks, construction should wrap at the Cotton-owned Bona Fide Bakery Co. building in Grosse Pointe Park, and the outdoor Atwater in the Park biergarten will open nearby while remodeling is underway at the Grace United Church of Christ building the Cottons bought in January, said Mark Rieth of Detroit's Atwater Brewing Co. and Grosse Pointe Park Manager Dale Krajniak.



Health plan biz



The powerhouse behind the Cottons and their expanding prominence in real estate development and philanthropy is the rapid growth of Meridian's contracts for managed care health plans.



Meridian Health, founded in 1997 as Health Plan of Michigan Inc., is a physician-owned, physician-operated group of health plans and related companies based in Detroit. It has expanded to 10 lines of business over the past five years and employs 1,300 people in seven states.



About 620 of those Meridian employees in Detroit could consolidate into the new building by 2017 from various Meridian offices at One Kennedy Square, 777 Woodward Ave., and the Dan Gilbert-owned 1001 Woodward building.



The Detroit Brownfield Redevelopment Authority board is expected to consider a package of $27 million in tax incentives Wednesday for a new 16-story, 320,000-square-foot Schostak Bros. & Co. development on the Monroe Block near the Compuware Corp. building in Campus Martius.

The company expects to occupy at least 60 percent of the tower in four years once relocation is complete, then grow over time to fill it completely with 1,050 employees in Michigan, said Sean Cotton, secretary and general counsel for Meridian Health Plan and president of pharmacy benefits company Meridian Rx LLC.



"We are committed to having our corporate headquarters in Detroit. We want to invest in Detroit because we believe in Detroit," he said.



Over the past two years, the company has received contracts for Medicaid Advantage managed care plans in Illinois and Michigan, and Medicare prescription drug plans in Michigan, Indiana, Kentucky and Illinois. This month, it received a contract to participate in Michigan's health insurance exchange starting Jan. 1.



But Cotton said the company will also add 20,000 new customers under a new contract to take part in Illinois' Medicare-Medicaid Alignment Initiative, and Michigan will be only a partial driver of the Detroit growth.



"Most of our key strategy initiatives involve Michigan, but also it's going into these new lines of business in Medicare and Medicaid, and that really drives large staffing increases as well as increasing care and care coordination hires," he said. "That's where I think (adding) 500 people over the next four years will come in, and that's mostly driven by new lines of business."



Meridian also owns Medicaid HMOs in Illinois (with 22,000 members) and Iowa (35,000 members), and it just received its Medicaid license in New Hampshire (projected 30,000 enrollment in 2014). Sean Cotton said the company plans to expand into many other states in the next several years.



"We will bid on other states' (Medicaid programs) as they come up," he said.



Building relationships



Meridian launched MeridianRx in January 2011 to contract with other Medicaid health plans, employer-sponsored plans, and state and municipal governments on pharmacy benefits. MeridianRx has signed contracts with health plan clients that service Medicaid or Medicare patients in Washington, D.C., and New York, covering more than 40,000 beneficiaries.



In mid-2011, the Cotton family also launched new civic pursuits and economic development initiatives like the Grosse Pointe Housing Foundation, for students in local colleges and professional development programs, and the Detroit Crime Commission, a nonprofit formed to curb crime and neighborhood blight.



"Sean is a good networker, and he's plugged in very well to the next generation of leadership that's developing within this community, and that's been a great asset for us to have," said Susan Burns, president of the nonprofit St. John Providence Health System Foundations.



"But the family has been very supportive of a number of programs here, partly because of their relationship with one of our physicians who used to work with Dr. (David) Cotton."



The Cottons recently gave a second annual gift of $250,000 to the foundations, of which about $200,000 supports St. John Providence's free cord blood collections program. The program allows birth mothers at its hospitals to donate blood of the umbilical cord after delivery, since it has a rich concentration of stem cells, which are available to the birth family or the public with no process or storage fees.



The rest, Burns said, has gone to medical needs equipment and its Tactical Emergency Medical program support for the Wayne County Sheriff's Department SWAT Team. (Some St. John doctors also serve as tactical medical physicians for SWAT.) A portion this year will go to the Covenant Community Care primary care center at Grace church, near St. John.



That location is one of four in the city, plus a fifth in Royal Oak, maintained by Covenant as a federally-qualifying health center.



The hospital is collaborating with Covenant, a faith-based nonprofit organization independent from Grace Community, on construction of a permanent location while it operates out of a temporary modular location.



St. John also provides some specialist care and pharmacy prescription support at that location, said Covenant CEO Paul Propson. Burns said a portion of the Cotton family gift planned for later this year will help fund some of its services to Covenant on Moross.



Sean Cotton also serves on the St. John Foundation board of trustees, and David Cotton, formerly specialist-in-chief of obstetrics and gynecology at Detroit Medical Center before founding Meridian, is a longtime friend of Brian Mason, M.D. Mason is a maternal and fetal medicine specialist at St. John and a coordinator of the cord blood program.



Housing efforts



The family was also a past donor to the hospital's $163 million worth of construction projects, which received about $35 million in total philanthropic support through a capital campaign in 2007 and 2008.



A cooperative effort of more than 90 residential landlords in predominantly multifamily housing units of Grosse Pointe Park has enrolled nearly 150 students from Wayne State University, University of Detroit Mercy, the College for Creative Studies, and medical residents of St. John and Beaumont Health System.



Participating landlords within a predefined housing district each receive educational housing incentives from the foundation covering half a student's rent up to a cap of $350 per month.



Krajniak said demand has been steady for that program, but not enough so far to generate a growth or backlog of students waiting to participate this year. But Wayne State, the largest source of students in that housing program, also saw an enrollment decline of 3 to 4 percent for the academic year that began this month, according to President M. Roy Wilson.



The new tower



Sean Cotton and Jeff Schostak, vice president and director of corporate real estate at Schostak Bros., both said Meridian initiated discussions about the new proposed office tower.



Schostak said he hopes construction could begin by late 2014 or early 2015, depending on the pace of regulatory approval to obtain the property and tax incentives. The ground floor will be devoted to retail space, but Schostak said the company hasn't yet had any "specific discussions" to court tenants for it.



"We are realistic of who's out there and what retailers we could draw for the project. This will be a first-class project and will be able to attract some strong retailers and restaurants," he said.



About $35 million of the project cost is expected to come from public financing, between the incentives and possible new markets tax credits and other sources.



Cotton told Crain's last week it was not yet clear whether Meridian would eventually own the building or become its sole office tenant, or how the private portion of project financing will be structured. If it does lease, Meridian expects a term of 20 years.





Effects elsewhere



It's not clear how the new office tower may or may not change real estate arrangements for other Cotton-supported entities.



For example, Andrew Arena, who took over the Detroit Crime Commission in 2011 after retiring as special agent in charge of the FBI offices in Detroit, said he has seen information about the planned tower but has had no discussions with the Cottons about whether the commission will move there.



The commission is a tenant at the 1001 Woodward building and Sean Cotton said it's too early to know if the commission will move.



The nonprofit has grown from six to 10 employees pushing property owners to resolve urban blight, tracking local crime data and trends, and conducting criminal enterprise investigations.



The commission recently received a contribution from the nonprofit DTE Energy Foundation for its nuisance abatement work and is looking to coordinate with the Detroit Police Department on analytical research project involving gang violence, to help track and predict possible centers of activity in the city, Arena said.



Arena said the Cotton family has been very engaged; Sean Cotton was part of a team that helped organize the local nonprofit commission, and David Cotton is chairman of its board of directors, and Arena said he has become something of a personal adviser in that role.



"I deal a lot with Dr. Cotton as one of our board members; he's a great guy. To me, he's been a partner, he's much like a mentor figure for me in running a nonprofit business, He's been very embedded with Detroit, and it's been very helpful having him," Arena said.

Jon Cotton, meanwhile, who is Sean's twin brother and president of Meridian, was the family member who initiated discussions with Atwater Brewing about leasing the Atwater in the Park location in Grosse Pointe Park, said Rieth, owner of Atwater. Rieth has been working with David Cotton, as well, on the brewery project.



The company has no plans to move from its current Detroit production center; this summer, it purchased the building on Joseph Campau Avenue that it has leased since 2005, Rieth said. But construction is already underway to refit the Grace United church site to house Atwater in the Park, which could have a grand opening in March or April.



In the meantime, Rieth and city manager Krajniak said the company will open the outdoor biergarten on the property the first week in October. (A local version of Oktoberfest is planned Oct. 4.) In time, the company could brew up to 40 different beers at Atwater in the Park.



"I don't see the Park becoming another Royal Oak," Rieth said. "It's unique in many ways, and much more community-focused, but I still see it being a very vibrant downtown community, and I think the Cottons are very cognizant of all that."



Chad Halcom: (313) 446-6796, chalcom@crain.com. Twitter: @chadhalcom

Staff writer Jay Greene contributed to this report.

Related Links