1 Took over almost half of Mexico Flickr:leiris202

In 1846, shortly after the annexation of Texas, President James Polk ordered U.S. troops into disputed lands, precipitating a war against Mexico . The war ended with the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 1848. This is what Chicano activists mean when they say "the border crossed them." Today, 33.5 million people of Mexican origin live in the United States.

2 Colonized Puerto Rico in 1898 A member of the U.S. Army Honor Guard salutes the Puerto Rican and U.S. flags.

The United States invaded Puerto Rico in 1898 during the Spanish American War and has retained control of the island ever since. More people of Puerto Rican descent currently live in the United States than on the island.

3 Took over Cuba, put a naval base there, and only left when the new government allowed them the right to intervene at will Wikimedia: Col. Theodore Roosevelt stands triumphant on San Juan Hill, Cuba.

And yet somehow, U.S. politicians viewed themselves as liberators. Later U.S. administrations would use the naval base to jail suspected terrorists and hold them indefinitely without trial, also submitting them to torture tactics, according to Human Rights Watch.

4 Invaded and occupied Cuba two more times WikiMedia: The leaders of the 1933 Sergeants revolution: Ramón Grau, Sergio Carbó and Sgt. Fulgencio Batista.

Because once wasn't good enough, the United States invaded and occupied Cuba again in 1906 and once more in 1912. It retained the legal authority to intervene in Cuba's affairs until the 1933 Sergeant's Revolt overthrew U.S.-backed dictator Gerardo Machado.

5 Invaded Nicaragua and occupied the country for two decades WikiMedia: Fort on Coyotepe hill, near Masaya, Nicaragua, during the Nicaraguan Civil War and U.S. occupation, circa 1912.

The United States invaded Nicaragua in 1912 and occupied the country until 1933. Shortly after the U.S. forces left, Anastasio Somoza took over, launching a decades-long dynastic dictatorship with U.S. support.

6 Invaded Haiti and occupied the country for nearly 20 years PA

Woodrow Wilson ordered the Marines to invade and occupy Haiti in 1915 after the assassination of the Haitian president. The troops didn't leave until 1934.

7 Invaded the Dominican Republic in 1916 WikiMedia: U.S. Marines in action in the Dominican Republic, c. 1916-1920.

Mainly to collect debts, the United States invaded the Dominican Republic in 1916. The occupation lasted eight years.

8 Overthrew Guatemala's elected government in 1954 Getty Images: 28th June 1954, Colonel Carlos Castillo Armas, right.

At the behest of United Fruit Company, a U.S. corporation with extensive holdings in Central America, the CIA helped engineer the overthrow of the Guatemalan government in 1954, ushering in decades of civil war that resulted in the loss of hundreds of thousands of lives

9 Organized the Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 Alamy

The CIA organized and financed a group of anti-Fidel Castro exiles in an ill-fated attempt to overthrow the revolutionary government. The botched invasion ended in disaster and Castro declared himself a "Marxist-Lenninist" eight months later.

10 Supported the overthrow of a democratically elected government in Brazil WikiMedia: U.S. Army officer Charles Murray walks with Pres. John F. Kennedy, left, and Brazilian Pres. João Goulart on April 3, 1962.

11 Helped overthrow Chile's elected government in 1973 Alamy: Former President of Chile Salvador Allende.

General Augusto Pinochet, with the support of the Nixon administration , overthrew the democratically elected government of Salvador Allende, ushering in decades of violent dictatorship.

12 Backed a military dictatorship in Argentina that killed 30,000 people Former head of Argentina's military dictatorship Jorge Rafael Videla.

When the military overthrew the Argentine government and installed a dictatorship in 1976, the Nixon administration responded by offering its wholehearted support and financial assistance. The dictatorship lasted until 1983.

13 Paid a failed rebel army to overthrow the Nicaraguan government Alamy

When the leftwing Sandinista government rose to power in Nicaragua, it did not please Washington. In 1979, the United States began years of financing the "Contras," a rightwing group responsible for committee atrocities and smuggling drugs into the United States with the Reagan administration's knowledge

14 Invaded Haiti Again In 1994 A U.S. Army soldier monitors the surroundings of the National Palace, on Oct. 15, 1994, in Port-au-Prince, Haiti.

One invasion wasn't good enough. The U.S. military returned in 1994

15 Fomented a rebellion in Panama in order to build a canal WikiMedia: Miraflores Locks, Panama Canal.

The Theodore Roosevelt administration helped a group of Panamanian nationalists break away from Colombia, after that country's Senate rejected the terms of a deal to allow the U.S. to use its territory there to build a canal . After Panama broke away, the new country ceded permanent control of the canal zone to the U.S. government, which finally returned it in 1999, after years of protests.

16 Backed the the Salvadoran military as it committed atrocities in the 1980s AP: Former Salvadoran military officials.

17 Refuses to control the flow of weapons into Mexico Getty Images

Mexican authorities seized almost 70,000 weapons of U.S. origin from 2007 to 2011 . In 2004, the U.S. Congress declined to renew a 10-year ban on the sale of assault weapons. They quickly became the guns of choice for Mexican drug cartels.

18 Helped create today's drug cartels AP

The U.S. funded the Guatemalan military during the 1960s and 1970s anti-insurgency war, despite awareness of widespread human rights violations. Among the recipients of U.S. military funding and training were the Kaibiles, a special force unit responsible for several massacres. Former Kaibiles have joined the ranks of the Zetas drug cartel

19 Pushes trade policies that lead to unemployment Getty Images: Demonstrators carry an oversized replica of a corn cob to protest the lowering of tariffs due to NAFTA.