The 25th annual Cherry Creek Arts Festival kicked off Friday, bringing out thousands of people on a glorious summer day.

The Denver juried event, which runs through Sunday, is expected to draw 350,000 visitors to see and buy artwork, enjoy live music and feast on street food.

Of the 2,000 or so artists who applied, only 260 were chosen to display their creations.

But Erin Curry, 28, a Dallas-based artist, received an automatic invitation this year after winning the People’s Choice Award at last year’s festival — quite a feat considering she started drawing only three years ago.

“I started drawing as catharsis. And go figure, I could draw,” she said. Her drawings range from Star Wars spaceships to accurately rendered skeletal structures of animals. She was doing quick business Friday morning.

“God, it beats bartending,” she said.

“It’s like a museum to me,” said Nancy Darnell, 59, a visitor from Lakewood who has missed only one of the 25 festivals. Having just purchased a hat from Frisco artist Diane Harty, Darnell sat on a bench — map and pen in hand — and planned her next move. “Some aren’t even here for the art. They just like the camaraderie of other people.”

Artists mingled with festivalgoers in the shade of the white tents, a rare and welcome opportunity for many who typically labor in solitude.

“The creators are right here for people to go and talk to and meet with,” said Tara Brickell, interim executive director of the festival. “I think this is a grand tradition of Denver.”

Part of the festival’s mission is to provide educational outreach in Colorado, she said, and a piece of the effort was on display at the Janus Student Art Buying Showcase. Janus, one of the event’s sponsors, provided a number of student groups with $500 each to purchase pieces of art to be displayed in their schools. The groups then talked about the pieces they chose.

Hillary Holcomb and Halie Hall, both 16, were part of the art-buying team for Denver School of the Arts. The team purchased four pieces with their budget — and came away with new ideas of their own.

“Being an artist, you get some inspiration” at the festival, Holcomb said. She said she has been coming to the festival “since I was walking — forever.”

“It’s just a fun thing to do,” said John Pederson, 67, of Denver, who has been coming to the festival for 16 years. “Now it’s a fun thing to do with the grandkids.

“They like coming out here and just gawking at stuff.”

Matthew Nussbaum: 303-954-1666, mnussbaum@denverpost.com or twitter.com/MatthewNussbaum