Property owner retrieves woman, firefighters save cat during Sunday afternoon fire

Firefighter Jim Coulson gives oxygen to a cat that was discovered hiding in an apartment that was actively burning Sunday. (Shane Roberts / Cañon City Area Fire Protection District)

Firefighters responded to a structure fire on North Illinois Avenue on Sunday.

The Cañon City Area Fire Protection District received the report of a structure fire, and possibly a female resident trapped inside, at about 1:15 p.m. Property owner Charlie Lohnes said when he arrived home Sunday, he saw flames coming from the upstairs apartment that sits on his private property. The upstairs tenant was not home at the time, Lohnes said, but he did go inside the downstairs apartment to retrieve the female tenant who still was inside. He attempted to extinguish the fire with a garden hose, but winds fanned the flames.

While on scene, firefighters learned that pets possibly still were inside the upstairs apartment. Lt. Shane Roberts said the firefighters went back into the apartment during firefighting operations and found a cat hiding under a futon mattress. Roberts and firefighter Jim Coulson retrieved the cat, whom Roberts initially had presumed was dead, and Coulson proceeded to give it oxygen, using a special oxygen set designed for pets that previously was donated to the department by the Southern Colorado Kennel Club. The tenants' other cat was found outside, unharmed, and two dogs were not home at the time.

"We understand pets are part of families," Roberts said.

Advertisement

Roberts said the upstairs apartment sustained significant fire damage, and the downstairs apartment sustained smoke damage. The residents of the upstairs apartment are staying in a hotel for a few days, thanks to the Cañon City Firefighter Local 1002 Burnout Fund. The fund is set up through the firefighter's employee association and helps with temporary shelter, a change of clothes and food.

The cause of the fire remains under investigation.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com