On Thursday, a federal jury granted $4.2 million in fracking damages given to PA families, who said the fracking operation by Cabot Oil & Gas contaminated their ground water.

Scot Ely and Monica Marta-Ely of Dimock, PA were awarded $1.3 million each by six jurors in a Scranton federal court. Each of their three children were awarded $50,000.

The second family, Ray and Victoria Hubert, also from Dimock, received $720, 000 each. Their daughter was awarded $50,000.

“This has been an exhausting 6-1/2 years,” said Scott Ely after the verdict. Ely said Cabot fought hard and “boxed them in,” limiting the evidence his pro bono attorney, Leslie Lewis could introduce and restricted what Ely could say in testimony.

“They are an arrogant company that bullies their way to what they want. If they had just done the right thing, it would have been so much easier for them,” said Ely.

George Stark, Cabot spokesman, said the company was surprised by the verdict’s outcome, asserting that there was not evidence of contamination linking the Ely and Hubert family wells to their fracking operation.

Stark said, “Cabot will be filing motions with the court to set the verdict aside based on the lack of evidence as well as conduct of plaintiff’s counsel calculated to deprive Cabot of a fair trial.”

Over 40 families previous the Elys and Huberts had additionally sued Cabot. The primary allegation was that their home water was contaminated with methane gas. Fracking is a process of injecting a combination of water, sand and various chemicals to break apart of “fracture” shale deposits to release the natural gas they contain. But a soon discovered byproduct of the fracking process is that unwanted chemicals deep in the ground, such as methane, uranium and vanadium, often reach the surface and contaminate surrounding groundwater.

“We haven’t had clean water since he was in kindergarten,” said Monica Marta-Ely, referencing her now 13-year-old son, Jared.

Lewis, the family’s lawyer, said Cabot displayed “reckless disregard” for the safety of families.

Dimock, PA became a notable location for the fracking controversy from its appearance in the 2010 documentary “Gasland” by Josh Fox. The film features visuals such as local residents being able to ignite their tap water on fire due the extremely high amount of methane in their water supply.

Cabot lawyer Stephen Dillard argued that methane occurs naturally and was not caused by the company’s drilling operation. The ground water, while aesthetically displeasing, was nonetheless safe to drink, he contented.

Source: Pennsylvania families win $4.2 million damages in fracking lawsuit

Photo credit:www.nofrackingway.us

Join the Discussion