LOS ANGELES, Nov. 5, 2013 /PRNewswire/ -- Care Harbor — a Los Angeles-based nonprofit organization that helps uninsured and underserved populations by organizing large-scale free urban health clinics — wrapped up its four-day clinic at the Los Angeles Memorial Sports Arena thanks to 2,950 medical and general volunteers who donated their time to provide more than 5,700 medical, dental and vision services to approximately 3,000 patients.

(Photo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20131105/CG11444)

Care Harbor by the Numbers

Patients Services Breakdown Affordable Care Act Education/Enrollment (Medi-Cal, CalFresh, Covered CA) • 1,258 Hispanics • Medical: 2,730 • Patient consultations: 1,300 • 1,104 African Americans • Dental: 1,760 • Patients enrolled in programs: Approximately 300 • 326 Caucasians • Vision: 1,293

• 87 Asian/Pacific Islander



• 17 American Indians



• 203 Unidentified





This year, Care Harbor expanded its electronic health record system, hosted by zPaper, to capture patient data in real time through an iPhone app. The app not only assures accurate, HIPAA-compliant patient data, it avoids expensive duplication of tests at follow-up facilities and makes detailed reporting and analysis of clinic results possible.

"This is, above all, a community event," said Don Manelli, Care Harbor president. "We are deeply grateful to Supervisor Mark Ridley-Thomas for his extraordinary support, and to all of those who came together to make this free clinic possible." Care Harbor partners and supporters include: L.A. Care Health Plan; the Tzu Chi Medical Foundation; Dignity Health; S. Mark Taper Foundation; UCLA Health Systems and more than 40 other community organizations that donated time, equipment and funding to make the event possible.

About Care Harbor

Care Harbor brings help and hope to the uninsured and underserved in America's urban centers. The organization works with local community resources and volunteers to produce free clinics providing comprehensive medical, dental, and vision care to individuals and families who are without access to the healthcare they need. There is no cost to the patient for the services provided. Clinics are staffed by professional and general volunteers, and supported by donations – both financial and in-kind – from local and national supporters. Don Manelli, President of Care Harbor, recently received the NBC4 Life Connected Award, which celebrates acts of community goodwill in Southern California. Manelli was also an Unsung Heroes of Los Angeles honoree and one of the California Endowment's Health Happens Heroes. To learn more about CareHarbor and this year's clinic, please visit CareHarbor.org, like us on Facebook at Facebook.com/CareHarbor or follow us on Twitter @CareHarbor.

Media Contact:

Liz Narrillos Roux| 323.202.1074

liz.narrillosroux@edelman.com

SOURCE Care Harbor

Related Links

http://careharbor.org