Rep. Bill Shuster for a second time Tuesday held off challenger Art Halvorson and won a Republican nomination for the 9th Congressional District seat. Halvorson had also tried unsuccessfully to unseat Shuster in the 2014 primary election.

Unofficial returns from The Associated Press show that across the sprawling, 12-county district, voters Tuesday backed Shuster with 48,686 votes compared to 47,677 for Halvorson, a retired Coast Guard captain from Blair County who is now a commercial real-estate developer.

“I am honored to represent a region that I have called home my entire life, and I thank the people of the 9th District for electing me to represent the Republican Party in the election this November,” Shuster said in a statement released early this morning. “My campaign focused on a positive message of conservative solutions that cut spending and put up a roadblock to President Obama’s disastrous agenda, and I won’t stop fighting for these values.

“As I have since my first day in office, I’ll continue representing our region with conservative leadership, and I look forward to our party coming together to stop Hillary Clinton and get a conservative back in the White House,” Shuster said.

But Halvorson told the Gazette just after midnight that he’s not conceding defeat, and that being short about 1,000 votes could change.

“We don’t know how many absentee ballots are out, and some provisional ballots, because some locations ran out of ballots and had to use paper ballots that didn’t get counted electronically,” Halvorson said. “So, there’s still ballots out there. … Clearly, the difference is within the margin of outstanding ballots. I think we need to wait before we call this. … I’m not conceding one vote. When all the votes are counted, we’ll see what the end result is. We’re not done yet.”

Halvorson said he was very pleased with the support he received from 9th District voters.

“We won Franklin, Fulton, Bedford, Blair and Indiana counties,” he said.

Halvorson had strong support from Indiana County voters Tuesday. He received 7,425 votes (63.57 percent) to Shuster’s 4,221 votes (36.14 percent).

“People are fed up with big government and I’m for limited government,” Halvorson said. “I’m running against a big government guy with unlimited funding who buys his elections. It shows the money still has an out-sized influence.”

Halvorson said Shuster had at least a 10-to-1 spending advantage over his own campaign.

But, Halvorson continued, his vote total “shows you can go toe-to-toe with a big government guy if you work hard enough and you have enough volunteers, as we did, extraordinary volunteers, particularly in Indiana.”

Halvorson said it may take two to three days to count the outstanding ballots, so by Friday morning the results of all the voting should be known.

“I’m not giving up,” he said. “I still think we’re in it. I think the votes are out there. We just need to find them.”

And Halvorson said he and his supporters will continue trying to defeat Shuster.

“We think he’s bad for America,” Halvorson said. “He’s absolutely bad for the 9th District. The results are all around us. Look at the boarded-up main streets. … The coal industry — decimated. The gas industry — decimated. Jobs leaving. Population in decline. Agriculture just tied up in knots by big government. People are fed up with that. But unfortunately, with a lot of money you can deceive people, and he’s been able to do that. And we’re going to be about exposing it.”

Halvorson said earlier in the campaign that he was running again in part to “break the pattern of entrenched career politicians.” With a campaign slogan of “Rescue America,” Halvorson pledged to try to change the Republican leadership, limit the deficit, pay off the national debt and grow the economy by reducing what he said is a mountain of oppressive governmental regulations that strangle small businesses and farms.

Shuster, chairman of the House Transportation Committee, has represented the 9th District since 2001. His reelection campaign material described him as a “conservative champion” who has fought for fiscal responsibility, limited federal government, pro-life and pro-Second Amendment values, immigration reform to better protect America from “failed state” terrorists and to defeat Obamacare.

Some news accounts earlier this spring accused Shuster of a “coziness” with the airline industry that included spending time in Miami with the leader of the airline industry group Airlines for America and dating one of the group’s female lobbyists, Shelley Rubino.

In response to the allegations, Shuster said he had been completely open about his personal relationship with the woman and had taken steps to ensure that she doesn’t lobby his office or the House Transportation Committee.

There were no Democrat candidates seeking a nomination for the 9th District listed on Tuesday’s ballots. However, Adam Sedlock, of Fayette County, ran as a write-in candidate with the goal of winning a Democrat nomination and getting on the ballot in the general election. He needed 1,000 write-in votes to do so. A total of 1,346 write-in votes were cast by Democratic voters in the 9th District. Details of the write-in vote will not be available until verified by elections officials.The 9th District includes all of Bedford, Blair, Fayette, Franklin, Fulton and Indiana counties and parts of Cambria, Greene, Huntingdon, Somerset, Washington and Westmoreland counties.