When the Singer Sewing Machine Co. announced plans to build the world's first skyscraper in February 1906, the United States was in the final stages of an economic expansion that was about to go bust in the financial panic of 1907.

Two decades later, the industrialist Walter P. Chrysler sought to do the Singer scraper 400 feet better. But by the time the Chrysler Building opened its posh doors at 405 Lexington Ave. in New York City, the recession that would turn into the Great Depression already had begun.

New York's Empire State Building hit the drawing boards at the absolute peak of the 1920s speculative frenzy. Empire State opened in 1931 and quickly earned the dubious moniker, the Empty State Building.

Plans for New York's Twin Towers were announced in the 1960s at the height of the postwar economic boom, though the World Trade Center (yes, that one) didn't open its doors until the American economy was on the precipice of a severe recession in April 1973.

Similar late-cycle projects have occurred overseas, most notably the Petronas Twin Towers in Kuala Lumpur, which debuted during the Asian financial crisis in 1998. At 1,483 feet, Petronas is 32 feet taller than the world's previous tallest building, the Willis (formerly Sears) Tower in Chicago, which opened during the depths of the 1973-'75 recession.

Not again...

So it is with a degree of trepidation that investors might note this summer's opening of the Shanghai Tower, a 121-story reflection of China's economic vitality — or vanity. Though Shanghai Tower will be only the world's second-tallest building, it nonetheless resides at the epicenter of arguably the world's most incendiary mix of financial excesses.

Over the last year, the Shanghai Composite Index has climbed 70%, and that's after a nasty correction last month that dropped the Chinese equity benchmark by 13% in a single week. Valuations are triple and quadruple those in the United States, inflated by a mania for tech stocks among young and inexperienced investors.

Those lofty valuations, in the context of a stubborn growth slowdown, reflect a worrisome decoupling between the real Chinese economy and its financial markets.

Like the runaway bull market in U.S. stocks during the 1920s, China's latest equity binge is fueled by margin debt. Though the Chinese government recently moved to limit credit extended through traditional intermediaries like brokerages, so-called shadow banks operate in a Wild West environment in which the rules are few and the potential for losses vast.

Until last year, Chinese shadow banks — mostly wealth management firms and trusts — were more interested in financing that country's red-hot real estate market. But with authorities focused on finessing a property bubble, money began flowing into Chinese stocks, which now look ominously like their American counterparts in the late 1920s.

The question investors need answered is whether a virulent correction in mainland Chinese stocks would send shock waves through global markets as well. Given China's position as the world's second-largest economy, deep losses by individual investors there would undermine consumer spending and restrain a needed shift toward equity financing among the country's overleveraged private sector.

On a reassuring note, a research paper by Rutgers University economics professors Jason Barr, Bruce Mizrach and Kusum Mundra casts doubt on skyscraper height as a reliable "bubble indicator," citing the widely varying lag times between when the 311 projects they reviewed in the U.S., Canada, China and Hong Kong were announced and when an economic downturn began.

Malaysia's Petronas, for example, was initially planned six years before Asia's currency crisis.

Yet some lag times were uncomfortably tight at significant turning points, such as in the case of Singer (15 months), Chrysler (10 months) and Empire State (0 months). And that makes sense: the same excess optimism that emerges late in a business cycle can reasonably be expected to feed architectural overreach and manifest itself in bloated financial asset prices as well.

While it may be true that the biggest dangers are the ones you don't see coming, in the case of Shanghai's futuristic 2,073-foot Shanghai Tower, you'd have to try hard to miss it.

Tom Saler is an author and freelance financial journalist in Madison. He can be reached at www.tomsaler.com.