WASHINGTON, August 27, 2014 – There are some things in life you can simply count on. If you are a Chicago Cubs fan, forget about the World Series, your team isn’t even going to break .500. If you are a Tennessee Titans fan, you can count on the team blowing a 4th quarter lead.

And if you are a Republican, you can count on Mitch McConnell keeping his job.

McConnell will be reelected to the Senate. The real problem is he is going to keep his job as the Minority Leader.

Perhaps it is time to change the name of the Republican Party to the Tofu Party. After all, tofu is bland and shapeless, which is a pretty good description of the modern Republican Party.

Virginia is a great example of what is wrong with the GOP. When Ed Gillespie announced he was running for the Senate seat currently held by Mark Warner, the beltway got excited. Some of the experts even put Virginia in play.

Before Gillespie entered the race, the experts pretty much said Warner was a shoo-in for reelection.

Gillespie did a good job with the GOP base, uniting the establishment at the Tea Party. But his campaign has been taken over by the consultants and it has gone totally tofu.

Put Virginia back in the Democrat column.

Gillespie’s first commercial is a totally content free commercial. The theme is, “we can do better.” The last guy who tried that theme was a guy named John Kerry and we all remember when he was sworn in as President, right?

The DC brain trust for the Republican Party is trying to beat the drum for another Mitt Romney run for President.

Seriously?

Mitt Romney has the distinction of losing to the two worst candidates in the history of bad political candidates. John McCain beat him in 2008 and Barack Obama beat him in 2012.

Romney lost the race that any Republican whose brain cells are not on the endangered species list should have won.

What did Mitt Romney stand for in 2012?

“We can do better.”

Oh, that’s right.

Romney lost the unloseable race because he stood for nothing. He would not or could not stand up against Obamacare. He would not or could not stand up against Obama’s policies. His campaign came down to tofu and a better haircut.

Two years later, the GOP still has not learned. In Mississippi, the GOP was willing to do anything it took to win, including trashing the conservative base. The Republican establishment ran a campaign of tofu laced with cyanide.

They infuriated the Republican base and used Democrats to win the nomination. How bright is that?

But even with that win, the GOP still is not offering any ideas.

America is hungry for ideas and principles. They are hungry for leaders who stand for something. Whether you agree with Obama or not at least he and the left stand for something. They stand for all the wrong things and stand for tearing America down, but at least they stand for something.

What does the GOP stand for?

Not losing their power?

That is about it.

They are the party of tofu. They are the content free party.

In an era when America craves leadership, the GOP is AWOL.

The Republicans Party needs to remember its history. Before the Republican Party there was the Whig Party. They did not listen to America and now all that is left of the Whig Party is a museum exhibit.

The Republican Party can start standing for something or it can find itself a museum exhibit, right next to the Whigs.