Here are some of the worst offending questions:

What's your greatest weakness?

Questions about a person's greatest strength or weakness don't do much more than tell you how well a person has been trained to answer interview questions, researchers say. Ditto for the old nugget, "Where do you see yourself in five years?"

Rivera's pet peeve: "Tell me about a time that you demonstrated leadership."

"It tests someone's familiarity with the type of stories you're supposed to tell an employer," she said.

Related: Want a Job? Get Ready for the Phone Interview

How many garbage cans are there in New York City?

Jobseekers have been inundated in recent years with oddball logic questionslike, "How many red cars are there in Cleveland?" or "If you were a pizza deliveryman, how would you benefit from scissors?"

These questions are meant to show how a person thinks, but the answers are way too subjective to give you a good idea of how you can do a particular job, Claman said. They also work against people who just don't see the logic in being asked a question that's totally unrelated to their ability to do a job.

"It won't pick the person who says, 'What the hell is this person asking this stupid question for?'" she said.

"What three things would you bring to a desert island?"

These related oddball questions revolve around theoretical personal choices, such as "What celebrity would you have dinner with?" and "If you were 80 years old, what would you tell your children?"

Experts say that can tell you a lot about what a person is like, and whether you have similar tastes in music or survival gear. But it's not going to give you a good idea of whether the person will show up on time or can write great lines of code.

Related: 7 Signs Your Job Interview Is Going Well

As the economy slowly improves, researchers say, there's another danger to asking these kinds of cutesy questions instead of practical ones: You'll alienate your best candidates.

That's why Donald Truxillo, a professor of industrial and organizational psychology at Portland State University, dislikes questions like, "How many uses could you have for a spoon?"

"Unless someone has come up with a really good scoring key for that, all it does is make the interviewer feel clever," he said.

Are you planning to have children?

One of the biggest mistakes an interviewer can make is to ask personal questions that are at best inappropriate and at work legally questionable. Pro tip: Don't ask candidates if they are married, have kids or are pregnant, even in casual conversation.

What's your SAT score?

There's been a mini fad lately of asking people who are long out of college to provide such data as SAT scores or college grade point averages.

Related: Best Ways to Handle the Worst Job Interview Questions

Experts say there are two problems with this line of questioning: These tests and measures aren't necessarily predictive of your ability to succeed in the working world, and they can be biased toward people from certain socioeconomic backgrounds.

Claman suspects people are asking these questions because they want a piece of hard data to evaluate candidates on. The problem is that it's not a very useful piece of hard data, she said.

Hypothethically speaking …

Hypothetically speaking, it sounds like a good idea to ask candidates what they would do if they were given a particular task at your company.

In reality, Daum said, it's much more useful to have the job candidate tell you about something they actually did, and to keep drilling down on real examples that show how they work in real-life settings.

You can even have the person show their skills by actually writing a few lines of code or doing another hands-on project.

"A lot of people are good at giving a hypothetical example, but they're not so good at actually doing it on the job," Daum said.

This story originally appeared at CNBC.com. Read more at CNBC:

Think twice about faking your resume

Economy's sticky problem: Older and jobless

Stay-at-home dads struggle to shake Mr. Mom image