Lakewood man wounded during drive-by shooting

A Lakewood man was wounded early Saturday in a drive-by shooting at an apartment building, police said.

The shooting happened at about 2 a.m. on the 2600 block of S. Sheridan Boulevard, a police news release said. An apartment home was shot several times.

A man inside an apartment was wounded and taken to a hospital with non-life-threatening injuries. Another occupant of the apartment was unhurt, the release said.

Lakewood police are investigating the shooting to determine if it was a random attack or if the victims were targeted, the release said. Police released a photo taken from a surveillance camera that showed a white, four-door sedan they said was of interest in the investigation.

Anyone with information is asked to call Lakewood police at 303-987-7111.

Deputy on leave. A Denver sheriff’s deputy is on leave pending the outcome of an Adams County case, officials said.

Simon Crittle, spokesman for the Denver Sheriff Department, confirmed that Deputy Phillip Mangeri was placed on leave, but he did not confirm the charges related to the Adams County Sheriff’s Office case.

A spokesman for the Adams County Sheriff’s Office was not immediately available for comment.

CDOT delays express lane test•IDAHO SPRINGS — The opening of the Interstate 70 Mountain Express Lane, scheduled to make its Saturday debut, was postponed at least a day because of weather, the Colorado Department of Transportation said.

The department said the lane might be opened Sunday if weather permits.

The express lane from Empire to Idaho Springs is designed to ease congestion on the highway.

Man in critical condition after being shot by deputy. A 38-year-old suspect wanted on warrants was in critical condition after being shot by a Jefferson County sheriff’s deputy and bitten by a police dog late Friday night, officials said.

The shooting happened at 9880 W. Belleview Ave. in Littleton at 11:30 p.m., according to a news release by the Jefferson County Sheriff’s Office.

The wounded man, identified as Michael Manaois, was taken to Swedish Medical Center and was in critical condition Saturday after overnight surgery, the sheriff’s office said. He was expected to survive. No deputies were injured. Denver Post staff and wire reports