Q&A with Wayne Pettigrew

Insurance companies scramble to provide Obamacare coverage

Q: What does the president's recent announcement that he wants health insurance companies to continue to be able to offer canceled insurance policies for the next year mean?

A: Largely nothing. Several insurance carriers stated Friday that they are likely unable to rescind the discontinuation of policies already not pre-filed with state insurance departments for sale in 2014. It takes several months to get plans approved at the state level and costs the carriers filing and legal fees that they would not be able to recoup if such policies are only expected to be offered for a year or less.

Q: Is there a way to speed up this plan approval process?

A: It would be difficult. Many carriers just recently got approval for their new plans that are being offered with effective dates that start in January. These plans are normally approved for sale months before now, but were delayed due to the backlog created by federal guidelines for plans being issued much later than anticipated. This left carriers scrambling to get plans to state regulators that would be in compliance.

Q: Is this going to present a coverage problem for many companies and individuals?

A: It may for some companies and individuals whose plans did not include all of the coverages required under the Affordable Care Act. But many carriers offered to renew policies early with a Dec. 1 renewal effective date for those individuals and groups that wanted to delay going under the new required plan provisions. Many other plans are not required to adhere to the new provisions until their first renewal that occurs after Jan 1.

Q: When must employers and individuals have compliant coverage in place?

A: Until Congress amends the law, the current federal statue still states that the date is Jan. 1. On July 2, President Obama by executive order delayed the employer mandate until Jan. 1, 2015, but some have questioned his authority to change statutory law via an executive order. Individuals are required to have coverage under the individual mandate by Jan. 1, but do not face a tax penalty as long as they have coverage for nine months of the taxable year. So individuals who obtain coverage before April 1 and maintain such coverage for the balance of the year shouldn't face any penalty for the individual mandate.

PAULA BURKES, BUSINESS WRITER