Sen. Dean Heller, R-NV, was back in Reno Friday, visiting the Homeless Veterans "Stand Down" event, where various organizations provide help for homeless vets in the form of clothes, towels, food and counseling services.

Heller went around and greeted the veterans there. He is a member of the Senate Committee on Veterans' Affairs and seems to take a genuine interest in vets and their issues.

One of the disabled veterans Heller spoke with said he had come to Reno from Texas and praised the care of the VA Sierra Nevada Health Care System (Reno's VA hospital).

Heller thanked the man and told him what a help the Reno VA hospital has been for his father, "Blackjack" Heller. Heller's pop owned an auto shop when Sen. Heller was growing up and was also a local stock-car racing legend.

Heller told a gathering of media about his dad, who turns 80 this month.

"I would be the first to acknowledge that if it wasn't for this VA hospital here in Washoe County, he probably would not be here with us today," Heller said. "This is a man whose had stomach surgery, heart surgery, back surgery, go down the list, intestinal surgery. I mean the guy has had surgery on everything expect for his brain, I think. But he does great, He is doing very well."

Heller was asked about the vote in the House of Representatives Friday that OKed a stopgap spending bill to fund the federal government through mid-December but also contained language to dismantle the Affordable Care Act, or "Obamacare."

The vote was along party lines, mostly.

"If I would have been in the House, I would have voted for the measure," said Heller, a member of the House before he was appointed to the Senate in 2010 by Gov. Sandoval. (He won election in 2012).

If a similar vote is taken in the Senate, Heller would for in favor of defunding Obamacare.

"If I had a vote before me today to defund Obamacare, I would — again and again."

Heller noted he was for ending any "congressional exemptions" of the Affordable Care Act. He also wants no exemptions of the new health care law in the judicial and executive branches of government — and that includes President Obama, Vice President Biden and the Supreme Court Justices.

When asked if he and his staff will opt out of the health care act, Heller said: "I will live by the law. Whatever the law is, is what I will live by."

Rep. Steven Horsford, D-Las Vegas, voted against the measure. Rep. Mark Amodei, R-Carson City, voted for the measure. Together, the two represent all of Northern Nevada in the House. Here are their statements

Amodei (Reno's rep): “Today the House did its job. It passed a bill to control spending, prevent a government shutdown, and protect Americans from the higher premiums, limited choices, and job-destruction caused by the ACA,” said Amodei. “It is now the Senate’s turn to act. The coming 10 days will give the American people a clear view on who stands with the middle class, small business owners, and seniors, among others, in opposition to the implementation of the ACA and ongoing fiscal practices that undermine the economy.”

Horsford (Yerington's and Ely's rep): Horsford noted that the House Republican's continuing resolution continues deep sequester cuts and defunds critical health programs. “Not only does this irresponsible continuing resolution lock in deep and irresponsible sequester cuts, it also will raise Nevadans’ health costs and deny them the health coverage they need.

“It’s time for all parties to come together to find a way to stop sequester cuts and find a responsible compromise that funds our vital social programs," Horsford said. "Nevadans cannot afford to be caught in the political games of the Tea Party. We cannot afford to continue lurching from fiscal crisis to fiscal crisis. We should work to reduce our deficits and debt in a fair and responsible way.”