Topics: Art, isis, Looting, Mosul, Museums, Nimrud, Terrorism, Tunisia, Entertainment News, News, Politics News

The term “tomb raider” brings to mind a scantily clad video game heroine before most people associate it with black-clad fundamentalist terrorists. But the people who illegally excavate archaeological sites rarely wear daisy dukes while brachiating their way, vine to vine, across subterranean chasms. The world of antiquities looting has crossed into the realm of terrorism—the ancient pot you buy on eBay, or at a prestigious auction house, might be funding jihadists.

The union of art and terrorism is nothing new. In the 1970s, IRA operatives stole art on several occasions from Irish private collections, in order to sell or swap for the release of political prisoners. In 1999, Mohammed Atta, one of the masterminds behind the 9/11 attacks, flew to Germany with photographs of looted Afghan antiquities, which he sought to sell in order, in his own words, “to buy a plane” that would have been crashed into American buildings. Just a few weeks ago, ISIS bulldozed the ancient Assyrian city of Nimrud and smashed statues at a museum in Mosul, destroying pre-Islamic monuments and artifacts, while news filtered out that they were earning “as much as tens of millions” by selling antiquities looted from territory in occupied Syria alone, to foreign buyers. Just days ago, terrorists stormed a museum in Tunisia and killed everyone they found inside. Stolen art and looted antiquities fund terrorist groups. So why has it taken so long for the world to take this seriously, or even notice?

Of course, this is old news to those of us who study art crime. As early as 2005, U.S. Marine Col. Matthew Bogdanos and colleagues presented evidence, much of it still classified due to active operations, at the annual Interpol conference in Lyon on stolen works of art, that terrorist groups were funding their activities by selling looted antiquities abroad. At the same meeting, it was announced that art crime was perhaps the third-highest-grossing criminal trade worldwide, behind only the drug and arms trades. This was also the year when Der Spiegel broke the news about Mohammed Atta trying to sell looted antiquities in a precursor to the hijacking plan for 9/11.

But it is only now, 10 years later, in 2015, when ISIS, with their savvy terror-marketing videos of executions of people, statues and monuments, that the world has taken proper notice. ISIS’s activities are just the latest chapter in the story of art and terrorism, which often mixes the idea that certain artworks have a corrosive influence and must be destroyed, with the recognition that this artwork has high value for collectors who love it, and can be sold. ISIS accepts the value of antiquities but also destroys them, finding it unacceptable for non-traditional, non-Islamic art to exist within its territories of conquest. This lack of logic sounds spookily similar to the indecisive Nazi theories on “degenerate art,” stealing as much as they could, selling as much of that as they could (much of it to prominent American and British collectors, who passed cash to the Nazi war effort), and burning the rest in bonfires. The art they didn’t like was to be destroyed, unless they could profit from it. Even more macabre, this attitude to art ran parallel to Nazi views on concentration camp victims—those of “lesser races” were not killed outright, but put to work and used as an economic commodity, as long as they could reasonably be sustained, before being killed or allowed to die off. It is an easy pairing to see ISIS and Nazis as peas in a pod: the former obsessed with a warped interpretation of a real religion, the latter having cobbled together their own pseudo-spiritual amalgam of white supremacist beliefs.

If experts have known about art funding terrorism for at least 10 years, why is the media talking about it only now?

Three momentous things happened just weeks ago, in the fight against terrorists and the theft and destruction of art, both in direct reaction to ISIS’s YouTube-friendly videos of iconoclasm (the destruction of art and monuments for symbolic reasons). First, Ahmed Al-Tayed, grand imam of the Egyptian Islamic Institute Al-Azhar, issued a fatwa forbidding the destruction of ancient artifacts. The Anglophone world is used to hearing about fatwas calling for murders, like the one issued against author Salman Rushdie, though the term simply describes a learned interpretation of Islamic religious law in the form of a decree, a spiritual parallel to a Supreme Court ruling on interpreting the U.S. Constitution. Here was a decree from the “foremost authority of Sunni Islam,” prohibiting the destruction of artifacts. As Al-Azhar declared in its official statement, “These artifacts have important cultural and historical significance. They are an important part of our collective legacy that must not be harmed.” The statement went on to point out ISIS’s hypocrisy, on the one hand selling ancient artifacts for enormous cash profit, on the other destroying them on principle as non-Islamic “idols.” Second, the United Nations Security Council unanimously passed Resolution 2199, which condemned ISIS, al-Qaida and other terrorist groups for using “the looting and smuggling of cultural heritage [as a means to fund] recruitment efforts and strengthen their operational capability to organize and carry out terrorist attacks.” This was quickly followed by G-7’s Financial Action Task-Force announcing that ISIS might “have earned as much as tens of millions” by selling antiquities looted from Syrian territory alone, to buyers abroad. And just days ago, terrorists entered a museum in Tunisia and shot everyone they found inside who did not look like one of them.