Zachary Lahn is state director for Americans For Prosperity-Montana in Bozeman. (Photo: Courtesy photo)

Recently, former Gov. Brian Schweitzer took to the pages of Montana’s major newspapers with an op-ed maligning Americans for Prosperity and other free-market advocates for opposing Medicaid expansion in our state.

But Schweitzer seems to have forgotten that while he was governor, he too adamantly opposed Medicaid expansion. In fact, as governor, Schweitzer even echoed many of our same concerns about adding 70,000 Montanans to the government’s health care rolls. In particular, that plan could bankrupt our state and do little to help our most vulnerable.

In a 2011 interview with Yes Magazine, then-Gov. Schweitzer admitted that expanding Medicaid would “run the risk of bankrupting Montana.”

Now, Schweitzer is trying to have it both ways. But we have news for him: You can’t have your cake and eat it, too. We’re not exactly certain what changed his mind as the Medicaid program hasn’t changed, but Schweitzer was absolutely right to be worried of Medicaid’s exorbitant costs. We are, too.

Consider first the sheer cost of expansion. Washington will pay for the first three years with $750 million in federal funds — but that only covers the first three years. Montana state taxpayers will be left to cover 10 percent of the additional costs every year after that. While that may not sound significant at first glance, with such an expensive program the sum quickly exceeds hundreds of millions of dollars over time.

But the $750 million from the feds isn’t “free money” as Schweitzer would have you believe. Federal tax dollars pay for this $750 million expansion. If we refuse to expand, our money doesn’t go to other states — this money simply isn’t spent and doesn't add to the already $18 trillion national debt.

Other states have tried Medicaid expansion — and they’re paying the price.

Take Illinois, for example. State health officials originally estimated that expansion would cost state taxpayers $573 million. Yet after only one year of going online, budget officials were forced to revise their projections to $2 billion — nearly quadruple their initial estimates. Meanwhile, Arkansas’s expansion has come in over budget every single month since its inception. And Ohio? On track to be $1 billion over budget by the end of this fiscal year.

Everywhere you look, the result is the same: Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act is costing states far more than what they originally projected. And when costs run over, the only options are to cut funding for programs like schools and roads, or raise taxes to fill the gap. Montana can’t take this risk.

We forget that expansion is prescribed directly by President Barack Obama though his health care law. If that law hadn’t passed, we wouldn't be talking about expanding Medicaid. In a word: expanding Medicaid is expanding Obamacare.

Schweitzer can accuse us all he likes of trying to “hoodwink” Montana’s state Legislature into opposing Medicaid expansion.

But by arguing that Montanans won’t pay the price for this shortsighted plan, he’s only trying to hoodwink you.

Zach Lahn is the Montana state director for Americans for Prosperity.

Read or Share this story: http://gftrib.com/1C5QorD