Please enable Javascript to watch this video

CLEVELAND--While some have been critical of Obamacare, a Northeast Ohio family said their situation proves it works. Justine Ula, 23, of the Youngstown suburb of Poland, began five days of chemotherapy treatment at University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center Friday.

Ula is battling bone cancer for the second time. "We're doing the same protocol as ten years ago. We're doing the same exact chemotherapy, just a little bit stronger," she said.

Ula has no medical insurance herself. A provision in the Affordable Care Act allows children to remain covered on their parents’ plan until the age of 26. Without coverage, Ula is not sure how she could afford treatments. "My mom kind of looked at me and said this is something that is working for us. If you couldn't be on our insurance what would be doing right now," Ula added.

There are also daily medications she must take. Without insurance coverage, Ula would be facing thousands of dollars of monthly prescription costs. "I have a shot that if we didn't have the insurance it would cost $4,500 and with the insurance it costs $25. And, it’s one of those things: What do you do if you don't have that money? You have to have it," Ula said.

President Obama used Ula’s story as an example that the Affordable Care Act is working for her and three million other young adults who gain coverage by staying on their parents' plan until age 26.

He learned of her situation from an email Ula's mother sent to The White House praising the Affordable Care Act.

Dr. Robin Norris, Ula’s oncologist at University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center agreed. “The ACA really lets us focus on taking care of her and getting rid of her cancer," she said.

But, not everyone claims to be having the same great experience with the new health care law.

According to the Chairman of the Republican National Committee, visitors to the RNC website are leaving complaints. One woman is quoted as saying her insurance policy is being terminated due to the Affordable Care Act and she can't find premiums lower than $830 a month.

*Read more on Obamacare*

*Hear more of Justine Ula's story*