Chocolate chip cookies meant as a way to say, 'Hey, we don't mean to be in the way'

Leanda Cave, left, and Amanda Stevens begin the bike leg of the Boulder Ironman 70.3 Triathlon last summer. This August is Boulder's inaugural full Ironman. ( Cliff Grassmick / Camera file photo )

Ironman Boulder run, bike routes finalized Ironman officials have released the finalized course maps for the run and bike portions of the race. Parts of the routes were changed due to flood damage or ecosystem repair. To view course maps: bit.ly/1lJgWCD

If you go What: Ironman Boulder When: Aug. 3 Where: Boulder, various locations More info: bit.ly/1lJgWCD

As a way of thanking motorists who live and drive along the bike route for the upcoming Ironman Boulder race, a group of athletes plans to hand-deliver fresh-baked chocolate chip cookies next month.

The athletes are part of The Cookie Project, an organization started last year at Ironman Wisconsin by founder Jen Anderson, a triathlete who wanted to say thanks to all of the motorists who passed her safely and politely while she trained in Madison.

Ahead of Boulder's inaugural Ironman in August, Lafayette resident Susan McNamee has recruited dozens of her friends and acquaintances to bake hundreds, if not thousands, of cookies.

The 112-mile bike route for Ironman Boulder starts at the Boulder Reservoir, before taking cyclists north through Loveland and south again on Colo. 119.

Every weekend, and often on weekdays, too, McNamee said she sees countless cyclists riding that route in preparation for the race this summer.

Advertisement

"There are so many of us out there every single weekend," she said. "As a way to give back, I feel it's very important that we as cyclists do something. (Cookies) are the perfect thing. Who doesn't like chocolate chip cookies?"

McNamee and Anderson plan to drive the bike route this weekend to count how many homes they need cookies for. Residents who live and drive along the route are most likely to be affected by cyclists training, McNamee said.

At Ironman Wisconsin last fall, McNamee said The Cookie Project delivered 3,342 cookies to 557 homes along the course.

In recent years, there have been some contentious, and some deadly, collisions involving motorists and cyclists in and near Boulder County.

Though the cookies will only attempt to bridge the gap between athletes and the homeowners along the Ironman route, it's a start toward easing the tension more broadly, said Carla Thompson, who's baking cookies to be distributed.

"There are some cars that when you're riding, they give you a lot of clearance and it's not a problem," said Thompson, 48. "But there are also others that are maybe older, maybe they don't understand why you're on the road. They seem annoyed or frustrated, and I think it's just a nice way to say, 'Hey, we don't mean to be in the way on your roads. But we would like to train here; maybe we can share the road.'"

Thompson, who lives in Highlands Ranch but trains in Boulder, said the cookies might make way for conversations about why cyclists and triathletes enjoy competing and training so much, and why they need to ride on the roads around the county.

It might also help cyclists better understand the concerns or frustrations of motorists, she said.

"It seems like a white flag, an olive branch, 'Let's be friends,'" she said. "I think if they knew us or were more familiar with what we were trying to accomplish by being on the road, maybe we could begin to develop compassion. It goes both ways; that we would understand that for someone that's not used to driving past a cyclist, that it might be scary for them."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Sarah Kuta at 303-473-1106 or kutas@dailycamera.com.