With the release of “Go Set A Watchman,” the “prequel” to Harper Lee’s “To Kill a Mockingbird,” this year saw adult fiction enjoy a little bit of the excitement and hype that has been reserved in recent years for books targeted at younger people. Yes, it turns out non-millennials read and purchase books, too.

Here are some year-end fiction recommendations from Denver Post staffers. We hope you enjoy them.

“Our Souls at Night” by Kent Haruf (Knopf)

His gift for using simple but rich language and small-town settings to illuminate universal truths helped make Kent Haruf a literary treasure. The Colorado author’s final novel tells the poignant story of a man and women who lost their spouses but find new bonds as they talk, holding hands, in bed at night. — Suzanne Brown

“City On Fire” by Garth Risk Hallberg (Knopf)

For a little more than 900 pages, Hallberg bends time and space to tell a story that crosses classes, cultures and generations. From chapter to chapter, the point of view shifts between a dozen central characters, and subsections can cover a day or a decade. But “City on Fire” is rooted in late 1970s New York City, where the lives of those characters become tangled in messy, deadly and brutally human ways. — Ashley Dean

“Purity” by Jonathan Franzen (Farrar, Straus and Giroux)

Whether you love him or just love to complain about him, Franzen is back with a hefty (some would say bloated) tome that takes on love and lust, murder, identity and even cyber security. The whirlwind starts with a young woman’s quest to find her father, who she hopes can pay off her student loan debt. — Jenn Fields

“Bright Lines” by Tanwi Nandini Islam (Penguin)

The house at 111 Cambridge Place in Brooklyn in Islam’s debut novel feels like a cut-away set in an intimate theater, against which love stories, anti-love stories, weed stories and war stories play out. “Bright Lines” captures the exhilaration of not knowing who you are in New York, and also of knowing who you’re not. — Dave Burdick

“The Japanese Lover” by Isabel Allende (Atria Books)

Allende masterfully writes of two San Francisco families — one Jewish, one Japanese — twined by love and World War II. This relatively short novel follows a 70-year arc of artist Alma Belasco’s life as she navigates rapidly evolving racial, political and gender politics with good humor — and a generous dose of magical realism. — Dana Coffield

“Disgruntled” by Asali Solomon (Farrar, Straus and Giroux)

The coming-of-age story of a Philadelphia girl beginning in the ’80s, “Disgruntled” follows her life trying to navigate the diverging paths blazed by her parents, two radical black intellectuals. There are so many ways to not fit in. — DB

“Saint Cole” by Noah Van Sciver (Fantagraphics)

Former Denverite and current alt-comics hero Van Sciver delivers his most bracing and personal work yet in the story of a young man whose dumb decisions make his bad life far, far worse. Funny, sad and often revelatory in its ability to capture all-too-real situations and characters. — John Wenzel

“The Cartel” by Don Winslow (Knopf)

Joaquin “El Chapo” Guzman, leader of the Sinaloa cartel, made his second escape from a Mexican jail just three weeks after “The Cartel” was published, with one of its characters based on Guzman. This best-selling crime novel is a riveting tale that closely mirrors the reality of America’s long war on drugs. Winslow spent 15 years researching and writing “The Cartel” and its predecessor, “The Power of the Dog,” and together they give full immersion into a shadowy world often in the headlines. — Colleen O’Connor

“My Documents” by Alejandro Zambrano (McSweeney’s)

The characters in this short-story collection embody a pervasive loneliness. They often say and do the wrong thing. Some of the stories would be painful to read — for hitting so close to home — but Zambra’s sharp wit cuts into the existential angst, reminding us that dark humor makes a dark night of the soul more bearable. — JF

“The Turner House” by Angela Flournoy (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt)

With the matriarch of a family of 13 siblings in failing health, those who remain close enough to their empty childhood home — in a nearly abandoned East Side Detroit neighborhood — must hash out what to do with the house. Between nostalgia, fraud, secrets and an old ghost, there are as many competing, confounding, unappealing ways forward for the Turners as for their city. — DB

“The Joy of Killing” by Harry N. MacLean (Counterpoint)

A dark, compelling literary work, this marks the fictional debut of Denver true-crime writer Mac Lean. He combines an eerie night in a deserted house with the recollection of a teenage sexual encounter on a train, in a story that explores the lure of violence. The mystery repels and haunts. — Sandra Dallas

“The Sellout” by Paul Beatty (Farrar, Straus and Giroux)

None are spared in this thoroughly irreverent satire about a man who was born to a mad social scientist who performed race-based experiments on him, grew up in the Los Angeles “agrarian ghetto” of Dickens attending meetings of the Dum Dum Donuts Intellectuals and lands in the Supreme Court after reinstituting segregation in the local high school. — JF

“The Girl on the Train” by Paula Hawkins (Riverhead Books)

She’s a pathetic, depressed drunk by night. Each morning, she stares out the window for glimpses of truth as her commuter train passes the home she once shared with a man who’s now married to another woman. But is life really as idyllic as it seems on that neat block? Twists and turns keep the pages flying. — SB

“Confession of the Lionness” by Mia Couto (Farrar, Straus and Giroux)

In rural Mozambique, a young girl has every reason to want to change her world, but little agency, in stark contrast to the lionness terrorizing her village. Mozambican magical realist Couto shifts between the perspectives of his sometimes-broad characters to provide a fuller picture of the myth woven here. — DB

“Loving Day” by Mat Johnson (Spiegel & Grau)

Warren returns home to Philadelphia, where he inherits his father’s crumbling mansion amid urban blight and learns he has a teenage daughter. He’s forced to deal with questions of identity when daughter Tal, against his wishes, insists on attending high school at the Mélange Center for Multiracial Life. — JF