<p>A KUB crew works repairing a power pole on Middlebrook Pike on Tuesday, April 26, 2011, after a storm swept the area. The average customer time without power for 2011 was more than 20 hours, making it KUB's worst year for storms. (NEWS SENTINEL ARCHIVE)</p>

By S. Heather Duncan

There are no national requirements that local utilities provide reliable electric service.

And although half of all states have set reliability standards and even more require at least reliability tracking, Tennessee does neither.

The national Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers has developed a system of benchmarks for reliability widely used in the industry. Among the most commonly tracked are the average length of time a customer of the utility is without power in a year, and how often the average customer loses power.

Lin Fangxing, associate professor of electrical engineering and computer science at the University of Tennessee, said more than 20 states require utilities to meet a minimum standard for the length and frequency of power outages. More than 10 states require only that the information be reported.

Tennessee falls into the category of about a dozen states that have no electric reliability requirements at all, despite the monopoly status enjoyed by electric providers.

In many states, public utilities commissions must approve changes to rates but do not directly oversee reliability. Such commissions also focus on investor-owned utilities, not public ones, according to the Regulatory Assistance Project.

“Even those (utility commissions) that do investigate service problems may not have the authority to punish a utility,” said Rob Thormeyer, spokesman for the National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners. “And even if they do, the fines may be so low that the commission just holds a hearing and says: ‘Utility, do better next time.’ ”

The Tennessee Regulatory Authority is one of those commissions that oversees only rates — except in the case of privately-held electric utilities, of which there are none in the Knoxville area. Although power in the region is generated by the Tennessee Valley Authority, the quasi-public agency sells power in bulk to distributors that are mostly local governments.

Allen Mosher, vice president of policy analysis for the American Public Power Association, said most municipal utilities aren’t regulated by state utility commissions.

But he argues that because those power providers live in the communities they serve, they are more responsive to customer feedback.

“They’re at Rotary, church, and the Piggly Wiggly, so the customer interface is really immediate,” Mosher said. “We think we do a better job, even adjusting for the fact that we have a more urban territory.”

Still, it’s hard to know for sure since no one is tracking their performance.

States that monitor reliability more closely are often those that have had problems in the past, such as northeastern states that lost electricity for more than a week in 2003.

Some states, such as North Carolina, have an independent public safety staff to advocate for consumers in cases that come before the utilities commission.

Shannon Littleton, general manager for the Lenoir City Utilities Board, said he foresees that the North American Electric Reliability Corporation, an international regulatory authority, is going to start focusing more on reliability at the distributor level.

A 2011 report by the Galvin Electricity Initiative recommended power providers be required to report reliability information to communities without excluding major events such as storms. The report also argued utilities should be required to report deaths or injuries caused by power outages or interactions with the distribution system.

But many experts agree federal regulation is unlikely for several reasons. Challenges to electrical systems vary, depending on a region’s climate and topography, said Joydeep Mitra, a professor of electrical and computer engineering at the University of Michigan. He said stringent standards would require more providers to install expensive smart-grid technology that might be beyond their means.

But Mosher and Mitra agreed state and regional pressure for utilities to reduce outages is increasing.

And although the federal government doesn’t punish poor performance, it could encourage better performance.

For example, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, passed to help stimulate the economy after the 2008 recession, provided smart-grid investment grants for 99 projects, including one at KUB.

More than half of the grants sought to increase the reliability of distribution systems, usually through automated feeder switching, which can isolate and reconfigure faulty segments of the power grid and reduce outage frequency, length, and the number of customers affected.