Nearly one-third of all new jobs between 2012 and 2022 will be in industries related to health care and social assistance, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Kimbi Marenakos​ already had 20 years of experience in the counseling profession when she decided to become a nurse practitioner, a career change that would allow her to pursue her dream of working in a health clinic for the homeless.

She fast-tracked her bachelor’s in nursing degree by taking an accelerated program at the Medical University of South Carolina, later enrolling in their online doctorate in nursing practice program. "Online learning is a big change for me," says Marenakos, a 43-year-old mother who lives in Charleston, South Carolina. "It takes a lot of self-discipline."

After taking classes online for a few months, Marenakos now appreciates how online learning gives her the flexibility to balance her multiple commitments. "That’s the beautiful part and why online learning works," she says.



[Learn how to get into a top online graduate nursing program.]

Marenakos is one of the many professionals returning for advanced health care degrees. And with good reason: Nearly one-third ​of all new jobs between 2012 and 2022 will be in industries related to health care and social assistance, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. As part of that trend, employment for nurses is expected to increase.​



To make sure an online nursing program offers students adequate preparation, it’s important to know what is the right training for the shifting health care industry. ​

With the growth in health care, students should look at trends and new positions that are being created as a result of the Affordable Care Act. That’s why many schools are now offering training for guided care managers – a new government role where a health care professional guides patients through their experience, says Madeline Mattern, who oversees Pennsylvania State University's ​online nursing programs.​ ​There’s also a growing need for nursing management degrees, she says.

Students should also make sure their online program offers some training in health informatics, the study of how technology is used to transmit electronic health records, health information exchange standards and portable medical data.

"It’s a huge topic right now," says Taylor McKeowen,​ who is earning his doctor of nursing practice online at Medical University of South Carolina. As health care becomes a more technology-based industry​, more nurses are required to be competent in their tech skills, he says.



[Weigh the cost of an online master's in nursing.]

Nursing students should also consider learning how to work in a telemedicine environment, in which health care professionals and patients communicate through tablets and other devices, says Catherine Durham, interim director of the Master of Science in Nursing/Doctor of Nursing Practice program for Medical University of South Carolina. ​There is a growing trend in telemedicine that allows patients in rural areas to communicate their health concerns to specialists. ​

Students should also look for online programs that offer classes focused on health care prevention, a skill that many medical professionals now need as they look to prevent diabetes, stroke and other conditions, McKeowen says.