A diagram shows preliminary results of an independent autopsy done on Michael Brown, which found evidence that he was shot at least six times. Associated Press

As the Justice Department investigates the police shooting death of an unarmed 18-year-old in Ferguson, Mo., they’ll be a relying on a sweeping — but tricky to enforce — civil rights statute.

When federal prosecutors investigate a local police officer for using excessive force or other alleged misconduct, they typically look to Section 242 of Title 18 of the U.S. Code called “Deprivation of Rights Under Color of Law.”

The law, which dates back to the Reconstruction era, makes it a federal crime for a person acting under “color of…law” to willfully deprive someone of a constitutional right. Depending on the circumstances, convicted offenders can receive up to a life sentence or the death penalty.

Historically, prosecutors have found it a lot easier to bring charges alleging violations of the statute than to make them stick. Report WSJ’s Devlin Barrett and Ben Kesling:

[F]ederal prosecutors face significant legal limitations when it comes to charging police officers, because, unlike local district attorneys, they can’t file charges based on reckless acts, only over violations of civil rights. In such cases federal prosecutors must show an officer took actions with the intent to violate a victim’s civil rights. Proving such criminal intent—as opposed to proving the officer acted with disregard for life—is a much higher burden.

“It’s harder for the federal government to bring a criminal charge in a case like this, where a police officer used force in the course of trying to carry out their duties and then the question is, did they go too far,” Alan Vinegrad, a former federal prosecutor, told WSJ.

Few cases result in conviction because of the “lack of resources and the evidentiary requirement where the accused officer’s specific intent to violate a federally protected right must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt,” said a 2000 report on police practices and civil rights in America by the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights.

The challenge for federal prosecutors was recently underscored by the Justice Department’s post-Katrina civil rights prosecutions of five New Orleans Police Department officers in connection with the shooting death and burning of a 31-year-old man outside a strip mall in September 2005 days after the city was flooded.

Three of the officers were acquitted, including one in a retrial after a federal appeals court threw out the original conviction. Prosecutors dropped their charges against another officer. Ultimately only one of the officers went to prison, Gregory McRae, who was sentenced last week to 17 years in prison for obstructing a federal investigation and burning the body of the man, Henry Glover.

In the Ferguson case, police have said Darren Wilson, the officer under investigation, shot 18-year-old Michael Brown, after Mr. Brown pushed him into his patrol car, where the two struggled over Mr. Wilson’s gun. A lawyer for the Brown family and a witness who has given a series of media interviews dispute the police account and say he was gunned down in cold blood.