One year later, at the end of 2012, Congress faced another crisis, this one nicknamed the “fiscal cliff.” The massive tax cuts signed into law by President George W. Bush were scheduled to expire, and the sequester was about to kick in. Congress passed legislation that allowed some of the tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans to expire while permanently extending all of the middle-class tax cuts. Allowing those tax cuts to expire, along with other savings in the fiscal cliff deal, reduced deficits by $737 billion over 10 years compared to what deficits would have been under current policy at the time.

Had the fiscal cliff deal been produced by the super committee instead of the normal legislative process, it would have automatically reduced the sequester spending cuts by $737 billion. Instead, the sequester was left nearly untouched. Congress did postpone the sequester as part of the fiscal cliff deal, but only for two months. After that, the sequester kicked in.

How to fix it

The Budget Control Act calculates the size of the sequester cut by subtracting the debt reduction produced by the super committee from a base of $1.2 trillion. Since the super committee failed to produce a bill, that leaves a full $1.2 trillion sequester to be implemented over nine years. But whether the fiscal cliff deal was produced by the super committee or not, it still delivered more than half of the debt reduction required by the Budget Control Act’s sequester provision. All Congress needs to do is amend the Budget Control Act to include the debt reduction from the fiscal cliff deal in the sequester calculation.

Subtracting the fiscal cliff savings of $737 billion from the $1.2 trillion sequester base leaves $463 billion of sequester cuts. The remaining sequester cuts will also yield extra savings by reducing the national debt, and therefore the interest that must be paid on that debt. To account for that extra savings, the sequester law reduces the overall amount of program cuts by 18 percent. Finally, the sequester law spreads those cuts over nine years, and then splits each year’s cuts evenly between defense and nondefense programs.

When the fiscal cliff savings are included in the sequester calculation, the annual amount of sequester cuts falls from $109 billion to $42 billion. That reduces the defense and nondefense cuts from $55 billion to $21 billion. Reducing the defense sequester gives the Pentagon flexibility to draw down national security spending in a responsible and strategic manner. But the benefits of applying the fiscal cliff deficit reduction to the sequester are even greater on the nondefense side.