The New York Times put out a poll last week about the cost of health care. Among the Times’ findings is that the cost of health care is becoming a problem for more Americans. Forty-six percent of poll respondents said affording basic medical care was a hardship. Last year, only 36 percent of respondents indicated the same thing. The Times poll also found that for many people, out of pocket expenses for medical care are increasing, even for those who have health insurance. Thirty-three percent of respondents said their out-of-pocket costs had “gone up a lot,” and 19 percent said they had “gone up a little.” Thirty-nine percent said out-of-pocket costs had remained the same, while only 5 percent indicated these costs had decreased. Seventy-four percent of those who said their out of pocket costs had gone up indicated the reason is that medical care has become more expensive.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Obamacare]

The New York Times poll is an interesting contrast with another piece of news that came out last week showing the numbers of uninsured continue to decrease. The White House Council of Economic Advisers released an analysis of new National Center for Health Statistics data that showed the rate of uninsured for the second quarter of 2014 was 11.3 percent. Last year, the uninsured rate averaged 14.4 percent. The White House Council of Economic Advisers wrote: “These data imply that the uninsured rate will continue to fall in the year ahead, reaching low levels unprecedented in the nation’s history.” The decrease is attributed to policies in the Affordable Care Act.

The two sets of data offer conflicting views of the state of our health care system after the implementation of the Affordable Care Act. As the New York Times points out, the health care reform law addressed access to health insurance, but not health care costs directly. So while more people have gained health insurance coverage, the Times’ finding that out-of-pocket costs are rising indicates that what health insurance pays for may be decreasing. Indeed, the Times elaborates their respondents are seeing more out-of-pocket expenses, “partly because newer insurance plans – including policies under the Affordable Care Act – are designed to make sure patients have 'more skin in the game,' so they will be more discriminating users of health care. Fixed co-pays ... are being replaced by requirements that patients contribute a percentage of charges, which often ends up costing them far more.”



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Barack Obama]