Getty Government shutdown wouldn't affect Planned Parenthood funding

A government shutdown wouldn’t shut down Planned Parenthood.

Instead, Planned Parenthood would continue to receive the majority of its federal funding — including all of its Medicaid payments — even if Congress cannot enact a new spending law on Oct. 1, according to a nonpartisan study by the Congressional Research Service, obtained by POLITICO. In addition to that federal funding, most of Planned Parenthood’s financial backing comes from outside the government, making it easier for the organization to weather a government shutdown.

Story Continued Below

The report delivers new fuel for this fall's bruising fiscal fights, when lawmakers will struggle to strike a budget deal while dealing with a fundamental disagreement between the two parties over women's health care. GOP leaders are hoping to navigate through a rocky fall while staving off a politically disastrous government shutdown by holding a series of standalone votes attacking Planned Parenthood in an effort to mollify conservatives.

But like the 2013 movement to defund Obamacare, conservatives are girding for battle with President Barack Obama and congressional Democrats over cutting off funding for Planned Parenthood this fall. Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) and a cadre in the House’s right flank say they won’t vote for any bill that funds Planned Parenthood, while Democrats say they won’t support a bill that defunds it.

All of the 2016 Republican presidential candidates have lined up in opposition to the women's health organization after the release of several sting videos and groups like Heritage Action and the Senate Conservatives Fund are urging House Speaker John Boehner and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell to take the most confrontational approach possible.

But, much like the 2013 shutdown did little to impede Obamacare, a temporary government shutdown this fall is unlikely to help conservatives further their goal of hitting back at the organization after a series of controversial videos have shown Planned Parenthood employees discussing the donation of fetal tissue. Unless Democrats somehow cave to conservative demands, Planned Parenthood is likely to keep a steady revenue stream through any temporary shutdown of the federal government, according to the report. And there's no evidence that Democrats are reversing their vows to block any bill that strips Planned Parenthood of funding.

That’s not to say Planned Parenthood wouldn’t be hurt by a shutdown. There is some spending that would be cut.

Planned Parenthood received $528.4 million in government funding in its fiscal year that ended June 2014, according to the group. CRS said that some of that money is funded through Department of Health and Human Services grant programs and would likely be halted if the government were to shut down. Planned Parenthood receives funding under Title X family planning grants.

But CRS said that in addition to Medicaid, other federal funding programs would be preserved, such as the Children's Health Insurance Program and some programs that are funded for multiple years, such as Community Development Block Grants. CRS cautioned that its estimate was not exact and was based on Government Accountability Office estimates of Planned Parenthood's federal funding in 2012.

Even if a shutdown produced minor cuts to Planned Parenthood, Republicans would be faced with the same problem they had in 2013: In addition to not harming the organization in the short term, a government shutdown over Planned Parenthood would also largely be blamed on Republicans, according to a Quinnipiac poll out this week. A clean win on the matter would be so difficult to achieve that Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) is warning the right not to take congressional Republicans down that road again.

“We just don’t have the votes to get the outcome that we’d like,” McConnell said on WYMT Tuesday.

Still, McConnell vowed to have another vote to defund Planned Parenthood in the fall. The first one failed in August, 53-46, and there is no sign that the tally would be any different in a second vote. The House, meanwhile, is likely to vote this month on slashing Planned Parenthood's funding, though it's the Senate's supermajority requirement that will stymie the defunding movement.

"We voted on that already in the Senate, we'll vote on it again. But I would remind all of your viewers the way you make a law in this country, the Congress has to pass it and the president has to sign it," McConnell said on WYMT. He suggested that electing a new Republican president is the only way to take on Planned Parenthood.

That attitude has already angered conservatives on the far right, who say McConnell isn't doing enough to cutoff taxpayer funds to the organization. They want the GOP to take a hard line even if Obama's veto pen makes it impossible to force the defunding of Planned Parenthood.

"There are no excuses left for the Senate Majority Leader," said ForAmerica President David Bozell. "Sen. McConnell must lead on this issue and end taxpayer funding of Planned Parenthood. If he refuses, he is complicit in murder."

Planned Parenthood shot back at McConnell's remarks, too, questioning whether other Republicans will realize that the defunding effort is futile.

"The real question is can McConnell convince the rest of Congress to not hold the federal government hostage as a few politicians try to score cheap political points by cutting health care for millions," said Planned Parenthood Action Fund Executive Vice President Dawn Laguens. "From the beginning, this relentless campaign has been about one thing: anti-abortion extremists who will do anything ... in their quest to ban abortion and block millions from accessing basic reproductive health care."