Gov. Scott Walker has a selfie taken with Matthew Golash of Palatine, Ill., Thursday after speaking at Eureka College in Illinois. On Friday, Walker takes his presidential campaign back to Iowa, where his poll numbers have been dropping dramatically. Credit: Associated Press

By

Maquoketa, Iowa — As presidential candidate Scott Walker returned to Iowa on Friday to mark a somber day in the nation's history, his campaign was greeted by its own hard facts.

The latest poll by Quinnipiac University showed that in two months the Wisconsin governor has fallen from first in this state to 10th among GOP candidates, trailing not just front-runners Donald Trump, the real estate mogul, and Ben Carson, the surgeon, but even second-tier candidates such as former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee and U.S. Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky.

With 16 Republican contenders, polling can do little to distinguish between the baker's dozen of candidates with less than 6% support, given that the poll has a margin of error of plus or minus 3 percentage points.

But the trend is clear — Walker has fallen from garnering 18% of likely GOP caucusgoers in July to just 3% today in Iowa, a state that most experts see as absolutely crucial to his chances in the overall nomination contest. Other traditional candidates also are struggling, with Trump, Carson and former business executive Carly Fiorina taking more than half of the likely caucusgoers surveyed, even though none of the three has held a single elected office.

Underlining the challenges for candidates deep in the pack, former Texas Gov. Rick Perry suspended his presidential campaign Friday. Speaking to reporters here, Walker praised Perry as a fellow governor, Eagle Scout, and Harley-Davidson enthusiast and appealed to Perry's supporters.

"If you like a governor, a conservative governor, with a proven track record of actually getting results ... now's the time to send someone to Washington to wreak havoc on Washington, who's actually been tested and we've done just that," Walker said.

There's a little good news for Walker in the Quinnipiac poll — Republicans in Iowa still like the governor from neighboring Wisconsin.

Of likely caucusgoers, 62% have a favorable impression of Walker and only 15% an unfavorable one, giving him one of the better net favorability ratings among candidates.

But everything has changed since February, when Quinnipiac had Walker at 25% in Iowa the month after he gave a breakout speech in Des Moines at the Iowa Freedom Summit. Now, Walker is struggling in the middle of the pack, even when Quinnipiac asked voters to give their second choice.

Sam Lau, a spokesman for the Iowa Democratic Party, dismissed Walker's pledge that he would go to Washington, D.C., and "wreak havoc" on the federal government.

"Iowans are looking for a president who can bring people together and wreak progress. In contrast, Scott Walker has wreaked havoc in Wisconsin, divided his state, overseen a lagging economy, and gutted funding for schools and health care," Lau said.

On Friday, Walker traveled to three counties in eastern Iowa, part of his plan to visit all 99 counties in that key state for his presidential campaign. His first event was held at the Decker Hotel, a stately structure that was built in 1875, and drew several dozen supporters.

Walker's campaign did not respond to the paper's request for comment.

Walker said he was the only candidate in the race to have a detailed plan to repeal the federal Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. He said he would start acting on it on his first day in office, including eliminating health coverage perks for Congress.

"I will sign an executive order that requires Congress, their families and their staff to live under the same rules as everyone. Once they start paying those higher premiums, you can bet they'll start moving on our reforms," Walker said.

Mary Hamann, 78, said she came to see Walker on Friday as she decides between the governor, Fiorina, and U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas). A member of the local GOP central committee, the Maquoketa resident said she still sees Walker as viable and isn't worried about his current polling position.

"I like the fact that he stood up for what he believed in," Hamann said of Walker's record in Wisconsin.

Mike Swanson, a 53-year-old anesthesiologist from Davenport, said he liked Walker along with Cruz and Carson and also has no worries about electability.

"The purpose of the Iowa caucus is to make candidates viable," Swanson said.

David Polyansky, Walker's senior Iowa adviser, said the governor's campaign is staying focused on basics.

"Despite the chattering class wanting to prematurely frame the race before Iowa Republicans have had the opportunity to decide for themselves, team Walker is focused on keeping our heads down and working to engage our growing grass-roots leadership team across the state," he said.

Walker sought to right his campaign Thursday by visiting Eureka College in Illinois, the alma mater of his political idol, Ronald Reagan, and promising to repeat Walker's actions in Wisconsin by ending dues deduction for federal workers' unions from workers' paychecks on his first day in the White House.

Walker's pledge to "end federal employee union dues that are used for political activity" is similar to parts of Act 10, the governor's signature 2011 law that ended most collective bargaining for most public employees in Wisconsin, including dues checkoff.

But the union system for federal workers works differently than Wisconsin's did at the time Walker took office as governor. For instance, federal workers have to pay fees to their unions only if they choose to join them — a difference from the previous situation in Wisconsin and a fact that Walker frequently mentioned while he was arguing for Act 10 four years ago.

Federal unions can only bargain over working conditions, not over pay or benefits.