MONTEREY PARK >> A City of Monrovia deputy fire chief with 22 years of experience will become Monterey Park’s fire chief, effective Monday.

Scott Haberle, 42, will take over for Jim Birrell, who retired in December and has been working as interim fire chief since then. Birrell will leave his post Wednesday after spending three days helping Haberle transition.

Haberle said he feels very fortunate to be given the opportunity to work with Monterey Park.

“I’m looking forward to the leadership that comes with working with a great fire department. It is a great city, a great community,” he said. “I’m looking forward to getting to know the community, getting to know the firefighters, just getting to meet everyone.”

Haberle, who lives in Rancho Cucamonga, began his career in Monrovia in 1992 and has also worked as a firefighter/paramedic, fire inspector/investigator, fire captain and battalion chief. In his new position, he will lead 52 sworn fire personnel and three fire stations. Haberle will also manage an annual budget of more than $11 million.

City Manager Paul Talbot said a headhunting company gave the city about a dozen potential candidates. Six came in for interviews, and Haberle was selected from a pool of three finalists.

“Scott’s a very impressive individual,” Talbot said. “He’s very well respected in the region. He’s forward thinking about fire services as well as community involvement.”

Haberle will be an at-will employee and will earn an annual salary of $160,000. Birrell earned $177,000 prior to retiring.

An experienced leader, Haberle has coordinated and managed many special assignments. He has worked as a fire marshal and in the administration of the emergency medical services and operations division. He has also been in charge of a citywide disaster preparedness program that includes the Community Emergency Response Team and an emergency operations center.

Talbot said Haberle and Monterey Park have a similar perspective about the future of fire services. He expects Haberle to continue Monterey Park’s tradition of providing outstanding fire and emergency services while also keeping an eye out for new opportunities in upcoming years, such as regionalization, he said.

“There has been a lot of discussions we’ve had here regarding joint services with other communities,” he said. “We’re going to be looking at our service delivery models for advanced life support and basic life support in the future. He’s well-versed in that and all the changes in the Affordable Care Act and in-home services. Some of his expertise in that area will be very helpful.”

Advertisement

Although Haberle is experienced in fire services, there are differences between Monrovia and Monterey Park. Some 60 percent of Monrovia residents are white, according to the 2010 U.S. Census. About 19 percent of Monterey Park’s residents are white; 67 percent are Asian.

“Ultimately fire safety is the same,” he said.

Haberle has a master’s in public administration from the University of La Verne and has completed his Executive Fire Officer designation from the National Fire Academy.

His swearing-in ceremony will take place at 5 p.m. Tuesday in the Monterey Park City Hall Council Chambers.

>> Correction: The City of Monterey Park changed the time for Haberle’s swearing in ceremony. The ceremony is scheduled for 5 p.m.