A very pregnant Juliana Berger took a five-day trip with her husband and didn’t speak to him once.

They weren’t fighting. They were attending a silent retreat.

Berger, 33, a web developer, had attended a number of silent retreats over the past decade. Her husband, Jonathan Mann, a 32-year-old songwriter, had never been. The New York-based couple wanted a break from the stress of daily life.

“I thought the stillness would help me connect with my baby,” said Berger, nearly eight months pregnant at the time.

Silent meditation can be traced back thousands of years. Today’s retreats last from a day to several weeks at monasteries, colleges, spas, hotels, even hospitals.

“It’s not really a vacation,” cautioned Robert Epstein, senior research psychologist at the American Institute for Behavioral Research and Technology and professor of psychology at the University of the South Pacific in Fiji. “It’s a very unusual experience, which can certainly be beneficial, but it’s difficult in some respects, because it’s a time when you are alone with your thoughts. And you can hear your thoughts very clearly.”

For some people, hearing those thoughts can be difficult, though by having time and space, some people are able to “exhaust the most disturbing ones and throw them away,” he said.

Berger and Mann both experienced what they described as a transformation during their stay at the Buddhist-influenced Insight Meditation Society in Barre, Massachusetts.

Mann said he found a 45-minute meditation on the second day physically painful and emotionally frustrating. Afterward, he went to his room and wept in what he described as, “the most violent emotional reaction” he’s ever had.

“The meltdown helped a lot,” he said. He decided to stop trying so hard, and started moving during the meditation periods and allowed his mind to wander.

As a result, he relaxed, and “some moments of clarity came,” he said.

Carol Gibney, who has facilitated retreats for the past dozen years, offers this advice:

■ It takes at least 24 hours for a person to move past the point of “monkey brain” — racing from one thought to another — and begin to relax. Once a person relaxes, there tends to be a heightened awareness of things both internal and external.

■ The stillness evokes all kinds of feelings, including frustration and even grief.

“Compassionate awareness is what emerges,” she said. “Compassion for oneself; for feelings that they might have buried and pushed aside.”

■ With retreats increasing in popularity, “Think about what you’re getting away from and what you’re going to,” she said.

■ Finally, she advised: “Be open. Expect to be surprised.”