A drone is flown for recreational purposes in the sky above Old Bethpage, New York, Sept. 5, 2015. Getty Images

Every week, CIO Journal offers a glimpse into the mind of the CEO, whose view of technology is shaped by stories in management journals, general interest magazines and, of course, in-flight publications.

Welcome to the drone age. If the unmanned aerial vehicle industry could be compared to the evolution of the PC industry, some analysts think drones are having their “1984””Macintosh moment. “It is hard to think of a business which could not benefit from a PC, whereas many may not benefit (at least directly) from drones,” says the Economist. But drones are already involved in agriculture, filmmaking, land-surveying and delivering things. Now startups are working on developing better “send-and-avoid” technology using neural networks as well as better avionics for increased flight time. “The future of the this market will have many twists and turns,” the Economist concludes, “but all the signs suggest that the air will soon be abuzz with machines.”

10-hour commutes are a thing now. David Neeleman, founder of JetBlue Airwaysand CEO of Brazilian airline Azul commutes every week from Connecticut to Azul’s headquarters in Sao Paolo. He leaves Sunday, returns on Thursday. More and more executives are choosing melatonin-riddled commutes on a permanent basis, Quartz writes. Globalization and tech-enabled flexibility has something to do with it, but so does a shift in priorities of many top executives. “Men in particular, are putting more value on being a good parent, not just a provider, and in some sense that might mean not moving their kids,” says the president of the Families and Work Institute.

Alphas rock retro tech. Blackstone Group CEO Stephen Schwarzman, Vogue Editor-in-Chief Anna Wintour, Berkshire Hathaway CEO Warren Buffett…what do these titans in industry have in common? They “have all been spotted with archaic, clunky flip phones,” Business Insider writes. Go ahead and sneer, but given the level of attacks against corporate email accounts—or any digital asset handled or owned by a famous person– they might be on to something.