Ted Cruz (whose given name is actually Rafael Edward Cruz) is a Republican presidential candidate and Texas senator. In his high school bio , Cruz wrote that he planned to run for president, and now he is one of the leading GOP candidates. As a teenager, Cruz was a member of a traveling club called the Constitutional Corroborators, and he went around Texas and recited bits of the constitution from memory. Cruz has been clear about his conservative beliefs. Here's where he stands on 14 key issues.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Health Care

Cruz disagrees with the Affordable Care Act so much that he once filibustered for a record 21 hours to try to block it. Since it passed, Cruz has remained an outspoken critic of the health care plan. He supported Hobby Lobby's challenge to the Affordable Care Act's birth control mandate, which requires most employers to provide contraception coverage to its employees or pay a fine.

Reproductive Rights

Cruz has always been strictly against abortion . Cruz led 13 states in asking the Supreme Court to defend a federal law that prohibits partial birth abortions. He also defended a Texas law that disallowed federal funds to go toward groups that provide abortion services, like Planned Parenthood. Cruz has a section on his website that asks visitors to sign a petition to fully defund Planned Parenthood. When asked about whether he'd support personhood bills, he responded: "I told you I'm not going to get into the labels, but what I will say is we should protect life. But I'm not interested in anything that restricts birth control ... And I'm not interested in anything that restricts in vitro fertilization because I think parents who are struggling to create life, to have a child, that is a wonderful thing."

National Security

Although Cruz didn't agree with Trump's proposed waterboarding tactics, in a February GOP debate, he said he would implement enhanced interrogation with terrorists.

If it were necessary to, say, prevent a city from facing an imminent terrorist attack, you can rest assured that as commander in chief, I would use whatever enhanced interrogation methods we could to keep this country safe.

Cruz's conservative national security policy has three parts: Defend our allies in other countries, increase our leadership presence at a global scale, and think about national security threats by asking what is best for America. If elected president, Cruz has said he would destroy ISIS by carpet bombing — non-targeted bombing of a defined area. And, in order to destroy ISIS and keep America safe, Cruz has explained how he plans to strengthen our military forces in every branch: "Start with tax reform and regulatory reform, unleash the American economy, and use that economic growth to rebuild the military."

If I am elected President, I will direct the Department of Defense to destroy ISIS: https://t.co/am6Sxe3anE — Ted Cruz (@tedcruz) December 7, 2015

Jobs

Part of Cruz's jobs creation plan is to focus on helping small businesses avoid Washington's regulations so they can create jobs at the local level. On his website, Cruz writes that his proposed flat tax plan will create nearly 4.9 million jobs in the U.S. Cruz has said he will approve the Keystone Pipeline if he becomes president in the hopes of creating even more jobs that focus on modernizing the nation's infrastructure. Cruz is against net neutrality (which he has called "Obamacare for the Internet" ), and he has said that internet free speech helps entrepreneurs expand job opportunities.

Criminal Justice