ARAPAHOE BASIN — The legend of Nate Dogggg continued for the 19th consecutive year Friday morning.

Dogggg, who insists that’s his real name, has claimed the first chairlift ride of the ski season in North America for nearly two decades, camping out for the past three days to ensure he would be the first one up the mountain when Arapahoe Basin opened its slopes.

“I just want to keep doing it as long as I can,” said Dogggg, 36, who lives in Breckenridge.

Colorado’s ski season began at 9 a.m. as Dogggg and three loyal friends became the first ones to enjoy the hill. The snowboarders raised their arms in jubilation and welcomed what they hope will be a great, snowy season before disappearing up the mountain.

PHOTOS: View more images from opening day at A-Basin.

Thousands, many in costume and neon spandex, gathered to enjoy and celebrate the nation’s only open ski area on a small patch of snow in the high country. Some skipped work, others left their kids at home and many said they planned their week around Friday’s opening.

“It’s crunchy,” said Chuck Lutz, of Wheat Ridge, of the snow after taking a run with his wife. “Everyone who is skiing in the country right now is skiing on that white strip.”

Jim Lesniack, of Boulder, said he cut short a business trip to Texas to make it back in time for opening day. Lesniack arrived home about 1 a.m. Friday morning, slept for four hours and then sped up to the mountains for his sixth consecutive opening.

“Lots of great people,” he said after polishing off a beer and while waiting in a long line to ride the ski area’s only open lift. “Lots of great skiing.”

Arapahoe Basin opened the Black Mountain Express lift giving skiers and riders access to just the High Noon run. The ski area began making snow Oct. 2 and has been blanketed by roughly a foot of natural snow in recent weeks, allowing the area to continue its tradition of being one of the first to open in the country each year.

“People really want to go skiing and riding and it’s as simple as that,” A-Basin chief operating officer Alan Henceroth said. “Just look around and see all the people having fun and out here today.”

The ski area also opened on Oct. 17 in 2012, and last year opened on Oct. 13.

Tickets at Arapahoe Basin through Dec. 19 are $69 for adults, $57 for youths and $34 for children.

Many other resorts around Summit County and Colorado also are making snow in hopes of opening soon.

Jesse Paul: 303-954-1733, jpaul@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jesseapaul