The heat is on, and employers are feeling the pressure like never before. A changing workforce, uncertain economy, ever-changing (and sometimes conflicting) laws with no clear guidance, hidden surprises in the law, ramped-up enforcement initiatives by state and federal authorities, and the increased potential for litigation only add to the pressures of everyday life in the workplace.

.

Wednesday, March 30, 2016

8:30am to 4:30pm

National Cowboy & Western Heritage Museum

Oklahoma City, Oklahoma

Registration closed

.

Tuesday, April 5, 2016

8:30am to 4:30pm

Renaissance Tulsa Hotel and Convention Center

Tulsa, Oklahoma

Registration closed

.

.



At EmployerLINC16, McAfee & Taft’s annual employment and employee benefits seminar, our attorneys will address the timely concerns of HR and benefits professionals and offer practical advice for dealing with uncertain times.

Hosted by the Labor and Employment Group, the morning session will focus on current hot topics and trends in employment law and feature a special presentation focusing on the current enforcement priorities of the Oklahoma Department of Labor by new Labor Commissioner Melissa McLawhorn Houston. Other topics include:

Strategies for Discouraging High-Exposure Employment Litigation and Implementing Practical Pre-Employment Protections

Expanded and Expensive: How to prepare for the new DOL overtime rules

Employees in Disguise? Key issues for misclassification of contractors

Restraint or Response? The NLRB’s stance on responding to employee outbursts on social media

Hosted by the Employee Benefits Group, the afternoon session will feature presentations that uncover many of the “gotchas” found in the laws and regulations governing retirement plans, health and welfare plans, and related tax issues. Topics include:

Surprise! Emerging gender identity benefits issues and unexpected traps in the Affordable Care Act

Lessons Learned From a Retired IRS Auditor: Best practices to stay prepared for a benefit plan audit

Overlooked Employment Tax Issues

What Am I Missing? COBRA, HIPAA and other medical plan issues

Marriage is What Brings Us Together Today

Registration closed. There is no cost to attend this seminar, but registration is required. Please note that priority reservations for this event will be given to clients and special guests of the firm. McAfee & Taft reserves the right to limit registration at any time. When registering, please be sure to specify whether you will attend the morning session, afternoon session, or both. Separate HRCI and SHRM credit is available for each session. IMPORTANT NOTE: Lunch will not be provided.