Snow carvers hope weekend brings cold to Fire & Ice Festival Fire & Ice Festival snow sculpting event set Friday-Saturday in downtown Loveland

Steve Mercia monitors a snow machine at Fairgrounds Park on Thursday as it generates snow for the snow sculpture competition and Fire & Ice Festival this weekend, Feb. 13-14. (Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald) Loveland Fire & Ice Festival When and where: The Fire & Ice Festival will be 3-10 p.m. Friday and 10 a.m.-10 p.m. Saturday between Garfield and Washington avenues on Fourth Street. Light and fireworks show: A light and fireworks show set to music will be at 6:15 p.m. and 9 p.m. each evening. Other events: The festival will also include the snow sculpture competition, live music, snow vehicle car show, romantic carriage rides, hot chocolate and s'mores. More info: For details, find the festival on Facebook or read more about the event in the A&E Spotlight section of the Reporter-Herald on Friday, Feb. 6. Steve Mercia started preparing for the snow sculpture competition and Fire & Ice Festival several weeks in advance of the event. He spent evenings, early mornings, and some all-nighters babysitting a snow machine at Fairgrounds Park as it cranked out enough snow to create a tall mound of white powder at the park. The Fire & Ice Festival will take place at 3-10 p.m. Friday and 10 a.m.-10 p.m. Saturday in downtown Loveland from Garfield to Washington avenues. Twelve sculpting teams will spend Thursday, Friday and Saturday sculpting blocks of snow into artistic creations before judging begins on Saturday. The snow sculpting teams have three days instead of five to sculpt their creations this year. Advertisement "Guest connection is what makes the event happen," said Nate Webb with Blazen Illuminations. Webb and his wife Heidi are organizing the event. He added that in past years, some of the teams didn't work all of the days — which was sometimes due to waiting for the right weather conditions — and finished up in the last couple of days. He figures that the whole event will have more guest interaction and better response when visitors stop by Thursday through Saturday. Holly Poole, 10, right, and her sister, Amanda Poole, 6, look at a snow sculpture by Team Scream during the sculpture competition in 2014. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald) Mercia and the members of the snow sculpture teams are praying for a last minute forecast of cold rather than the high of 51-61 degrees forecast for Wednesday to Friday. He said he had to wait until it was 25 degrees Fahrenheit or below to make snow, which is why he spent several nights waking up every hour to check on the snow machine. This week he might have a hard time finding a cold enough night to finish making the snow. Kerri Ertman, on the sculpting team that won People's Choice last year, said that 2014 was a difficult year with warm wind chipping away at the snow, so she planned for that this time. "With the design I created for this year, I'm allowing for more melting, so it should age well in the heat," she said. Ertman, while a little disappointed with the fewer days to sculpt this year, now thinks it might work in their favor since they spent a lot of last year rebuilding and resculpting what they had done the day before. "We'll just have to work smarter," she said. Discounts People can pick up wristbands at two on-site information booths and use the bands to get discounts or promotional items in many of the businesses along Fourth Street and the nearby area. Visitors will receive a list of what each business is offering, which is also a way to promote the businesses not on Fourth Street. The wristbands are free and will also be used to track the metrics of the visitors to the Fire & Ice Show. "We have nearly 100 percent participation downtown," Nate Webb said. "It is awesome. We are totally thrilled about the success and partnership." The snow will be packed into 8-foot-tall square molds on Wednesday — approximately 7 tons of snow each — in preparation of the teams that will start sculpting on Thursday. The community is invited to help stomp snow into the molds to pack them tight at 5 p.m. Wednesday evening. "We had a record number of responses (of snow sculpting teams) this year," Mercia said. He helped found the snow sculpture event in 2010. It became a sanctioned event a couple years later that allows the teams to qualify for national competitions. I can't get over the fact that my snow sculpture event is bringing fireworks to downtown Loveland," Mercia said. Angel Light Pyrotechnics will shoot off the "close proximity" fireworks from an area just west of Railroad Avenue on Fourth Street. The smaller fireworks require only a 150-square-foot perimeter, and pose no danger to nearby buildings, said Larry Darrington said, owner. He and his team of volunteers will shoot off fireworks twice a night. The opening barrage will be choreographed and timed to music along with a light show by Blazen Illuminations at 6:15 p.m. The second show, also to music along with a light show, will be longer and bigger, at 9:15 p.m. Cindy Mackin, visitor services coordinator with the city of Loveland, said the city budgeted $15,000 for Sculpture in the Dark in 2014. This year, with the new festival, "Fire & Ice" and accompanying events, the city is supporting the event with $45,000. "We're taking last year's successful snow sculpture event and blowing it up," Mackin said. The money comes from the lodging tax, which is a 3 percent tax on hotel and motel bills, and is earmarked for promoting tourism and related activities in Loveland. The city and organizers hope to make this the premier signature Loveland event of the year. The snow sculpture competition was organized by E.L. Events until that group dissolved in 2013. The next year, the city took on the event with the hope that a new event planner will eventually get sponsorships to support it. "We didn't want the event to go away," Mackin said. The city had a contract with E.L. Events where the city pledged a certain amount of money and the event planning company found sponsorships for the rest. "I think that's what Blazen Illuminations is hoping. In future years, they will be getting sponsorships," Mackin said. "We will take it year to year until we find what's making sense." She added that the city ended 2014 having collected $840,272 in lodging tax, which is up almost $100,000 over 2013. Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/jessicabenes.