A group of PE firms are betting the nation’s health care “quarterbacks” could use some help. Reuters/Brad Penner

A Goldman Sachs Group-led consortium’s move last week to launch a physician practice management platform, is a bet on the power held by primary care doctors.

The Goldman-led group, which includes Pamplona Capital Management, Cardinal Partners, set up Brighton Health Group, merged it with Privia Health LLC and invested $400 million to help fund Brighton’s national expansion. Privia’s existing investors, Health Enterprise Partners and Morgan Noble Healthcare Partners, were also involved in the deal.

Privia advises independent doctors that are not affiliated with hospitals or provider groups on operations and provides administrative services like billing.

It’s a segment of the medical community that has been facing serious obstacles. Primary care physicians are typically paid much less than specialists and are coming under increasing pressure from urgent care centers and retail pharmacies veering into their coverage areas by providing services such as flu shots. The Association of American Medical Colleges predicted by 2020 the U.S. will be short more than 45,000 primary care doctors as residents opt for lucrative specialties.

Brandon Hull, a co-founder of Cardinal Partners described primary care physicians as the “quarterbacks” of the nation’s health care system.

Their referrals account for the bulk of the nation’s health care spending, he said.

“Primary physicians are making clinical and economic decisions with tremendous consequences for the health care system, and in a world where patients are on the hook for more of their spending, doctors ought to be economically rewarded for choosing wisely,” he said.

Mr. Hull said Brighton aims to form a national network of physicians to help primary physicians, and some specialists, manage the monetary risks doctors may have regarding care for patients. Brighton may even help them develop private label products to be sold on health care exchanges, which have emerged as part of the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, he said.

Brighton’s model is similar to what health maintenance and managed care organizations are using. For a monthly payment—sometimes sponsored by government subsidy programs like Medicare and Medicaid—providers give patients health care services.

The service providers can keep any left over money from the fee if they manage to look after patients at a cost below the monthly payment. But providers will have to fork out extra capital if the cost of patient care exceeds the monthly sum.

In theory, health maintenance and managed care providers have the incentive to lower costs, but provide quality care that will prompt others to join their programs.

Brighton is essentially hoping to use the same model for primary physicians, giving them the incentive to make efficient and economical choices when they refer patients to specialists or to have laboratory tests. There aren’t really any existing economic incentives for primary physicians to help patients and the health care system as a whole save money, and referral decisions may be driven by doctors’ affiliation with specialists or laboratory providers, or by convenience.

The platform would have a fairly wide pool from which to fish. A new survey by the Physicians Foundation of over 20,000 doctors found that more than 40% of primary care physicians were not affiliated with a hospital or a medical group.

Write to Amy Or at amy.or@wsj.com