EDITOR'S NOTE: The Times-Call's series Take Two revisits people we have written about in the past year. Take Two stories will run on Mondays.

The first few weeks of Jackson "Flash" Palmeri's life were tumultuous and decidedly nomadic.

Jackson was born Sept. 14 at Exempla Good Samaritan in Lafayette after his parents narrowly escaped the floodwaters that devastated much of Lyons, his hometown, the day before. Ginger and Roy Palmeri were evacuated on a Colorado National Guard Truck and had only settled in with a friend in the Carbon Valley for a few hours when Jackson made his bid for the outside world.

Again, his parents found themselves on the move and driving through heavy rains from the Carbon Valley to Lafayette to welcome him. While they officially named him Jackson Rocco Palmeri, he was also saddled with a nickname, "Flash," as in "flash flood."

"I feel like a lot of people call him 'Flash,'" his mom noted.

The family of three returned to their Lyons home on Oct. 17, about a week ahead of most of their utilities. The power was on, but the water was not.

"We were kind of hippies and camped out in our house," Ginger said, noting that the family had electricity, but lived in the house without running water for about another week. They used a lot of hand sanitizer and bathed and did laundry elsewhere.

"He wears diapers so he was like, 'I don't need a toilet,'" Ginger joked about Jackson's reaction to the stripped-down accommodations of his own home.

Between the baby's birth and the family's return home, though, they found a lot of kindness and open doors, they said. The Palmeris spent a week with Ginger's good friend in the Carbon Valley. In that time, a friend of a friend offered up an entire house in Erie. Ginger said it is a second home and the owners allowed them to live there free until they could get back to Lyons. They stayed for five weeks.

"Flash" Palmeri is glad to be back in his home in Lyons, his parents say. (Matthew Jonas/Times-Call)

Those nomadic first weeks were tough for Jackson, who busied himself with a lot of late-night screaming. That ended, his parents said, when the family returned to Lyons.

"We thought he was instantly much happier at home," Ginger said, adding that she was grateful for the Erie house, but increasingly desperate to get back into her own home.

Ginger has been on maternity leave from her teaching position at Longmont's GOAL Academy, but Roy, a city of Longmont park ranger, has been able to stay home with their new addition, as well. His co-workers donated enough paid time off to him that he does not have to return to work until Dec. 4.

Jackson has settled into the business of being more of a baby and less of a traveler. On Friday that meant a eating big meal out of his bottle, grunting, hiccuping, smiling toothlessly, yawning, and of course, blasting other sounds from the diapered regions.

"That's terrifying," his mother deadpanned in response to that one.

He was dressed as "The Flash" for Halloween and the family is looking forward to the town's annual holiday celebration.

"While we were gone, all I could think about was that parade," Ginger said, adding she envisioned the entire town being home for Christmas.

While they collectively await the celebration, Jackson seemed contented with his lion mobile and the frantic family dog, Cubby, vying for some of the baby's spotlight.

Pierrette J. Shields can be reached at 303-684-5273 or at pshields@times-call.com.