GOP Senate nominee Ed Gillespie to roll out health plan Friday

He said it would preserve tax credits that employers get for offering health insurance and add new ones for individuals who buy coverage. He re-iterated his call to repeal the Affordable Care Act, but said he wanted to keep some as-yet-undefined protections for people with pre-existing conditions.

WILLIAMSBURG – GOP Senate nominee Ed Gillespie said Wednesday that he'll roll out his long-promised health plan on Friday, and he previewed the plan during a lunchtime speech to the local Kiwanis Club.

"The ACA bill was passed because there were legitimate concerns," Gillespie told club members. "But we now know that we've disrupted an entire marketplace."

Gillespie didn't go into much detail, but laid out several basic tenets of his coming plan, including:

- A refundable tax credit for individuals who buy insurance.

- A rollback on regulations that keep insurance companies from selling policies across state lines.

- New incentives for medical savings accounts to encourage people to set aside money for out-of-pocket health costs.

- Tort reform to limit excessive malpractice awards and cut down on defensive medicine.

Gillespie has hit his opponent, U.S. Sen. Mark Warner, repeatedly for voting for the ACA, which is also known as Obamacare. Warner, D-VA, has said repeatedly that he'd like to see changes to the law, but Republican intransigence on the issue has made it impossible to get anything substantial through Congress.

Among other things, Warner favors adding a fourth, and cheaper, category of insurance plans for consumers – the "Copper Plan," after the gold, silver and bronze that are already part of the ACA.

The senator criticized Gillespie Tuesday night, during a televised debate, for promising a health care plan for months but not revealing details with less than a month to go before the Nov. 4 election.

Warner has also hit Gillespie over the Republican's support for over-the-counter birth control. Since insurance plans don't typically cover over-the-counter drugs, the change would increase birth control costs for women across the board, Warner has said.

During his talk Wednesday, Gillespie also made his pitch for regulatory and tax reform, saying he wants to lower the country's corporate tax rate. He called for wage enhancements to help the working poor – and "particularly single mothers" – stay above the federal poverty line through a "work-incentive tax credit."

He re-iterated support for offshore drilling and said the money it produces could be spent on transportation infrastructure. In response to a question about pharmacuetican costs, he called for an overhaul at the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, saying it takes too long now for new drugs to be approved.

In an earlier meeting with the Daily Press editorial board Gillespie said he would work hard to secure federal money to deepen and widen shipping channels in Hampton Roads, and that he supported an 11 carrier fleet and the current construction effort on nuclear submarines.

Asked about cuts at Langley Air Force Base, Gillespie said they were an example of the problem with making across the board reductions rather than looking at real national security needs.