Seeking to avoid the fate of a fellow Democrat who fumbled the ball when asked about her support for President Barack Obama, Georgia senate candidate Michelle Nunn said on Friday that she did in fact vote for the Obama in the last two elections.

'I did vote for the president,' Nunn told the Washington Post in an interview this afternoon.

'I have said throughout the campaign that we need more people in Washington working with the president – Republican or Democrat – to get things done. I pledge to do that on behalf of Georgians,' she added.

When confronted by a tracker for America Rising, a Republican opposition research outfit, on Wednesday, Nunn had refused to say whether she voted for Obama in 2008 and 2012.

SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEO

Democratic candidate for U.S. Senate Michelle Nunn, center, arrives for early voting with her daughter Elizabeth and husband Ron Martin, left, at Fulton County's Adamsville Recreation Center on Wednesday. Nunn was reportedly confronted by a tracker outside the venue and asked whether she voted for Barack Obama for president. The Georgia Senate candidate wouldn't respond

Her only response was in the form of a grin she gave her questioner as she walked away from him and toward the entrance of the venue she was about to enter, an early voting center at the Adamsville Recreation Center, in Atlanta, Georgia.

'Ms. Nunn, did you vote for President Obama in 2008 and 2012?' the tracker had asked her, pouncing on an opportunity to toss Nunn the same question that's tripped up Democratic Senate candidate Alison Lundergan Grimes of Kentucky.

A Nunn supporter can then be heard in the background telling the young man, 'Would you leave her alone?'

As Nunn and her gaggle of supporters continued walking, other members of her entourage began touting President Obama's accomplishments.

'Yes, of course, yes, he’s the president…he’s done great things,' one of the supporters said.

'He's doing great things. Great things,' another voice said in response.

Nunn's refusal to speak to the tracker is not surprising given his party affiliation and the nature of his question. But the Democratic candidate's non-answer could have come back to haunt her in her close race against businessman David Perdue.

Multiple polls conducted in late September and early October had Perdue leading Nunn by several digits. A SurveyUSA poll released on Wednesday shows a reversal, with Nunn now up by three points. The race could just as easily flip back in Perdue's favor in the next two and a half weeks, however, and pollsters expect this race to be a nail biter.

Nunn is the daughter of former Georgia Senator Sam Nunn, a notable Democrat who has given thousands of dollars to Obama's election efforts. She's currently on leave of absence from her day job as CEO of Georgia-based non-profit organization Points of Light.

Perdue is the cousin of former Georgia Gov. Sonny Perdue, also a Republican. The self-funded, former Dollar General head defeated Republican Congressman Jack Kingston in a brutal primary this summer to win the GOP nomination.

Nunn and Perdue are competing to replace retiring Republican politician Saxby Chambliss. A third, Libertarian candidate, Amanda Swafford, is also vying for the seat and could prove a spoiler on Election Day. Swafford is steadily polling at five percent of the vote.

If neither Nunn or Perdue is able to win 50 percent of the vote, Georgia law calls for a run-off election that won't be held until early next year when other newly elected senators are already descending on Washington to begin the new legislative session.

Michele Nunn, right, and her family participate in early voting on Wednesday in Atlanta. Nunn is running against Republican David Perdue. The two are virtually tied two and a half weeks ahead of the election. Nunn said on Friday that she did in fact vote for Obama in the last two presidential elections

Neither major political party wants an extended campaign season lasting into 2015, and both the National Republican Senatorial Committee and the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee are pouring loads of cash into the race on behalf of their respective candidates.

Earlier this week the DSCC announced that it would go dark in Kentucky, where its candidate repeatedly stumbled over questions about her support for Obama, in order to shift $1 million into Nunn's race in Georgia.

Ironically, Nunn could have become the next victim of the 'did she or didn't she' vote for Obama conundrum that has plagued Kentucky's Grimes if she hadn't admitted her support for Obama today.

Nunn is hardly alone in her attempt to distance herself from Obama, though, whose approval rating is at a career low, according to an ABC News/Washington Post poll that came out on Wednesday.

New Hampshire Sen. Jeanne Shaheen, Alaska Sen. Mark Begich, Colorado Sen. Mark Udall, North Carolina Sen. Kay Hagan, Arkansas Sen. Mark Pryor and Louisiana Sen. Mary Landrieu have all went out of their way to avoid being associated with Obama this year as they wage reelection bids.

Udall is the senator who was supposed to appear at a July fundraiser with Obama, then cancelled at the last minute to stay in Washington.

He claimed at a debate in September that the 'White House when they look down the front lawn the last person they want to see coming is me.'

U.S. Senate candidates bearing Obama's party ID are avoiding the president like the plague. As a result, Obama, who is seen here delivering remarks during a cabinet level meeting at the White House on Wednesday, hasn't made a single public appearance on behalf of a Democratic contender this fall

Another Colorado Democrat, Gov. John Hickenlooper, is now claiming that he was never a proponent of Obama's signature healthcare reform law.

At a debate earlier this week against Republican Bob Beauprez, Hickenlooper said while talking about health care, 'and again, I'm not big fan of the Affordable Care Act, I wouldn't have designed it that...' He stopped short of finishing his sentence as he was both interrupted by his opponent and booed by members of the live audience.

As his Republican opponent immediately pointed out on Twitter after the debate, Hickenlooper was singing a slightly different tune when the Supreme Court ruled in 2012 that the individual mandate portion of Obamacare was constitutional.

A press release from Hickenlooper's office includes a direct quote from the governor praising the legislation.

'More Coloradans will benefit when the Affordable Care Act is fully implemented in 2014,' he said.

Once considered a rising star of the Democratic Party, Hickenlooper is trailing Beauprez by four points, per a Quinnipiac poll that came out yesterday. The incumbent governor is gaining on Beauprez, who was once ahead by 10 points, but he the race still leans heavily in Beauprez's favor.