Executive Briefing | by Sarah C. Threnhauser, MPA | July 10, 2015

It seems like everyone has been talking about ICD-10 – not just this year, but for the past few years. The big issue – all organizations need to switch to ICD-10 coding system for diagnoses for billing and claims by October 1, 2015. What does this mean for health and human service provider organizations?

First, it helps to understand what the ICD is and how it is used. The International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, usually called the International Classification of Diseases (ICD), was developed by the World Health Organization (WHO) and is used to report medical diagnoses and inpatient procedures. All entities covered by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996 are required to use the ICD coding system for all billing and claims – this includes payers, provider organizations, and hospitals.

The problem is that the United States has been in the process of switching from the ICD-9 classification system to the newer tenth version of the ICD for the past few years. Currently, the U.S. is the only industrialized nation not using the ICD-10 classification system.

The transition from ICD-9 to ICD-10 affects everything from clinical diagnoses, billing, contracts, and work flow to health information technology (HIT) and compliance protocol standards. The ICD-10 has many benefits from payers, provider organizations, and the health care system as a whole because it allows for more precise diagnoses and for a more accurate reporting of the severity and complexity of patients’ conditions. The ICD-9 has about 14,000 diagnosis codes and about 3,000 procedure codes, whereas the ICD-10 has closer to 69,000 diagnosis codes and 71,000 procedure codes. While these changes allow for greater accuracy in reporting, it also requires more precision from provider organizations.

This transition has proven difficult for payers and provider organizations alike, and the deadline to implement has been pushed back twice. Have these deadline extensions enabled the health care community to properly prepare for this major change?

The reports are mixed. A February study from the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) has indicated that Medicaid and Medicare are ready for the transition (Medicare, Medicaid Ready for ICD-10, Report Suggests) – but provider organizations, on the other hand, may not be so prepared, according to an article, “Who is not prepared for ICD-10? Plenty,” by Healthcare IT News. That could spell big trouble for provider organizations, as incorrectly coded claims may not be paid on time, or at all. However, there is some good news for providers – CMS has announced that it would reimburse for wrongly coded claims for up to one year after the October deadline.

For more information on this topic, check out What Does The Transition To ICD-10 Mean For The Health & Human Service System?: An OPEN MINDS Market Intelligence Report. This report is free to all premium members – and can be purchased in our e-store for $495. The reference guide answers a number of questions:

What Is The ICD? What Is The ICD-10 & What Has Changed From The ICD-9? How Does The ICD-10 Relate To Other Coding Systems? Making The Transition To ICD-10: The Payer Perspective Making The Transition To ICD-10: The Provider Perspective

Still, ready or not, the ICD-10 is finally going to arrive in October, and if provider organizations want to see uninterrupted billing, they have a lot of work to do over the next few months.