Los Angeles marches, rallies commemorate Armenian killings

hello

Demonstrators rally outside the Turkish Consulate to commemorate the killings of an estimated 1.5 million Armenians under the Ottoman Empire more than a century ago, in Los Angeles on Sunday, April 24, 2016. Historians estimate that up to 1.5 million Armenians were killed starting in April 1915. Turkey denies the killings were genocide and contends those who died were victims of civil war and unrest. Turkey also insists the death toll has been inflated. Associated Press

Demonstrators rally outside the Turkish Consulate to commemorate the killings of an estimated 1.5 million Armenians under the Ottoman Empire more than a century ago, in Los Angeles on Sunday, April 24, 2016. Historians estimate that up to 1.5 million Armenians were killed starting in April 1915. Turkey denies the killings were genocide and contends those who died were victims of civil war and unrest. Turkey also insists the death toll has been inflated. Associated Press

LOS ANGELES -- Weekend vigils, marches and demonstrations were held across the Los Angeles area to commemorate the killings of an estimated 1.5 million Armenians under the Ottoman Empire more than a century ago.

Tens of thousands rallied Sunday afternoon outside the Turkish Consulate just hours after a procession marched through the Little Armenia neighborhood.

Demonstrators carrying banners reading "Never Again" and "Turkey Must Pay" were met at the consulate by a small number of counter-protesters kept by police behind a barrier.

There were no immediate reports of any arrests.

A vigil was held Saturday outside City Hall in neighboring Glendale, home to a large number of Armenian-Americans. There was also a special observance at the Armenian Genocide Martyrs Monument in Montebello, California.

Gov. Jerry Brown issued a proclamation Sunday declaring April 24 a statewide "Day of Remembrance of Armenian Genocide" in honor of those subjected to "torture, starvation, mass murder and exile."

Historians estimate that up to 1.5 million Armenians were killed starting in April 1915. Turkey denies the killings were genocide and contends those who died were victims of civil war and unrest. Turkey also insists the death toll has been inflated.