Republicans won big on Tuesday, securing seven seats to seize Senate control (with races in Alaska and Louisiana still up for grabs) and gaining 13 seats in the House. Not only did the GOP deliver a shellacking to Democrats in Congress, but it also won a number of key governors’ races, including those in Florida, Massachusetts, Wisconsin, Kansas, Illinois and Maine.

So why the wave? Taegen Goddard says the GOP takeover is a direct result of low Democratic turnout; the voting coalition that supported President Barack Obama just didn’t show up to the polls like it did in 2008 and 2012. Goddard points to low turnout among key groups like single women, blacks, Latinos and young voters – groups that previously drove Obama to victory (and also posted not-so-hot turnout numbers during the 2010 midterms). “If Democrats were going to hold off a Republican tsunami, they needed their base voters to come out to the polls and pull the lever for the president’s party,” wrote Goddard. “That didn’t happen where Democrats needed it to.”

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on 2014 Congressional Elections]

But others say the Democrats’ defeat was less on voters than on the party itself. Political infighting between Democratic leadership and the president, say Philip Rucker and Robert Costa at the Washington Post, sowed the seeds for a GOP takeover. “All year on the trail, Democratic incumbents would be pounded for administration blunders beyond their control,” wrote Rucker and Costa. Repeated attacks on Democratic candidates for the Affordable Care Act’s flawed rollout, for instance, and the backlog at veteran hospitals left Senate leaders with a bitter taste in their mouths.

And when Senate leadership pleaded with Obama for funds, they were met with opposition, until just two months out from Election Day. “I don’t think that the political team at the White House truly was up to speed and up to par doing what needed to get done,” said David Krone, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid’s chief of staff. “No member of the Democratic caucus screwed up the rollout of that health-care Web site,” Krone told the two reporters, “yet they paid the price – every one of them.”

Despite stumping for a number of races, it seemed Obama had long prepared for the worst, said the New York Times’ Peter Baker. “In those red states, Mr. Obama was politically toxic and deferred to candidates who asked him to stay away,” said Baker, visiting only five states in the last days before the election. But the president seemed hardly comfortable omitting himself – or his policies – from the race. “I am not on the ballot this fall,” Obama said in an Oct. 2 speech in Chicago. “But make no mistake: these policies are on the ballot. Every single one of them." Those words flew directly in the face of what every Democratic candidate was campaigning on: a political future divorced from Obama and his administration.

[READ: Time for a Shake-Up]

Politico’s Edward-Isaac Dovere, Manu Raju and John Bresnahan agree. Ultimately, the race came down to one thing: a "simple message" from Republicans. “A vote for us is a vote against Obama," they wrote. "And Democrats were never able to escape it.”

But a Republican sweep may not doom the Democrats for long, says Andrew Kohut at the Pew Research Center. “If the [Republicans] don’t meet or exceed expectations, given views of Obama and public discontent, it will raise real questions about their long term political viability,” Kohut told the New York Times.

It would be a mistake, though, to underestimate Republican gains in the lead-up to the 2016 elections, says Times contributor Thomas Edsall. For one, the GOP wrangled its tea party faction, making it tougher for Democrats to paint a picture of the GOP as run by conservative fanatics. Republicans also shrugged off the accusation that they are waging a “war on women”; Republican Joni Ernst won a Senate seat in Iowa, becoming the first woman elected to Congress in that state, and Mia Love, the GOP’s first black woman in Congress, defeated her Democratic opponent Doug Owens in Utah.

[READ: Both Parties Are in Deep Trouble]