Things are great. Your two-year-old startup is growing fast. You're closing in on a lucrative round of Series A funding, you just landed a cornerstone client, and the team is coming together. You see nothing but growth. But, as any entrepreneur who's gone before you knows, growth is hard. Take health-insurance benefits, for example.



As we enter the employee benefits renewal season, changes in the health-insurance landscape will have a significant impact on fast-growth companies, especially in New York.



For starters, the size of your company is very important in determining benefits options. Fast growers may cross a threshold that could greatly affect the insurance choices available, and that threshold will change in 2016.



In 2015, companies in New York with two to 50 full-time employees are considered "small groups." If you're in this category, your rates are determined by county, and there is no fluctuation for demographics of the employee base, such as average age or the industry in which an employer operates. Companies of this size in the same county all pay the same rates.



The market for employers with 51 to 99 workers is different. To offer coverage to staff, they need to submit a census to each carrier with their demographic information. For this group, the industry of the company is taken into account, and there is much more flexibility with regard to the plan designs available. The option of self-funding the health plan also exists, at the moment.



So, if your business crosses over that 50-employee threshold, you'll typically be able to craft a benefits program that is more suitable to your workforce.

But in 2016 that's going to change. Notably, the small-group market will be extended up to 100 employees. This is going to cause a tremendous amount of change in the 50- to 99-employee space. Specifically:



• They will no longer have plan design flexibility; their plans will need to fall into the Affordable Care Act's tiers of platinum, gold, silver and bronze, as the under-50 employee market does today.



• Their demographics will no longer matter. A young tech firm with healthy 20-somethings will likely see a large increase in premium at renewal this year because that "discount" will disappear. On the flip side, an employer with an older population in a risky industry will very possibly see its rates go down.



• The option to self-fund a health plan will be lost in 2016.



The carrier market may also change. Today, insurers treat the two-to-50 and 51-to-99 categories as two distinct markets, and how they'll handle the merger of them remains unclear. For instance, Cigna currently does not sell policies to employers with fewer than 50 full-time employees in New York. Will Cigna extend this approach up to the 99-employee level? If Cigna is your insurer and you have 60 employees, pay attention.



Additionally, New York is switching the way it counts employees. Currently, the state uses the number of eligible employees. As of Jan. 1, 2016, New York will use a full-time equivalent methodology. This could put your organization into a different market.



These are potentially major changes. It's time to get organized. Employers that haven't yet requested a community rating analysis from their employee benefits consultant should do so immediately. This will show what the potential renewal increase will be if you're moving into community-rated, fully insured plans, or out of them.



As 2016 approaches, many employers are confused, uninformed or both. That's a scary proposition. If the renewal isn't handled proactively, it could even short-circuit your fast-growth track.



Yes, the goalposts are moving.



Mark Grisanti is a vice president and senior benefits consultant at Corporate Synergies.





Get Crain's Daily Alert Sign up for our FREE daily email newsletter. A summary of the day's top business and political headlines from the newsroom of Crain's New York Business. More Newsletters ›

Comments