MEMPHIS, Tenn., Jan. 27, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Sedgwick, the leading global provider of technology-enabled claims and productivity management solutions, today published its "5 factors for fifteen," forecasting major industry trends that employers should watch in 2015.

"We are committed to helping our clients prepare for this year and beyond by highlighting emerging trends and risks likely impacting their businesses and their people," said David A. North, president and CEO of Sedgwick. "Technology and healthcare advancements, changing workforce demographics and legislative, political and climate changes, among other factors, contribute to the challenges we expect this year. It's important for us to stay at the forefront of these shifts so we can continue achieving the best outcomes for our clients and their employees and stakeholders."

The key trends that Sedgwick's thought leaders believe will most significantly affect employers in 2015 include:

Redefining healthcare An evolving U.S. healthcare market Patient engagement Mental health Technological advances User-centric solutions Hyper-connectivity Cyber risk Market and economic forces Economic improvements Focusing on the customer experience Political landscape Workforce challenges Integration The growing need to groom new adjusters Diversity and inclusion Weathering disasters Addressing resiliency Understanding exposures Preparing for the ripple effect of climate change

"We believe that the aforementioned issues will be significant in 2015 and join other industry experts in closely monitoring the legislative impact of the recent shift in power in the U.S. Senate—and the potential political impact of the 2016 presidential election—on the Affordable Care Act," North added.

For more on the 5 factors for fifteen and Sedgwick's perspective, visit sedgwick.com/5forfifteen and follow the Sedgwick blog "Connection" at blog.sedgwick.com for ongoing thought leadership.

About Sedgwick

Sedgwick Claims Management Services, Inc. is the leading global provider of technology-enabled claims and productivity management solutions. Sedgwick and its affiliated companies deliver cost-effective claims, productivity, managed care, risk consulting and other services to clients through the expertise of more than 12,000 colleagues in some 275 offices located in the U.S., Canada and the U.K. The company specializes in workers' compensation; disability, FMLA, and other employee absence; managed care; general, automobile, and professional liability; property loss adjusting; warranty and credit card claims services; fraud and investigation; structured settlements; Medicare compliance solutions; and forensic investigations. Sedgwick and its affiliates design and implement customized programs based on proven practices and advanced technology that exceed client expectations. For more, see www.sedgwick.com.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20120813/CL56657LOGO

SOURCE Sedgwick