CINCINNATI - Nightmares. Insomnia. Depression. Thoughts of suicide.

For those who have witnessed an extremely frightening or shocking event, these symptoms can consume their lives, disrupt relationships with family and friends, and interfere with work or school. It’s a condition called post-traumatic stress disorder, known commonly as PTSD.

Now researchers at the University of Cincinnati are planning to test a new medication that might ease the symptoms of PTSD, particularly among military personnel and police officers.

About AtEase UC is one of 25 study sites across the country carrying out AtEase. The study seeks: Men and women, age 18-65.

Those serving or who have served in the military, law enforcement, or with Homeland Security, Secret Service, an intelligence agency, or who have worked as a military contractor.

Participants must have suffered a work-related trauma after the year 2000. The study will last about 12 weeks. Individuals who qualify will receive evaluations and study medication at no cost and will be compensated for time and travel. For more information about the AtEase study, call 513-558-6612 or email Alicia.Heller@uc.edu .

“It’s not uncommon for military personnel and police officers to experience post-traumatic stress disorder,” said Dr. Lesley Arnold , a professor of psychiatry and behavioral neuroscience at the UC College of Medicine. “In their efforts to protect all of us, they may get into life-threatening situations. They may witness or experience very traumatic events, and bad exposure puts them at risk for PTSD.”

To find a safe, effective treatment, Arnold and her colleagues at UC will test a formulation of a medication called cyclobenzaprine , TNX-102 SL, manufactured by Tonix Pharmaceuticals Inc. New York-based Tonix specializes in medicines for nervous system disorders.

The UC team’s work is part of a nationwide clinical research trial, called the AtEase Study , that will evaluate how well the medication works compared with a placebo. Participants will take the medication once a day, before bedtime. It dissolves under the tongue, and it’s specifically designed to reduce sleep disturbances and lessen the intensity of PTSD symptoms.

AtEase will be a double-blind study, meaning neither participants nor those who administer the study will know during the trial who’s getting the medicine and who’s getting a placebo.

“The goal is to see if the medication can improve the quality of sleep in individuals with post-traumatic stress disorder and reduce distressing dreams and nightmares,” said Arnold. “And the hope would be that this will improve the quality of life and also reduce the daytime symptoms associated with post-traumatic stress disorder.”

Significant problem among vets

Arnold says that PTSD has become a significant problem for returning veterans and that there is a great need for better treatments.

According to the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, 7 percent to 8 percent of people in the general U.S. population will have PTSD at some point in their lives. For members of the armed forces, the numbers are significantly higher:

Up to 20 percent of Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom suffer from PTSD in a given year.

About 12 percent of Gulf War veterans suffer from PTSD in a given year.

Nearly a third of Vietnam War veterans, about 30 percent, have had PTSD in their lifetimes.

“The symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder can be very serious and negatively impact a person’s life,” said Arnold. “And the symptoms can last for years after exposure to a traumatic event.”

Those symptoms can include:

Distressing dreams and flashbacks.

Avoidance of events that remind a person of the trauma.

Hypervigilance (reacting to sounds that wouldn’t normally cause stress).

Emotional numbing.

Depression and thoughts of suicide.

“It’s very important for us to address this problem,” said Arnold. “We need to develop more treatment options for these individuals and medications that might reduce the intensity of their symptoms, so they can improve the quality of their life.“

“Ultimately we’d like to reduce risks associated with post-traumatic stress disorder, such as depression and suicide,” she said.