Sixty-one percent of Americans support allowing daily prayer to be spoken in the classroom, reports Rebecca Riffkin, a Gallup analyst.

Repeat that: Six out of 10 people support prayer in public schools. No problem. Go right ahead, teachers and students. Eighty percent of Republicans, 64 percent of independents and 45 percent of Democrats agree with this, the pollster finds in a survey released Friday. But wait, there’s more.

Three fourths of the nation — 75 percent — say students should be able to pray during graduation ceremonies as part of the official program; 92 percent of Republicans, 75 percent of independents and 65 percent of Democrats agree. About 61 percent say public school facilities should be made available to student religious groups after school hours; 83 percent of Republicans, 76 percent of independents and 76 percent of Democrats agree.

SEE ALSO: Ted Cruz wins presidential straw poll at 2014 Values Voter Summit

“Religion continues to be important to many Americans. The vast majority of Americans identify with a religion, a majority of Americans say religion can solve today’s problems, and three in four Americans see the Bible as the actual or inspired word of God,” Ms. Riffkin says. “Thus, it is not surprising that a majority of Americans are in favor of religion having a larger presence in schools.”

THE VALUES NARRATIVE BECOMES A WAR CRY

The most traditional of the nation’s conservatives had their say for 72 hours during the recent Values Voters Summit, and here are a few takeaways from the luminaries that could keep resonating for a while:

“It’s very, very, important that we nominate a conservative for the first time since Ronald Reagan. There are people under 50 years old who have never had an opportunity to vote for a conservative president. We want to show them what it’s like. It’s our generation’s responsibility.” (Mark Levin)

SEE ALSO: Bill Maher slams liberals for phony ‘war on women’

“We stand for life, we stand for marriage, we stand for Israel. We repeal Common Core. We repeal every word of Obamacare.” (Sen. Ted Cruz)

“Keep faith in the American Dream and share it, because the message resonates, and it has since that band of brothers dumped tea in Boston Harbor. We can be optimistic, as they were. We can be optimistic about the future of our one nation because we’re under God. So stand up and stiffen your spine. The best is yet to come.” (Sarah Palin)

“Imagine what would happen if the people of faith, the value voters of America — the evangelicals, the pro-life and pro-family Catholics and Protestants from all over this country would let it be known: We are registered, and we will show up. We will hire people, and we will fire people who should have been fired a long time ago.” (Mike Huckabee)

“Has anyone said what a blessing Barack Obama is to us? I will tell you, I’m a better man. I know more about American history since he’s been president. While I wish it wouldn’t have happened, and I’m not rooting for someone else who was his secretary of state — I don’t think I need to be that much better, Lord. I’m stronger.” (Glenn Beck)

“If you look at the current conservative movement, the Republican Party, there are issues we haven’t even lost yet, and we’re talking about giving up. Do something. Quit being scared and start being activists and making things happen in America.” (Rick Santorum)

AN ANTIDOTE FOR TOM FRIEDMAN

New York Times columnist Tom Friedman irked more than one person with his observation in a column Sunday that President Reagan “had it easier” than President Obama when dealing with the nation’s security, foreign threats, clandestine issues and a world on the brink of one thing or another.

“Basically, his point is that Arabs are barbaric savages, unlike Communists. Well, the Communists were pretty savage, too. Where I think Reagan did have it easier is that in his day, America still retained a largely functional political class. Now we have a largely dysfunctional one,” points out Glenn Reynolds, the “Instapundit” for PJ Media.

THE EARLY FACTOR

A single Election Day? Not anymore. In America, It is now Election Month, the sages say — which can help explain the intensity of campaigning and political advertising — the cost of which is projected to run about $4 billion. Early mail-in voting in 35 states is the major factor: Voting began the first week of September in North Carolina and gets underway this week in Iowa, followed by Georgia, Minnesota, California and Arizona.

“In reality, the days of an actual election ‘day’ are long gone. It’s a solid election month, if not more in some places, and will continue to expand,” Michael McDonald, a University of Florida political scientist, tells the Los Angeles Times.

Mr. McDonald oversees the United States Elections Project, a research project that found that ballots cast before Election Day increased from 4 percent in 1972 to 25 percent in 2010.

“Moving up the timing of the vote has forced campaigns to change. Ads and arguments that once were saved for right before Election Day are now unleashed earlier,” notes Kurtis Lee, a political reporter for the LA Times.

LIKELY OVERLOOKED

“As mist clears off glistening lakes and fog lifts from forests and grasslands, sportsmen and women carry forward a proud tradition rooted in self-reliance and environmental stewardship. On National Hunting and Fishing Day, we recognize all those who responsibly participate in these national pastimes and their contributions to the preservation of our land, water, and wildlife.

“Our Nation’s natural bounty bolsters our economy, supports tourism and recreation, and rejuvenates the human spirit. And as our parents and grandparents did, we have a profound obligation to protect these outdoor resources. Effective conservation ensures generations to come will be able to enjoy the beauty of our expansive and unspoiled wilderness. For decades, hunters and anglers have championed sustainable practices and supported environmental stewardship through hunting licenses and other small fees collected for the use of our public lands. As they teach their children and grandchildren to track game through the woods or wade into a cascading stream, they pass on our country’s legacy of embracing our wild and scenic places.”

— From President Obama’s proclamation for National Hunting and Fishing Day, issued on Sunday

POLL DU JOUR

• 30 percent of Americans are “not sure” who sets the agenda in Washington these days.

• 21 percent say President Obama sets the agenda.

• 20 percent say lobbyists set it; 9 percent say House Republicans.

• 7 percent say media set the agenda, 6 percent say Senate Democrats set it.

• 3 percent say Senate Republicans, 3 percent House Democrats.

• 2 percent say the Supreme Court sets the agenda.

Source: An Economist/YouGov of 997 U.S. adults conducted Sept. 20-22.

• Grimaces, grins to jharper@washingtontimes.com.