LANSING, MI — Michigan Republican Gov. Rick Snyder set an aggressive agenda when he ran for office in 2010, releasing a 10-point plan to address problems facing the state.

His personal wealth helped Snyder emerge from a crowded Republican primary field four years ago, but he also proved his policy mettle in a series of white papers that spanned more than 35,000 words.

Related: Can Democratic challenger Mark Schauer do what he says he’d do?

With the governor up for re-election this fall against Democrat Mark Schauer, we revisited those white papers and other early-term proposals to see if Snyder delivered.

Here are some of our key findings.

Reform Michigan’s tax system: Snyder called elimination of the Michigan Business Tax -- “the dumbest tax in the United States” -- one of his top priorities in 2010 and followed through in mid-2011. As promised, the governor and the Republican-led Legislature replaced the MBT with a six percent Corporate Income Tax.

But Snyder also approved several tax code changes he hadn’t discussed on the campaign trail. The 2011 package cut the Homestead Property Tax, reduced the Earned Income Tax Credit and phased out a long-standing exemption on all pension income.

The total package was projected to cut total business taxes by some $1.7 billion while increasing individual income tax collections by about $1.4 billion annually.

Create jobs: Snyder, in his white paper on retaining young residents and attracting new talent, offered a succinct objective: Create more jobs.

Michigan has added about 233,000 payroll jobs since 2011, according to federal data, but that trend arguably started before Snyder took office and has slowed down. The state added 75,600 jobs in 2010, the last year under former Gov. Jennifer Granholm. The state added 96,500 jobs under Snyder in 2011, 74,700 jobs in 2012 and then just 31,900 in 2013. About 30,100 jobs had been added through August of this year.

Michigan’s unemployment rate has fallen from 11 percent in January of 2011 to 7.2 percent in September of this year. But those numbers coincide with a similar drop in the national unemployment rate, which now stands at 5.9 percent. Michigan had the fourth highest unemployment rate in the country when Snyder took office; As of August, Michigan was tied for the fifth highest.

Improve transparency: As a candidate, Snyder proposed a system to rank Michigan’s national competitiveness, which he’s followed through on with MiDashboard, a website that provides generally reliable performance metrics. An overview of government spending by department is now available “Open Michigan” website, but the state has not yet added the sort of line-item expenditure information Snyder called for in 2010.

Snyder also criticized Michigan law for allowing “unregulated third party contributions to finance robo-calls and masquerade them as issue advertising without revealing the funding source.” But instead of changing the law to require disclosure, he signed a new version codifying existing rules and allowing issue ad donors to remain anonymous.

The governor has not followed through on a majority of his ethics reform proposals from 2010. Michigan does not require disclosure of itemized lobbying expenditures, has not banned “all gifts” from lobbyists to elected officials or required lobbyists to file financial reports quarterly rather than yearly.

Revitalize central cities: Snyder didn’t offer many direct proposals to revitalize Detroit in 2010 but said it would be a focus, and he’s arguably spent more energy on the city more than any governor in recent history — Republican or Democrat. He appointed an emergency manager in 2013, authorized a Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing and brokered a “grand bargain” to minimize pension cuts and protect prized Detroit Institute of Art pieces from a fire sale.

Under Snyder, state police have supplemented local law enforcement efforts in Flint, Detroit, Pontiac and Saginaw — each of which have ranked in the top 10 nationally for violent crime rates in recent years. Recent data suggests the state assistance is having some impact, and the new state budget that took effect in October includes money for the state police to buy a new helicopter for added patrols.

In his 2010 white papers, Snyder proposed reformulating revenue sharing to assist cities in fielding renewable energy technology. That didn’t happen, and the governor frustrated some locals by cutting traditional statutory revenue sharing and requiring them to meet new requirements to qualify. The state eased requirements for the current fiscal year and increased statutory revenue sharing payments, but funding is still down since Snyder took office.

Protect the Environment: As proposed, Snyder has partnered with universities to study and monitor environmental risks, and the state has worked with its neighbors to identify regional threats and develop contingency plans. He reconvened the dormant Council of Great Lakes Governors, which finalized a mutual aid agreement in April for shared staff and expertise in the event of a serious regional threat.

The governor has also followed through on plans to promote mass transit rail and connect outdoor trail networks. The current-year budget includes new funding to fight Asian Carp and other invasive species. But again, it’s what Snyder did not say he’d do that has proven controversial.

The Michigan League of Conservation Voters gave the governor a “C” on a mid-term scorecard, saying he too often “let the anti-conservation Legislature lead” and signed bills that the group said would jeopardize sand dune protections and divert money from programs designed to reduce the use of hazardous chemicals.

Reform Michigan’s education system: Snyder didn’t say in 2010 he’d cut K-12 education funding in his first budget, or that he’d end up increasing state funding by more than $1 billion over his four years. What he did say was that school funding should be tied to specific goals for enhancing the quality of classroom instruction, which he has done to some extent through best practice grants.

Research Michigan candidates and issues

The governor has focused on the P-20 model he described four years ago. He’s increased funding for early childhood education and signed bills facilitating transfer credits between high schools, community colleges and universities. But after arguing that the state must “reverse recent trends of under-investing” in universities, he cut spending his first year and has not yet fully restored higher education funding.

Snyder’s 2010 education white paper mentioned charter schools just once, and only in passing, but he’s been an advocate for school choice in Lansing. Just four months after taking office, Snyder proposed a plan to lift the state’s cap on charter schools, which the Republican-led Legislature approved by the end of the year. That move, along with changes to teacher tenure, was widely opposed by Democrats and teachers unions.

Reform Michigan’s health care system: Snyder’s push to expand Medicaid eligibility under the Affordable Care Act surprised some conservatives, but it was consistent with a number of health care reform goals he advocated for in 2010. As of late September, the state had enrolled more than 400,000 people in the “Healthy Michigan” plan.

The plan incentivizes recipients to make healthy lifestyle choices by offering them the chance to reduce cost-sharing and includes a website where residents can create a personal health plan, as Snyder proposed four years ago. Federal funding has also extended outreach programs to citizens in high-risk communities.

Snyder completed or made progress on most of the health care proposals he made in 2010, with one exception: Michigan has not created an inexpensive, high-deductible insurance product to protect residents from financial ruin in the face of a catastrophic medical disaster.

Fix the roads: Snyder didn’t spend much time on infrastructure in his 2010 white papers, but he started discussing the need for additional funding his first year in office, and his call for up to $1 billion a year in new money for roads and bridges has been a staple of his tenure.

During a 2011 special message, Snyder suggested a revenue-neutral plan to tax fuel at the wholesale level and mentioned the possibility of increasing vehicle registration fees to generate new revenue. He also suggested that county and regional authorities should have the ability to propose registration fees of their own for local projects.

Two years later, Snyder asked the Legislature to consider increasing fuel taxes and registration fees. That hasn’t happened. While state lawmakers have approved some extra one-time road funding in recent budgets, they have not yet approved a comprehensive and long-term solution. A plan based primarily on fuel taxes fell apart in the Senate in June.

MLive reporter Emily Lawler contributed to this analysis.

Jonathan Oosting is a Capitol reporter for MLive Media Group. Email him, find him on Facebook or follow him on Twitter.