STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. - Democrat Domenic M. Recchia Jr. slammed House GOP Majority Leader Paul Ryan's budget plan on Wednesday, and tried to use it as a cudgel in his House battle against Rep. Michael Grimm.

"The budget proposed by Michael Grimm and the Republican House is yet another example of failed leadership that throws the middle class, working families, children and seniors under the bus in order to benefit the millionaires and corporate special interests funding his campaign," said Recchia, a former city councilman from Brooklyn.

The White House has also slammed the budget proposal, saying it would raise taxes on middle-class families by an average of $2,000 in order to cut taxes on those who make $1 million a year and more.

Recchia said that the budget would cost the country 3 million jobs in 2015 and cut $52 billion in transportation and infrastructure improvements.

Ryan's budget contains $5.1 trillion in cuts to help bring the government's ledger into the black by 2024. It pushes wide-ranging cuts to programs such as food stamps and government-paid health care for the poor and working class.

Ryan (R-Wis.), chairman of the House Budget Committee and the 2012 GOP vice presidential candidate, said his plan "puts us on the path to pay off our debt."

Among the spending cuts in Ryan's budget: $2.1 trillion over 10 years in health care subsidies and coverage under the Affordable Care Act; $732 billion in cuts to Medicaid and other health care programs, and almost $1 trillion in cuts to other benefit programs like food stamps, Pell Grants and farm subsidies.

"It's a slap in the face to the hard-working families in Staten Island and South Brooklyn who now more than ever need a voice in government that is going to fight for them," Recchia said. "When elected, I'll be that voice."

But Grimm (R-Staten Island/Brooklyn) said it was "insulting" for Recchia to say he would be a voice for the Island when Recchia had voted in favor of extending term limits, higher property taxes and congestion pricing while in the Council.

"This tax-and-spend, progressive liberal must think the people of Staten Island are stupid or they forgot his record, but he is wrong yet again," Grimm said.

He added, "I have consistently stated that the Ryan budget is far from perfect, but it is a starting point for negotiations with liberal Democrats that refuse to address our ever-growing debt."

"We must get a handle on the $17.5 trillion debt because leaving it for our children and grandchildren to pay is morally reprehensible," Grimm said.