Rams targeting John Freismuth for help down the road

Colorado State tight ends coach Art Valero gives instruction to John Freismuth (8) and Brett Jordan (88) during practice this week. Freismuth, a Loveland product, will spend this season learning the nuances of being a college athlete and getting bigger. ( Mike Brohard/ Loveland Reporter-Herald )

FORT COLLINS — Even after he committed, there was debate about where he fit best.

John Freismuth hadn't even started his senior year at Loveland when he made the verbal pledge to the Colorado State football team. At the time, he felt they were looking at him more as a safety, a position he played well for the Indians.

But he'd also run some at wide receiver at a CSU camp, and that intrigued them. When he showed big-play ability on the outside in the fall, the thoughts in Fort Collins had started to change.

Then midway through the summer, they were altered again. Freismuth was told he was needed in the meeting room with the H-backs and tight ends. For a college coach, it's not about what a player has done, but what they envision you becoming.

So they looked past the fact Freismuth had never been asked to block and projected his athleticism into a bigger version on his 6-foot-5 frame.

"Great example. I talked to Kivon (Cartwright) this summer, he was 195 when he got here. Now he's a 245-pound man," CSU tight ends coach Art Valero said. "Things have changed. He's still alive, he's a lot faster than the guys he's going against. It will translate the same way with John. John came in, he was 205, and so I can see that same kind of growth. The key thing is just being patient for the next four years."

If Freismuth develops likes Cartwright, the Rams will be more than happy. Though the senior has missed the past two games, his 57 career catches for 857 yards and nine touchdowns have NFL scouts intrigued. However, there's a ways to go before the comparisons extend beyond initial introductions.

Advertisement

Freismuth needs to learn to block, be it coming out of the backfield, off the line or with a hand on the ground next to a tackle. It's not all brute strength, but technique, leverage, pad level and hand placement. The good part about that, Valero said, is Freismuth came to him with no pre-learned bad habits.

"The great thing about it is is he's a blank slate in terms of the blocking part of it," Valero said. "He's just never been asked to do it in that realm. When I said he was a willing participant, he's willing and he tries and he works hard and gets upset with himself when he doesn't have the success he wants. That will come."

All agree a bit of bulk will help, but it won't do any good if it comes as a result of empty categories, either. The key is keeping that athleticism and speed in place, as offensive coordinator Dave Baldwin said Freismuth is the fastest option the Rams have at the position.

Like Cartwright did before him, they want him to get bigger and faster in the process. Strength and conditioning coach Mike Kent said they have Freismuth on a different program than those who are on the travel squad, and it's based on an individual assessment they did with him. He's lifting four days a week, and it's a more intense program than what he was doing in high school.

"We put him on a little bit more aggressive program because of the limited amount of reps he's getting," Kent said, adding a nutritional plan has been added. "We can increase his load and his metabolism so he can gain weight."

Kent also stressed it will come gradually so as to keep his functionality. Freismuth is up to 210, and Kent aims at 215 when Ram U begins in January. At the start of spring, 220, then 225 when fall camp begins for his redshirt freshman year.

In the meantime, he's not getting much of a look at the CSU playbook. His time now is devoted to individual drills at practice and whatever role they need him to fill on the scout team, which Baldwin said is his most important job at the time, that and getting accustomed to simply being a student-athlete and learning the discipline required.

It's not always easy waiting for your time to come, but the guy he's been compared to most already sees the right attitude producing progress.

"I've been really impressed with him. He has the same body type as me coming in," Cartwright said. "The thing that's really impressed me is how smart he is, how fast he picks up the plays and how fast he can just stay on pace.

"He's a guy that can see that it's a progression. He will get on the field. He just has to be patient and focus on getting himself better right now. He's a guy that already knows that."

Contact Sports Editor Mike Brohard at 970-635-3633 or mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and twitter.com/mbrohard