Rapid City, SD

After a big public vote that nixed a $180-million-dollar expansion plan for the Rushmore Plaza Civic Center, Rapid City voters are into another important campaign.

Mayor Sam Kooiker is running for his third term, and facing a challenge by Steve Allender, the man who once served as police chief.

Allender says he and Kooiker had good working relationship, with some disagreements.

"I was one of those employees of his who was not afraid to tell him how I felt," Allender says. "I think he appreciated it some of the times and some of the times he didn't. But I disagreed with him a number of times."

One disagreement came after Allender retired last spring. Kookier and Allender parted company in a big way over Kooiker's initial appointment of Lt. Elias Diaz as the new chief. Kooiker liked Diaz for his Hispanic and Native American ancestry, but Allender considered Diaz to be a good officer who wasn't prepared to be chief.

Allender had groomed Capt. Karl Jegeris as his successor, and Jegeris was serving as interim chief when the Rapid City Council rejected Diaz. Kooiker then appointed Jegeris, who was confirmed.

There were hard feelings, which could carry into the mayor's race, where Allender says he won't sling mud but will point out differences.

"The mayor's a politician. He's trained to be a politician. He's got 12, 13 years in city politics," Allender says. "I consider myself to have 29 years in community service."

Kooiker argues that his years on the city council and four years as mayor are his community service, and welcomes the challenge by Allender.

"This position belongs to the people. I don't hold the title. The title belongs to the people," he said. "And I believe frequent and fair elections are good for the process."

He was coy about criticizing Allender or defining differences between them.

"It's a little early to be able to see where that, how that's going to shake out," Kooiker said. "I'm focused on running positive, people focused campaigns, as I have in the past."

Right now it's a two-person race for mayor. City council member Amanda Scott announced over the weekend that she was running for mayor. But Scott withdrew a few days later and now supports Allender.

Anyone running for mayor has until March 31 to get 50 valid petition signatures filed with the city.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.