America’s goalkeeper has been there, done that and got 106 caps with the U.S. national team to prove it. So what in the world is 37-year-old Tim Howard doing back in Major League Soccer, with the Rapids of all teams?

Yes, Colorado is a nice place to put your feet up and sip lemonade on a summer evening. Please don’t tell me Howard is coming to Denver as a way to ease into retirement, while pocketing millions as a last big payday from the sport.

Oh, greed is driving the best player in American soccer history to the Rapids. But it’s not the kind of greed you might think.

“Once you taste success, you become greedy for it,” Howard said Sunday, when I asked what would motivate a keeper with nothing left to prove to sign a contract that could keep him scrambling for saves past his 40th birthday.

What, is he crazy?

RELATED: Tim Howard signing puts Colorado Rapids on the U.S. soccer map

“I feel fit. My body’s better than it’s ever been, believe it or not, at 37,” said Howard, whose goal is to play at least 100 games for Colorado. “I want more and more success.”

When Howard joins the Rapids in July, it will be the first time Colorado has put a player in uniform that futbol fans around the world can immediately recognize without a scorecard. Or have you forgotten #ThingsTimHowardCouldSave, which became an international Internet sensation during the 2014 FIFA World Cup?

My three favorites were: 1) Taylor Swift from getting hassled by Kanye West, 2) Mufasa from dying in “Lion King,” and 3) the Tower of Pisa from leaning.

Howard, however, insists he is not coming to Colorado to sit on his big fat famous meme.

“I want to play in another World Cup,” Howard said.

“In order to be playing in Russia 2018, I’ve got to be playing well. I’ve got to be playing every week for the Rapids; that’s what goes into making a decision for the national team manager. Being in the World Cup, having gone to three, it is the most exciting experience of any player’s life. The fact I have (the World Cup) on the horizon as a carrot to chase, it wakes me up every morning and gives me the motivation to try and do that.”

In recent years, sunny Colorado is where sports legends have gone for the golden years of their careers. Peyton Manning played his first game with the Broncos at 36, and chased a championship ring until his final throw of Super Bowl 50. Jarome Iginla joined the Avalanche at 37, and his old legs are still strong enough for at least one more playoff push.

Howard is coming to Denver intent on proving his “sell by” date has not already passed. While he certainly can serve as a soccer ambassador and a ticket salesman for the Rapids, the way Howard intends to make a name for himself in Colorado is with clean sheets as a keeper for an MLS champion.

“We’re going to create a buzz and an awareness in Denver by winning, it’s as simple as that. It’s not about magazine covers. It’s not about billboards. It’s about winning. If you win, people are going to notice,” Howard said.

RELATED: Tim Howard signs with Colorado Rapids, will join club in July

Closing the deal with Howard was the most important date in Rapids history since Nov. 21, 2010, when Colorado won the league championship with a 2-1 victory against FC Dallas. After a last-place finish a year ago, luring Howard showed the Kroenke family will indeed spend a huge chunk of change on quality soccer in Colorado.

Yes, Howard’s exit from Everton of the English Premier League was hastened by losing his starting job to Joel Robles. Howard, however, left MLS 13 years ago, in a move that screamed the obvious: If a U.S.- born player sought top dollar and serious competition, he had to leave a second-rate U.S. league.

Now, like Clint Dempsey and Michael Bradley before Howard, another stalwart of the USMNT is returning to play for a club team on North American soil. Yes, it’s cool to see 33-year-old Brazilian international Kaka and Spanish World Cup winner David Villa on the pitch in MLS. But soccer will resonate even louder with American fans when they can stand up and cheer stars born in the USA.

Howard is joining the Rapids.

Add the team’s credibility to #ThingsTimHowardCouldSave.

MLS is more than a retirement home to the stars, because Howard is coming to Denver to hunt for trophies rather than a rocking chair.

And know what’s best of all?

Pro soccer in Colorado just got serious.

Mark Kiszla: mkiszla@denverpost.com or @markkiszla