An Oakton Community College official said relatively recent changes to the college's employment policies were necessary reactions to laws passed at both the state and federal levels, and resulted in lost jobs for some adjuncts and reduced hours for others.

Chester Kulis, a former adjunct lecturer at Oakton Community College, says more than 50 adjuncts have lost their teaching positions at the college as a result of the new employment policy that bans hiring individuals who receive pensions from the State University Retirement System of Illinois. Kulis said he receives a $4,000 pension from the state every year.

The change comes after a law passed in 2013 by the Illinois General Assembly outlined new rules for those who receive the pensions and continue to work at institutions covered under the system. One of the provisions includes financial penalties for colleges and universities that pay pension recipients over a certain amount of money, Bonnie Lucas, vice president of technology at OCC, wrote in an email.

The college instituted a monitoring system as a way to avert any penalties, but "regrettably, despite these substantial efforts, Oakton was subject to significant financial penalties," Lucas wrote.

As a result, she wrote that a total of 77 employees who are already retired pensioners will not be re-hired by the college effective July 1.

The college also cut the number of hours adjunct lecturers could teach, which Chester said was part of an effort to avoid covering health care costs of part-time faculty members once the Affordable Care Act took effect.

Lucas confirmed that adjuncts were limited to teaching 13 credit hours a semester and 27 for the entire 12-month year as a result of the ACA. A typical class at Oakton is equivalent to three credit hours, she wrote.

The college did agree to provide health-care coverage for a "new category of adjunct employee" known as "affiliated adjuncts" who have a higher limit on the number of credit hours they can teach, Lucas wrote. She did not answer a question asking how many of the college's adjunct lecturers fall into this category.

But Kulis said "the vast majority of adjuncts had their hours reduced and no health care" as a result of the policy change.

Kulis, who has served as an active member of the Adjunct Faculty Association, a union at the Des Plaines-based college, said the adjunct labor issue isn't one that only plagues part-time faculty at OCC. He said adjuncts at many colleges and universities across the nation are paid little and offered nothing in the way of health benefits.

In general, Kulis said, colleges have resorted to hiring more adjuncts to keep labor costs down.

"There certainly has been a marked increase in the use of contingent faculty in general," said the director of Northwestern University's Institute for Policy Research, David Figlio.

At OCC, about 60 percent of classes were taught by adjunct instructors, and 40 percent were taught by full-time faculty during the 2014-15 school year, Lucas wrote. During that period, the college employed about 153 full-time faculty members and 564 part-time faculty members.

At Harper College, a community college in Palatine, between 46 and 50 percent of classes were taught by adjunct faculty in the last academic year, and during that time, the college employed 224 full-time professors and 640 adjunct professors, according to Phil Burdick, chief communications officer for the college.

Like OCC, Harper also limits the number of hours its adjunct faculty can work. But Burdick said the policy, which restricts adjuncts to less than 24 hours of instruction per academic year, was in place well before the implementation of the ACA.

Figlio said some who fall into the category of "contingent faculty" — his preferred term for adjunct lecturers — have long-term relationships with the institutions they work for, receive the same benefits as tenured faculty and have the opportunity to advance their careers.

On the other hand, he said, there are a large number of contingent faculty scraping together classes at various institutions who have no office, no benefits and make only a few thousand dollars per class.

Depending on their level of experience and educational background, adjuncts at OCC will be paid between $1,046 and $1,542 per credit hour for the upcoming school year, according to a document provided by Lucas. At Harper College, adjuncts are paid between $919 and $1,086 per credit hour, depending on their level of education and teaching experience, according to information provided by Burdick.

Low pay and a lack of benefits are a more common scenario for part-time instructors working at public colleges and universities as opposed to private institutions with big endowments, Figlio said. Part of the reason for that, he said, is because of "the widespread erosion of public subsidization for institutions."

Fewer state tax dollars are going to cover the cost to educate students at public colleges and universities, Figlio said.

As far as the future is concerned, Figlio said he doesn't expect cash-strapped institutions to change their policies regarding the adjuncts they employ.

For his part, Kulis said he only expects the issue to get worse.

"If it's bad now, imagine what's going to happen in the next few years," he said.

Lee V. Gaines is a freelance reporter for the Chicago Tribune.

triblocaltips@tribune.com

Twitter: @TribLocal