Our society is being rewired in ways we never imagined. The touch — or heavy hand — of a changing economy is inescapable. We all struggle to keep up with how we both describe the change and adapt to new models that work for everyone. But, as we approach Labor Day — a celebration of the American worker — we find that trendy words oversimplify a historic societal shift that warrants more thought from all of us.

“Disrupting” old business models has a rebellious feeling to it. The “gig” economy — picking up a side job to earn extra cash — now feels fashionable. And nothing sounds more enlightened than a “sharing” economy. Yet, a closer look reveals something deeper.

In the spring of this year, the California Applicants’ Attorneys Association conducted a statewide poll on a variety of issues. One of them considered the growing use of “independent” contractors as replacements for employees. There it is again — “independent” — a California-cool word that fails to convey its precarious nature. As you might expect, when California voters were asked how they felt about the trend, 49 percent approved of it and 37 percent disapproved.

But when the next poll question exposed voters to the fact that using independent contractors helped businesses avoid any responsibility for health benefits and fair wages, voters reversed course with 70 percent opposing the trend. In fact, the voters most likely to be early adopters of the “gig” economy — millennials — are the strongest opponents of the trend with 83 percent in opposition.

And while it’s all the rage to debate whether Uber is cool, it is troubling that the company now finances the cars their “independent” drivers use. This looks a lot more like sharecropping in the South’s 19th century Reconstruction Era than a “shared” economy model for a 21st century California.

Uber and others aren’t causing the shift. They are simply adding to it in a way that feels cool and convenient. But, instead of people standing around a Home Depot parking lot looking for a “gig” — that side job that has now become the only job or one of several jobs — it’s a growing number of men and women sitting around in Uber-financed black cars waiting for their smartphone to vibrate.

The sheer volume of people who can no longer find a steady, good-paying job is turning us back to a time when longshoremen had to show up every morning to ask — yes, ask — for a day’s work. The system was called the “shape up,” and it led to some of our nation’s most militant labor movement activism with 95 percent of longshoremen joining their union. The change resulted in a protracted strike and then “Bloody Thursday.”

I am not suggesting that history will repeat itself. I am suggesting that we should learn from history and reshape public policy instead of just modernizing the “shape up.” Public policies need to address a growing gap. On one side, we have an “employee” workforce covered by Obamacare, protected by workers’ compensation, and able to make use of unemployment insurance to feed a family during the inevitable bad times. On the other side, we have day laborers with an app. And nothing else.

Advertisement

We can’t go back in time. That’s not an answer. But, as we enjoy the day off to celebrate the contributions of hardworking Americans, we must recognize the changing nature of work, analyze the uneven nature of its impacts and adjust our social policies to reflect a marriage between our technological abilities and our societal values.

Rusty Hicks is executive secretary-treasurer of the Los Angeles County Federation of Labor, AFL-CIO.