This will be the first legislative session in 16 years Rep. Jim Abeler’s name won’t be at the top of the voting list in the Minnesota House of Representatives.

After not seeking re-election last year, the Anoka Republican’s eight-term run at the Legislature wrapped up this week. Legislative Clerk David Surdez removes retiring Rep. Jim Abeler’s nameplate from the voting board in the House Chamber Dec. 29 as the board is updated to accommodate the 2015-16 House members. Copyright Minnesota House of Representatives; Photo by Paul Battaglia

Abeler is known for his expertise in health and human services, his collaborative nature and his independent streak – his voting record regularly aligned with the needs and wants of his constituents, but not always the Republican Party.

“I was truly a citizen legislator. I was a chiropractor, a charter school founder, a father, a volunteer in the community – just a regular person who thought I needed to go make a difference,” Abeler said.

Going into the job, he had never even taken a political science course.

There have been two rounds of redistricting during his tenure, but most recently he has represented House District 35A, which includes Anoka and Ramsey. It becomes the job of newly-elected Republican Rep. Abigail Whelan.

“Out in this neck of the woods people just wanted me to keep it off their back. They’re up to their necks in their family, paying their bills, their taxes and getting the schools going … so they’re grateful for somebody who they trust who would do their best,” Abeler said.

When Abeler’s predecessor, former House Rep. Charlie Weaver, announced that he wasn’t running in the 1998 election, Abeler decided to go for it.

Just off founding PACT Charter School, which had its roots in Anoka and has since moved to Ramsey, Abeler saw some of the hurdles that stood between the state government and its citizens.

“When we founded the charter school, I became aware of some challenges in education,” Abeler said. “We did the school as an experiment to see if we included parents more if that would be productive.”

While Abeler is no longer involved with PACT, the charter school has continued to grow over the past 20 years, with a current enrollment of 650 students and 2,000 more on a waiting list.

A freshman

Abeler won that first election in a close contest against DFL’s Jerry Newton, who now represents House District 37A, by 393 votes – just 2 percent. During the campaign he knocked on 10,000 doors. Rep. Jim Abeler (R-Anoka) at work as the chairman of the Health and Human Services Committee in 2012. File photo, ABC Newspapers

“That’s only 190 people changing their mind,” Abeler said. “That’s pretty close in a district like ours.”

He’s run against Newton twice and says they have since become good friends.

The day Abeler was sworn into office his wife Barb gave birth to the couple’s sixth son, Judson, who turned 16 this week on Abeler’s last day in office.

Looking back, he said, “it isn’t really a job I would recommend for someone with a young family.”

In Abeler’s first term, he joined a battle to save the Anoka Technical College, which was slated to close after a 13-2 vote by the Minnesota State Colleges and Universities Board of Directors.

Dan Erhart, who at the time was a commissioner on the Anoka County Board, asked for Abeler’s help.

Eventually, the college would stay with help from dozens of community leaders and staff at the college

“I think that the MnSCU system was surprised that a punk freshman could win. It became a policy fight and a political fight and a statement that MnSCU needs to worry about access, and they never tried to close another school after that.”

Human services

Going in, Abeler assumed that he might become more involved on educational issues at the state level. That didn’t turn out to be the case.

Instead, he became a leader in the realm of health and human services.

Anoka County Administrator Jerry Soma was leading the county’s human services division when Abeler was first elected. Like many rookie legislators, Abeler asked to come in and learn more about the county’s human services programming. “We did the dog and pony show in the conference room where all the departments came in and talked about what they did and the issues they were having,” Soma said. “It wasn’t anything unusual.”

But what happened next was.

He remembers getting a call from Abeler asking why county staff hadn’t given any input on the state’s latest health and human services bill.

“We don’t get a lot of calls like that,” Soma said.

So staff went through the bill line by line and offered suggestions, Soma said.

The bill died in committee.

But it was the start of a long relationship between Abeler and Soma and it kicked off what would become the defining work of Abeler’s legislative career.

This was when Abeler first began to learn about the realm of people living with disabilities and the services they rely on, often for life.

The humanity of it drew him in.

When Abeler came into office in 1999 Republicans were in the majority for the first time in 12 years.

“I thought that I would broaden out my expertise to become an expert in more areas,” Abeler said. “To my surprise, my focus narrowed – instead of growing broader, I went deeper.”

In 2011, Abeler was named the chairman of the Health and Human Services Committee, which would turn out to be his most difficult, and most gratifying, work.

“It turned out to be a bucket list thing,” Abeler said. “A once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.”

But that chance came with a huge challenge. Gov. Mark Dayton has just been elected, replacing Gov. Tim Pawlenty, and the state was facing a $6 billion budget shortfall.

The system needed to be retrenched, Abeler said, and it was his job to lead that effort, along with newly named Health and Human Services Commissioner Lucinda Jesson.

Jesson was a reformer, Abeler said, and they were well-matched.

“It was the hardest time of my life, I think,” Abeler said. “I didn’t sleep well for four months, knowing that if I messed up somebody could die. I didn’t want anybody to come to harm.”

When the budget was finally put together at the end of March in 2012, a fiscal analyst told Abeler nobody was going to die from it.

“It sounds crude, but I just relaxed,” he said. “And I slept eight hours that night.”

From November to March, he took 400 meetings from the public, lobbying groups, advocates and nursing home administrators.

He looked to successes in the private sector, at models like Mary T in Coon Rapids, to improve services for people with disabilities.

For Abeler, how that difficult task was tackled was just as important as the end result.

“For once in my life, I was able to set the tone of a whole niche of government,” Abeler said. “The tone was respectful. It was caring and humanitarian but it was frugal. It was focused on outcomes and the welfare of the clients.”

He was able to preserve mental health services, in particular for adolescents, something that was close to his heart after Anoka experienced a series of young people dying by suicide.

The chairmanship changed Abeler’s mind on term limits for House members, which was something he thought he could support. Abeler was in his 13th year at the Legislature when he was named to the leadership position.

“It took all the knowledge and experience I had to fill the role,” he said.

Abeler has been the recipient of more than 60 awards, with most of the accolades coming from nonprofits and advocacy groups for the clients that receive services under the health and human services umbrella.

“I think that shows how effective he is as a legislator and that other groups have noticed the impact he has had on policy,” said Kathy Tingelstad, a former Republican legislator from Andover who represented the neighboring district.

In 1999 Tingelstad was charged with mentoring a group of new legislators, including Abeler.

“Jim is very intelligent and has a keen understanding of things. He caught on much faster than any other legislator I’ve known.”

She calls him creative and innovative, particularly when it was time to tackle that human services budget.

“I think he really looks at issues holistically,” she said. “The way he voted on an issue had to be in balance with his conscience and his constituents. There have been too many legislators who vote only with their caucus.”

Taking a stand

In 2008 Abeler made headlines, along with Tingelstad, when the pair was among eight Republicans who voted to override Pawlenty’s veto of the transportation bill that included $6 billion in new taxes over 10 years to fund transportation infrastructure.

It started the year before when there was talk of finding money and the most obvious was a user fee.

“We were persuaded that we were going to do the right thing, not the easy thing,” Abeler said. “I asked around and I surveyed people and talked to business leaders, and they all said you better vote for this because we need the roads.”

Less than a year earlier, the I-35W bridge had collapsed and the state had no plan, or funding, in place to fix hundreds of decaying bridges, he said.

But bucking the party line changed Abeler’s trajectory in politics.

“It made me both a hero and a goat by different groups. After counsel and prayer and consideration, I decided to vote to override the governor.”

Out of that money came the third lane on Highway 10 between Egret and Hanson boulevards. Abler said it was the only new road in the state to be built from those funds. The rest has been used to repair more than 180 defective bridges.

Almost seven years later, Abeler is still sure he made the right call.

“People loved me and people hated me,” he said. “But I knew I did the right thing. I didn’t feel bad, I didn’t ask for forgiveness. Because we needed roads.”

The next week both Tingelstad and Abeler were not supported at their respective endorsement conventions. Abeler won a Republican primary and kept his seat. Tingelstad did not seek re-election.

This was not the only time Abeler put himself in a controversial spot, which included his involvement in trying to improve the state’s health insurance exchange under the Affordable Health Care Act. He knew the bill was going to pass, but he wanted a chance to make it better.

Tingelstad said his ability to work with both Republicans and Democrats is notable.

Abler is proud of his collaborative spirit.

“I learned very early on that you can get a lot done if you don’t care who gets the credit,” he said.

He found himself on four or five conference committees a year, where the real action happens, he said.

He spent a lot of time making suggestions about other legislators’ bills and authored more than 500 himself, offering countless amendments before they were presented.

“The goal was to focus on the end result, which was better services delivered in a better way for the people who need it,” Abeler said. “Laws are going to get passed. You want them as good as they can be, that was my motto all the way through.”

Things change

In 2012 the Democrats had control of the House, Senate and the governor’s office.

Now in the minority, Abeler said there was less for him to do. The phone stopped ringing the day after the election.

He said he tried to offer help and his expertise, but it wasn’t well received by the Democrats.

“They just weren’t that interested,” he said. It was a letdown.

“Where it has evolved to, even in my 16 years, is that things have become much more polar, more personal and frankly more petty, to the detriment of the product – and the product is services to the people or enabling businesses to be successful or opportunities you try to create,” Abeler said.

He began to turn his attention to federal politics and thought maybe that was where he should head next.

Last year he made a run for the U.S. Senate seat held by Democratic Sen. Al Franken. Abeler didn’t get the Republican Party’s endorsement, which went to Mike McFadden after 10 ballots over two days, but he wasn’t surprised. He ran against McFadden in a primary anyway.

“I didn’t want to have any regrets,” Abeler said. “I didn’t want to look back and wonder what might have happened.”

He spent much of the year traveling the state, meeting people and learning about communities. He lost the primary, but said he learned a great deal.

Now he will continue his work as a chiropractor, something he kept up two or three days a week while in office. He also manages the commercial and retail buildings he owns.

Abeler has already taken on contracts to lobby in the areas of disabilities and autism.

He also says he will “probably run for something again.”

But for now, he quotes Bilbo Baggins from “The Hobbit.”

“I’m going on an adventure.”

[email protected]