Several Arkansas Republicans are encouraging their peers to support a rebranded version of the state’s Obamacare expansion.

Republican Gov. Asa Hutchinson’s “Arkansas Works” proposal would replace the Private Option, an Obamacare Medicaid expansion program crafted by Republican legislators and implemented under Democratic Gov. Mike Beebe.

The Private Option uses Obamacare money to buy private health insurance for low-income Arkansans. Hutchinson officially supports ending the Private Option, which has been plagued by fraud and huge cost overruns since its 2014 launch.

But Hutchinson has also pleaded with the Arkansas State Legislature to keep taking Obamacare expansion money for working-age adults with no kids and no disabilities when the Private Option ends Dec. 31, 2016.

The governor telegraphed his intent to rebrand the Private Option in a January speech when he noted, “the phrase Private Option itself has become politically toxic.” Hutchinson’s office failed to respond to questions from Watchdog.org.

Nic Horton, a senior research fellow at the free-market Foundation for Government Accountability, said Arkansas Works is destined to fail and its major provisions require federal waivers the Obama administration will deny.

“Arkansas Works is an ObamaCare Medicaid expansion by another name,” Horton told Watchdog.org. “The state’s not going to get the things they’re asking for — not work requirements, not asset tests, not any of the other tweaks that they’ve floated.”

“And I think they know this because they’re already starting to pivot away from real work requirements, moving the goalposts and talking about ‘work training.'”

Using Obamacare money to cover the Obamacare expansion population, Arkansas Works would retain the Private Option’s worst qualities, Horton said, adding billions to the national debt “while nearly 3,000 Arkansans with disabilities remain on the waiting lists.”

“Ultimately, policymakers promised taxpayers and the truly needy they were ending the program,” Horton continued. “But now they’re trying to change the deal.”

This month, the state Health Reform Legislative Task Force voted unanimously to back Arkansas Works. In a Dec. 16 press release, Hutchinson signaled he would move forward with Arkansas Works without a vote from the full Legislature.

“I think the governor’s headed in a very strong direction with regard to Arkansas Works as a follow-on to the Private Option,” health reform task force co-chair State Rep. Charlie Collins told Watchdog.org.

“Focusing on personal responsibility, encouraging work and encouraging healthy behaviors are exactly the type of changes to this program that are right for Arkansas and Arkansans,” Collins said.

Collins, a key Republican backer of the Private Option, said he is “enthusiastic to continue to support” Hutchinson’s proposed Obamacare expansion waiver requests.

RELATED: Red states still grasping at Obamacare Medicaid cash

Hutchinson has promoted Arkansas Works as part of a larger package of Medicaid reforms to reduce spending on traditional Medicaid enrollees — the elderly, the disabled, pregnant women, children and impoverished families.

Not all Republican lawmakers are excited about tying changes to traditional Medicaid to a renewed Obamacare expansion.

State Rep. Josh Miller, a Republican from Heber Springs, applauded Hutchinson’s support for reforming traditional Medicaid. But Miller opposes Obamacare expansion regardless of the label used or the waivers requested.

“I have been an advocate for reforming traditional Medicaid since long before I was elected as a state representative,” Miller told Watchdog.org. “That’s one of the biggest reasons I’ve fought against Medicaid expansion.”

Miller said he’s against making more Arkansans dependent on welfare, especially given the likelihood of Obamacare expansion funding cuts, the pressure expansion puts on traditional Medicaid and the lack of flexibility from the feds.

“I have a hard time voting for something where we’ve got to go and ask somebody else permission, and if we don’t get it then our taxpayers are stuck figuring out how we’re gonna foot the bill,” Miller said.

“I don’t believe we need to be expanding programs that are already broken,” he added. “I don’t think the governor’s got a slam-dunk on his hands, because so many folks were ready to be done with the Private Option.”

Miller said the governor will need approval from the Arkansas Legislature to move forward with Arkansas Works, and he expects legislators elected to fight the Private Option will see through the attempted rebranding.

“You can call it whatever you want to call it — the Public Option, There Ain’t No Option, Arkansas Works — it’s still the Private Option,” Miller continued. “It’s still taking tax dollars that will be used for this expanded population and turning around and buying insurance.”