When no one was looking, author Andrew Roberts lay down on the bed in which Napoleon Bonaparte died.

The deposed French emperor had been exiled to St. Helena in 1815. He died there in 1823 at age 51 in one of the bedrooms of Longwood House.

Mr. Roberts said that kind of you-are-there experience is critical in writing biography and history.

“It was very important to travel to the places where Napoleon lived and where he fought his battles,” Mr. Roberts said from London during a recent phone interview. “What is not clear when you read about a battle, you can understand at a glance when you actually go there.”

In the course of his research for his new book, “Napoleon: A Life,” Mr. Roberts visited 53 of the 60 battlefields where the general led French armies. He also took a multiday boat trip to the remote island in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean where he died.

Consider the issue of Napoleon’s reportedly small stature. At 5 feet 6 inches, Bonaparte would not have been the “Little Corporal” he was nicknamed by his enemies. He would have been close to the average height of a Frenchman in the early 19th century, the author said.

Andrew Roberts Where: Literary Evenings, Monday Night Lecture Series at Carnegie Music Hall, Oakland. When: 7:30 p.m. Monday. Tickets: $15-$35; 412-622-8866 or $15-$35; 412-622-8866 or pittsburghlectures.org

Mr. Roberts performed his own on-the-scene test to confirm Napoleon’s height.

While confined on St. Helena, Napoleon is reported to have used a penknife to cut a spy hole through the shutters of the billiard room at Longwood. That small opening allowed him to keep an eye on the British sentries assigned to watch him.

Mr. Roberts, who is himself 5 feet 6 inches, found that the hole was made at exactly the right height for Napoleon to observe the guards.

Mr. Roberts will speak at 7:30 p.m. Monday in Oakland’s Carnegie Music Hall. His “Literary Evenings, Monday Night Lecture Series” talk is part of a 10-author series presented by Pittsburgh Arts & Lectures.

Mr. Roberts, 51, was born in London and educated at Cambridge University. He is the author of more than a dozen books and the editor of several more. His previous works include two related histories: “Napoleon and Wellington” and “Waterloo: June 15, 1815.”

He also has written for many British and American newspapers and has appeared as a television presenter and commentator.

Mr. Roberts said there had been many more books written with the word “Napoleon” in their titles than there have been days since he died 193 years ago. Why another?

Mr. Roberts said his is the first one-volume life to appear in English since the publication of all 33,000 of Napoleon’s letters. The varied correspondence shows what Mr. Roberts called the “extraordinary compartmentalization” of Napoleon’s mind and his ability to pursue multiple goals and interests simultaneously.

Born Napoleone di Buonaparte in 1769 on the Mediterranean island of Corsica, his parents were of Italian ancestry.

Trained as a soldier, the young Napoleon had a meteoric rise in the years after the French Revolution. His many military victories allowed him to seize power, initially as France’s First Consul and later as Emperor of the French.

Critics have complained that despite his many battlefield triumphs, Napoleon appears to have had a pattern of abandoning armies in trouble. Mr. Roberts said Bonaparte’s conscience and reputation should remain clean on that point.

When Napoleon returned to France in 1799 after an unsuccessful attempt to conquer Egypt, he was needed desperately at home to fight Austria.

“He was the nation’s best general,” Mr. Roberts said. “He wasn’t abandoning his troops but marching toward the sound of the guns.”

In 1812, Napoleon led an apparently successful invasion of Russia, capturing Moscow. When the Russians declined to negotiate, he and his Grande Armee were forced to make a winter retreat.

Once again, it made military and political sense for Napoleon to leave the struggling army and hurry back to Paris, Mr. Roberts said.

“There was no point in his being isolated in central Poland,” he said. “The army had to be rebuilt and that rebuilding could only take place in Paris.”

That’s not to say Bonaparte didn’t have second thoughts. Looking back during his years in exile, Napoleon expressed regret that he hadn’t been killed during his 1812 victory at the Battle of Borodino outside Moscow, Mr. Roberts said.

Napoleon was deposed and exiled twice. The first time was in 1814 to the island of Elba in the Mediterranean, and then after his defeat at Waterloo in 1815 to far off St. Helena.

Napoleon and the world would have been much better off had the ex-emperor remained on Elba, Mr. Roberts said. The deaths of an additional 100,000 soldiers and civilians would have been avoided, and Napoleon would have had a much more comfortable exile “in a lovely palace on a sun-drenched island.”