Two Northampton County Republicans will face off in their party's upcoming primary for the right to challenge U.S. Rep. Matt Cartwright in the 17th Congressional District.

The GOP race pits Northampton County Councilman Glenn Geissinger against Matthew Connolly, who two years ago lost the same GOP nomination to Schuylkill County Coroner David "Doc" Moylan. Cartwright, a Democrat, defeated Moylan in the 2014 general election with 57 percent of the vote.

Geissinger and Connolly each claim they're the party's best bet to win the district, a gerrymandered monstrosity that stretches from Easton in the southeast to Scranton in the north to Pottsville in the west. It is solidly Democratic.

The two candidates hold similar views on several main issues. Both want to repeal the Affordable Care Act, oppose the nuclear treaty with Iran and say the Environmental Protection Agency is hamstringing job growth in Pennsylvania.

Each believes the United States needs to lead a military coalition against the Islamic State in Syria and Iraq. Geissinger, an Army veteran, supports putting American troops on the ground, while Connolly said he would leave it to military leaders to craft a strategy.

The two also are in lockstep in their criticisms of Cartwright, a Lackawanna County trial lawyer who in 2012 ousted longtime incumbent Tim Holden, a moderate Democrat. Cartwright, they said, is too liberal and out of touch with the blue-collar, working-class district.

Cartwright supports the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare. He also backed a proposed assault rifle ban, supported President Obama's nuclear treaty with Iran and wants the EPA to have more oversight over fracking operations. While he has been busy crafting legislation proposals since taking office, nearly all of them have died in committee in the GOP-dominated House.

Distinctions between Geissinger and Connolly lie in how they would approach the job should they get elected.

Geissinger pointed to his resume, saying he is the conservative candidate with a track record of getting things done. He's built a marketing business, served as a bishop in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints and won a countywide election. As a councilman, Geissinger has been a strong supporter of Northampton County Executive John Brown, and said their work has allowed the county to right its finances and develop a long-term maintenance plan that has been absent for at least a decade.

"When it comes to being able to work within the system and promote legislation and move legislation forward, to actually accomplish something in Washington, that's something that I'll be able to do," Geissinger said.

Geissinger said he's the more electable candidate, saying his business acumen and leadership skills will allow him to defeat Cartwright and his $630,000 war chest in a district where Republicans are outnumbered more than 2-to-1. Paperwork filed with the Federal Election Commission from January, the most recent available, show Geissinger raised $108,588 by the end of December, more than Moylan raised during his entire 2014 effort. Of that amount, $87,588 has come from Geissinger's wallet.

Connolly painted Geissinger as a moderate posing as a conservative, pointing to Geissinger's vote to raise county taxes 9.25 percent in 2014 as proof. To win over independents and Democrats that a Republican candidate would need for a November victory, Connolly said, the GOP candidate must be a true conservative whose ideology will entice them away from an incumbent with whom they're familiar. Money in the bank won't change that, said Connolly, whose campaign reported having $1,459 on hand in January.

"People don't trust moderates," Connolly said. "They go whichever way the wind is blowing."

Connolly vowed he would stick to his grass-roots effort and refuse to play nice with lobbyists or party leaders whose methods don't mesh with his conservative views. Nothing gets accomplished in Washington, he said, because political leaders only look to manage problems instead of solving them. His willingness to break away from the mold, instead of Geissinger's desire to work within the system, is the approach needed on Capitol Hill, he said.

"I'm not an establishment guy. The establishment is what got us here," Connolly said.