2016 Republican presidential candidate Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) told a crowd in Iowa that he commends Indiana "for doing the right thing" in regard to the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. (Reuters)

SIOUX CITY, Iowa - Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) reiterated his support for Indiana's controversial religious freedom law Wednesday, despite a fresh push by that state's governor to "fix" the measure.

Speaking in a stuffy, cramped auditorium at Morningside College here, Cruz said that religious liberty is not a "fringe view." Cruz staked his claim to the right of Indiana Gov. Mike Pence, who signed the law but said he wanted to see "a fix" to the law that makes clear it does not give businesses license to deny services to customers on the basis of sexual orientation, and Arkansas Gov. Asa Hutchinson (R ) who asked lawmakers Wednesday to recall or amend a religious freedom bill.

"We're seeing in the news right now a lot of noise because the state of Indiana bravely stood up and passed a law defending religious liberty. I’ll say this: I will commend the state of Indiana for doing the right thing," Cruz said.

When asked by Tyler Brock, 41, what he would have done if he were in Pence's shoes during the past week, Cruz refused to bite, saying that he doesn't want to second-guess the Indiana governor.

"I admire him for standing up and signing the legislation," Cruz said, not mentioning Pence's request for a modification.

[Indiana law draws Republican White House hopefuls into the culture wars]

Cruz painted the issue of religious liberty as a First Amendment issue, a guiding value on which the country's foundation rests.

"Religious liberty is not some cockamamie new theory that the Indiana legislature just figured out yesterday. It was literally among the founding principles of our nation, and we have to be able to explain that cheerfully and with a smile," he said.

Cruz is here on his first trip to Iowa, a state where he is assiduously wooing religious conservatives, since he officially launched his campaign last week. During his stop Wednesday afternoon, he worked to establish himself as the most conservative candidate in the race -- one who has, and will, fight for all issues of import to the base, including repeal of the Affordable Care Act. His first stop on a two-day swing here came in the very conservative western part of the state, where he is looking to gain the support of voters motivated by faith.

Cruz's comments on the Indiana law and his denouncement of same-sex marriage was well-received by the audience, which interrupted him with applause when he spoke about religious freedom.

The Texas Republican said that, unlike many other Republicans, he was unafraid to take on same-sex marriage and the religious freedom bill.

"A whole lot of Republican politicians are terrified of the issue," he said. Cruz also castigated Fortune 500 companies for condemning Indiana's passage of the bill, telling the crowd that they are "running shamelessly to endorse the radical gay marriage agenda over religious liberty."

Cruz pined for a time when there was bipartisan consensus where people "defend the civil liberties of Americans. Even those we disagree with." Now, he argued, the Democratic Party elevated partisanship over the issue of gay marriage.

"This is all part and parcel over the fight over gay marriage. And because of their partisan desire to mandate gay marriage everywhere in this country they also want to persecute anyone who has a good faith religious belief that marriage is a holy sacrament, the union of one man and one woman as ordained as a covenant by God," Cruz said, to loud applause.

When asked what should be done about an upcoming Supreme Court ruling on same-sex marriage, Cruz told the audience to pray. The Texas senator reintroduced a bill in February that would protect the rights of states to define marriage. If the court decides same-sex marriage should be mandated nationwide, it would be "rampant judicial activism. It will be lawlessness. It will be fundamentally illegitimate," he said.

Brock, who supports Indiana's law, said he was satisfied with Cruz's position.

"He made it clear that we need somebody to fight on this issue," he said.