A Hamilton police officer who pleaded guilty to preying on women he was supposed to rescue from the sex trade appears to now be without a lawyer.

Related Stories Clairmont: Cop preyed on the women...

Sergeant Derek Mellor, formerly in charge of the service's human trafficking initiative Project Rescue, has officially dismissed Toronto lawyer Gary Clewley.

Newmarket lawyer Leo Kinahan, a former police officer, took part in a brief Police Service Act conference call Friday morning but, after an in camera session, is not confirmed as Mellor's lawyer, said Catherine Martin, Corporate Communicator for the Hamilton Police Service.

Kinahan told police prosecutor Marco Visentini there were matters he wanted discussed in camera, with the media not present, before he could confirm himself as Mellor's lawyer.

"I had no idea this was going to be a call with the media," Kinahan said. "I'm not against the public's right to know, but I'm asking for a part of this to be done in camera."

Visentini argued all cases in Hamilton against police officers are open to the media and the public.

"The public is entitled to every part of this process," Visentini countered.

Hearing officer, retired Toronto police superintendent Bob Strathdee, agreed to the in camera session. The conference call hearing ended with the media, including The Spectator, being asked to hang up. The two lawyers and Strathdee resumed the hearing in private.

Visintini and Kinahan could not be immediately reached for comment Friday.

Mellor pleaded guilty last month to a slew of police act misconduct charges involving off-duty sex, sexting and sending a woman a three-second video of himself masturbating. His targets were the women he came into professional contact with.

They included witnesses, victims, a victim's mother and even agency staff. The probe against Mellor began in 2012 after a 19-year-old former sex worker, who was a witness in a human trafficking case, accused him of having an inappropriate sexual relationship with her.

Mellor has been suspended from duty since he was charged in December 2012. He faced 13 charges — and has pleaded guilty to nine. Two counts of corrupt practice and breach of duty were withdrawn by the prosecutor and two counts were "adjourned sine die," meaning they are suspended, but can be reactivated in the future.

Mellor's previous lawyer, Clewley, said last month Mellor hopes to keep his job with Hamilton police.

Mellor did not participate in Friday's conference call. Next is an in-person appearance for Mellor April 24 at 8 a.m., at the Hamilton Police Central Station.

Hearing dates have been set for July 14 and 15 at the Hamilton Police Central Station.