GREEN ISLAND, N.Y., May 10, 2016 /PRNewswire/ --

Highlights:

Crystal IS announces its new commercial product line targeting higher power applications for UVC disinfection of water, air and surfaces. Klaran, Crystal IS's first generation disinfection product line, offers germicidal output powers from 15 mW to 30 mW, uniquely suited for use in healthcare, lab water and consumer product applications where health and human safety is of primary importance.

Tweet this: @CISUVC Introducing Klaran, our commercial product line for #disinfection for use in #healthcare #labwater & #consumerproducts

Product is available now in both sample and production quantities. For more information please visit Crystal IS at Analytica, Hall A2 Booth 213 or at http://www.cisuvc.com/

Use cases demonstrating the need for high powered UVC LEDs include healthcare, lab water and consumer products:

According to the Centers for Disease and Control (CDC), Hospital Acquired Infections (HAIs) impact one in 25 patients in the US each year. The Affordable Care Act (ACA) and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) report improved patient outcomes, shorter stays and fewer repeat visits linked to healthier environments that incorporate UVC technology in addition to approved standard surface wipe protocols.





Point-of-Use lab water purifiers now make up 75 percent of an approximately 480 million dollar global market. UVC LEDs can be integrated into these systems for Type I, II and III water purification, as defined by the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM).





global market. UVC LEDs can be integrated into these systems for Type I, II and III water purification, as defined by the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM). Global headlines highlight the need for safe and reliable drinking water and with that, the UVC water purifier market is expected to almost double in size over the next five years from 9.16 billion to 17.85 billion dollars in 2020. In addition to the US, this growth is attributed to China and India where industrialization and a rising urban population is putting a strain on drinking water resources.

Crystal IS's Klaran extends its value to manufacturers who need:

Optimized, high output germicidal power for maximum disinfection rates





Smaller footprint that affords design flexibility and product innovation





A rugged design for mobile use cases





Non-hazardous, mercury-free solution with no fragile quartz tubes

"For Crystal IS, developing a reliable disinfection product has been one of the company's primary strategic goals," said Larry Felton, CEO of Crystal IS. "Building on the successes of our commercialized Optan product line, we are pleased to now offer our high performing Klaran UVC LEDs for disinfection."

In addition, Crystal IS offers expert technical assistance via application engineering support, software modeling or onsite training to assist innovation teams in developing state of the art disinfection solutions.

Media Inquiries:

MSLGROUP

Nina Gill or Lauren Goldman at 781-684-0770 or crystalIS@mslgroup.com

About Crystal IS

Crystal IS, an Asahi Kasei company and ISO 9001:2008 certified, is an innovative U.S.-based manufacturer of proprietary, high-performance UVC LEDs. Crystal IS products are suitable for monitoring, disinfection and sterilization in a variety of applications, including industrial and point-of-use (POU) water purification as well as infection control in air and surfaces in healthcare industries. The company's powerful and reliable UVC LEDs provide customers with the flexibility to develop new products that enhance and sustain life. For more information, visit cisuvc.com.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20140516/88546

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/crystal-is-expands-product-line-to-include-high-powered-uvc-leds-for-disinfection-of-water-air-and-surfaces-300262193.html

SOURCE Crystal IS

Related Links

http://www.cisuvc.com