Hannah Miracle and her brother, Jacob, pretend to drive the firetruck at the new Mountain View Fire Rescue Station 1 on Saturday. (Cliff Grassmick/For the Longmont Times-Call )

Friends, family members and neighbors showed up on Saturday afternoon for a ribbon cutting and Christmas open house to celebrate Mountain View Fire Rescue's newest station.

Mountain View's new Station 1, south of Colo. Highway 119 on Weld County Road 5, will provide better access to fires and accidents along the Colo. 119 corridor, the Del Camino interchange with Interstate Highway 25 and the stretches of interstate to the north and south of Del Camino, said Chief Mark Lawley.

"The location allows us to respond to emergencies more quickly," Lawley said, and it's "going to serve any new growth that comes into the Del Camino area."

After September's floods, a washed-out-bridge along Weld County Road 1 further complicated Mountain View's response times from its former Station No. 1, which lies south of that bridge.

While Mountain View's new Station 1 and the firefighting and emergency medical equipment it's housing may have been among the things that drew people to Saturday's open house, it might not have been the chief attraction.

When asked what his favorite part of the visit was, 5-year-old Jacob Miracle said: "Santa."

Jacob and his 3-year-old sister, Hannah -- who came with their parents, Laura and Tyeson Miracle -- were among the many children sporting red plastic helmets identifying each as a "Future Firefighter."

The event also included a card making station for Mountain View Fire Rescue's Christmas for the Troops program. People have been leaving donations at the fire protection district's stations to send items to military men and women serving overseas -- items such as socks, lip balm, toiletries, hand-held games, DVDs, books and packages of coffee and hot chocolate and cider mix.

Fireman Mauricio Rodriguez takes a photo of his daughter Savannah at the ribbon cutting of Mountain View Fire Rescue Station 1 on Saturday. (Cliff Grassmick/For the Times-Call)

Lawley said the purchase and remodeling of an existing building at 10939 Weld County Road 5 cost about $1.5 million -- all of which, he emphasized, was "paid with cash," funded from operating-budget revenues rather than financed with bond issues.

Mountain View Fire Rescue moved into the new station in late November, according to district spokeswoman Amy Tallent. It now houses a fire engine and its three-person crew, an ambulance and its two-person crew, and a brush truck. Soon to arrive, Lawley said, will be a new rescue pumper truck.

The new station replaces a onetime Mountain View Fire District headquarters station at 9119 E. County Line Road, although that facility is still in use and has been converted to offices for the district's battalion chiefs, Lawley and Tallent said.

Lawley said Saturday's holiday party was just one of the events Mountain View holds each year in the eastern Boulder County and southwest Weld County areas it serves. He said the district takes its emergency-response responsibilities to those communities seriously, and the people have responded in kind.

"They treat us well," the chief said.

Two weeks ago, he said, "we had a family deliver half a dozen turkeys to the fire station."

John Fryar can be reached at 303-684-5211 or jfryar@times-call.com.