MONTPELIER — A new federal report shows Vermont Health Connect to be the best state-run health care exchange in the nation.



The report from the U.S. Government Accountability Office gives high marks to Vermont’s health care exchange, judging it fully operational in three of four criteria and placing it at the top of the exchanges operated by 12 other states and the District of Columbia.



“Well, I think what it means is we’ve made some major improvements over time,” said Steven Costantino, commissioner of the Department of Vermont Health Access.



“All of the states and the federal government have been challenged with this implementation,” he said. “Vermont has responded and has learned some major lessons as it’s gone through this conversion to establish this state-based exchange.”



In October 2013, the state rolled out Vermont Health Connect in response to the federal Affordable Care Act, which called on states to establish state-based marketplaces where individuals and small businesses could compare and purchase health care plans.



That first rollout was a rocky one, with the computerized system unable to handle the volume of traffic, leading to backlogs that left customers waiting months to purchase a plan, and ultimately, comply with the new law.



The new report looks at data from March of this year, measuring state-run exchanges based on an array of metrics from determining eligibility and ease of enrollment to financial management of the system.



Each metric received a grade ranging from “fully operational” to “not operational.” Vermont’s exchange was deemed fully operational in all fields, save one.



The change received a rating of “partially operational” in the way the system connects with federal databases that verify a customer’s information, ranging from citizenship to income.



Costantino acknowledged not having a fully operational system to verify a customer’s information has an impact on their experience.



“The greater ability you have to automatically verify data, the less applicants need to provide documentation,” Costantino said.



He noted that information verification capacity within the exchange has improved in the past six months. Improving customer information verification “adds integrity to the system, so that those really deserving of the benefits get them,” he said.



Going forward, Costantino said new software updates will improve the system’s ability to verify customer information in time for the next open enrollment period Nov. 1.



josh.ogorman @timesargus.com







Join the conversation with the Vermont Press Bureau by following us on Facebook, Twitter and at vermontpressbureau.com. Listen for new podcasts Mondays and Fridays, and look for Capitol Beat on ORCA Media and online.