Though his tongue has made Kiss famous, it makes things a little messy when he tries to get a drink. ( Jonathan Castner / For the Camera )

Meet Kiss online • Meetkiss.tumblr.com • Facebook.com/meetkisstheboxer • Twitter.com/kisstheboxer • Instagram.com/meetkiss

When Kiss, a 4-year-old boxer, was hiking Mount Sanitas with his owner, other hikers commented on how thirsty he looked. His lengthy pink tongue flopped out to one side.

But Kiss was not thirsty. That's just how he is.

Kiss was born with a rare neurological condition that makes him unable to pull his tongue into his mouth. The more relaxed and happy he is, the floppier the tongue. Think of it as his unique, silly smile.

In his short time in Boulder, Kiss already is becoming known around town, at the dog parks and beyond, says his owner Dawn "Drew" Korres. In fact, Kiss has his own Facebook, Twitter, Tumblr and Instagram accounts with a quickly growing number of followers around the world (1,300 on Instagram), and he recently was featured on the Dogs of Instagram collection.

Kiss is not the only viral pup with a funny tongue. Marni the Dog, a senior Shih Tzu rescue, has "vestibular syndrome," which also makes her long tongue stick out. Marni has been featured everywhere from People Magazine to "Good Morning America."

Kiss has two rare nerve disorders, neither with a name, says his veterinarian, Nancy Bureau, of the Left Hand Animal Hospital in Niwot. Kiss' hypoglossal nerve, which controls the tongue's motion, doesn't work well, while the facial nerve on his right side is hyperactive; that's what makes his tongue hang out so far to the right.

Kiss never set out to be famous, and that's not why Korres adopted him five months ago. When she went to pick him up in California, she says, she was shocked to see the tongue. No one had mentioned it to her in advance.

Kiss, a 4-year-old boxer, gets a treat this week from owner Dawn Korres at the Valmont Dog Park. Korres rescued Kiss from being euthanized in California. (Jonathan Castner / For the Camera)

"I was surprised," she says, "but it didn't stop me."

Korres had a history of adopting pets in need, including a deaf albino Australian shepherd, a dog with severe separation anxiety and senior animals.

She says she stumbled across Kiss' photo — one of the few where his tongue was barely sticking out — on Petfinder.com, an animal-adoption website.

Korres' 13-year-old boxer, Shakira, recently had died, and a few months later, she lost her 12-year-old Great Dane-pitbull-mix, Rico. Both were rescues and had cancer.

(Shortly after she adopted Kiss, Korres lost her third senior dog, Chai, 13.)

Korres says she wasn't actively looking for another dog, but Kiss "had me as soon as I saw the picture."

When she called the adoption agency, she learned a family already had expressed interest in adopting him. But something fell through. Another family was in line. They didn't take him. The third in line was the charm for Korres.

Other than the tongue issue and occasional twitches while sleeping, Kiss is healthy and living a full life, his vet says.

But the dog's life was nearly cut short. When Korres found him on Petfinder, she says, he was on the way to be euthanized.

Today, she says she can't imagine her household without Kiss' puppylike energy and enthusiasm.

Kiss has no problem eating and drinking.

"He doesn't have any trouble getting it down, but it gets all over the place," Korres says. "It gives everyone a laugh. He's really sweet."

She says Kiss gets along great with her last remaining dog, Cronus, a black Newfoundland; her two rescued, senior cats, Siamber and Deeksha; and her three children, Andrey, 20, whom she adopted from Russia when he was 11; Alijah, 6, who was adopted at birth, and Korres' biological daughter, Ava-Rae, 12, who is an animal advocate, like her mother.

When people stop Kiss on the streets or trails to remark on his unusual tongue, Korres says she uses the opportunity to tell them that he was rescued from a "kill shelter." She says she hopes Kiss can raise awareness about adopting animals — even ones that look a little different.

"Here's a dog that was on death row that could have lost his life, and look at him. He's bringing happiness and joy to everyone," Korres says. "Although Kiss has a funny tongue and a slight neurological problem, it makes him rich in character. You can never judge a book by its cover."

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay.