This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

... yet seen for awhile is that there was another day of the Republican presidential candidate mascot of the way it felt again on Tuesday when John K sick the governor of Ohio announce he's running for president ... not a surprise he's the sixteenth a candidate to throw his hat in the ring ... the last of the sitting governors the rounds up the field and in many ways ... so is a good time to step back and see where the assets were the liabilities ... for candidate he's just getting into the race ... that's for tickle e interesting exercise from the for John K sick dizzy so when conventional first ... on the assets I discuss million trusting an important once ... the governor of Ohio a very import states Republicans that never run that won the presidency without winning Ohio and is a popular governor of that state he's done ... he's done well in his time as the chief executive of Ohio on the political front ... secondly he's got a reputation some eager to get somethings done his share of the House Budget Committee to manage to balance the budget working with President Bill Clinton ... aam and he's got better if this is the kind of compassionate conservative somebody who's ate a lot ... out of reaching out beyond traditional Republican audiences to talk to about the pore to the foreign to talk to minorities ... that all makes in a very interesting candidate some liabilities and offset that is not to be popular with conservatives to see ... embrace the Affordable Care Act also those Obamacare's instead he decided that the state which in turn into ... the Medicaid expansion that was called for under that Act it's not popular with conservatives ... he spoke in favor of common core in ... and some immigration reform measures at the May conservatives perfectly happy ... and he's a bit of a non guided Nestle SA that has very unconventional announcement speech in which he talked ... in a server rambling the very interesting way the for a long time without the teleprompter without notes ... is that any guy who can say in Iowa City thing in any time it's a very interesting Ripper pocket of ... as necessarily make and save the people in the party established ...