CONCORD, N.H. — The question that flummoxed former senator Rick Santorum (Pa.) was simple.

"What do you list as Marco Rubio's biggest accomplishments?" MNSBC's Joe Scarborough asked, just 12 hours after Santorum ended his campaign to endorse the senator from Florida.

"I would just say that this is a guy who's been able to, number one, win a tough election in Florida, and bring people together from a variety of different spots," Santorum said. "This is a guy who can work together with people."

"He's been in the Senate for four years," nudged Scarborough. "Can you name his top accomplishment in the Senate?"

"My feeling on Marco is someone who has tremendous potential, tremendous gifts," Santorum replied.

And then there were nine. Rick Santorum says he's ending his campaign for president, joining Republican Sen. Rand Paul who also announced he's bowing out. (Reuters)

[Rick Santorum endorses Marco Rubio after dropping out]

The interview, in which word salad is tossed for three unpleasant minutes, is reminiscent of a moment from the 2008 Democratic primary. Sen. Kirk Watson (Tex.), an Obama endorser, walked into a buzzsaw when MSNBC's Chris Matthews asked him to name some of Obama's "legislative accomplishments" as a senator from Illinois. Watson couldn't do it.

There were issues that Watson could have raised, if he was willing to state some Obama talking points about nuclear safety. Similarly, Santorum might have escaped the pummeling if he'd given Rubio credit for the one Senate vote that makes it into his TV ads — a rider to a must-pass spending bill that cut funding to the "risk corridors" of the Affordable Care Act, something Rubio takes credit for even if fact-checkers do not agree.

[Fact Checker: Rubio’s inaccurate claim that he ‘inserted’ a provision restricting Obamacare ‘bailout’ funds]

But Santorum, the runner-up in the 2012 GOP primary fight, was especially ill-suited to be stumped. In this presidential campaign, even as he didn't get any kind of traction, he regaled audiences with stories of how he'd been able to get a Democratic president to sign welfare reform, how he'd favored Iran sanctions before anyone else thought them feasible, how he'd banned "partial-birth" abortion.

Santorum was uniquely ill-suited to make a promise-not-experience case for Rubio. If the senator from Florida consolidates more support, from rivals who've actually questioned his experience on the record, they'll have to find an answer to the obvious, looming question.