As we gear up for an improved economy in 2015, let’s take a look at the economic, safety and social highlights of 2014 that shaped our current economy. We ended the year on a high note as we had our best year for hiring in 15 years with a healthy gain in December, and the unemployment rate hit a six-year low. On Jan. 5, the national average for gas was at $2.085, giving consumers more expendable income.

On the first day of 2014, the Affordable Care Act, which requires businesses with more than 50 employees to provide health insurance for their staff, went into effect with much controversy and skepticism. It is projected that 9.1 million will be enrolled by Feb. 15.

The Ebola epidemic, which started in West Africa in the spring, became a global health crisis, but was mostly contained in Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia. It still managed to put a damper on travel due to the travel restrictions and the fear of becoming infected. Overall, there were more than 17,000 cases reported with 6,000 deaths. Only three cases were reported in the U.S.

Marijuana was a hot topic as states toyed with legalizing the substance and cities dealt with permits for dispensaries. On Jan. 1, 2014, Colorado began legal sales of recreational marijuana, and in July, Washington state also began allowing the sale of marijuana for recreational use. In the first four months, Colorado sales generated approximately $70 million in recreational marijuana sales and $133 million in medical marijuana sales. The economic benefits of legalizing marijuana are still being debated.

The threat of terror continued as a new group, known as the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), took it yet to a new level with graphic beheadings and the horrific takeover of entire towns in Syria and Iraq. ISIS gained notoriety in the West after beheading American and English journalists and aide workers and then posting videos of the murders online. Terrorism is a real threat that will continue to threaten our safety and our economy.

Hacking was front and center when Sony took an economic and image hit after private emails were leaked in opposition to the release of the movie, “The Interview.” The actual losses due to legal fees, sales and those distancing themselves from Sony are still unknown.

Violence broke out in the St. Louis, Missouri, suburb of Ferguson in August after an unarmed black teen was fatally shot by a white police officer. Businesses in Ferguson were destroyed or impacted for weeks due to demonstrations, and protesters took to the streets in New York when a grand jury decided not to indict a police officer in the death of an African-American who was put in a chokehold.

Voter turnout hit an all-time low for the 2014 midterm elections, with only 36.3 percent of voters weighing in. The Republicans took control of the Senate and held on to their firm grip of the House of Representatives.

Advertisement

Without a doubt, 2015 will bring just as many challenges and more surprises but hopefully with even more growth in the economy.

Mary Claypool is an adviser with Claypool Consulting and former executive director of the Monterey County Business Council. She can be reached at maryclaypool@sbcglobal.net or 917-3777.