WLWT first told you about Red, the puppy who was found alone and abused outside the Reds Urban Youth Academy in Roselawn last week.

The community’s love and support helped him get the surgery he needed to repair a fractured femur.

Watch this story

Red's scars show just how much he's been through the 5-month-old puppy was left with a broken femur after likely being beaten, dragged and tied to a fence.

However, his journey to recovery started Wednesday night after his surgery.

“He was in so much pain, yet at the same time he never lost that, he just loves,” said Janel Hemrick with Joseph’s Legacy. “He's very excited about all the love he has received and he's kissed everyone who has come in to see him.”

Red needed help to pay for his discounted surgery and it came pouring in from everywhere.

Ten-year-old Dylan Livengood-Willams heard about his story on the news, made him a gift basket and came to visit three times.

“Just the thought of people abusing animals just makes me so mad and upset that people would do that to animals. I mean, animals have feelings too,” said Dylan.

The community raised more than enough for doctors to put a plate in his femur.

"It's been hard for all of us to see that, but he's got great spirit and a great personality and we're happy that we were able to help him,” said Dr. Erin Schelle from County Animal Hospital.

“I asked my dad if I could keep him and my dad said no, we just got a puppy, haha,” said Dylan.

Now the requests to take Red home are flooding in, but we're happy to say Red will have a good home when he leaves the hospital Friday.

You’ve already met his new mom Hemrick, from Joseph's Legacy. She said it's the first time she's taken a rescue dog home from Joseph’s Legacy.

“I couldn't stand to see him go through anything more than he already has,” said Hemrick. “No animal deserves to be treated the way he was and we just wanted to ensure that wouldn't happen to him ever again."

Red will be on crate rest for two month and will need some physical therapy.

The extra money raised for Red will go to help other animals in need.

If you are interested in helping, click here.