In a move reminiscent of the Today Show anchors Matt Lauer’s and Al Roker’s televised prostate exams last fall, Myrtle Beach Pelicans vice-president and general manager, Andy Milovich, underwent a public prostate exam Friday at the Myrtle beach minor league team’s Prostate Cancer Awareness Night.

Not to be outdone by Lauer and Roker, Milovich had his exam while poking his head out of the press box and singing Take Me Out to the Ballgame in front a sell-out crowd of over 6500 Myrtle Beach Pelicans fans.

The exam was the result of a promise that Milovich made to support 10-year-old brain cancer victim Fallon Emery, reported the Beach Carolina Magazine. On July 19, the Myrtle Beach Pelicans sent out a tweet in which Milovich agreed to a challenge from his staff to have an in-game prostate exam if Emery’s “Fierce Fallon” Facebook page received 10,000 likes by Thursday, July 24:

‘Like’ http://t.co/8SqENhoPVz today & help us hit 10K ‘Likes’ before noon Thursday (7/24)! @ARMilovich #FierceFallon pic.twitter.com/PYwsyv3Ajr — MyrtleBeachPelicans (@Pelicanbaseball) July 19, 2014

The announcement was shared on Twitter by ESPN’s Sports Business Reporter, Darren Rovell the next day. By Monday, Fallon’s Facebook Page had reached the 10,000 like mark. Milovich said during a WRNN Hot Talk radio intervew, “One Darren Rovell tweet later and here we are.” He kept his promise, and the prostate exam took place during the seventh inning stretch of the Pelican’s home game at Myrtle Beach’s TicketReturn.com Field.

In a slightly humorous tribute to the GM’s act, the team also passed out 1000 foam fingers with blue ribbons on them to the adult men in the stadium to promote prostate cancer awareness.

If ‘taking one for the team’ keeps one child from going fatherless,” Milovich said, “then it will be worth it.”

The Myrtle Beach Pelicans’ GM took his first prostate exam in good humor, telling ESPN, “It wasn’t bad. The doc was done maybe 15 seconds into the song. I think my next exam is going to be a significant letdown.” He was also suprised with the response to his public exam. “The amount of people, who are either prostate-cancer survivors or people who have lost family members to prostate cancer, who have said what tonight meant to them has been overwhelming, ” he said.

Emery Fallon, who was too ill to attend the game, watched the performance from home on a laptop. Her mother, Melanie, expressed gratitude for the Myrtle Beach team’s support, saying, “She had a rough week with fever and viruses, so the fact that this happened was really a godsend.”

As for his singing, Milovich told ESPN that he though he needed voice lessons. What do you think?