Last week, the N.H. Senate passed its own form of Medicaid expansion, a new plan that would insure about 50,000 additional New Hampshire residents and allow them to choose their preferred health insurance on the state’s health exchange.

But this expansion will still leave out one important thing for adults: dental insurance.

Medicaid, a federal insurance program, covers children, and adults who are disabled, pregnant or have Medicaid-dependent children.

In New Hampshire, Medicaid covers dental care for children up to age 21, as well as disabled adults and pregnant women. It pays for preventive care for children, but for adults, it only pays for emergency care, such as extractions.

If approved by the House and signed into law — which is expected to happen — New Hampshire’s Health Protection Plan will give more residents access to medical care and mental health services. But even though Medicaid expansion means more people are getting covered, the scope of dental services they receive won’t change.

“There is no dental benefit covered by expansion,” said Thomas Bunnell, policy consultant for New Hampshire Voices for Health, a nonprofit health care advocacy group. “Our state would have to do something to change the Medicaid benefit for dental to be covered.”

It’s something the N.H. Department of Health and Human Services has considered for a few years, according to Jeffrey Meyers, director of intergovernmental affairs at the department.

But each time the department proposed expanding dental coverage for the uninsured as part of its biennial budget, it’s been turned down by the state Legislature to save money, Meyers said.

People can learn more about expanding benefits at upcoming public hearings hosted by the state agency.

Meyers said the department has tried to add dental care with the goal of taking a “whole-person approach” to health care.

In addition to medical care, “you’ve got to look at oral health,” Meyers said.

Dentists tout good dental care as an integral part of overall health: Preventive care like check-ups can help prevent cavities and tooth abscesses, which, left untreated, can sometimes turn into serious systemic infections.

Getting coverage

Under the Affordable Care Act, Medicaid expansion will cover adults who make less than 138 percent of the federal poverty level, or about $16,000 per year. It’s estimated about 40,000 to 50,000 adults will receive health insurance under the expansion, which will kick in July 1.

Although Medicaid expansion doesn’t include a dental health benefit, it opens the door to getting one, according to Meyers and Bunnell.

There are opportunities for states to leverage federal Medicaid dollars to implement optional programs such as dental benefits, Bunnell said.

Here’s how it would work: By signing onto Medicaid expansion through the Affordable Care Act, New Hampshire would be showing a commitment to having more people insured, more people getting preventative care, and theoretically, less people developing serious health problems because of it.

And fewer people getting sick would mean less money spent by the state and federal governments on emergency and intensive care.

Meyers said if the state shows it’s reforming programs and saving money, it can ask for a waiver from U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services.

This waiver grants New Hampshire the ability to put the money it’s saved back into developing other programs that improve the quality of health care available to low-income patients, such as dental insurance.

To start getting on-track for dental benefits and other programs, the state Department of Health and Human Services must submit a waiver application by June 1, according to Meyers.

But even if the federal money is granted to New Hampshire, the final decision with what to do with the money rests with the state Legislature.

If the Legislature were to agree on spending money for Medicaid dental benefits, N.H. Medicaid Dental Director Margaret Snow said the Department of Health and Human Services would develop a specific plan tailored to the Legislature’s specifications, and amend the state Medicaid plan as the legislation directed. Finally, they would submit the request for a waiver to the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the federal agency for those programs.

Snow said these steps could take many months.

“There have been discussions for decades about the need for an adult dental benefit under N.H. Medicaid, yet there had not yet been success in ... authorizing legislation or even pilot programs under waivers,” she said.

But Meyers said the department is looking closely at applying for waivers if the N.H. House and Gov. Maggie Hassan sign off on Medicaid expansion.

Meyers said his department will be announcing public hearings about waivers and expanding benefits in the coming weeks.