4260778

The Daily Caller’s alphabetical tour de force showing that everything — no really, everything — is racist these days continues apace. The word has been bandied about so much that it is rapidly losing any real meaning.

Here are 12 things beginning with the letter ‘C’ that somebody, somewhere has deemed racist.

Carp — oily freshwater fish of the family Cyprinidae — are racist according to Minnesota state senator John Hoffman. In April, Hoffman introduced a bill to start calling “Asian carp” the completely offensive name “invasive carp.” Hoffman complained that calling the fish “Asian” was insensitive, notes Breitbart.

Crossing your arms is racist according to black comedian Aries Spears, who explained to digital cable channel TV One that large numbers of white people are racists. As evidence, he said according to Breitbart, many white people cross their arms when President Barack Obama is referenced.

Climate change is racist according to Democratic Congressman Keith Ellison who, though he represents a district in frequently frigid Minnesota, managed to tweet in April: “Communities of color are more vulnerable to deaths from heat waves, which climate change will make worse #ActonClimate.” The tweets in reply are hilarious, by the way.

After country music singers Carrie Underwood and Brad Paisley sang an acoustic ditty critical of Obamacare at the 2013 Country Music Awards, Twitter users took to their accounts to call the country music-loving audience a bunch of “rich white people who are racist and hate black people,” according to Fox News.

In December 2013, the obscure leftist website called Salon ranted that Christianity is racist in an all all-over-the-place essay that lops in “Duck Dynasty,” Evangelicals’ rejection of homosexuality and these darned kids today. “[R]acism and colonization have also allowed white people, like Fox News anchor Megyn Kelly, to create the Jesus they wish to see, too: a blonde, blue-eyed white man with long hair,” the Salon writer fumes.

Back in 2009, the Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) bizarrely suggested that colorblindness concerning race — “the idea that ignoring or overlooking racial and ethnic differences promotes racial harmony” — is somehow itself racist. The SPLC is, of course, most famous because a man named Floyd Lee Corkins used an SPLC “Hate Map” to find the Family Research Council headquarters in Washington, D.C. He entered the headquarters lobby in August 2012 in an attempt to “to kill as many people as possible” and “smother Chick-fil-A sandwiches in their faces” because he disagreed with the conservative organization about gay marriage. Corkins managed to shoot a security guard. The guard disarmed him. (RELATED: FBI Severs Ties With Liberal, Domestic Terrorism-Inspiring Southern Poverty Law Center)