Dawn Starnes (Photo: Submitted photo )

Tuesday’s elections changed the landscape of power in Washington and in many state capitals around the nation. We asked Dawn Starns, Louisiana state director of the National Federation of Independent Business, how the election results will affect members of her organization, which counts 4,000 members in Louisiana.

Question: How did the Tuesday election results match up with NFIB’s choices? Will your members be pleased?

Answer: NFIB supported candidates this election cycle who supported small business through our Vote for Main Street campaign. Election night was a great night for small business. Three of our endorsed candidates were re-elected outright — U.S. Reps. Charles Boustany, John Fleming and Steve Scalise. Additionally, NFIB endorsed Bill Cassidy in the US Senate race and although we expected a runoff, we were happy to see how strong his numbers were statewide and will continue to support him.

Q: Given that it’s so difficult to effect political change in Washington, how much practical effect will Tuesday’s results have for independent business?

A: You’re right that change is difficult in Washington. However, now with a truly representative democracy with a Democratic president and a Republican Congress, we are optimistic that change is possible. We believe that the candidates we endorsed heard the message of small business loud and clear and will begin dialogue to end the gridlock so that small-business owners can begin to see some economic certainty.

Q: Did the NFIB have specific changes in mind based on the outcome of this year’s election? What was most important to the organization, and will Tuesday’s results help you achieve it?

A: We repeatedly heard three major concerns from our members during this election: health care costs, taxes and regulations. The uncertainty on all three fronts is creating an environment where business owners are less likely to take risks associated with hiring on more employees or expanding their business. It was clear to NFIB which candidates had been and would continue to be champions for small business on Capitol Hill. We believe those re-elected will do everything in their power to bring a level of certainty to these areas so that small-business owners regain confidence in the economy and start to grow again.

Q: Looking ahead, will the elections be favorable to independent businesses? Why or why not?

A: Yes, at a very basic level, change in leadership in the U.S. Senate alone will go a long way in changing the tone in D.C. However, it remains to be seen if the president will support reforms to the Affordable Care Act or back down on over-reaching government regulations that threaten the nation’s small business owners.

Q: What else was important about the election that we may have missed?

A: NFIB will continue to hold members of Congress accountable for their votes ensuring that the voice of small business is indeed heard in D.C.

Read or Share this story: http://www.theadvertiser.com/story/money/business/2014/11/08/qa-election-beneficial-small-business-owners/18726731/