House Speaker John Boehner (R. Ohio) and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.), pictured at the Capitol on April 16, 2015, are being criticized for not fighting hard enough for conservative ideals. Gabriella Demczuk/Getty Images

Republican congressional leaders John Boehner and Mitch McConnell have become a big, wide target on the 2016 campaign trail. Not just for Democrats, as you’d expect, but for presidential candidates of their own party who are calling out the House speaker and Senate majority leader for not doing more to advance a conservative agenda in Congress.

Sen. Ted Cruz, one of the most anti-establishment candidates in the field, has taken the lead in criticizing the GOP leaders. Even some of the more establishment-oriented candidates like New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie have heaped blame on them.

Those candidates are playing to a sentiment that is running strong in Republican activist ranks: Many conservatives are bitter with disappointment that, even after Republicans won control of both the House in 2010 and the Senate in 2014, party leaders are not fighting harder for conservative ideals.

Messrs. Boehner and McConnell have faced these attacks for years from grassroots activists. But now the complaints are coming from the political heights of the presidential campaign as well.

Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, speaking during the GOP presidential debate Wednesday night, complained that Congress hadn’t passed legislation to repeal the “Obamacare” health-care law, defund Planned Parenthood, or block the Iran nuclear deal.

“We won the Senate. We won the House,” Mr. Jindal said, in the debate among second-tier presidential candidates at the Ronald Reagan Library and Foundation in Simi Valley, Calif. “What was the point of winning those chambers if we’re not going to do anything with them?”

That kind of anger was expressed more personally and bluntly on a protest sign held aloft at a recent demonstration against the Iran nuclear deal: “Boehner McConnell–Repugnant Traitors.”

Some conservatives think that such frustration is contributing to the rise of real-estate developer and reality-television celebrity Donald Trump.

“Rank-and-file Republicans are turning to the Donald because he, unlike the party establishment, seems energetic, articulate, and determined to get something done,” John M. Ellis, an emeritus professor at the University of California at Santa Cruz recently wrote in The American Thinker, an online publication.

Spokesmen for Messrs. Boehner and McConnell declined to comment on such criticism. But allies of the leaders have long argued that critics are overlooking or downplaying the limits on Republicans’ power in the Senate. Republicans have a majority, 54 seats, in the chamber but it takes 60 votes to break a filibuster, giving Democrats plenty of power to stop conservative bills. Even if Republicans did pass, say, a bill to repeal the health-care law, they likely wouldn’t have the votes to override a presidential veto.

That is why Sen. Lindsey Graham, another presidential candidate, snapped at Mr. Jindal’s criticism of congressional Republicans in Wednesday’s debate.

“I’m tired of telling people things they want to hear that I know we can’t do,” said Mr. Graham. “If you want to repeal Obamacare, get a new president.”

Conservatives’ frustration with Mr. Boehner has grown to the point that the Capitol is abuzz with speculation that his hold on the speakership may be challenged later this year. He, too, may be a victim of overblown expectations as he tries to manage a GOP caucus split between very ideological and more pragmatic members.

“Boehner has a near impossible job,” said Michael Genovese, a political scientist at Loyola Marymount University. “Boehner makes a good target because he is herding cats, when some people want results.”

More

Video

The GOP Debate in Two Minutes: