202

NYC hotels planned

31K

Rooms in pipeline

-5%

Decline in occupancy (Jan.-Feb. 2015 vs. Jan.-Feb. 2014)



People are worried that there are too many hotels in the city. Manufacturers are upset, charging that hotels are invading their turf and driving out factories. Other groups argue that hotels are starting to erode available sites for housing. Some are calling for the city government to act to stop these developments.

At first blush, the numbers appear worrisome. The most recent Hotel Horizons report from PKF Hospitality Research estimates that 202 hotels are in the pipeline in the city (excluding ones listed as "unconfirmed"). Those projects could add more than 31,000 rooms to the city's existing inventory of just over 100,000—a pretty big percentage increase.

But remember, these are planned hotels. Many, if not most, will not be built because the city's great tourism boom is running out of gas.

In the first two months of the year, occupancy in New York hotels declined by 5%, compared with the same period in 2014. The crucial revenue-per-room metric dropped by more than 12%. Although the year-ago number may have been boosted by the Super Bowl (there is actually some controversy about the big game's impact), macroeconomics have turned against the city.

In just the past year, the dollar has gained more than 25% against the euro, almost as much against the Canadian dollar, and even more against currencies in countries home to once-growing sources of tourists, such as Brazil. The consensus is the dollar is headed even higher, especially after the Federal Reserve Board starts raising interest rates sometime this year.

The big jump in visitors to the city—60% since 2002, when Michael Bloomberg took over City Hall—occurred during a period when the dollar was weak. Not only was New York a cheap date for people from abroad, but going outside the country was very expensive for Americans, many of whom decided New York was a more affordable option.

Now that equation has reversed in a big way. Coming to New York is now much more expensive for international travelers. Europe, Canada and virtually every other place are affordable and sure to lure legions of Americans who've postponed their dream trips.

Although NYC & Company officials continue to insist they can keep the industry expanding, hotel executives are talking another story, telling investors on conference calls that demand has weakened significantly in the city.

The result is easy to predict as the bad numbers sink in. Some developers will abandon their hotel plans. Others will find it impossible to find financing. The market will solve the problem of too many hotels—and any city action at this point will only muck it up.

Get Crain's Daily Alert Sign up for our FREE daily email newsletter. A summary of the day's top business and political headlines from the newsroom of Crain's New York Business. More Newsletters ›

Comments