[Editor’s note: This item has been updated to include a statement from Lance Armstrong.]

On September 4, attorneys representing disgraced Oak Cliff-born, Plano-raised cyclist Lance Armstrong and Dallas-based sports promotions company SCA were scheduled to meet in Judge Tonya Parker courtroom at the George L. Allen Sr. Courts Building to wrestle over $10 million in prize money an arbitration panel says Armstrong owes SCA. But at the last second, for unexplained reasons, that hearing was canceled. Now, we know why:

The lawsuit has been settled.

That is according to SCA’s attorney, Dallas’ Jeff Tillotson, who says via email Sunday afternoon that the settlment resolves the parties’ long-simmering dispute, which dates back more than a decade.

“SCA has agreed to settle its dispute with Lance Armstrong,” the LBJ Freeway-headquartered promotions company says in a brief statement. “While the terms of the settlement are confidential, SCA can say that the agreement was mutually acceptable to both parties. SCA is pleased to have this matter finally resolved and beyond this statement, SCA has no further comment.”

Armstrong says via email that he’s glad the issue is behind him.

“While the terms of the settlement are confidential, I can say that the settlement was mutually acceptable to all parties,” he says in a statement sent via his manager and spokesman Mark Higgins. “I am pleased to have this matter behind me, and I look forward to moving on. I do wish to personally apologize to SCA and its CEO, Bob Hamman, for any past misconduct on my part in connection with our dispute and the resulting arbitration. ”

Tillotson and SCA sued Armstrong to retrieve millions SCA paid the cyclist for winning the Tour de France in 2002, ’03 and ’04. SCA paid the money on behalf of Tailwind Sports, which owned the U.S. Postal Service team for which Armstrong raced, and wanted it returned after Armstrong admitted to Oprah Winfrey that, yes, all those stories about him filling his blood with numerous banned substances were true after all.

It wasn’t the first time Tillotson and SCA tussled with Armstrong: In 2004 SCA tried to keep from paying the bonus around the same time reporters Pierre Ballester and David Walsh published their book L.A. Confidentiel: Les secrets de Lance Armstrong, in which Armstrong’s masseuse Emma O’Reilly spoke openly of performance-enhancing drug use. Tillotson would become the only attorney to ask Armstrong about those allegations, among others, after he swore to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, so help him God.

“I race the bike straight up fair and square,” he told Tillotson, who can be seen questioning the cyclist under oath in Alex Gibney’s 2013 documentary The Armstrong Lie. Except, of course, he didn’t.

SCA and Armstrong settled their differences in 2006. Seven years later, after that Oprah interview, SCA filed its lawsuit, claiming “Lance Armstrong perpetuated what may well be the most outrageous, cold-hearted and elaborate lie in the history of sports.” In February of this year, two members of a three-member arbitration panel — one representing Armstrong, one representing SCA, and a third who was neutral — said that Armstrong must repay the money. The reason was a simple one, it said when handing down its decision:

“Perjury must never be profitable.”

In May Armstrong’s attorneys tried to get the judge to vacate the panel’s decision, insisting that it “effectively eviscerated a fully negotiated and binding settlement agreement” made between SCA and Armstrong in 2006. On September 4, Parker was going to consider confirming the award.

But two and a half years later, the parties have decided to end the race, just in time for the U.K. release of Stephen Frears’ movie The Program starring Ben Foster as Armstrong. The film, writes Catherine Shoard in The Guardian, “excels is in examining how it feels to be unable to accept defeat, even when you know victory was ill-gained.”