OAKLAND, Calif., March 25, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Chairman and CEO Bernard J. Tyson today joined President Obama, Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell, and other business leaders for the White House launch of the Health Care Payment Learning and Action Network.

The Network intends to further the framework established by the Affordable Care Act to move the U.S. health care system away from a payment model based on the quantity of care provided and towards one based on quality. This has been Kaiser Permanente's approach for 70 years. More than 2,800 payers, providers, employers, patients, states, consumer groups, consumers and other partners have registered to participate.

As part of the launch event, Kaiser Permanente committed to sharing important learnings based on the organization's experience in providing value-based care to nearly 10 million Americans. Tyson said Kaiser Permanente would take an active role in helping create a process that mobilizes the health care industry to share best practices around value-based payments among participants. "Sharing is an important role for us as a not-for-profit organization," Tyson said.

Kaiser Permanente's integrated model aligns the health plan with the care delivery provided by its physicians, resulting in both high-quality outcomes and greater affordability.

"We believe a constructive dialogue within health care — led by the Health Care Payment Learning and Action Network and combined with greater flexibility in Medicare — will allow us to share our experience and also learn from what other industry partners are doing," Tyson said. "It is time that we come together and act to make care more affordable. We commend the Administration and Secretary Burwell for their work on this critical issue and appreciate the opportunity to help in any way we can."

Earlier this year Secretary Burwell announced the goal of tying 30 percent of payments to quality and value through alternative payment models by 2016 and 50 percent by 2018 under new approaches to paying for health care created by the Affordable Care Act.

About Kaiser Permanente

Kaiser Permanente is committed to helping shape the future of health care. We are recognized as one of America's leading health care providers and not-for-profit health plans. Founded in 1945, Kaiser Permanente has a mission to provide high-quality, affordable health care services and to improve the health of our members and the communities we serve. We currently serve approximately 9.6 million members in eight states and the District of Columbia. Care for members and patients is focused on their total health and guided by their personal physicians, specialists and team of caregivers. Our expert and caring medical teams are empowered and supported by industry-leading technology advances and tools for health promotion, disease prevention, state-of-the-art care delivery and world-class chronic disease management. Kaiser Permanente is dedicated to care innovations, clinical research, health education and the support of community health. For more information, go to: kp.org/share.

SOURCE Kaiser Permanente