Morris R. Beschloss. (Photo: File Photo)

As the current presidential nominees of both major political parties are on the verge of being chosen, their outcome, and the November 8 final presidential choice will play a dominant role in America’s economic future.

The difference in the directions taken by the two-term presidency of William Jefferson Clinton (1991-1999), and that of Barack Hussein Obama (2009-2017) are graphic examples of how the major objectives of newly-elected presidents can determine the economic direction of duly-elected heads of state, especially if the presidency encompasses two terms.

Much of the nation’s economic stability of the 1990's can be attributed to the positive economic rationale that pervaded eight years of Clinton’s leadership. In listening to his top aide, James Carville, who stated that “It’s the economy, stupid,” Clinton brushed aside his wife’s desire to impose a single payer insurance plan, but instead used his political preeminence to push through the North American Free Trade Authority, which practically turned North America (U.S., Canada, Mexico) into a single economic unit. The ultimate free trade that ensued from this initiative, vastly increasing U.S. exports to their neighbors, are a testimonial to the economic value judgment of President Clinton.

Conversely, President Barack Obama, faced with the worst U.S. economic calamity since the Great Depression, chose to use his incoming presidential victory to push through the controversial “Obamacare health plan,” and the climate control initiative of Cap and Trade, which failed to pass. While a badly neglected nationwide infrastructural program (highways, railroad tracks, dams, bridges, pipelines) were waiting for a go-ahead, especially with record unemployment awaiting the presidential call, this was shunted aside. While the private sector has attempted to fill that void, such efforts have been few and far between, since much of the pipeline construction is energy-oriented and financial loans are increasingly unavailable.

The economic leadership facing the new President will be similar to that of President Franklin D. Roosevelt, in 1933, which was successfully implemented in putting people to work, while getting the job done through TVA, WPA, PWA, and other makeshift organizational approaches.

Depending on which party’s nominee will be sworn in on January 20, 2017, this will determine whether an extension of the Obama Administration, or the more realistic economic approach of FDR and Bill Clinton will move the country’s economy ahead in the immediate ensuing years.

Since “as goes the U.S., so goes the world,” continues to be critical for the future, the presidential victor of November 8 will have immense influence as to how the global economy will shape up for the rest of the decade and beyond.

For future easy access to my blogs, please use the link below, and bookmark it to your desktop. The old link you may be using is still available. However, an alternate link is: http://bit.ly/morrisbeschloss

Read or Share this story: http://desert.sn/27v2f0V