JACKSON, MI – Allegiance Health has finished in the red three out of the last five fiscal years, according to IRS documents — a trend that could see a turn-around as the Jackson-based hospital is absorbed into the University of Michigan Health System.

Allegiance and U-M announced a partnership this week, which brings Allegiance under the U-M umbrella, though Allegiance will retain its own identity. Experts say there are definite financial advantages for the smaller partner in such agreements.

“Allegiance partnering with U-M would certainly help them if (Allegiance) has been operating in a deficit for the last couple of years,” said Alwyn Cassil, director of public affairs at the Washington D.C.-based Center for Studying Health System Change. “By Allegiance coming under the wing of U-M, it could help with insurer negotiations, suppliers, and a certain level of cost savings can be accomplished I’m sure.”

Allegiance leadership, however, say money was not the key motivator for the merger, though they do expect there will be financial benefits. Allegiance could get a boost that includes an initial $25 million investment for the Allegiance Heath Foundation, and $100 million for renovations.

Overall, existing partnerships, similar missions and the sharing of resources is why officials say the partnership is a win-win situation.

“We have a long history with the University of Michigan in ways that the community-at-large might not be aware,” Allegiance Health President and CEO Georgia Fojtasek said. “I think that this will give us a foundation for being able to leverage those even more in a new era.”





Financial challenges



The last five years have been difficult financially for Allegiance Health.

The hospital finished in the negative in tax years 2007, 2008 and 2010. Its fiscal year runs from July 1 to June 30.

Its toughest year was 2008 -- during the country's recession —when the hospital lost about $22.5 million, according to its form 990 filed with the Internal Revenue Service. Allegiance brought in $346.4 million, but lost $19.3 million of it in investment income.

In 2007, the hospital brought in about $342 million but lost about $7 million. Allegiance Health earned about $401.6 million in tax year 2010 but spent $404 million, landing the hospital in the negative by about $2.4 million.

Allegiance Health also ended its most recent fiscal year in the red, experiencing a shortfall of $12 million, Fojtasek said. That year, the hospital received an automatic 2 percent federal cut.

“We also have a high Medicaid population here which is not fully reimbursed,” she said. “Those are financial challenges for us.”



According to Allegiance Health's audited financial statements —which officials say give a clearer picture of how a business operates — the hospital was operating at a net loss only during fiscal year 2008. The IRS forms include non-operating expenses and investments with operating expenses, while the audited financial statements separates out the operating expenses.



During that fiscal year, which was from July 1, 2007 to June 30, 2008, the hospital was at an operating loss of $7.31 million.



During this time, Allegiance was investing in its new open heart program, as well as its electronic health records system, and community health-related initiatives, said Jeanne Wickens, senior vice president of finance and chief financial officer of Allegiance Health. The investment market also was on the decline, which continued on into fiscal year 2009, she said.



Allegiance Health finished in the black in tax years 2009 and 2011.

In tax year 2009, the hospital earned about $411.4 million and spent about $400.6 million, resulting in a surplus of about $10.8 million. In 2011, Allegiance Health brought in about $421.5 million and spent about $417.3 million, ending with an excess of about $4.2 million.

Along with the recession, the hospital was facing other financial challenges, including bond refinancing costs and investment manager expenses.







Breaking down the budget

Not surprisingly, the bulk of Allegiance Health’s revenue comes from program services, which includes the full menagerie of medical services.



Between July 1, 2007 and June 30, 2012, at least 95 percent of the hospital’s revenue was generated by program services. Other, smaller revenue sources include contributions and grants, investment income and miscellaneous sources, such as cafeteria and services to affiliates.

Experts say, though, we can expect a shift in how hospitals generate revenue. Under the Affordable Care Act, hospitals receive incentives for keeping patients away and healthy and also penalties for not doing so, she said.

“For years, hospitals made money by filling their beds with more patients,” she said. “It’s beginning to shift toward hospitals having more total costs of a patient’s care so they have some incentive to keep patients away and healthy. Some of this is because of the high cost of care and some of it is because of the Affordable Care Act.”

Also, not surprisingly, the bulk of expenses during that five-year period came from program expenses, which includes pay, benefits and pension costs for most employees.





Pay for top executives and physicians at the hospital has totaled between $4.8 million and $8.1 million.

The increase in physicians being employed at Allegiance over the past several years is the primary reason for the increase in salaries, Wickens said.



In the 2011 tax year, Fojtasek brought home $1.2 million, while Dr. Ryan Beekman – the hospital’s top-paid physician that year – earned $923,941. In the 2007 year, Fojtasek earned $763,965, while the hospital’s highest-paid physician, Dr. Max Hutton, made $791,445.

Allegiance employs nearly 4,000 and serves seven counties.



The hospital incurred its highest expenditures in 2011, with about $417 million. Over the five-year period, at least 40 percent of the services offered were for elderly Medicare patients while at least 15 percent went to poor patients.

The hospital has seen more people who cannot afford to pay for care and have had to take on bad debt, which accrues when patients do not pay, Wickens said. Allegiance also offers free care for patients who fall below the 300 percent of the federal poverty level.



Currently, there are 19,000 Jackson County residents on Medicaid, Fojtasek said. “We had a lot of challenges last year,” she said.

As part of the proposal with U-M, UMHS would absorb Allegiance Health along with its assets.

The partnership could also open the doors for sharing resources, including applying for grants and lobbying for contributions though the university. Along with that, a $100 million investment could be used for renovations at the hospitals, 205 N. East Ave. There aren’t many details on those yet, but funding could come from grants and revenue.



Wickens said the partnership with UMHS will help improve coordination of care and continue investments in programs and services that will boost the health of the community.

"We're making decisions to invest in our future," she said. "We already have excellent quality, safety and care but we believe (the partnership) will enhance it."