Smart Benefits: Carriers File Requested Rates for 2016

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Rhode Island, Neighborhood Health Plan Tufts Health Plan, and United Healthcare recently requested approval for 2016 health insurance rates filed with the state’s Office of the Health Insurance Commissioner (OHIC) for individuals, small employers, and large employers.

Individual Market Proposed Rates

Blue Cross Blue Shield: The overall average rate increase in the filing is 17.9%.

Neighborhood: The proposed average rate increase is expected to be 8.6%.

United: The requested average rate change is 11.1%.

Small Employer Market Proposed Rates

All four carriers filed in the small employer market.

Blue Cross Blue Shield: The overall average rate increase in the filing is 4.7%, not including benefit changes.

Neighborhood: The proposed average rate increase is expected to be less than 1%.

Tufts: Rates will be lower for small groups with an average decrease of 2.5% for HMO plans and 2.9% for PPO plans.

United: For PPO plans, the requested average rate change is 13.5%.

Large Employer Market Proposed Rates

Blue Cross Blue Shield: The average rate change proposed is 7.3%.

Tufts: The average rate increases weighted by renewal membership are projected as 6.7% and 7.2% for Tufts HMO and Tufts Insurance Company plans respectively.

United: The average rate increase in the filing was 2.1%.

The rates filed are averages; the exact increases will depend on a number of factors such as the enrollee’s age, plan selected, dependents, and more. OHIC will now review the rates, which are subject to change.

Related Slideshow: RI Business Rankings in US

Related Articles

Enjoy this post? Share it with others.

Rob Calise is a founding partner of Cornerstone Group, where he helps clients control the costs of employee benefits by focusing on consumer driven strategies and on how to best utilize the tax savings tools the government provides. Rob serves as Chairman of the Board of United Benefit Advisors, and is a board member of the Blue Cross & Blue Shield of RI Broker Advisory Board, United HealthCare of New England Broker Advisory Board and Rhode Island Business Healthcare Advisors Council. He is also a member of the National Association of Health Underwriters (NAHU), American Health Insurance Association (AHIA) and the Employers Council on Flexible Compensation (ECFC), as well as various human resource associations. Rob is a graduate of Bryant University with a BS in Finance.