As Florida's self-inflicted health care budget crisis goes on and on, Gov. Rick Scott continues to be less and less helpful because he makes less and less sense.

Two years ago, Scott supported Medicaid expansion, to give between 800,000 and 1 million more Floridians health insurance. Now, he opposes expansion. Last month, Scott wrongly blasted the federal government for "walking away" from a program — the Low Income Pool — that helps to reimburse hospitals for treating the uninsured, and he demanded that Washington keep sending the money. Then Scott said state hospitals didn't need all that money. To make up what will be a cut in that federal money for next year, Scott first urged hospitals to share profits. Now, he wants taxpayer-supported hospitals to subsidize for-profit hospitals.

Scott set this confusing tone as the Florida Legislature prepared to reconvene Monday for a three-week special session to pass a budget before the fiscal year ends June 30. When it comes to health care, this will be one of the most important months in Florida's history.

At issue first is that Low Income Pool program, which matters so much in Florida because so many residents remain uninsured or underinsured. Also looming, however, is the U.S. Supreme Court decision on whether the 1.6 million Floridians who obtained coverage through the Affordable Care Act can keep the subsidies that enabled them to buy the coverage.

Just as the governor has no long-range plan for the Low Income Pool money, he has no plan for what would happen if those 1.6 million people lost their coverage. Congress claims to be working on an alternative, but good luck with that.

The safest and smartest response for Florida remains the state Senate's plan to expand Medicaid and move toward a more efficient method of compensating providers who care for the uninsured. After the House and Scott rejected the first version of the Florida Health Insurance Affordability Exchange — based on their partisan hatred of expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act — Senate leaders revised the plan. No enrollee would spend one day in Medicaid. Enrollees would have to sign a contract. They would have to be employed or looking for work.

Yet Scott and the House remain opposed. The governor argued that the Obama administration never has approved a state's Medicaid expansion plan that includes a work requirement. That's true. The looking-for-work condition, however, could be enough to get a waiver from an administration that would love to have Florida join Ohio and Michigan as Republican-run states that have expanded Medicaid.

The House and Senate at least should be talking together. Instead, they're talking apart. The chambers met separately Monday to discuss the Senate plan, which House leaders have dismissed.

That brings us back to the governor, and the latest salvo in his war on non-profit hospitals. Scott wants local, taxpayer-financed hospitals that care for many of the state's uninsured to send Tallahassee roughly $900 million, which would bring Florida another $1.2 billion in federal money. Those hospitals are concentrated in urban counties, but Scott would distribute the money throughout the state.

In return, the governor said, he would send back 10 percent of the money to the hospitals. Scott called that a good deal. The president of the Safety Net Hospital Alliance of Florida called it a rip-off. Tony Carvalho said Scott's plan would cost his members $302 million. Broward Health would lose $30.8 million. Memorial Healthcare System would lose $28.6 million. Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami would lose $84.7 million. For-profit hospitals, like those the governor used to run, would come out ahead.

So the supposed tax-cutting governor would be forcing hospitals to raise taxes. Broward Health President and CEO Nabil El Sanadi said Monday, "This is the beginning of the conversation. There are going to be a lot of changes" to the various proposals. Raising taxes, he said, is "an option of last resort." Broward Health lowered its tax rate by 9 percent this year. Memorial Healthcare's tax rate is less than one-third what it was 10 years ago.

Meanwhile, the governor's Commission on Hospital and Healthcare Funding will meet again Thursday in Tallahassee. Since Scott appointed all the members, the commission's thinking matches the governor's. But it's a three-week session. "You don't revamp the hospital payment system in 20 days," said Sen. Maria Sachs, D-Delray Beach, whose district includes a large portion of northern Broward. "This is 11th-hour stuff."

Unless Scott and the House drop their resistance to expanding insurance, the least harmful outcome would be a one-year stopgap: the Legislature using general state revenue to help close the Low Income Pool gap. Washington is cutting back because of Scott's failure, despite repeated warnings, to work out that long-term solution. The governor would have to give up some or all of his communications tax cuts. There would not be record per-pupil school spending, which also had been a Scott priority.

Such an outcome would be unsatisfying and frustrating, but it would be better than anything the governor has proposed.