Checking for any discrepancies and steering clear of "free" offers will help to keep your information out of the hands of scammers.

Health insurance scams that target older Americans can jeopardize their health – and devastate their bank account and self-esteem.

“We receive complaints from consumers all the time,” says Patricia Poss, senior attorney with the Division of Marketing Practices for the Federal Trade Commission's Bureau of Consumer Protection. “There are dishonest marketers out there who pose as representatives from Medicare.”

Most scams involve telemarketing, mailings or emails offering bogus health insurance or medical equipment that require people to divulge their Medicare or bank account information. In one recent case, the FTC shut down an alleged telemarketing scam that asked older adults to verify their bank account numbers in order to receive a new Medicare card. Within weeks, the victims' bank accounts were drained of hundreds of dollars.

Schemes that milk billions of dollars a year from the federal government through fraudulent claims made by white-collar criminals or organized crime are also prevalent, says Sally Hurme, project advisor with AARP’s education and outreach department. “Medicare fraud is an enormous industry,” she says. For example, a doctor visiting 20 nursing home patients may seek reimbursement for spending one hour with each individual, when the visits actually only lasted a few minutes.

Experts offer these tips to keep the con artists at bay:

Protect your medical identity. Never share personal or financial information with a stranger, whether you’re contacted by phone, mail or online. Only give your insurance information to those who have provided you with medical services.

“Guard your Medicare number as closely as you would any other personal identifier,” Hurme says. She recommends beneficiaries keep their Medicare card at home and instead carry a copy of the card with all but the last four numbers scratched out.

Beware of “free” services. “There’s often some kind of trade-off anytime someone offers something for free,” says Melissa Simpson, program manager of the Center for Benefits Access at the National Council on Aging. “They’re usually after your Medicare numbers.”

Hurme warns consumers to beware of community recruiters who direct people to storefront clinics for free medical care. “They want to draw people to the clinic, so they give up their Medicare number,” she says.

Another type of fraud involves medical equipment manufacturers, like companies that offer free diabetes testing supplies. These vendors then charge Medicare or private insurers for products that were not needed or perhaps never delivered.

“We’ve gotten reports from people who had closets full of supplies that they didn’t know what to do with,” Simpson says.

Review your Medicare summary notice. Carefully check the quarterly Medicare “summary notice” mailed to your home to verify the accuracy of your doctor visits, hospital stays and medical care. Some health care providers, for example, may charge for services that were never rendered.

“This summary tells you every claim that has been made to Medicare on your account,” Hurme says. “If the summary says you went to the doctor when you didn’t or you got a heart transplant when you actually got a flu shot, then you know there’s a problem.”

If you notice an error, immediately contact the health care provider. “It could just be an honest mistake that can easily be corrected,” Simpson says. But if the provider balks, it may be time to notify the authorities of a possible scam.

For help understanding your Medicare summary notice, check out AARP’s decoder. Another valuable resource is the Senior Medicare Patrol, which offers a list of state-specific fraud schemes and a tutorial on how to read the Medicare summary notice.