President Obama's top adviser Dan Pfeiffer has taken aim at the heartfelt op-ed penned by a terminal cancer patient about the disastrous impact of Obamacare on her treatment.

Pfeiffer tweeted a jab at the argument presented by Edie Littlefield Sundby, who is battling stage 4 gallbladder cancer, in her Wall Street Journal piece about how elements of her treatment will not be covered with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, since her insurance company won't participate in the new program.

After the op-ed heard 'round the world gained considerable media coverage, Pfeiffer took to Twitter to place blame at the feet of Sundby's insurance company for dropping the ball, not the administration's reform.

He posted a link to a Think Progress story, “The Real Reason That The Cancer Patient Writing In Today's Wall Street Journal Lost Her Insurance,” but soon earned disdain for targeting a vulnerable patient.

"That's right. Attack a cancer patient. Classy," one angered Tweeter wrote in response to his posting, with another adding "you have to smear a cancer patient for picking the wrong insurance company? Nice touch."

Edie Littlefield Sundby’s op-ed caused President Obama's top adviser Dan Pfeiffer to tweet a link to a story that criticized her insurer, not Obamacare. (Facebook)

Journal opinion writer James Taranto also chimed in to slam Obama's "fast-talking flack," for supporting the smear piece against Sundby in the left-leaning publication.

Think Progress writer Igor Volsky claimed in the Obama defense piece, that "Sundby shouldn't blame reform — United Healthcare dropped her coverage because they've struggled to compete in California's individual health care market for years and didn't want to pay for sicker patients like Sundby."

"Sundby is losing her coverage and her doctors because of a business decision her insurer made within the competitive dynamics of California's health care market," he adds.

But Taranto fought back, correcting Volksy's point by saying, "Sundby is losing her coverage and her doctors because of a business decision her insurer made within the competitive dynamics of California's health care market under the regulatory structure established by Obama's comprehensive 'reform.'"

California resident Edie Littlefield Sundby wrote an op-ed for the Wall Street Journal. (Facebook)

Sundby insisted in her article, "My grievance is not political; all my energies are directed to enjoying life and staying alive, and I have no time for politics."

"For a cancer patient, medical coverage is a matter of life and death. Take away people's ability to control their medical-coverage choices and they may die. I guess that's a highly effective way to control medical costs. Perhaps that's the point," she added.

In Sundby's piece, she explains how once the reform goes into effect on Dec. 31, she will be forced to choose between the state government health exchange - which means certain doctors won't be covered - or try to cover up to 50% of the medical expenses on her own since her insurance company, UnitedHealthcare, will not participate in California's insurance exchange.

The article went viral online and amassed over 2,500 comments in just a few days.

llarson@nydailynews.com