The Medicaid expansion was always a good deal for Louisiana, despite the misinformation from former Gov. Bobby Jindal's administration. If lawmakers believed otherwise, they really weren't doing their homework. Still, Gov. John Bel Edwards is working to make sure they understand the benefits now that the state is gearing up to add an estimated 375,000 uninsured residents to the Medicaid rolls beginning July 1.

Louisiana will save an estimated $677 million over the next five years and $1 billion over 10 years, he told the Senate Health and Welfare Committee Monday (April 18). Those are significant numbers, especially since the state has a sizable budget deficit at the moment.

"I believe the folks in the prior administration who said we couldn't afford Medicaid expansion, they took the worst case scenario on every variable," Gov. Edwards said. "If you look at what we're doing in light of experience in other states ... we know we're going to save money."

The federal government is picking up almost all of the cost of the expansion, so Louisiana will have only a small match to pay. In addition, the state should save money on its health care system for poor residents because far fewer people will be uninsured. Over time, that should reduce the number of Louisiana residents who end up in hospital emergency rooms because of chronic conditions like high blood pressure and diabetes.

That will be better for them and for the state's bottom line.

Sen. Ben Nevers of Bogalusa tried his best to get lawmakers to overrule Gov. Jindal and take the $15.8 billion Medicaid expansion three years ago. He and others pointed out the benefits to thousands of Louisianians and the state as a whole.

But most legislators cared more about rejecting a portion of President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act than they did about uninsured residents. So they backed Gov. Jindal, who tried unsuccessfully to use his resistance to the Medicaid expansion to further his short-lived presidential campaign.

Gov. Jindal and his health officials played down the excellent financial terms President Obama offered: no cost to the state for three years with the match topping out at 10 percent in later years. They emphasized a worst-case scenario in which

Louisiana might have to spend as much as $1.71 billion over a decade. But the Public Affairs Research Council pointed out that the variables in that projection were unlikely to materialize.

Every other estimate — from the Kaiser Family Foundation to the Legislative Fiscal Office — showed Louisiana coming out ahead.

Gov. Edwards, thank goodness, understands how important the expansion is and has compassion for people in need. Having health coverage could be life-changing for hundreds of thousands of residents.

Unfortunately, the governor is working at a disadvantage because the state didn't accept the expansion from the beginning. The federal government's offer to pay full cost of expansion for the first three years ends in 2017. At that point, the state is supposed to start paying a share.

There could be a reprieve, though. President Obama is asking Congress to extend the 100 percent coverage for states like Louisiana that are approving the expansion late. That would save our state a substantial amount of money over three years.

But many Republicans in Congress are still fighting the 6-year-old Affordable Care Act, so the proposal is expected to have tough going. U.S. Rep. Cedric Richmond, a Democrat from New Orleans, introduced the president's proposal last month. The Republicans who make up the rest of Louisiana's delegation should help him move the bill. It's more important to help our state than try to thwart the president.

The same goes for legislators. They made the wrong choice before. Now they ought to do whatever they can to make the expansion go smoothly in Louisiana.