Progressives predictably have objected to my post last week suggesting that progressivism hasn’t demonstrated yet that it has the answers to 21st-century problems because it doesn’t yet understand 21st-century questions. A typical response I received rebutted my assertion by pointing to such recent progressive successes as Obamacare, the federal bailout of the auto industry and investment in new energy firms, “making tax cuts for the middle class the norm” (I’m not sure in which country) and increased financial regulation.

The list actually makes my point: These are essentially 20th-century solutions. They don’t speak to the governance realities of the 21st century. I addressed these a bit in my prior post on the “sharing” – or, as I called it, “unbottling” – economy. Now comes a great piece in The Washington Post’s Wonkblog by Emily Badger allowing us to explore this subject a bit further. Badger asked:

Why are hundreds of thousands of people letting strangers rent their bedrooms or drive their cars if society is growing more cynical? Why would you trust a company that ships you a dress worn by another woman last week if you don't actually trust people all that much? How is the economy suddenly creating billion-dollar businesses around the idea of communal consumption at a time when we're not feeling communitarian at all?

[READ: Cheers to the 'Unbottling' Economy]

She concluded (citing a PricewaterhouseCoopers report): “Confidence in the sharing economy is not so much about trust between individual strangers – or even one person and one company – as it is about trust between one person and the crowd.” Hers is basically an argument that crowdsourcing is changing businesses because of the "law of large numbers": One person almost never can answer correctly the prototypical carnival challenge of naming how many jelly beans are in a giant bottle – but the average guess of a large number of equally uninformed individuals usually comes extremely close to the actual answer. Many of our basic institutions, from juries and elections to stock markets and now crowdsourcing, depend upon this “wisdom of crowds.”

But what’s really at issue, in my view, is the decreasing cost and increasing pervasiveness of information. Wrote Badger, “Maybe I don't have all that much trust in one woman renting her home on Airbnb, but I do trust the aggregated input of the 24 people who've given her high marks.” Well, 24 people don’t really make for a statistically valid assessment of whether you’ve checked into the Bates Motel. The analytic discipline at work here isn’t statistics – it’s game theory.

Here’s what game theory tells us about behavior: If individuals can benefit from antisocial behavior, they’ll engage in it. And that depends a lot upon whether they ever have to see you again. Game theory constructs like the “prisoner’s dilemma” – where everyone sells out everyone else – paint a dim picture of the prospects for human society. But only if it’s a one-off game; if players have to play the game repeatedly, as they do in real societies, they quickly learn to “cooperate” rather than “defect.”



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Economy]

Technologies today that make it easier to report on and learn of the behavior of others are making it harder to defect. You only get to lie or fail to send what you promised once and hope still to do business on eBay. In this way, the entire globe is indeed becoming a village. You don’t need police or transfer programs in a village. As modern technologies make information more widely accessible – about bad cabs and bed-and-breakfasts, about polluters or exploitive employers, about campaign contributors and voting records – they make elaborate enforcement mechanisms less necessary. As I wrote in my “unbottling” post:

[R]egulation itself is being not so much eliminated as modernized by these technologies. Like most apps that really take off these days, Uber allows – in fact, requires – users to rate each other, both drivers and riders alike. That brings consumer pressure (notably, based on egalitarian voting rather than economic muscle) to bear to regulate performance and punish substandard drivers (and riders).

Governments have always augmented, or outsourced, enforcement efforts through social regulation – everything from relying on citizens to report crime to Robert Reich’s “No Sweat” campaign as U.S. Labor Secretary. The app economy will make it even easier.



[READ: No, Uber and Lyft Won't Hurt Consumers]

As I’ve noted before, younger Americans believe more than their elders in all sorts of “progressive” social values – but not in government programs as a means for achieving them. This begs the question: How does this generation think it will deal with “collective action” problems – the kind of public goods or externalities challenges that form both the need and justification for government? The answer may very well be such social – rather than classically political – mechanisms made easier, cheaper and faster by modern information technologies.

Another Generation Y Washington Post blogger whom I greatly admire, Alexandra Petri, wrote a piece last year responding to the “whole story of the Hack That Found Everyone’s Nude Photos.” She not only insisted that people should feel free to treat new technologies as part of their zone of privacy, but also that younger Americans possessed a mechanism to enforce these expectations of privacy: a social contract. Don’t post because you’re then responsible for others violating your privacy? “No,” she insisted. “This is a terrible standard. We millennials have gotten by by ignoring it – reasoning that there is enough material there from each of us that destruction is mutually assured. … We all know this, and so we decide not to make this our standard.”

If Petri‘s piece is an accurate reflection of her generation’s views – and my experiences tell me it is – then younger Americans have a much higher expectation of social cohesion and collective enforcement of norms than is the case generally today. They expect new technologies to have everyone pulling together without coercion.