Massachusetts Institute of Technology Economics professor Jonathan Gruber prepares to testify before the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee about his work on the Affordable Care Act Tuesday. Gruber, who was a consultant paid by the authors of the Affordable Care Act and the Massachusetts universal health care program, called voters stupid and said that Obamacare would not have passed if lawmakers had really known what was inside the legislation during an academic conference earlier this year. (Photo: Chip Somodevilla, Getty Images)

WASHINGTON — Massachusetts Institute of Technology economist Jonathan Gruber repeatedly apologized for his videotaped statements on the Affordable Care Act, while defending the process used to pass the law known as Obamacare.

Gruber became the public face of the Obamacare debate since a video emerged of him touting a "lack of transparency" and "the stupidity of the American voter" as keys to getting the law passed in 2010.

"In excerpts of these videos I am shown making a series of glib, thoughtless, and sometimes downright insulting comments," Gruber said in prepared testimony to the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee Tuesday. "I behaved badly, and I will have to live with that, but my own inexcusable arrogance is not a flaw in the Affordable Care Act."

Indeed, Gruber defended the law. "Let me be very clear: I do not think that the Affordable Care Act was passed in a non-transparent fashion. The issues I raised in my comments, such as redistribution of risk through insurance market reform and the structure of the Cadillac tax, were roundly debated throughout 2009 and early 2010 before the law was passed. Reasonable people can disagree about the merits of these policies, but it is completely clear that these issues were debated thoroughly during the drafting and passage of the ACA."

Rep. Darrell Issa, R-Calif., the chairman of the oversight committee, called the hearing after the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services was caught giving inflated enrollment numbers by including standalone dental plans. He said the drafting and implementation of the law continues to be shrouded in obscurity.

Gruber's involvement in drafting the law has been hotly debated. Critics call him the "architect" of the law. Gruber himself downplayed his role, saying he was not a political adviser but instead developed a "complex economic microsimulation model" to gauge the costs and benefits of health care policy changes.

Issa said Gruber's comments suggest that there should be concern that the "books were cooked."

"You said in these video comments that essentially you had to deceive in order to get this passed," Issa asked. "If deception was part of the process by your own statements, why should we believe your own analysis?"

"No one has ever questioned the integrity or the quality of the modeling," Gruber said.

The ranking Democrat on the committee, Rep. Elijah Cummings of Maryland, said he was also angry with Gruber for giving Republicans a "public relations gift."

"As far as I can see we're here today to beat up on Jonathan Gruber for stupid — I mean absolutely stupid — comments he's made over the past few years. This may be good political theater, but it will not help a single person get health insurance," Cummings said.

The committee also questioned Marilyn Tavenner, the administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, for giving misleading enrollment numbers in previous testimony in September. Tavenner testified that 7.3 million people had signed up for health insurance on state and federal exchanges, but she acknowledged that the number included dental plans — therefore double-counting almost 400,000 subscribers.

"Simply put, this was a mistake," Tavenner said. "While this mistake was regrettable, it shouldn't obscure the fact that the Affordable Care Act is working. We have seen a dramatic decrease in the number of uninsured Americans and exceptionally low growth across a wide variety of measures of health care costs."

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services Administrator Marilyn Tavenner and Massachusetts Institute of Technology Economics professor Jonathan Gruber are sworn in before the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee during a hearing about the Affordable Care Act Tuesday. Gruber, who was a consultant paid by the authors of the Affordable Care Act and the Massachusetts universal health care program, called voters stupid and said that Obamacare would not have passed if lawmakers had really known what was inside the legislation during an academic conference earlier this year. (Photo: Chip Somodevilla, Getty Images)

Follow @gregorykorte on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1Ab0Fi8