A Second Opinion from the Lawrence Journal World, March 31

A backlog of unprocessed applications from people seeking Medicaid coverage in Kansas is placing an undue burden on nursing homes and long-term care facilities and perhaps compromising care for some of the state’s most vulnerable residents. Officials in the Kansas Department of Health and Environment confirmed this week that the office has 7,000 applications for Medicaid coverage that were filed more than 45 days ago. The applications include people applying for the first time and those who are seeking the required annual approval to continue their coverage. The backlog is so large that KDHE has taken the unusual step of authorizing “advance payments” of half the normal daily rate to nursing homes and long-term care facilities whose patients have unprocessed Medicaid applications. If the patients subsequently are found eligible for Medicaid, the nursing homes will receive the remaining payment (with interest?). If they are found ineligible, the nursing homes would have to repay the state. So, because KDHE can’t do its job in a timely fashion, nursing homes and care facilities must use their limited resources to try to determine on their own whether patients qualify for Medicaid. If they think they will, the facilities then must bear the cost of caring for these patients, perhaps for months, while waiting for a state determination and payment. If the facilities guess wrong, they will have to repay the advance payments and either cover the loss themselves or bill a patient who may not be able to pay. Officials for Kansas Advocates for Better Care, a nursing home advocacy group, say the lack of financial resources may be affecting the care of patients. They cite one case in which a patient submitted a Medicaid application in September, provided all the required information by November and wasn’t approved until February. In the meantime, the patient had been in four different nursing homes and four psychiatric facilities because none of the facilities wanted to invest too much in a patient tht might not receive Medicaid reimbursement. How can this happen? KDHE officials point to a new automated application system that apparently has given them problems and the decisions to shift Medicaid applications for elderly and disabled Kansans to KDHE instead of the Department for Children and Families. They also claim that an open enrollment period for the Affordable Care Act triggered an increase in Medicaid applications, apparently by raising people’s awareness that they might qualify for that program. None of these factors justifies the current situation. The state doesn’t have a very good record with new computer systems, but the Medicaid administration shouldn’t have been shifted until both the computers and the personnel at KDHE were prepared to handle that task. If the staff couldn’t handle the unusual number of applications they say came in between November and January, more staff should have been hired. They say additional staff is being hired now, but why didn’t that happen sooner? The well-being of Kansas residents is at stake.