Niko Navas, a member of the Junior ROTC, cradles an American flag for a moment of silence after folding it at the end of the Associated Veterans' Memorial Day ceremony at Loveland Burial Park. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Memorial Day commemorations on Monday — from somber to celebratory — honored the members of the military who never came home and gave thanks to those who did.

At the Associated Veterans of Loveland event at Loveland Burial Park, featured speaker Nick Pizzuti, a retired Army colonel who lives west of Berthoud, said the best way of thanking veterans today is by protecting and supporting them.

Pizzuti told the story of Alan, a young Army medic who was severely injured in Iraq in 2003 when he went to the aid of a fellow soldier and who is slowly working his way back from total paralysis.

"Alan would tell you he was just doing his job on the day he was wounded back in 2003," he said. "He's no hero, he would say.

Julianne Henry and her grandfather, Gene Stout, a Marine Corps veteran, salute the flag at the Associated Veterans of Loveland's Memorial Day ceremony in Loveland Burial Park on Monday. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"For that matter, I'm not sure I have ever heard a veteran or service member call him or herself a hero," Pizzuti said.

He stressed that this country can keep its promise to honor its warriors by "providing reinforcement" to wounded veterans such as Alan.

"We thank our veterans by fighting for them when they can't," Pizzuti said. "By ensuring they and their survivors get the care they earned when they wrote a blank check — up to, and including, their very lives."

The Loveland Burial Park ceremony concluded with a roll call and tolling of a bell for the 24 local veterans who have died in the past year, a 21-gun salute and taps by bugler Terry Thompson.

Loveland resident Mary Wheeler took her two young sons to the service, and they moved over at the end to get a better view of the Junior ROTC color guard taking down the flag.

Wheeler said her father served in Vietnam, her uncle in Vietnam and Korea and her great-uncle in World War II and Korea.

"I think it's important to teach the kids what Memorial Day's about; it's not about barbecues and shopping," she said. "I want them to see the sacrifices people make for us."

Wendy Miller, a member of the honor choir at Frontier Academy in Greeley, releases a dove during the Memorial Day ceremony at Resthaven Memory Gardens on Monday. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

She asked her boys, 10-year-old Brandon and 8-year-old Dalton: "What happens when we see someone at the grocery store or a convenience store who's in uniform?"

"Shake their hand and say 'thank you for your service,'" Dalton said.

Resthaven Memory Gardens

Later Monday morning, a crowd estimated at 400 or more people gathered at Resthaven Memory Gardens north of Loveland for its Memorial Day event, which in recent years has expanded from the traditional ceremony to include entertainment and a barbecue.

Three-war veteran Col. Joseph Cassidy of Fort Collins delighted the crowd with stories from his first days in the Army after being drafted in 1943.

The 90-year-old served in the Army, then the Navy, during World War II and then returned to the Army for a total of 32 years in uniform.

Cassidy ran through a quick history of the wars that the United States has fought and the death toll of each, which have added up to 850,446 American men and women killed.

"The one word that describes war is 'ugly,' in all aspects" he said. "War is indeed an indictment of the human race.

"There is always the lingering doubt that another war could spring up, and there's always the lingering hope, the desire, the prayer that war will cease, and we will never have war again," Cassidy said.

A helmet sits on a rifle during the Memorial Day ceremony at Loveland Burial Park on Monday. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"I have very often of late been approached by people who say, 'I want to thank you for your service,' and I, within myself, quietly, silently, I return that thanks to a country that is the greatest nation in the world, the United States of America."

Cassidy's speech was followed by a 21-gun salute, taps and the release of three dozen white doves.

And then the party began. Kevin Wolfe, chief operating officer of Resthaven and Allnutt Funeral Services, said his study of history shows that cemeteries traditionally were places where families gathered for picnics and concerts, and he's trying to bring that back.

Resthaven had concerts, fireworks and a skydiving demonstration Friday and Saturday, and on Monday after the traditional ceremony, the Andrews Sisters tribute act Reveille 3 sang songs from the World War II era and other nostalgic favorites.

"It just makes you feel good to give back to the families we serve and give back to the veterans," Wolfe said. "Today is to honor veterans."

Craig Young: 970-635-3634, cyoung@reporter-herald.com, www.twitter.com/CraigYoungRH.