In his latest attack ad, Democratic Gubernatorial candidate Vincent Sheheen mocks Republican Gov. Nikki Haley's now-famous slogan.

“It’s a great day in South Carolina,” a voice on the phone proclaims.

But the ad is quick to point out things are not so great.

"Nikki Haley vetoed teacher pay increases, while giving her own staff raises,” the ad continues.

Both of those statements are true, but both require some explanation.

First, while Gov. Haley vetoed teacher pay raises in 2012, she argued the Legislature was using "one-time money" to pay for a recurring expense. Haley said using that money to boost teacher pay was the equivalent of "making a promise about next year's budget that can't be kept."

SC lawmakers overrode Haley's veto and teacher got their two-percent pay raise anyway.

It's also true that Haley gave her staff members raises. Records obtained by the Associated Press showed three senior staff members received pay increases averaging 35 percent, giving them more than six-figure salaries. Haley said the pay increases were justified, based on the number of hours her staff was working and because expenses in her office were going down.

"Haley sent our Medicaid dollars to other states, denying healthcare to seniors and children," Sheheen's ad says next.

This statement refers to Haley's refusal to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act. Sheheen's ad claims federal dollars are being sent "to other states." That's debatable, because no one yet knows the full impact of states refusing to expand Medicaid. However, a recent study by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation shows the 24 states that have refused to expand Medicaid will lose a combined $424 billion in federal health care dollars. The study estimates South Carolina alone will lose $16 billion.

"Haley’s Department of Social Services has failed our most vulnerable children," the ad continues.

That statement is also debatable, because it assumes Haley was directly responsible for children who have been hurt or died while under DSS care. A report by the SC Legislative Audit Council confirmed DSS workers have "excessive caseloads" and the system of reporting abuse has placed children at "greater risk." This year, Haley was criticized for not firing the director of DSS, Lillian Koller. Koller later resigned, calling her leadership "a distraction."