It took Teddy Miller multiple attempts to get TennCare for his twins, Conner and Nolen, who were born a month early. (Photo: Submitted )

TennCare's problems with backlogged Medicaid applications have left Teddy Miller worrying about a $200,000 hospital bill while he changes diapers.

Separated from his wife, he's a full-time father taking care of 10-month-old twins. Conner and Nolen spent weeks in a neonatal intensive care unit in East Tennessee after being born a month early. It took him multiple attempts to get TennCare for the twins, and he is still trying to get the coverage backdated to the time of the original application.

"I don't know know what I'm going to do about that," Miller said.

Tennessee's Medicaid program is not supposed to work that way. The hospital could have temporarily enrolled the twins for coverage at birth if TennCare had a presumptive eligibility system in place. Repeated applications would not have been necessary if TennCare's new $35.7 million computer system had been working.

Miller's struggles illustrate flaws within the state Medicaid program, including some that violate U.S. law, according to a federal official and allegations in a lawsuit. TennCare has taken measures to correct the problems after receiving a mandate from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services and an order from a federal judge, but the issues are far from resolved.

TennCare is still not in compliance with new presumptive eligibility requirements established by the Affordable Care Act. It is not processing all its Medicaid applications within the time frame set by federal law. And it is fighting the judge's order to hold hearings for people who have waited months to learn whether they qualify for coverage.

Poor and vulnerable Tennesseans are being hurt because of political battles and policy disputes over the controversial federal health law, said Carol Westlake, executive director of the Tennessee Disability Coalition.

"There's an old Indian saying: When the elephants do battle, the grass gets trampled," Westlake said. "That's what this feels like. ... While you play out disputes about how the system should run in the legislature or you play them out in the courts or you play them out between the state and federal governments, on the ground there are sick babies who need care."

'Out of compliance'

TennCare on Aug. 18 did launch a hospital-based newborn presumptive eligibility initiative — a service it had previously offered and then halted with the full rollout of the Affordable Care Act. The federal law did not require the state to stop offering direct assistance to temporarily enroll pregnant women and babies who probably qualified for Medicaid. In fact, the law gave hospitals the right to expand presumptive eligibility to other types of patients.

Tennessee decided that all its Medicaid applications should be processed through healthcare.gov because it was one of the states that chose to operate under the "determination model." It would let the federal Health Insurance Marketplace determine new income guidelines for Medicaid eligibility established by the law.

But other states did not simultaneously stop taking applications directly from people, said Tricia Brooks, a Medicaid expert with the Georgetown Health Policy Institute.

"In stopping accepting Medicaid applications, Tennessee is the only state in the country that has drawn that line in the sand, and they are completely out of compliance with federal requirements by doing that," Brooks said. "They did not have the option to just wash their hands of providing access to Medicaid for individuals and tell them to go to the (Marketplace) and 'Good luck.' There is no other state that I am aware of that has done that."

No direction

A behind-schedule $35.7 million state computer system that could properly interface with federal computers never went online. People whose applications got lost are the plaintiffs in a class-action suit that has been filed against the directors of three state agencies: TennCare, the Department of Finance and Administration and the Department of Human Services.

TennCare Director Darin Gordon submitted a presumptive eligibility plan in July after Cindy Mann, the federal head of Medicaid programs, told the agency to take corrective measures. He said hospitals would be allowed to make presumptive eligibility determinations for pregnant women as well as expanded groups, which include children under 19, caretaker relatives of children, adult groups covered by the state, individuals eligible for family planning services and former foster care children.

Hospitals at this point have not been given direction from TennCare on how to enroll people who fall within the expanded categories.

Contact Tom Wilemon at 615-726-5961 and on Twitter @TomWilemon.

It took Teddy Miller multiple attempts to get TennCare for his twins, Conner and Nolen, who were born a month early.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1xbS3Ht