ARVADA —The Arvada campus of Red Rocks Community College is set to triple in square footage and in enrollment over the next few years.

With the stroke of a pen, Gov. John Hickenlooper signed the 2014-15 state budget, which included $10 million to renovate and expand the Arvada campus at 5420 Miller St.

The total cost of the project to link a two-story, 50,000-square-foot building to the existing one-story building is $22.5 million.

Red Rocks has pulled $7.5 million out of its reserve funds and is gearing up to raise the remaining $5 million. Construction is slated to begin in late summer of 2015 and should be wrapped up by fall of 2016.

The community college plans to solicit the money from large donors, 13-Colorado based foundations and a handful of Jefferson County investors.

At the Arvada City Council study session on June 9, Red Rocks officials asked the city to consider a $1 million donation to the campus.

Red Rocks president Michele Haney said the Arvada campus has outgrown its space, and increasing enrollment means the college has to deny entry to some qualified students.

The additional space will be used to consolidate health care programs from the Arvada and Lakewood locations and create a campus strictly focused on health care.

“We’ll be the biggest training center for health professions on the west side of the city,” Haney said.

The passage of the Affordable Care Act is also restructuring how health care is administered. The renovated campus will be one of the first in the country to teach students in an inter-professional learning environment, said Janet Steinkamp, the Arvada campus associate vice-president.

“That’s teaching students across different disciplines on how to work together to provide patient care,” Steinkamp said.

Those at the study session also discussed the economic impact that increasing the number of full-time equivalent students from 300 to 900 would have.

Some members of council expressed concern about where the new students would live and how traffic would be affected in the area.

Mayor Bob Murphy said any money given to the campus by the city would be considered an investment, and the city would be fully engaged “in some level to make sure we get our bang for the buck.”

A decision on whether or not the city will donate is not imminent; city manager Mark Deven said money in the city budget is tight.

“I would see it as very difficult to do in the next few years,” Deven said of a $1 million donation. “We would have to consult with financial staff and look at our long-range financial plan to see if that’s feasible in any way and under what conditions.”

Austin Briggs: 303-954-1729, abriggs@denverpost.com