.......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... ..........

Super Bowl isn’t place for political show

ON A REGULAR basis, I read Amy Goodman’s editorials in the Journal. She is strong and clear in her political beliefs and portrays them in a professional fashion.

The (Feb. 17) column (“Beyonce’s black power statement”) however was not at all up to her skill level and paygrade.

In the initial paragraphs she opined that the halftime show at the Super Bowl was clearly superior to the actual game. I am no die-hard football fan but do fancy myself as someone that understands the game and enjoys, from time to time, a TV game. The observation referenced above completely missed the mark. The game was tooth and nail in terms of spectator appeal and not decided until the last minute of the game.

More important were her comments about the very beautiful and talented Beyoncé and the program she and the dancers enacted. Simply stated, the Super Bowl halftime show is not the place for a social issues/politically based presentations. While not everyone watching the show realized the Black Lives Matter/Malcolm X focus of the presentation, much commentary has surfaced being critical of this socially pinpointed message that emanated in both song and dance.

And so, this is not meant to be a criticism of Beyoncé and the dancers but simply a statement of the fact that social and political issues should not be a part of game commentary from the booth or the halftime show. Shame not on the very talented performers but on the Super Bowl halftime committee that did not recognize the substance of the performance and not allowing such to happen.

DAVE BROWNING

Corrales

ABQ Fire Department saves the day

ON FEB. 12, I hired an individual mover to pack up my apartment as I was moving to a different location. I was informed by the apartment management that the laborers had accidentally set my unit on fire.

The Albuquerque Fire Department was dispatched and contained the fire from spreading. The was significant damage to the kitchen but it did not spread to the rest of the unit. The AFD’s quick response is most commendable and I praise these brave and dedicated professionals in containing the fire and from adversely affecting the lives of the other residents.

My renter’s insurance policy will pay for the damage that the fire caused, yet without the AFD’s response, the damage most likely would have been catastrophic!

THOMAS E. COXE

Corrales

Everyone deserves to see the caverns

WHILE IT IS good news for New Mexico, the city of Carlsbad and the local economy that visits to Carlsbad Caverns were up in 2015, the park could be bringing in even more tourists – and their money – to the state if the elevator at the caverns were fixed once and for all.

Unfortunately, there is a more-than-$30 million backlog in maintenance projects at Carlsbad Caverns, so the elevator repairs and other needed work simply can’t be done.

Without the elevators, any visitor to the caverns must complete a 3.75-mile round-trip hike – the change in elevation of which is equivalent to climbing 80 flights of stairs – into and out of the caverns’ “natural entrance.” That means small children, the elderly, people with disabilities and countless others cannot visit the caverns and are not coming to our state and patronizing New Mexico businesses.

It’s time that Congress passed the funding needed to help Carlsbad Caverns reach its full potential. New Mexico businesses are counting on it.

NATE COTE

Las Cruces

NM shouldn’t tolerate cruelty of circuses

I WAS SHOCKED and saddened to see that the Shrine Circus was visiting Albuquerque (recently).

The suffering of animals being forced to live in chains – in small cages – and endure the boredom and brutal training inherent in the circus industry has been well-documented as a systemic problem. Over 27 countries around the world have adopted national legislation prohibiting or restricting the use of wild and exotic animals in circuses, along with hundreds of bans in place worldwide.

Let’s take a stand against this exploitation of animals and add New Mexico to the list of places worldwide who will not tolerate this ongoing cruelty in the name of entertainment.

LINDA DOHERTY

Albuquerque

Bears Ears should be a national monument

I’D LIKE TO add a fervent second to Kevin Washburn’s op-ed in the Journal of Feb. 7 on Cedar Mesa and Bears Ears in San Juan County, Utah.

As an archeologist, but perhaps more importantly as someone who grew up in Utah – a descendant of people who came to Utah with one of the handcart companies of 1860 and many later immigrants – I can attest not only to the magnificent beauty of the land but also to the importance of the ancient lifeways represented there.

This is perhaps one of the last areas in the entire world that is large enough to reveal not only an occasional isolated structure but also many of the details of prehistoric and historic life. Tiny villages next to fields and gardens are scattered over the landscape. Little granaries are perched high in seemingly unscalable rock faces. Panels of figures pecked into canyon walls represent stories and legends we will probably never understand, but here it is possible to comprehend the rough outlines of entire prehistoric and historic cultural systems.

Three years ago, a group of Utah citizens and many others, including Indian tribes in Utah, New Mexico and Colorado, approached Utah Rep. Rob Bishop, chairman of the House Natural Resources Committee, and Rep. Jason Chaffetz, about a way to conserve both the beauty and the archeological sites. This they agreed to do. A recent poll that found 66 percent of Utahns support the effort to make Bears Ears a national monument may have encouraged them.

However, the Public Lands Initiative released on Jan. 20, which purported to do this, has instead done the opposite and constitutes a plan that would result in a giveaway to those who would plunder both the natural and cultural resources. What seemed to offer a hopeful resolution of opposing values is instead a sad disappointment.

We can only hope that President Obama will rectify the impending tragedy by using the 1906 Antiquities Act to declare Bears Ears a national monument. I intend to urge President Obama to do this and hope that others will too.

CAROL J. CONDIE

Albuquerque

Keep ‘headitorials’ on the opinion pages

SOMETIMES, I think the Albuquerque Journal headline division – news – has merged with the editorial staff – opinion – to become “headitorial” writers.

As one example I cite your front page article on Feb. 7. “Obamacare triggers surge in ER visits” could easily have been headlined “ER still favored by some newly insured.” That wouldn’t have contained the obligatory slam against the Affordable Care Act, though, so instead we got a biased headline, white lettering on black for greater emphasis, to describe a reasonable and informative article.

What exactly was the “surge”? Growth of under 7 percent, according to the chart provided on the inside page. Higher than last year’s 4 percent, but very much in line with 2014’s 6 percent. Hardly a dramatic surge as implied by the headline.

How do those figures compare with the overall growth of Medicaid enrollment? The Medicaid.gov site says Medicaid enrollment in New Mexico grew by 60 percent from 2012 to 2015. Usage of emergency room services in the three major providers detailed in your chart was up a total of 11 percent over those years. So it seems that most new Medicaid enrollees are making good use of the medical services available to them, although further education is needed.

And what is Obamacare’s role in the story? Opening the door to medical care to people who have been shut out for decades and need some time to get used to the new system.

Most people will read and remember only the headline, though, and that is a shame.

ROXANNE ALLEN

Albuquerque

Chew on this: We need more real dentists

YOUR OP-ED COLUMN from a dentist in the Feb. 10 Journal (“New Mexico needs dental therapists”) arguing for more dental therapists in New Mexico curiously ignores the more direct and beneficial solution to the acute shortage of dentists in New Mexico: we need more real dentists!

Dental therapists are not sufficiently trained. In an emergency, the safest is to be treated immediately by a real doctor/dentist.

Enough already with organized dentists restricting their own numbers so they can charge their extortionist rates. How convenient for dentists to be then creating this level of dental staff below them that earn a lot less, with too many New Mexicans then forced to go for dental needs to the likes of dental therapists.

On this count, it is high time dental schools increase their enrollment nationally to turn out more dentists so that there is actually competition among them for the patient’s dollar for a change, especially when too many Americans have to pay out of pocket with even government Medicare for poor seniors not covering dental needs.

ARUN ANAND AHUJA

Albuquerque

Tribal casinos turn backs on Indian Center

I FIND IT ironic that the Albuquerque Indian Center – almost totally dependent on taxpayers’ money and additional grants – will likely close, while the area casinos, which are taking millions from our community, can’t be bothered to help their own.

That only one casino was willing to write a minimal check for $500 should be a total embarrassment to the Native American community.

PATRICK MCMULLAN

Albuquerque

Bus service must serve all of the city

I HAVE BEEN following the news about the proposed “improvement” to the bus service here in Albuquerque. I grew up and worked in Chicago and have in mind the kind of bus service Chicago offers its citizens. This city could offer the same, possibly at the same or less cost than the proposed service on one street.

In Chicago, every main street offers bus service every 15 to 20 minutes between buses. No one is more than four blocks from bus service and the buses run 24 hours a day and seven days a week. Therefore, you can go from one end of the city to the other with minimum transfers whether you’re going downtown or cross town.

In Albuquerque, the bus service originates Downtown and many bus routes serve the city but the routes are not easily known unless you ride every day. Also, there is no bus service after a certain hour and none on Sundays. The elderly who might want to attend church or shop on Sunday are out of luck unless someone can take them.

The million or so dollars that will be spent on one street Downtown at the expense of the shop owners and those in government buildings will not benefit as much as they might with a more widespread streamlined transit system.

DOROTHY K. PARKER

Albuquerque

We need to know more on power projects

I HAVE SEVERAL concerns about added projects of wind power and solar power in the area (Sen.) Martin Heinrich speaks of in the recent op-ed (“SunZia makes America strong”).

This is where people live and ranch and farm. Will there be property condemnation, such as “eminent domain”? Will there be thousands of birds killed by propellers? Will ranch animals be disturbed? And what about the many other problems that can be caused by the wind- and solar-powered machinations on the land. We are talking about acres and acres of land!

While much of Sen. Heinrich’s discussion sounds interesting and well-examined by the likes of M.I.T. Lincoln Laboratory concerning the mutual coexistence of SunZia Southwest Transmission Line Project with wind and solar power using SunEdison as SunZia’s anchor customer, I have some doubts. I have read many articles about the multiple problems which exist with both wind power and solar power.

And besides Martin’s championing of this coexistence idea, I understood previously, it had already been settled about burying the line running across White Sands Missile Range and Flight Test Area. Did the “involved entities” not agree to bury the lines across that area?

Now, you’re talking about wind turbines that take a tremendous amount of land “per megawatt” and how about the vast fields of photovoltaic solar devices running across that area? What is all this going to cost the U.S. government and New Mexico before even a “watt” of power shows up to start bringing in the money? What will this add to our $19 trillion debt?

And while we are touting this whole idea, just who are some of these “involved entities”? Besides Heinrich’s mention of SunEdison and SunZia, I feel sure his constituents would all like to know more of the names involved in spending our hard earned tax dollars. There must be several more!

JUELIE LOFTIN

Albuquerque