Ted Cruz file (WLFI).

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) – Presidential hopefuls have been making their rounds throughout the Hoosier state for the past couple weeks now, grasping support from Hoosier voters.

For the second time this week, a presidential candidate has paid a visit to Tippecanoe County. On Wednesday, Vermont senator and Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders made a stop at Purdue University.

Sunday afternoon, Texas senator and GOP presidential candidate Ted Cruz held a rally at Faith East Community Center in Lafayette.

Candidates are making a last ditch effort to gain support from Hoosiers around the state before Tuesday’s primary election.

“It’s going to be the people of Indiana who decide this state,” said Cruz.

Right now, Cruz is behind GOP front runner Donald Trump in the delegate count.

Trump is just 241 delegates shy of clenching the nomination, which makes Indiana crucial for his campaign.

Cruz said all eyes are on the Hoosier state leading up to Tuesday’s election.

“Indiana is a battle ground. Right now, Donald Trump and I are neck and neck in this state,” Cruz said. “The entire country is looking to Indiana. Indiana has a national platform, a national megaphone, and it really is a choice for the people of Indiana.”

Last week, Cruz gained the support of Indiana Gov. Mike Pence.

After meeting privately with all three GOP candidates, Pence announced that he would be endorsing Cruz.

Cruz said he supports Pence and is happy to have his backing.

“I’m a big fan of Governor Pence. I think he’s a strong conservative, you look at his economic policies. He’s cut taxes, he’s reduced regulation, and we’ve seen private sector jobs growing here in Indiana,” said Cruz.

By repealing ObamaCare, passing a simple flat tax and reigning in those regulators who drove American jobs across seas, Cruz said more Americans will be back at work under his watch.

“We’re going to see millions and millions of new, high-paying jobs, jobs coming back to America, manufacturing jobs coming back to the state of Indiana,” said Cruz.

He also touched on topics such as religious liberties and illegal immigration.

For now, Cruz is focused on meeting with voters and listening to what they have to say.

“I think anyone running for president owes it to the voters to look them in the eyes, to shake their hands, to answer their questions — that’s what I’m doing,” Cruz said.

On Monday, Cruz will appear at rallies organized by the Keep the Promise PAC in Fort Wayne and Indianapolis.

There will also be a rally at the Indiana State Fairgrounds Monday night where Cruz will be joined by running mate Carly Fiorina and radio host Glenn Beck.

Share this: Email

Print

Twitter

Facebook

Google

More

Pinterest

Like this: Like Loading...