While Clinton didn’t mention Romney by name, she did call out other Republicans. | AP Photos Clinton takes a shot at Romney

Hillary Clinton on Thursday in Michigan took a veiled swipe at Mitt Romney as she criticized those who would have “let Detroit go bankrupt” following the financial crisis in 2008.

On the stump for Democratic Senate candidate Rep. Gary Peters and gubernatorial hopeful Mark Schauer, Clinton said that the two stood up for Michigan in Congress.

Story Continued Below

“They could have lined up with those saying, ‘Let Detroit go bankrupt. Let manufacturing just wither away,’” Clinton said at the event at Oakland University in Rochester. “They could have been on the side of those who were criticizing what they called Government Motors.”

Romney, the 2012 Republican presidential nominee, wrote a November 2008 op-ed in The New York Times titled, “Let Detroit Go Bankrupt,” arguing against the government bailout of the auto industry. “If General Motors, Ford and Chrysler get the bailout that their chief executives asked for yesterday, you can kiss the American automotive industry goodbye,” Romney said in his now-famous opening. Several critics of the bailout also derisively termed the emergency taxpayer ownership of GM in 2008 “Government Motors.”

( Also on POLITICO: Scoring Hillary Clinton's politics)

On the stump in 2012, President Barack Obama slammed Romney for the comments, as did former President Bill Clinton, a key supporter for the president during his reelection campaign.

Romney has since defended the op-ed, noting that he didn’t write the headline. The phrase “let Detroit go bankrupt” didn’t appear in the text of his column. In the 2012 campaign, he said that he was calling for a “managed bankruptcy” and restructuring of GM and that the bailout represented “crony capitalism.”

While Hillary Clinton didn’t mention Romney by name on Thursday, she did call out other Republicans. “They were willing to walk away from the people of this state — the jobs, the auto industry, the future,” Clinton said of incumbent Republican Gov. Rick Snyder and Republican Senate candidate Terri Lynn Land.

“There are some choices that define careers and define what people are made out of,” she continued, in reference to Schauer and Peters’ support for the bailout as freshmen congressmen. “There are choices that shape your whole life. This was a choice that would change the future of an industry, a state and a nation.”

( Also on POLITICO: Clinton adversary has change of heart)

Clinton’s speech was heavily partisan in tone, and her implicit criticism of Romney comes as the former Massachusetts governor has faced increasing pressure from Republicans to run for president in 2016. Recent polls show Romney leading the Republican field in early presidential nominating states Iowa and New Hampshire.

Thursday’s speech showed Clinton in attack mode, slamming Republicans on issues important to the Democratic base — paid leave, equal pay, raising the minimum wage and reproductive rights for women. And whether or not Romney ends up running in 2016, the attack on Republicans for opposing the auto industry bailout remains effective for Democrats, particularly in Michigan.

Land, whom recent polls have running firmly behind Peters, said in 2012 that she was “with” Romney in opposing the bailout. Weeks ago, her campaign said that she would have supported Obama’s auto industry takeover. That comment drew criticism from Michigan Democratic Rep. Sander Levin, who accused the Republican candidate of “trying to rewrite history … despite overwhelming evidence that she stood with Mitt Romney to oppose the auto rescue and gratuitously called GM ‘Government Motors.’”

Levin was in attendance at Thursday’s event. Others at the Oakland University rally included fellow Democratic Rep. John Conyers and Debbie Dingell, the wife of retiring congressman Rep. John Dingell and the favorite to win his seat in November.

Romney’s father, George, was chairman and president of the American Motors Co. before serving as the governor of Michigan from 1963 to 1969. In a campaign speech to the United Auto Workers conference in 2012, Bill Clinton slammed Romney and called Obama’s decision to rescue the auto industry the most important he had made as president.

“This was not about the factory workers,” Clinton said of Romney’s opposition to the auto industry rescue. “Every time I hear Mr. Romney talking about this, I think his daddy must be turning over in his grave.”

Democrats ran heavily on the issue in 2012, with Vice President Joe Biden saying at the Democratic National Convention: “[Osama] bin Laden is dead and General Motors is alive.”

First lady Michelle Obama visited Detroit last week to campaign for the two Democrats. Both Bill Clinton and President Obama will travel to Michigan in the coming weeks to campaign for the Senate and gubernatorial candidates.