Medical staff performance tools, health literacy and an online platform to develop and carry out research studies are among Blueprint Health’s fifth class of health IT startups

Among some news highlights from its fourth class, CredSimple is deploying its software as a service credentialing services at three hospitals this quarter. BoardVitals raised $500,000 from Rothenberg Ventures. It also has partnered with four publishers. Artemis closed a seed round.

BoardRounds: The punitive readmission rate provisions outlined in the Affordable Care Act have sparked several health IT companies to develop tools for hospitals and accountable care organizations to do a better job of tracking patients from discharge. RightCare Solutions and other businesses see a big market opportunity in this area in line with the widespread need. The goal is for changes in the patient’s condition to be spotted earlier and addressed sooner, particularly for conditions such as pneumonia, COPD and heart disease. To achieve that, hospitals are expected to give quite a bit of sensitive data to the company including a list of patients as they’re discharged, basic demographic information, some clinical data points and the name and contact details of the patient’s primary care physician. “Through a combination of automated and manual processes, BoardRounds does the legwork of notifying the PCPs, scheduling follow-up appointments and transportation, and providing automated SMS/text and phone reminders. It’s founded by Benjamin Jack and Aditya Mukerjee.

Decisive Health: One way to potentially increase patient engagement is to give people who have just been diagnosed with a condition a clear way to better understand it and how they can either manage it or treat it. Decisive Health is focusing on a handful of conditions. It will initially offer decision support tools for acoustic neuroma, a benign brain tumor which develops on the nerve that connects the ear to the brain. It also plans to add prostate cancer and colon cancer. The treatment options it generates will be based on their risk tolerances and personal preferences. Founded by Nathanael Rosidi and Jonathan Shih.

Advertisement

MediQuire is developing a way to track doctor and nurse performance using data from electronic medical records and to identify ways to improve it. Its platform compares each person’s performance to their peers and identifies areas where each physician needs to improve. Its first pilot hospital, Providence St Peter Hospital near Seattle, will pilot the technology in the first half of this year. It was founded by Klaus Koenigshausen and Omar Malik.

ProofPilot: I could be wrong, but this may be the first health IT/life science industry company in Blueprint Health’s portfolio that is focused on the research community. The online platform lets users develop and carry out research studies. It also lets them view preliminary data as soon as it becomes available. The platform can also be used to recruit and contact study participants. Founded by Matthew Amsden, Lochlan McHale, and David Sperber.

PulseBeat: This mobile health startup wants to use the wearable devices of patients with chronic conditions to help track any signs that their condition is worsening. It sees its approach as a cheap way to best address the soaring population of Baby Boomers of retirement age and the increased demand for long-term caregivers for seniors with chronic conditions. Its app for caregivers, PulseBeat, aggregates data from these wearable devices and biosensors and transmits the data to them. The app can send texts and email alerts on the caregiver-facing website. Founded by Dr. Omar Metwally and Youssif Abdulhamid.

RubiconMD: This healthcare startup thinks too many people are being referred to specialists needlessly. It wants to establish a more effective way of communicating between primary care physicians and specialists, presumably. It seems like the last thing that’s needed is for more people to get between patients and their physicians beyond health insurers, but it will be an interesting company to watch. Founded by Gil Addo, Carlos Reines, and Dr. Julien Pham.

Twiage comes out of the Brigham and Women’s Hospital Innovation Hub. It thinks it has a way to improve the radio dispatch communication between emergency medical technicians and hospitals with a mobile and web-based platform. It joins other companies such as Beyond Lucid Technologies and Stat that are developing ways to improve efficiencies from data transmission to arrival times. The need for secure, real-time transfer of information from the ambulance to the emergency room. The platform allows emergency departments to reduce delays and errors, and improve workflow. Ambulance services can increase capacity by decreasing turnaround time and differentiate themselves while bidding for service contracts. Founded by Crystal Law, John Rodley, and Dr. YiDing Yu.