From left: Emma Stone, Woody Allen and Parker Posey at the premiere of ‘Irrational Man’ at the Cannes Film Festival. Getty Images

Whatever it takes to get you through the existential emptiness of life—magic, romance or the sheer beauty of the perfect crime—are all familiar themes in Woody Allen’s films, and his latest tongue-in-cheek comedy, “Irrational Man,” is no different.

Warmly applauded at Friday evening’s world premiere in Cannes, Allen’s college town murder mystery gives crime and punishment a slightly different flavor, laced with the finest Scotch and poisoned orange juice.

The film is set at a small Rhode Island college, and Joaquin Phoenix plays a jaded alcoholic, pot-bellied philosophy professor who arrives to teach summer session. In contrast to the jazzy upbeat score (“The ‘In’ Crowd” by the Ramsey Lewis Trio), Lucas is clearly at rock bottom. The more he expounds to his class on the theories of Sartre, Kant, and Heidegger, the deeper he sinks into questioning the meaning of his own life.

After a half-hearted affair with a fellow academic, Rita (Parker Posey), fails to boost his morale, along comes a young student, Jill, played by Emma Stone (who starred in Allen’s “Magic in the Moonlight’’).

Anti-intellectual tirades abound. Lucas says in the film, “If it feels right, it often is” — a view that the director expressed in a press conference Friday morning.

“It’s no less irrational than some of the choices we all make in our own lives. Joaquin’s character is able to have a much better life, misguided as he is,” Allen said. Likewise, Stone’s character Jill ends up finding out a thing or two, after a close brush with death. “It’s nothing you can learn in a book,” he said.

“You need something you believe in—you make a choice,” he said. “You’re living in a random universe and you’re living a meaningless life. Everything you create in your life will vanish, the sun and the universe will all be gone one day.”

The director said he chose movie-making as “a wonderful distraction’’ to combat the heavy weight of existence. “What distracts me is—can I get Emma and Parker to do this scene right?”