Romans and others in Northwest Georgia who sign up for insurance under the Affordable Care Act this fall will be able to get help from someone in person.

Click here for the Get Covered America website.

The live enrollment assistance is being made possible by a three-year, almost $4 million grant from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Dante McKay, director of Enroll America Georgia, announced that HHS would provide the funds through five agencies in the state.

Georgia Association for Primary Health Care Inc. will receive $941,522 from the grant funds to contract for services in Floyd and nearby counties.

McKay said that more than two-thirds of the remaining uninsured Americans believe it is important to speak directly with someone when attempting to purchase health insurance, as opposed to signing up for something online.

Plans are to target low-income populations, veterans, Latinos and other minority groups, self-employed individuals, new mothers, and women with children.

In Rome, the service will be based at Quality Med-Care Inc., in Redmond Regional Medical Center, 501 Redmond Road.

Andrea Pitts, marketing specialist at Redmond, said Naomi Greaves is the designated certified application assistant through Quality Med-Care.

Greaves will be available during normal business hours, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. People can call 706-802-3137 to make appointments for help in choosing policies through the ACA, often referred to as Obamacare.

Pitts said the hospital had someone offering face-to-face assistance last year, but their time was split between Redmond and the Cartersville hospital.

“Last enrollment there were free classes for the public that were hosted here at Redmond, but at this point I can’t tell you for sure that we’ll do that this fall,” Pitts said.

Cartersville Medical Center, 960 Joe Frank Harris Parkway, is another of the sites people can visit to get assistance when the next open enrollment period begins Nov. 1.

The service also will be provided through Georgia Highlands Medical Services, 775 West Ave. in Cartersville, and The Resource Corporation of America, 1035 Red Bud Road, in Calhoun.