Steven Rojas/GrandLife Hotels

Musicians and concert promoters often gripe that ticket scalpers are cannibalizing their business. But a new ticketing study shows that the resale market might often benefit those primary ticket sellers.

In research recently published in Strategic Management Journal, a trio of business-school professors from New York University, Harvard University and the University of Southern California examined the effect that Craigslist had each time it launched in a different local market, from 2003 to 2008. The online-classifieds company is a popular online marketplace for fans looking to buy and resell tickets.

They found that after Craigslist launched in a given vicinity, regardless of the market size or geographical location, promoters generally reacted by raising prices along with booking smaller venues or taking other measures to get shows closer to selling out. It is generally more profitable to sell out a venue with fewer seats at higher prices than to sell only a portion of the available tickets at a bigger venue.

USC business school professor Victor Bennett, who interviewed promoters around the country, said they did so to take advantage of a phenomenon: when the secondary market “thickens,” primary ticket issuers benefit—but only if demand for a particular show exceeds supply. That’s because average fans are more likely to buy face-value tickets from the primary ticket issuer, such as Live Nation Entertainment’s Ticketmaster, if they trust they will easily be able to resell the tickets for a profit at the last minute, should their plans change.

Promoters generally started booking smaller venues to ensure this outcome, Mr. Bennett said, which, in turn, allowed them to price the primary tickets higher. The researchers also observed a similar effect each time eBay Inc.’s StubHub entered a local market, though the study isn’t based on the StubHub data.

“Demonizing or lionizing the secondary market is just too simple – it can be really, really good for artists, fans and promoters,” said Mr. Bennett. “If you are buying a ticket three months in advance, the ability to resell makes you more likely to jump on that rather than waiting.”

New resale sites, such as Live Nation Entertainment Inc.’s TM+, could accelerate the trend.

To be sure, resellers can hurt primary sellers in cases where an act doesn’t sell as many tickets as expected. Scalpers who can’t resell their tickets slash prices, potentially forcing the primary seller into a price war.

But that is becoming less common as the ticketing industry becomes more sophisticated.

“Not everyone has to promote Lady Gaga – you just have to be good at predicting how well (an act) will do,” Mr. Bennett said.