Muskingum Valley Health Center announces Cambridge expansion Published: May 19, 2015 1:00 PM

1 of 1 Photos | View More Photos

ZANESVILLE -- Muskingum Valley Health Center, an elite, comprehensive primary-care facility currently serving Muskingum, Morgan and Coshocton counties, announced Monday that it will open a new facility in Cambridge and expand its reach into Guernsey County.

Slated to open this fall, the Cambridge location will employ a staff of around 15, including up to five skilled medical providers that will oversee multiple practice areas dedicated to serve the area.

MVHC estimates the Guernsey County site will treat 3,400 patients through 11,000 clinical visits in its first year of operation.

In year two the organization estimates an increase to 4,100 patients treated through 13,400 visits.

Highlighting the need for expanding its reach into Cambridge, nearly 1,000 patients from Guernsey County travelled to MVHC's three locations for treatment in 2014.

See also - Red Cross urges blood, platelet donations during challenging summer months ]





[Article continues below]

In early May, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services announced approximately $101 million in Affordable Care Act funding to 164 new health center sites in 33 states and two U.S. territories for the delivery of comprehensive primary health care services in communities that need them most.

These new health centers are projected to increase access to health care services for nearly 650,000 patients.

In Ohio, this means an additional $7 million given to 12 awardees to serve approximately 43,461 new patients.

"Through ongoing discussions over the last year with Southeastern Med and local leaders, we collectively recognized there were some real health disparities in the area that pointed to the need for increased access to primary care," said Dan Atkinson, CEO of MVHC. "With this federal funding, we will establish a facility where we can effectively further MVHC's mission to provide superior, yet affordable, health care to every member of the Guernsey County community."

See also - Guernsey County and its surrounding areas meeting and events calendar ]





Founded in 2008 by the late Chuck Hunter, MVHC serves 27,000 patients annually and is one of the largest health centers in Ohio. In 2014 there were over 91,000 patient visits to the organization's three locations.

Rate this article

Do you want to leave a comment? Please Log In or Register to comment.