Topics: Ari Fleischer, Chris Cillizza, Iraq, John Kerry, Syria, Tom Udall, War, Politics News

Whatever you think of Secretary of State John Kerry, or the Obama administration’s case for attacking Syria, we can hopefully all agree that Kerry accidentally did the country a great service on Tuesday afternoon. Actually two great services.

First, he clarified what should be an obvious point — that when you bomb a country, you increase the likelihood that further military action will follow. Then, by so doing, he invited war supporters and other elites to align themselves with the cause of hiding the consequences of military action from the public.

The trap was so subtle, and so unintentionally set, that a day later it’s unclear whether anyone who fell into it realizes what happened.

So here’s what happened.

Early in his Tuesday testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Kerry engaged in a bit of improvisational contingency planning that in hindsight he probably wishes he’d withheld.

“It would be preferable not to — not because there’s any intention, or any plan, or any desire whatsoever to have boots on the ground. I think the president will give every assurance in the world,” Kerry said. “But in the event Syria imploded, for instance, or in the event there was a threat of a chemical weapons cache falling into the hands of al-Nusra or someone else and it was clearly in the interest of our allies — all of us, the British, the French, and others, I don’t want to take off the table an option that might or might not be available to the president of the United States to secure our country.”

It quickly dawned on him that he’d heaved the cat clear across the room and left himself awkwardly holding the bag. With the help of senators on the other side of the dais he did his best to shove it back in — “All I did was raise a hypothetical question about some possibilities and I’m thinking out loud about how to protect American’s interests,” Kerry said in response to a prompt from Sen. Bob Corker, R-Tenn, who’s favorably disposed to an attack — but it was too late.

That’s in the nature of “gaffes” as properly understood — moments of unintended candor — rather than the “binders full of missiles” sense of the term. They’re really hard to revise and extend.

But those who support attacking Syria, or generally don’t have substantive views about anything, blurred the distinction, and turned Kerry’s remarks into a misstep in the horserace to war.