The blogosphere is full of one offs – columns and posts that are written to sensationalize an issue that few if any bloggers bother to go back to. It is, I suppose, one of the many substantial differences between blogging and general news reporting.

It’s unfortunate that some folks who write otherwise excellent pieces do not have the budgets, the time or the staff necessary to stay on a single story the way a major news organization can. On the other hand it does allow for a variety of opinions and fresh perspectives, expressed in ways that sometimes shake up the great, gray media dowagers that for some many years set the tone for what everyone else wrote, published or broadcast.

Two stories that have not been given enough attention in the general press but with which regular readers of what I post in this space will be familiar – and the phrase “enough attention” is admittedly subjective – have seen important developments over the last week that should be shared because, in some small way, they both affirm that the system sometimes does in fact work.

[SEE: Political Cartoons]

In the first, the mighty Susan B. Anthony List – an organization that helps pro-life congressional candidates raise substantial sums of money – won a stunning victory in front of the Supreme Court earlier this week. The nine justices found the group did in fact have standing to bring a suit over an Ohio law that is a direct attack on its – and our – First Amendment rights. While for the moment remaining silent on the underlying issue – on which they were not asked to rule – the court affirmed the SBA List could in fact challenge a state law permitting the Ohio Elections Commission – a state agency – to determine when political ads contain false statements and, finding they do, to then prosecute those responsible for those ads.

The whole thing goes back to the passage of Obamacare through the House of Representatives after a group of self-identified anti-abortion Democrats were persuaded to vote in favor of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act based on a now-demonstrably false promise from President Barack Obama. The shorthand version of what happened – and you can read my initial post on the subject for a more detailed explanation – is that the SBA List planned a media campaign against those Democrats, one of whom was now-former Ohio Rep. Steve Driehaus, who alleged to the elections commission that the planned billboard included false and damaging information that ultimately caused him to lose his seat in Congress.

[READ: More by Peter Roff]

The state commission ruled against the SBA List, which then sued only to lose in front of the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals – not on the merits of the case but because, as the election had passed by the time the ruling came down, there was no chance of future injury so the plaintiff lacked standing.

It’s important to note that the SBA List ads were truthful and that the commission was wrong to reach the conclusion it did. Nonetheless, the mere existence of “government truth squads” is a threat to the rights guaranteed us in the First Amendment, something the nation’s highest court will no doubt affirm once the issues of fact are brought before them should the lower courts fail to see it would be wise to affirm the first amendment guarantee of free speech at the earliest possible opportunity.

Faithful readers of these posts may also remember the case of Justina Pelletier, whom the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, its courts, and the prestigious Boston Children’s Hospital seemingly conspired to hold in custody against her parents’ wishes in a dispute over her medical care.

[MORE: Cartoons on Obamacare]

At the time it occurred I wrote of the dangerous precedent the case might set, especially in a post-Obamacare world, if responsible parties and patients disagreed with health care providers about what course of treatment might be appropriate in a given case. By allowing Justina to be held against her will and her parents’ on the say so of doctors at Children’s Hospital – who in fact were latecomers to a case that was being managed by a competent team at Tufts’ University Hospital – the government was affirmatively asserting it knew best.

This, as I said, is a dangerous idea – the government is constituted by the people to serve the people. We are citizens, not clients. The idea that sovereign authorities are always unquestionably correct, as the commonwealth seemed to be saying in this case, means that America will have evolved into a nation governed by laws into one governed by men, putting us all at the mercy of the whims, caprices and capacity for tyranny that exists inside us all.