The Sedgwick County Zoo has plans laid out for their expanded elephant exhibit.

Orange Construction fence lines 5 acres of the zoo that will soon transform into the third largest elephant exhibit in the country.

"It will consist of four yards," said zoo operations manager Dan Wright. "The north yard is just over an acre. The south yard is the largest yard and it's about 3.5 acres and then two off site holding pins for the animals."

The massive project is expected to break ground next month. Zoo employees said it's a necessary move for the zoo to comply with the Association of Zoos and Aquariums requirement of three elephants, with one being a bull by September 2016.

"We just don't have the space for three elephants in our existing facility nor is that facility suited for a bull elephant which typically will weigh about twice as much as Cinda or Stephanie, the elephants that we have right now," said Wright.

Sedgwick County commissioners recently voted 3-2 to use $5.3 million of reserve money to build the new elephant barn. A controversial decision for some tax payers, but not for Dale Swenson.

"I like to see the county spending money in such a way to make Wichita a better place to live and I think this is a good investment," said Swenson.

The $10.6 million dollar exhibit comes with an exciting feature that you can't find at any other zoo in the world.

"The elephants will be allowed and encouraged to go into the canal, the typical canal people know who ride the boats and there will be an underwater fence so the boats and elephants don't actually meet too close," said Wright.

The zoo hopes to bring in five African elephants. Swenson said he looks forward to seeing the economic impact.

"People don't count how things like this actually impact the economy but it's positive for the economy," said Swenson. "it creates jobs."

The project is expected to be marked off this week and crews will start moving dirt later in October. The exhibit is scheduled to open Memorial Day weekend in 2016.