By Ricki Lindsay

At 2 months old, Will Weaver of North Port was diagnosed with Prader-Willi Syndrome, a rare genetic disorder — so rare that only 8,000 Americans are known to have it.

After Will was hospitalized at that tender age for “failure to thrive,” genetic testing confirmed that the struggling infant and his family were headed down a long road that would redirect their lives.

A bewildering condition that has been under the public radar until relatively recently, Prader-Willi Syndrome is emerging from the shadows as researchers and pharmaceutical companies search for clues to the national obesity epidemic.

The hallmarks of Prader-Willi include an appetite so powerful that those with the syndrome never experience the feeling of satiety, no matter how much food is available. They can literally eat until their stomachs burst.

Will’s journey was documented in a Discovery Health Network/TLC film when he was 13 years old. With 285 pounds on his short build, he had already been diagnosed with diabetes.

“My Deadly Appetite” chronicled life’s daily challenges for a Prader-Willi patient and family. During the filming, Will spent three months in the Prader-Willi unit of the Children’s Institute of Pittsburgh, a pediatric specialty hospital for kids with special needs. There, both he and his parents learned more strategies for coping in an environment where food is the enemy. Will lost 58 pounds during his stay.

Today, at 5’5” and weighing 172 pounds, Will wears a 36-inch waist size and walks at least two miles a day, rain or shine. He no longer has diabetes.Now 19 years old and a recent graduate of Sarasota’s Oak Park School for children with special needs, Will has been accepted to a group home in Gainesville for children and adults with Prader-Willi. He will live there full-time and receive additional education and training for work.

“The kid had never been able to wear a regular pair of pants in his life,” says his father, William Weaver. “We are so proud of the progress he has made, and he works hard every day at being as healthy as he can be.”

The Weaver family still has to take extraordinary efforts to lock up food at all times. All cabinets and the refrigerator have locks in an effort to help Will stick to his strict daily calorie limit.

“It’s pretty scary when you think of how something as normal as food can kill these kids,” Will’s father said. “There is never a reprieve for my son or for us; there is no letting down of the guard because he simply cannot help himself. He is voraciously hungry all the time and that never goes away. It is hard for any of us to imagine what it is like to live, day in and day out, when all of your thoughts are about being hungry and trying to get food. More than once, I have found him taking food out of trash cans — ours or our neighbors. We have to be on top of that all the time.

“As hard as it’s been for all of us, Will has been a gift since the day he was born. He’s funny, kind and just a great person with a really tough problem that he handles as well as can be expected. He’s a great guy and I am very proud of him,” Weaver said. “He is a success story.”

The Sarasota connection

First identified in 1957 by a Swiss physician, the syndrome was largely unrecognized until the advent of sophisticated DNA testing in the 1980s. The genetic abnormality affects about 1 in every 15,000 to 20,000 children born in the United States; girls and boys are affected equally. Few children with the condition live to see 30, dying a slow death from obesity or a fast death from a stomach rupture or intestinal perforation. The average life expectancy is about 25.5 years.

“The early-onset obesity caused by Prader-Willi in these kids results in the kinds of comorbidities such as heart failure, diabetes and respiratory problems that normally are associated with obesity in adults,” notes Ken Smith, executive director for the Prader-Willi Syndrome Association (PWSA/USA). “The improvement in life expectancy has been very slow to come. We see 4- and 5-year-olds dying of obesity complications.”

Headquartered in Sarasota since 1997, PWSA is funded through donations, grants and fundraising events around the country. Its mission is to educate the medical community, while serving and supporting families. The nonprofit organization has eight full-time and five part-time employees, along with a cadre of faithful local volunteers and scientific and clinical advisers who donate hundreds of hours yearly.

“Statistics tell us that the condition is underdiagnosed, particularly in the minority and less affluent populations,” says Janalee Heinemann, coordinator of research and international affairs for PWSA. “Early intervention is key, so it’s really important to have an early and accurate diagnosis.”

According to Heinemann, who is also a Prader-Willi parent, more than 97 percent of Prader-Willi patients display symptoms of the syndrome at birth; most are now diagnosed within the first two weeks of life.

“They are hypotonic — very flaccid babies with weak muscle tone — and often are classified as ‘failure to thrive’ babies because, ironically, they are disinterested in eating. It’s really hard to get them to eat,” explains Heinemann. “That changes in time, within a couple of years, though, and then it requires tough love for the kids at a very early age from parents and caregivers. This is not a psychologically-based eating disorder; it is biologically-driven behavior.”

As they grow, the children are constantly hungry and never feel “full” even after a large meal. Stacking the deck even further is their lack of muscle mass and tone and a lower metabolic rate, meaning they gain weight more easily and much faster than those with normal metabolisms.

In 2000, the FDA approved growth hormones to help these kids build more muscle mass and grow taller. The cost runs between $30,000 and $40,000 a year, generally covered by insurance.

“The advent of these growth hormones has had a major impact on those dealing with Prader-Willi,” Smith said. “Those and early intervention are the best tools we have so far.”

About half of the kids with the syndrome live in group homes or other kinds of placements. An 800- to-1,200-calorie-a-day diet is required to simply maintain a child’s weight, roughly half of what a normal child would require.

“Society can’t appreciate how difficult a situation this is for a child and that family,” Heinemannsaid. “It dominates family life and is a 24/7 situation. But with diet and continuous motivation and behavior management, we get through.”

Our imperfect biology

The genetic defect of the 15th chromosome associated with Prader-Willi also means that many individuals with the syndrome will exhibit behaviors that make them appear autistic. As a result, more studies are being done on the 15th chromosome.

Clint Hurdle, manager of the Pittsburgh Pirates baseball team with spring headquarters in Bradenton, is the national spokesman for the Prader-Willi Association. He has a teenage daughter with the syndrome and is helping to bring attention to the need for funds for research. And Mayim Bialik, an actress from the hit TV show “The Big Bang Theory” recently starting working with PWSA to raise awareness and funds. Outside of her acting career, Bialik has her doctoral degree in neuroscience and wrote her dissertation on Prader-Willi.

According to Dan Driscoll, a board-certified specialist in clinical genetics, pediatrics and clinical cytogenetics at the University of Florida College of Medicine, at least six clinical trials are aimed at targeting appetite control and behavior. Prader-Willi Syndrome offers researchers and pharmaceutical companies an extremely “pure” genetic population on which to test the benefits of new drugs.

“In the last two years, there has been an explosion of trials and there are more in the works,” Driscoll said.

In 1991, Driscoll and colleagues at UF developed the technique of DNA methylation analysis that is now the standard technique used worldwide to correctly diagnose Prader-Willi.

“This syndrome is so well defined and comes with a very clear, definitive genetic test to confirm its existence, that it makes a great model for testing obesity drug,” the geneticist said, adding, “I am absolutely convinced that in at least one of these trials, there will be applicability to obesity in the general population.”

The discovery of a drug that will stem the insatiable hunger experienced by those with Prader-Willi will come none too soon, Driscoll said.

“I am amazed at how families cope with this condition,” he said. “The parents are the driving force behind getting the interest of and funding for these studies.'