POLITICO Pro IRS won't collect on bad returns from Obamacare glitch

The Obama administration took a step on Tuesday toward containing the damage from sending the wrong Obamacare tax data to hundreds of thousands of taxpayers.

The 50,000 taxpayers who filed returns based on inaccurate subsidy data they got from the government will not need to file amended returns and the IRS won’t collect for any underpayment, the Treasury Department said.

Story Continued Below

Taxpayers who are owed a larger subsidy can file an amended return.

“Individuals may want to consult with their tax preparers to determine if they would benefit from filing amended returns,” a Treasury representative said in an email. “Affected individuals who have not yet filed their taxes should wait to file until they receive their corrected forms.”

A glitch in HealthCare.gov that used the wrong year’s data for the calculations caused about 800,000 Americans to receive erroneous tax forms for their Obamacare subsidy. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services revealed the mistake last week.

More than 85 percent of the newly insured under the Affordable Care Act qualify for a subsidy from the government to help pay for coverage.

But taxpayers have to reconcile the tax credits they got during the year because they were based on estimated income data. Any variations from those estimates or changes in life status — a marriage, or a salary raise, means the subsidies will likely change for some.

The headache for taxpayers — and the political one for the White House — comes as the IRS role in implementing the law becomes more apparent. The agency determines the accuracy of the subsidies and will be assessing tax penalties if those who didn’t qualify for an exemption failed to get insured.

Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch (R-Utah) sent a letter on Monday to CMS Administrator Marilyn Tavenner and IRS Commissioner John Koskinen requesting details of how the glitch occurred. Hatch asked Koskinen to confirm if he agrees with estimates that about 50,000 people have already filed their taxes using the incorrect information and asked him to clarify the procedures for those who must refile due to the mistake.

The Treasury move didn’t satisfy Hatch’s request.

“This is yet another example of the administration covering their tracks to avoid the political fallout of mistakes made in executing their own law,” he said in an emailed statement. “Unilateral action such as this deserves further scrutiny by Congress.”

The Finance Committee is planning an oversight hearing in the near future that will touch on this issue.

Treasury said that taxpayers are likely to benefit from filing amended returns if their original form lists a benchmark premium of $100 and the updated form lists a premium of $200.

CMS last week wouldn’t comment on the specific component of HealthCare.gov that’s supposed to generate the tax forms. The agency did say that the system used 2015 insurance information when it should have used 2014 for the tax forms. But it’s only the forms that were wrong; the system calculated the actual subsidies correctly.