A new store for home brewers will open Oct. 1 at 435 S. Kansas.

William White said his store, Downtown Craft Brew, will sell supplies for people who want to brew their own beer and ferment their own wine. The merchandise will include grains, yeast and sugars and the equipment used to turn them into a beverage, he said.

“From point A to point B you’ll be able to get that all at my store,” he said.

White said Topeka residents interested in brewing for their friends or starting a small-scale business have to drive to Lawrence or Manhattan or order their supplies online, and he thinks the market in the capital city is large enough to merit a local store.

It also will have supplies to make your mead and grind your own coffee and will sell flavoring extracts, White said.

“My goal is to get as much in there as possible so you can brew anything you want,” he said.

The store will be open from 11 a.m. to 7 p.m. every day, White said. A website is in progress at www.downtowncraftbrew.com, but it doesn’t yet have full information.

Formal wear

store moves

Start to Finish Celebrations has moved to 108 W. 5th in Holton.

Owner Rose Souter said the larger space has allowed her to carry more new and gently used clothing for formal occasions. Start to Finish focuses on weddings, and another business in the store, called It’s My Dress, has clothes for other occasions like proms at prices “blue collar” people can afford, she said.

“We try to maintain our prices so no matter who it is they can get a beautiful dress,” she said.

Souter said she tries to give each bride personal attention, even closing the store so she can talk one-on-one about what they want for their weddings. In addition to selling dresses, she will do set-up and tear-down for celebrations and has contacts with photographers, caterers and other people involved in wedding planning, she said.

“Every woman who comes in here is treated like she’s the only customer in the state,” she said.

The store is open from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. Tuesday through Friday, though hours sometimes vary. It also is open from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Saturday, and evening appointments are available, Souter said. For more information, visit www.itsmydress.com or call (785) 364-2257.