Jameson Health System will soon be joining UPMC, opening the door to $80 million in improvements to the Lawrence County hospital that has been fighting for the merger for two years.

Under terms of the acquisition, UPMC will make $15 million in improvements at Jameson during the first two years of a 10-year agreement, with the Pittsburgh hospital giant also picking up $18 million in Jameson’s pension obligations. The deal was expected to be inked by May 1, according to Jameson spokeswoman Lisa Lombardo.

“We continue to believe this merger is the strongest solution for a healthy future for Lawrence County, its residents, and surrounding communities,” Mrs. Lombardo said.

The Jameson-UPMC deal, first proposed in the fall of 2014, had been in question after the state attorney general’s staff raised antitrust concerns. On Monday, the attorney general’s office filed an amended complaint saying UPMC’s acquisition of Jameson “substantially will lessen competition” in the area.

But both sides had agreed to binding arbitration and the U.S. District Court order signed by Magistrate Judge Robert C. Mitchell on Tuesday gives the deal the go-ahead while also putting in place restrictions, such as requiring UPMC to maintain Jameson as an acute care hospital for at least 10 years.

The order further blocks UPMC from terminating current health plan contracts and requires it to offer those plans a chance to extend the contracts 10 years.

The new owner cannot revoke hospital privileges of any UPMC Jameson physician “solely because that physician is employed by a health system other than UPMC.”

The agreement stipulates that UPMC cannot acquire any additional Pennsylvania hospitals without providing at least 120 days’ written notice to the attorney general’s office.

“We look forward to further extending UPMC’s world-class care to patients in Lawrence and Mercer counties,” UPMC spokesman Paul Wood said.

UPMC has more than 20 hospitals and more than 500 locations, mostly in Western Pennsylvania.

Jameson, with 1,200 employees, had been looking to partner with a larger health system for more than five years, as patient revenue flattened and the health system encountered increasing problems recruiting doctors — a common issue for rural hospitals. And between reduced reimbursement from government programs, the shift to electronic health records and complying with regulations set out by the federal Affordable Care Act, the Jameson board decided it needed an affiliation or joint venture with an outside party.

Jameson officials had discussions with Highmark Health’s Allegheny Health Network and the Tennessee-based for-profit Community Health Systems Inc.

The two parties reached an agreement in February 2015 but still needed regulatory approval from the state attorney general’s office. That office balked over concerns the deal would give UPMC, which had previously acquired Horizon Health System in Mercer County, too much control over health care in the area, leading to higher costs to consumers.

In August, under directions from the state attorney general’s office, Jameson officials issued a new request for proposals seeking partnerships, even as they continued to maintain that the UPMC affiliation represented the health system’s best option.

Steve Twedt:stewdt@post-gazette.com, or 412-263-1963 Kris B. Mamula:kmamula@post-gazette.com, or 412-263-1699