The Arkansas Department of Human Services is getting a full inspection by a former Army officer as part of a governor-appointed project to improve state agencies.

Following a ribbon cutting for the new Arkansas Department of Veterans Affairs county office at the State Office Building downtown, Lt. Gov. Tim Griffin sat down with more than a dozen Sebastian County DHS employees to hear problems and learn more about the programs offered.

Computer system issues created by the Affordable Care Act and related program inefficiencies as well as training are among some major issues the local DHS employees told Griffin about Wednesday. While some issues, like dwindling Medicaid funding, are out of reach, Griffin hopes to find “systemic” problems that can be fixed on the state level.

Griffin is collecting this information for a report to give Gov. Asa Hutchinson with the Arkansas Policy Foundation, possibly in March, he said. After visiting with all of the county offices, he will let it “stew” and “gel” for a couple weeks before giving his report.

DHS Director John Selig announced last year that he planned to step down and agreed to stay on until Hutchinson named a successor. Griffin said that process should be complete by the end of March and this report could provide solutions to any problems within the agency.

“This is the first county office I’ve been to after visiting the headquarters, and we want to take a good look at the structure and see if needs to be any different,” Griffin said. “If so, how, so we can better serve and be more efficient and have a better future.”

Griffin said all state agencies need to be looked at every now and then. The project comes on the heels of his nonbinding recommendations and assessment of the state’s Common Core program, which the governor also assigned him to inspect. Griffin told the DHS workers he was just a “glutton for punishment,” but in sincerity he sat surrounded by them, diligently taking notes on a DHS department agency map.

In addition to current employees of DHS, Griffin said he is also interviewing former employees and third party connections that include state legislators to hear stories from their constituents.

Griffin told the 14 or so DHS employees they could call his office anytime to provide information they feel would improve the system. He also can be reached at his website, ltgovernor.arkansas.gov.