Voters must register by Feb. 1 to participate

EDITOR'S NOTE: An earlier version of this story incorrectly stated that Coloradans who weren't already registered to vote could still do so, and declare a Republican or Democratic Party affiliation by Feb. 1, in order to participate in the March caucuses. That's been corrected below.

At least 2,300 more Boulder County Democrats and 30 more Boulder County Republicans are eligible to participate in their party's March neighborhood precinct caucuses, according to voter registration figures from the Boulder County Clerk and Recorder's Office on Thursday.

Monday, Jan. 4, was the deadline for voters to register and join the Democrats or Republicans in order to be able to cast March 1 caucus votes and be eligible to become delegates to their parties' county, state legislative district, congressional district and state assemblies later in March and April.

Democrats on Boulder County's registration rolls grew to 102,244 voters from 99,884 as of Dec. 1 on those rolls after Monday's midnight deadline.

Boulder County's registered Republican voters showed a much smaller increase, to 44,271 this week from 44,240 on Dec. 1.

Dropping in the county's official registration rolls between Dec. 1 and this week were the numbers of voters identifying themselves as unaffiliated with any political party, decreasing to 98,268 from 99,694.

Also showing decreases since Dec. 1 were the numbers of Boulder County voters affiliated with smaller parties, which won't be holding March 1 caucuses. Libertarians dropped to 2,588 from 2,663, for example, while the Green Party's registered voters fell to 1,342 from 1,453. The American Constitution Party's voters fell to 287 voters from 293.

Advertisement

Mircalla Wozniak, a spokeswoman for the Clerk and Recorder's Office, said there may yet be a few additions to the number of people who revised their registration by midnight Monday, since the county may not yet have received a few mailed-in voter registration change forms that were postmarked by midnight Monday.

While precinct caucuses typically are lightly attended, even in some presidential election years, they — and the assemblies that follow — are the traditional path for picking most of the Republican and Democratic candidates who will appear on those parties' June primary ballots. Some candidates choose to bypass the caucus-and-assembly process and petition onto the major parties' primary ballots.

John Fryar: 303-684-5211, jfryar@times-call.com or twitter.com/jfryartc