A rock slide closed the exit off U.S. 24 just west of Manitou Springs Monday, and as of 8 a.m. the Colorado Department of Transportation had no estimate of when the rubble would be cleared.

The slide at about 7 a.m. spilled all the way across the ramp off the eastbound lanes of the highway, CDOT said.

There were no vehicles involved when the rocks came down. U.S. 24 remains open.

This story will be updated as more information becomes available.

There were no reported major accidents on Colorado interstate’s Sunday morning, according to the CDOT.

The weekend is one of the busiest travel periods of the year.

AAA Colorado forecast 632,000 Coloradans would travel at least 50 milesfrom home during the holiday weekend from Thursday to Monday, a 5 percent increase over 2014.

Last year, 219,470 cars passed through the Eisenhower Tunnel on Interstate 70 during the four-day holiday travel period. During Labor Day, 167,600 cars passed, and the Fourth of July had 162,728, according to CDOT data.

Highway travel on I-70 was down slightly last year from 2013, CDOT records show.

A spokesman for the Colorado State Patrol knew of no fatalities on state highways Sunday.

Saturday morning northeast of Longmont, 21-year-old State Patrol Cadet Taylor Thyfault was killed and Trooper Clinton Rushing, 37, was critically injured when Christopher Lee Gebers, 27, allegedly drove through an unrelated accident scene and hit the officers.

Gebers is facing preliminary charges of first-degree murder with extreme indifference.

A rockslide also temporarily closed U.S. 50 about 25 miles west of Cañon City Sunday night. The debris was soon clear the route was reopened, CDOT said.

Two stretches of road on the Eastern Plains remained closed Monday morning because of flooding.

Colorado 71 for 21 miles south of Brush has been closed since May 11 because of severe intermittent flooding, CDOT said.

Twenty miles of Colorado 194/U.S. 50 La Junta to near Las Animas has been closed since Thursday.

Two roads that are among the state’s most popular tourist attractions remained closed because of extended winter conditions. Trail Ridge Road through Rocky Mountain National Park and Mount Evans Road in Clear Creek County traditionally open for the season on Memorial Day weekend.

CDOT has not estimated an opening day for either road.