Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Oklahoma began informing health insurance agents on Tuesday that the company won't pay commissions on the sales of any new policies for individual plans that take effect April 1 and afterward — a move that some industry observers believe will hurt consumers.

Eliminating commissions ultimately will force people to call the toll-free phone numbers for healthcare.gov or insurance companies for help, said Leah-Anne Janway, a broker with Bigbie, Hensley & Janway Insurance Agency in Oklahoma City.

“I feel like this inadvertently will drive consumers to buy junk coverage,” Janway said, noting that without guidance, consumers often choose the cheapest plan without realizing they may have to meet an out-of-pocket deductible of $6,000 before any benefits are paid; that a particular facilities and provider network may be too narrow for them; or that their doctors aren't included in all plans.

“It's not unusual for agents to spend an hour and half explaining and selling an individual policy,” Janway said.

Added Jim D. Duncan of Benchmark Financial Group Inc., “The consumer won't have any unbiased help from licensed independent professionals, representation when it comes to their claims, pharmacy and other issues … and be at the mercy of 800 numbers, and waiting in long telephone lines.”

Blue Cross has been paying agents a 2 percent commission on individual sales. Plan rates are the same, whether consumers use agents or not.

Blue Cross spokeswoman Ashley Hudgeons said the decisions won't impact commissions for individual renewals, any sales or renewals within the group market or Medicare market, or retail ancillary products.

“As always, we assess and evaluate our commission structure on an ongoing basis and will make adjustments as appropriate,” Hudgeons said. “We are committed to expanding access to quality health care to as many Oklahomans as possible through the retail market, and we have been ‘all-in' since the inception of ACA (Affordable Care Act).”

She noted the availability of a variety of educational resources — in both English and Spanish — to help consumers navigate the entire health insurance process.

“However, as the individual market evolves, we, in turn, need to make changes to the way we operate in order to continue offering sustainable health plan options to our members,” Hudgeons said.

Blue Cross has 75 percent or more of the individual market in Oklahoma, and is one of only two insurers participating in the state's federally-

run healthcare.gov insurance exchange and individual market.

The other insurer, UnitedHealthcare, pays 2 percent commissions on policies sold off the exchange, Janway said, but eliminated commissions on exchange policies, starting this past enrollment period, she said.

United Healthcare spokesman Dustin Clark said, “Our actions are consistent with our long-stated approach to continually evaluate the dynamics of exchanges as they evolve, and to refocus our resources as necessary so that we can provide consumers with access to quality care.”

Including its group plans, UnitedHealthcare insures 405,000 Oklahomans, Clark said.

Insurers once paid commissions up to 15 percent on sales of policies for individual plans. But the incentives have been dwindling for the past several years, with the current national trend in California and elsewhere being to eliminate them.

Janway and other agents are concerned that Oklahoma's current policy premiums — which were approved and filed through the Oklahoma Insurance Department — include compensation to agents, as agents are part of carriers' medical-loss ratios. Ratios measure the share of health care premium dollars spent on medical benefits, and insurance carriers aren't allowed to deduct commissions/fees from their administrative expenses when calculating the ACA ratio, she said.

“So does eliminating commissions without lowering premium add to a carrier's profit?” she asks.

Wayne Pettigrew, president of the Oklahoma State Association of Health Underwriters, said his group plans to review the recent changes and study whether to request a regulatory ruling from the Oklahoma insurance commissioner.

Some 145,329 Oklahomans signed up for health insurance through healthcare.gov this year, compared with 126,115 covered in 2015, according to the Department of Health and Human Services. Fifty-one percent of the Oklahomans who actively re-enrolled for this year switched to a new plan — which would disqualify any involved agents for commissions in the future, since they wouldn't technically be renewals.