Good morning and welcome to Wake-Up Call, your guidebook to and roundup of the latest in city, state, and national political news...

EXCLUSIVE: New year, old probe. The investigation into whether the Working Families Party violated election laws in 2009 will continue for at least a month into 2015.

The grand jury convened in the matter was set to expire Dec. 21, but a judge extended it through the end of January at the request of special prosecutor Roger Bennet Adler.

Adler, who was selected in 2012 after Staten Island District Attorney Dan Donovan recused himself from the case , wouldn't comment why he needed more time, citing grand jury secrecy.

A Queens man overheard at a bank talking about killing cops vowed to unleash another attack on the NYPD before Christmas, adding that the next victim should be white — for maximum impact. “They should have killed two white cops, instead of a Hispanic and an Asian, if the guy really wanted to send a message,” Elvin Payamps, 38, allegedly said while talking on his cell phone. Mayor de Blasio on Thursday tweeted praise that an arrest was made — and that the public helped out during a time of extreme vigilance among members of the NYPD.

michael schwartz for new york daily news

The family of Eric Garner joined the Rev. Al Sharpton for a Christmas Day moment of silence honoring two cops murdered by a deranged killer out to avenge the Staten Island man’s death. Garner’s mother, Gwenn Carr, and his widow, Esaw Garner, paused for the moment of silence at the National Action Network headquarters in Harlem, where they were helping to feed the homeless and senior citizens.

The chorus of public officials urging New Yorkers to give to a Daily News fund for the families of two slain NYPD heroes now includes Gov. Cuomo. In his annual Christmas message, Cuomo cited The News campaign. The governor said the families of Rafael Ramos and Wenjian Liu — both murdered as they sat inside a squad car in Brooklyn on Saturday — need the public’s support.

Spend Christmas Day in the capital of the world? Mayor de Blasio didn’t. With tensions still high after the murder of two NYPD cops, Gotham's CEO split for Connecticut, per his public schedule. De Blasio and First Lady Chirlane McCray will return Friday. The couple also spent Thanksgiving in the Constitution State, where they celebrated at a cousin’s home.

Mayor de Blasio: Spending Christmas out of state. Former Republican mayoral candidate Joe Lhota: Not impressed. "I guess going to a few precinct roll calls this morning and last night was inconvenient?" Lhota deadpanned.

Another newborn boy has contracted herpes after a controversial Jewish circumcision ritual — the fourth case this year and the 17th since 2000, city health officials said Wednesday. In 2012, under Mayor Michael Bloomberg, the city enacted a regulation requiring that anyone who performs the ritual obtain a signed consent form from parents acknowledging the potential health risks. As a candidate, Bill de Blasio voiced dissatisfaction with the 2012 regulation. A year has passed since he took office, but de Blasio has not yet come up with a new policy.

Who knew that motel sex and jihadist terror would make great satire — penned by a Long Island congressman, no less? Rep. Steve Israel (D-Nassau County) reveals his inner Jon Stewart in his debut novel, “The Global War on Morris.” It’s the story of a nebbishy New York pharmaceutical rep named Morris Feldstein who comes to be viewed as a major security threat because of a government surveillance program that’s gone awry. Israel got the idea from his day job.

With 2015 a week away, the starting line for lawmakers to announce whether they’ll run for President is right around the corner. And with no clear GOP front-runner, no fewer than five leading Republicans have scheduled high-profile book releases in the first few months of the year. Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, Texas Sen. Ted Cruz and Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul are all among the growing list of GOPers whose book tours promise to be launching pads, or least testing pads, for potential 2016 bids.

LANCE KING/GETTY IMAGES

AP: "Former President George H.W. Bush remained hospitalized through Christmas Day after experiencing shortness of breath two days ago. Family spokesman Jim McGrath said Thursday that the 90-year-old Bush “had another terrific day and is in great spirits.” ... It was his second Christmas in the past three years spent in hospital care. He spent Christmas 2012 hospitalized as part of a two-month stay brought about by bronchitis."

Jeb Bush’s presidential ambitions are looking healthier now that he’s dropped Obamacare. Bush announced Wednesday he would resign from Tenet Healthcare Corp.’s board of directors, effective Dec. 31. It’s a significant move because Tenet CEO Trevor Fetter has said Obamacare swelled the ranks of people seeking care at the company’s hospitals, driving revenue and directly profiting Bush, according to The Los Angeles Times.

AP: "President Obama marked the end of more than a decade of combat in Afghanistan by paying tribute to America’s military, telling troops on Christmas Day that their sacrifices have allowed for a more peaceful, prosperous world to emerge out of the ashes of 9/11."

From our Bramhall's World:

Leaders' Lineup:

#Christmas #stars, #nyc A photo posted by Celeste Katz (@celestekatz) on Dec 12, 2014 at 3:58pm PST

President Obama is in Hawaii through Sunday, Jan. 4, 2015

Gov. Cuomo is in New York City; no public schedule

Mayor de Blasio is in Connecticut and New York City; no public schedule

Tuning In:

"The Brian Lehrer Show,” WNYC 93.9 FM, 10 a.m.: "We're re-playing some of our favorite segments from our anniversary series, '25 Years in 25 Days,' including: Mad Men creator Matt Weiner; 2004 in food; Maureen Dowd; and more."

"It was the best Christmas gift that I would ever be able to ask for."

News tips, schedules or suggestions? Email me!

ckatz@nydailynews.com