This is a good example of how the government can use the power of its purse to push for better, more cost-effective medical care.

When you go to a hospital, there's always a small chance the hospital is going to make an avoidable mistake that delays your recovery or requires further treatment.

Putting you on a catheter, for example, can cause infection in the urinary tract – infections like that happened about 290,000 times in 2013, according to federal data. About 1 million times, US patients suffered bedsores, according to the same data. Both problems are easily avoided with proper care.

That's why the federal government has started keeping track of those mistakes and other preventable errors and penalizes hospitals with the worst records. Make too many mistakes (known as "hospital acquired conditions"), and a hospital loses 1 percent of the money it is due from Medicare, the federal health coverage for senior citizens.

This year's hospital ratings have been released, and some big name Central Pa. hospitals will be paying the price for less-than-stellar work.

All told, some 721 hospitals across the nation will lose an estimated $373 million of Medicare payments, according to Kaiser Health News.



This is a good example of how the government can use the power of its purse to push for better, more cost-effective medical care.

One of the biggest reasons the American health care system is so expensive is that by and large the doctor or hospital gets paid for procedures, not for results.

Some of that is inevitable – many conditions are hard to diagnose until other possibilities are ruled out by testing or treatment. But it is also strange that a hospital can actually make a patient's condition worse and then collect more money for treating the problem it caused.

Rating hospitals by their preventable errors is part of a welcome and necessary shift in the American health care system: emphasizing the quality of medical care, rather than the quantity.

In an earlier step toward results-based medical care, Medicare stopped paying hospitals for treating preventable conditions. Medicare also monitors the effectiveness of a hospital's treatment, by looking at how often patients are readmitted within 30 days after undergoing one of five common major operations.

In future years, Medicare will begin penalizing hospitals whose patients acquire other types of infections at high rates.

Hospital complaints

Hospitals have complained about the way their federal error ratings are calculated, and the criteria may need some refinement.

The government relies on self-reported data from hospitals, so those that are most aggressive about monitoring (and trying to fix) potential problems may be penalized for it. There's also an incentive for hospitals to spend a lot of time massaging the numbers they report, instead of actually dealing with the problems. Hospitals that noticeably improve their error rates may still fall in the group that gets hit with penalties.

Some observers were surprised to see that nearly half the nation's 292 major teaching hospitals, including Penn State Hershey, now face the 1 percent Medicare payment penalty. It's unclear whether that's because they are training new doctors, who may be prone to more mistakes, or because the hospitals treat more challenging medical cases.

Valuable tool

But any refinements should not compromise the value of the tool being used here. This federal oversight is a powerful way to make sure hospitals are vigilant in preventing avoidable problems for their patients.

As Dr. John Bulger, chief quality officer at Geisinger Medical Center told PennLive's David Wenner, "It's important to focus on [preventing] complications. This has made people do that."

Oh, and the name of the law in question, which uses the financial power of the federal government to press hospitals into delivering safer care?

The Affordable Care Act, aka "Obamacare."