Neil Ryding, Hospira Inc.'s senior vice president for devices, is leaving the post after just 15 months. Mr. Ryding was hired to the newly created position in July 2012 as part of a management shakeup aimed at addressing the Lake Forest-based firm's long-running product-quality issues. Prior to Hospira, Mr. Ryding held senior executive roles at San Diego-based CareFusion Corp. and at New Brunswick, N.J.-based Johnson & Johnson. He “left . . . to pursue other opportunities” on Oct. 11, Hospira said in a filing yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Mr. Ryding was one of the highest-paid executives in the company, with total compensation of about $3 million in 2012.



Riverside wants to drop children's unit

Riverside Medical Center in Kankakee wants to discontinue its 18-bed pediatric unit to make way for private patient rooms. Children would still be treated at the 325-bed hospital but placed in beds categorized for general medical-surgical purposes, according to an application Riverside filed on Oct. 4 with the Illinois Health Facilities and Services Review Board, which must approve the change. Fewer pediatric patients are seeking care at Riverside, with the occupancy rate dropping each year since 2005, to 15.4 percent in 2012, the application said. Eliminating the pediatric unit would free up space to add private rooms, the application said.



Small biz likes Shop exchange features, but price is key

Small employers favorably view many of the features of the Small Business Health Options Program, or Shop exchanges, established under the Affordable Care Act, but price remains the key factor, according to a new survey conducted by researchers at the University of Chicago. For example, 56 percent of employers are interested in defined-benefit coverage, in which employees pay any extra cost for choosing a more expensive plan, according to the survey of 604 employers with three to 50 employees. But that feature is offered in just 17 states that are running their own exchanges. Only 36 percent prefer offering one health care plan, which is the model for 2014 in the 36 states where the federal government is operating exchanges, including Illinois. Of the 170 firms that don't offer coverage to workers, 75 percent said cost was the most important factor in their decision. The survey was sponsored by New York-based Commonwealth Fund, a nonprofit that specializes in health care policy.