A long-brewing debate over the definition of craft beer is spilling from the barroom to the courtroom in a legal challenge against MillerCoors, the maker of Blue Moon.

San Diego craft-brew drinker Evan Parent claims in a lawsuit that the brewing giant fraudulently promotes Blue Moon as a craft beer and confuses customers by never showing the name “MillerCoors” on labels and packaging.

“People are deceived into thinking that Blue Moon is the product of a craft brewery,” said Parent’s attorney, James Treglio.

“In that deception, they are undermining craft breweries,” he said. “For a consumer willing to pay extra to support these small, independent businesses, MillerCoors essentially is manipulating the system and putting those independent breweries at an unfair disadvantage.”

Treglio is seeking class-action status for the suit in a move that he said could make thousands, even millions, of California beer drinkers plaintiffs in the case.

Blue Moon Belgian White was born 20 years ago as a small-batch ale in Coors’ Sandlot brewery at Coors Field. Now a big seller nationally, Blue Moon is brewed at MillerCoors’ flagship brewery in Golden and another MillerCoors facility in Eden, N.C.

MillerCoors was created from the 2007 merger of the U.S. operations of Denver-based Molson Coors with SABMiller.

In a Denver Post interview last month, Molson Coors CEO Mark Hunter noted that Blue Moon’s introduction in 1995 came long before most current craft beers were created.

“We’ve been helping shape (the craft segment) for the last 20 years,” Hunter said.

MillerCoors spokesman Jonathan Stern said the lawsuit is “without merit.”

“Blue Moon is the gateway beer into craft for many drinkers and is the most popular craft beer in America,” he said. “There are countless definitions of ‘craft,’ none of which are legal definitions. We choose to judge beer by the quality, skill and passion that goes into brewing it.”

The Boulder-based Brewers Association defines a craft brewery as having annual production of less than 6 million barrels and having less than 25 percent ownership by a noncraft brewer.

“We believe transparency of brand ownership allows beer drinkers to make an informed choice,” said Paul Gatza, director of the Brewers Association. “We have no position specifically on the lawsuit. Win or lose, the fight is likely to be expensive to MillerCoors.”

The San Diego case isn’t the first time that Blue Moon has been a point of legal contention.

In 2000, Coors agreed to settle a lawsuit filed by a consortium of brewers from Belgium who alleged deceptive trade practices because consumers believed they were buying beer brewed in Belgium, instead of a U.S. ale brewed in Belgian style.

Steve Raabe: 303-954-1948, sraabe@denverpost.com or twitter.com/steveraabedp