CLEVELAND - If you're depending on that tax return to help your financial situation this year, pack your patience. The warnings from the IRS have gone out.

Lots of people can't wait to get their hands on their returns but because of changes at the IRS and even changes in Ohio, you'll probably have to wait even longer to see your money this tax season.

We caught up with retired school teacher Gylene Pelton who is a client with the JL Smith Group in Avon. She’s aware of the IRS budget cuts. Our research found there are hundreds of millions of dollars less now and funding levels are similar to 2007. There are fewer resources to deal with people just like Pelton. "I think it's going to make it more complicated for people and for people who are depending on those refunds," said Pelton.

Not only that, but this is the first year healthcare through the Affordable Care Act is tied directly to your taxes. Subsidy eligibility and possible penalties are changes that are creating additional processing issues.

Tax Preparer Bryan Bibbo from JL Smith said even the normally-quicker electronic filings will be affected. "To get a refund, on average it only took 2-3 weeks from the IRS, but now we can probably expect a month to a month and a week," said Bibbo.

He went on to tell us the IRS expects to get 100 million calls this tax season from people looking for help, but it will only be able to take about half of those calls coming in. And if you're one of those people who gets through on the IRS hotline, reports show you should expect to be on hold 30 minutes or more before actually talking to a representative.

Plus, Bibbo said the state of Ohio has changed how it flags returns and a possible verification process could slow things down, too. "Between the healthcare situation and those kinds of things changing and the delays, it's going to be a more complex tax season for tax preparers and tax payers,” predicted Bibbo.

Pelton said she could see that happening. “It will be frustrating this first year because people will be expecting their money and it won't come right away," she told us.

So, what can you do to help yourself? Bibbo suggested you start earlier especially this season getting your tax documents in order. Then, if you do sit down with a tax preparer, make sure you have everything you need so you're not making multiple visits and causing more delays yourself.