If you're in an eight-way tie, you're in an eight-way tie for what? No. 1. — Will Adams, Amash spokesman

GRAND RAPIDS, MI — U.S. Rep. Justin Amash's first campaign ad released ahead of next month's primary doesn't tell voters the whole story, PolitiFact argues.

The Tampa Bay Times fact-checking project takes issue with the ad from the start: "Justin Amash is rated Michigan’s No. 1 conservative," the narrator states. Groups National Right to Life, Club for Growth and FreedomWorks appear on screen to give credence to the claim, though it's the former of the three whose spokesperson says they do not give a distinction of who's the top conservative — or liberal, for that matter.

PolitiFact found Amash, R-Cascade Township, actually is in a eight-way tie of Michigan's Republican delegation as those members received 100 percent on the latest National Right to Life voting scorecard. A look into the previous scorecard for legislators shows he had one of the lowest rankings among most Republicans for voting against key measures the organization deemed worthy to support.

Amash spokesman Will Adams took issue with PolitiFact's findings. On Tuesday, The Washington Post chimed in that Amash's ad "inflates his conservative cred."

"Justin has a 100 percent with National Right to Life," Adams said, "That does, by definition, make him No. 1 in Michigan, and Justin is widely recognized as the top conservative in Michigan.

"If you're in an eight-way tie, you're in an eight-way tie for what? No. 1."

Despite explanations for those votes against the National Right to Life's agenda — two present and one against — the statewide group, Right to Life of Michigan, pulled its support of Amash in 2012. It since has endorsed Amash's primary challengerand local businessman, Brian Ellis.

Ellis' ads haven't avoided a critical eye, either, with FactCheck.org calling an ad critiquing Amash's abortion record "misleading" to viewers.

On Amash's commercial, PolitiFact writes: "Amash’s ad implies approval from a group that has criticized his voting record, and whose state affiliate is backing his opponent. We rate Amash's statement False."

The ad is the first endorsed by the Amash campaign this season. Released in early July, it targets Ellis' membership on the Michigan Strategic Fund, in addition to the East Grand Rapids School Board, and alleges he wants Michigan to expand its implementation of the Affordable Care Act, or "ObamaCare."

Ellis says it's all "ludicrous." As a state representative, Amash joined other legislators to unanimously appropriate federal stimulus dollars to avoid cuts to public education. Ellis said he volunteered on the board and signaled approval because it's what lawmakers wanted.

The ad's Common Core allegation is disingenuous, too, because there clearly are problems with public education, Ellis said. He argued accountability and standards should be at their highest; that's different than providing a national standard to how teachers are supposed to teach.

Finally, Ellis reiterated he does not endorse "ObamaCare" as claimed by the ad. The state's expansion of Medicaid was approved because it was more cost-effective than people going on the federal program, Ellis said.

"Where do you start?" Ellis asked. "It's disappointing that Justin has refused to debate. It's disrespectful to voters and all of this could be cleared up, but he'd rather confuse people and play word games."

Watch Amash's TV ad, here:

Andrew Krietz covers breaking, politics and transportation news for MLive | The Grand Rapids Press. Email him at akrietz@mlive.com or follow him on Twitter.