Good Thursday morning, the 317th day of 2014, with just 414 shopping days until the Iowa caucuses and only 779 days until the next presidential inauguration. Seems like only yesterday (or was it last week?) that we were in the thick of the 2014 midterms; where does the time go? We can, however, account for the 180 seconds you’ll spend on today’s Three Minute Briefing:

[READ: Last Call: Fortunate Son Edition]

Asia Swing: President Barack Obama continues his Pacific Rim swing, departing China for Myanmar after warning the government of stagnating democratic reforms and meeting with opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi for emphasis. He’ll then move on to Australia, which is already feeling the pressure from the U.S.-China deal to drastically cut greenhouse gas emissions by 2025.

Ready (or Not): Even though the midterm elections technically aren’t over, and the lame duck Congress still has work to do, it’s never too early to continue our speculation on whether Hillary Clinton will be the first female president, and if she’ll be beholden to Wall Street or Main Street - even though she hasn’t officially declared she’s running.

Will Fox Chuck Huck?: Meanwhile, in the Republican version of “Undeclared,” Fox News’ Mike Huckabee is sending strong signals he’ll toss his lid into the ring: going on tour, huddling with advisers, dropping the obligatory pre-campaign book on what’s wrong with America and why he’s the only guy who can fix it. But his decision may cost him his day job.

Genie, Meet Bottle: Back in the lame-duck Congress, lawmakers left and right may have found an area of common ground: reining in the National Security Agency.

[ALSO: Rand Paul Outlines a 2016 Game Plan]

Movin’ On Up: The one woman liberals wish would run for president: Sen. Elizabeth Warren, a freshman Democrat from Massachusetts, is about to get a promotion.

D’oh!: One careless remark by an Obamacare architect has given conservatives new ammunition to aim at the law they love to hate -- and that remark is the basis of a Supreme Court case that could hollow out the core of the Affordable Care Act.

Harpers' Index Stat of the Day: Percentage of U.S. smartphone owners aged 18 to 24 who check their phones immediately after waking up each morning: 74