Jul 15, 2015 | Tags: Alabama Public Radio, College of Communication & Information Sciences | Posted in Awards & Honors, Faculty & Staff |

Tweet

TUSCALOOSA, Ala. — The Alabama Associated Press honored Alabama Public Radio, housed in The University of Alabama’s Digital Media Center, as “Most Outstanding News Operation” in the state.

This is the fourth year in a row APR has received the award.

Student interns Valese Jones, of Birmingham, and Jasmine Haynes, of Grayson, Georgia, represented the newsroom at the Associated Press Media Editors’ annual awards banquet in Birmingham.

Both Jones and Haynes major in telecommunication and film at UA.

“Getting to see examples of the work that people were rewarded for was also a highlight for me,” Jones said. “The experience motivated me to work harder at my craft so I can one day be an award-winning journalist.”

“I was able to network and get a better understanding of what the news industry is all about,” Haynes said. “It was amazing to see what some of the other stations within Alabama covered throughout the year.”

The “Most Outstanding News Operation” award represents work accomplished in 2014. Among the stories covered was a year-long examination, by APR in tandem with AL.com, of the implementation of the Affordable Care Act.

The news team also looked back on the 150th anniversary of the battle of Mobile Bay during the U.S. Civil War. Historians credit this naval engagement with helping to end the “war between the states,” and putting Abraham Lincoln into a second term in office.

APR was similarly honored by the AP in 2011, 2012 and 2013.

Along with the “Most Outstanding News Operation” award, APR’s Stan Ingold won “Best Sports” for “Wheelchair Boxing,” about a training program for University of Alabama’s adapted athletics program sponsored by WBC Heavyweight boxing champion Deontay Wilder.

The news team also won for “Best Documentary” and “Best Use of Tape” for “Damn The Torpedoes,” APR’s news special about the 150th anniversary of the battle of Mobile Bay.

The University of Alabama, a student-centered research university, is experiencing significant growth in both enrollment and academic quality. This growth, which is positively impacting the campus and the state's economy, is in keeping with UA's vision to be the university of choice for the best and brightest students. UA, the state's flagship university, is an academic community united in its commitment to enhancing the quality of life for all Alabamians.