Newport News Rep. Scott honored for commitment to mental health

Take note of screenings for early detection of colon cancer

U.S. Rep. Robert C. "Bobby" Scott, D-Newport News, has been a strong advocate for the Affordable Care Act, holding multiple educational sessions on the health care bill for his constituents. This week, he was honored by the National Association of County Behavioral Health and Development Disability Directors for his continued leadership on mental health issues in Congress.

"Mental illness and severe emotional stress affect millions of Americans every year and, unfortunately, too many problems go untreated," said Scott, in a news release. "We have made great progress in ensuring that a range of health services are available for all Americans. The Affordable Care Act includes mental health and substance use disorder services in the 'essential health benefits' package, which all new health plans are now required to cover."

The 2014 deadline for individuals to sign up for Affordable Care Act health insurance through Virginia's federally run marketplace is Monday, March 31. To enroll, go to http://www.healthcare.gov.

For information or help with enrollment, there's a Hampton Roads Marketplace Enrollment event at the Hampton Roads Convention Center on Saturday. The event runs from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. In addition to on-site enrollment, there will be a job fair, workshops, educational seminars, and entertainment. Free and open to the public. For more information, call 757-287-0277.

Colorectal cancer

March has been dubbed Colorectal Cancer Awareness month, and activists hope to raise awareness of the preventable disease and encourage screenings for its early detection. One in 20 Americans is affected by the second deadliest cancer. Only lung cancer kills more.

Bon Secours pharmacies and Good Neighbor pharmacies are offering free colon cancer home test kits ($10 value) this month while supplies last. The health system is also inviting people to take free ColonAware health risk assessments at http://www.bshr/colon. It is sponsoring a Colon Cancer 5K and 1 mile Fun Walk on Saturday, April 5 at Bon Secours Health Center at Harbour View, 5818 Harbour View Blvd., Suffolk.

To schedule a screening appointment, contact the Bon Secours Colorectal Center at 757-673-5970.

The American College of Gastroenterologists recommends screening colonoscopies starting at age 50, and earlier, at age 45, for African Americans.

Chesapeake Regional Medical Center is participating in educational outreach, including a "walk-through colon" on display at Greenbrier Mall in Chesapeake through Sunday, March 9. The display offers prevention tips and information about the disease.

Mental health reform

Virginia has launched a "real-time" psychiatric bed registry as part of the mental health reforms pushed for after the November death of Gus Deeds, son of state Sen. Creigh Deeds. The younger stabbed his father and then killed himself after being released from emergency custody for a psychiatric crisis when no appropriate in-patient bed could be found for him.

The online registry aims to provide screening clinicians with accurate, detailed information for bed availability in Virginia's public mental health hospitals, private hospitals and crisis stabilization units, according to the Virginia Department of Behavioral Health. It's intended to assist in locating an available bed for individuals experiencing a mental health crisis who are under an emergency custody order, ECO, and need to receive treatment under a temporary detention order, TDO.