Animal Care & Control of NYC Brooklyn residents Katherine Lynn, 30, and Keith Lubeley, 33, on Saturday adopted the kittens that held up the subway in August.

The adorable kittens that hopped onto the subway tracks at Church Ave. in August — delaying the B and Q trains for two hours — have found a new home.

August and Arthur were adopted by Brooklyn Heights couple Katherine Lynn, 30 years old, and Keith Lubeley, 33, on Saturday. The husband and wife were looking to adopt a pet, and when they saw the subway felines were available they put in a basic application with Animal Care and Control of New York City.

Katherine Lynn Arthur and August in their new Brooklyn Heights home.

“We assumed there would be a person with an inside track who really has their eye on [the cats],” said Ms. Lynn, who works for a theater consulting firm. But the couple was chosen, and they met the cats “on the day we took them home, Saturday,” Ms. Lynn said.

The kittens became instant celebrities in the city, captivating commuters and even drawing responses from mayoral candidates Joe Lhota and Bill de Blasio. (Mr. Lhota, the former Metropolitan Transportation Authority Chairman who is running as a Republican, took some heat for saying he wouldn’t stop the subways in order to help search for the cats.)

For the record, Ms. Lynn said “of course [the subways] should have been stopped.” She and Mr. Lubeley are voting for Mr. de Blasio, she said, and that is not just because he said he would have halted the trains. “But it doesn’t hurt that I know he would support stopping for cats,” she said.

The kittens immediately took to their new home, Ms. Lynn said.

“They just kind of checked it out. At first we sort of kept them in a smaller area so they could get acquainted to the sounds of the house and smells of the house. They were perfectly content to keep each other company. They groom each other…they sleep with each other,” she said.

“Arthur keeps August out of too much mischief and August keeps Arthur from being anti -social,” she added.