"You wanted change in Washington, and we're going to bring it to you." -- Bradley Byrne

MOBILE, Alabama – Returning from the nadir of his political career after a stinging loss in the 2010 Republican gubernatorial primary, Bradley Byrne on Tuesday won a landslide victory over Democrat Burton LeFlore in a special election for Congress.

Byrne, 58, won about two-thirds of the vote, according to incomplete and unofficial returns. The Associated Press declared him the winner at about 9 p.m. He carried every county in the district.



Byrne will be sworn in next month as the next representative of the 1st District, which includes Mobile, Baldwin, Escambia, Monroe and Washington counties, as well as part of Clarke County.

The district has been without representation since Jo Bonner, R-Mobile, left office in August to take a job as vice chancellor of the University of Alabama System.

“You wanted change in Washington, and we’re going to bring it to you,” Byrne told supporters at Moe’s Original BBQ in Mobile.

Byrne promised to be a “conservative reformer” in the nation’s capital.



“Not fight and not name call, but to get real results,” he said. “Fight hard against the Washington establishment holding our nation back. We are a great country but we are not acting like a great country in Washington.”

LeFlore, 48, is the grandson of John LeFlore and attended the high school named for the late civil rights icon.

He had no prior political experience except for a failed run for the state House of Representatives earlier this year in a race to replace Rep. Yvonne Kennedy, D-Mobile, after her death. LeFlore, who works as a Realtor, ran as an independent for that seat and claimed just 7 percent of the vote against Adline Clarke.

In the race for Congress, LeFlore easily dispatched Lula Albert-Kaigler in the Democratic primary but found it difficult to gain traction against Byrne’s better-funded campaign.

LeFlore said he would not concede until complete results from Mobile County were in, although he did eventually call Byrne to offer his congratulations.

“If I don’t emerge the victor, my advice to Byrne would be we need bipartisanship in Washington,” he said. “We have got to work with our president and certainly we’ve got to do what’s right for the people (here).”

The timing of the election will spare Byrne from having to cast a difficult vote early in his congressional career on the budget. The House and Senate both have approved a two-year compromise deal that amounts to a temporary truce between the parties on the taxes and spending. Byrne had declined to take a position on the proposal, citing the need to study the details.

But Byrne will find a full plate when he does take office. The deal to ease some of the automatic budget cuts known as sequestration notwithstanding, Congress will have long-term issues of deficits and entitlement spending to grapple with. Issues related to President Barack Obama’s heath care law might also come up. Byrne is on record against what is popularly known as Obamacare.

Byrne also will go to work on local issues he has promised to champion, including securing funding for a long-debated Interstate 10 bridge over Mobile Bay, deepening Mobile’s shipping channel and protecting Austal USA’s military contracts.

Byrne, a lawyer by training, has been in politics since the 1990s when he first won election to the state Board of Education as a Democrat. He later switched parties and served as a Republican in the state Senate, representing a district on the Eastern Shore.

Then-Gov. Bob Riley tapped him in 2007 to take over a scandal-ridden two-year college system. He touted his record there during his 2010 campaign for governor and entered the race as the front-runner. He finished first in the Republican primary but found himself the target of an all-out effort by the state teachers union – with whom he had tangled as two-year college chancellor – to defeat him.

The beneficiary was Robert Bentley, who won the race and went on to win the election.

The defeat left Byrne out of public service for the first time since 1994. On the campaign trail this year, he attempted to douse speculation that he would use a congressional seat as a launching pad for another run for governor, saying this would be his last office.

Staff reporters John Sharp and Michael Finch II contributed to this report.