Most Popular

1 The Media Must Decide Whether to Follow Donald Trump Down the Sewer

2 The Democratic Platform Committee Now Has a Progressive Majority. Thanks, Bernie Sanders.

3 Clinton Needs Sanders Supporters to Win, But Sanders Needs Clinton Supporters to Change the System

4 Anthony Weiner Wasn’t the Only One Who Couldn’t Stop Exposing Himself

5 This Will Be a Historic (and Terrifying) Election for Gun Control

On this closely divided Court, outcomes are determined not by the most extreme but by the most centrist justice. Convention dictates that we call it the Roberts Court, but in truth this is the Kennedy Court. And Kennedy has voted with the liberals on issues of speech, sexuality, the death penalty, and the rights of enemy combatants, while siding with the conservatives on issues of racial discrimination, federal power, and access to courts. The Court’s results are mixed not because of Roberts’s leadership, but because of Kennedy’s more balanced commitments.

There are at least three areas, however, in which the Roberts Court has been unrelentingly conservative. It is deeply suspicious of race-conscious efforts to ameliorate racial inequality, whether in voting or education, and it seems so committed to the ideal of color-blindness that it has frustrated efforts to achieve integration and racial diversity. Indeed, there is a risk that the Court will effectively end the practice of affirmative action in the coming term—even as race and class disparities persist and, in some settings, deepen.

Second, in Citizens United and other decisions, the Court has erected First Amendment roadblocks to campaign-finance reform. It has ruled that the only legitimate rationale for regulating campaign spending is to avoid the reality and appearance of bribery, and has struck down laws aimed at the broader corruption that stems from the outsize influence of the wealthy, even without bribes. As a result, big money has been let loose in our electoral system as never before.

Third, the Roberts Court has been consistently skeptical of the need for judicial redress for victims of state or corporate wrongs. It has imposed strict “pleading” requirements that help corporate defendants get lawsuits dismissed before having to turn over potentially damning evidence to employees or customers, and it has barred classwide remedies even when they are the only meaningful way to hold businesses accountable. In criminal cases, it has eviscerated the “exclusionary rule,” the principal means of enforcing Fourth Amendment privacy rights. Without exclusion as a remedy, many victims of illegal police searches have no incentive to sue. And a police force that cannot be held accountable for its wrongs can quickly become abusive—as a slew of videos in recent months have vividly demonstrated. Related Articles Is the Death Penalty Unconstitutional? George H. Kendall The Case Against the Roberts Court Nan Aron and Kyle C. Barry

The good news is that none of this is set in stone. Many of the conservative rulings that have closed the courthouse door to victims of illegal government or corporate conduct were closely divided and might be reconsidered if the people demand it—especially if the Court’s personnel changes. The same is true with respect to affirmative action, campaign finance, and the exclusionary rule. Whoever wins the next election is likely to shape the Court for decades to come. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg is 82, Kennedy and Antonin Scalia are 79, and Stephen Breyer is 77. And because the Court is so closely divided, a single appointment could have dramatic consequences. If a Republican gets to appoint Ginsburg’s or Breyer’s successor, Kennedy would no longer be a swing vote, and the Court would likely become consistently conservative. By the same token, if a Democrat replaces Scalia or Kennedy, the Court would have a solid liberal majority for the first time in about a half-century. More so than in any election in my memory, the fate of the Court, of constitutional law, and of justice itself is at stake in the coming election.