DALLAS, March 2, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Viverae®, a leader in total population health, today announced it has formed a strategic alliance with Concentra, a U.S.-based national healthcare company, to offer comprehensive onsite health and wellness solutions to improve access to quality healthcare services, and advance total population health management best practices for employers.

Through this new partnership, clients will benefit from a fresh approach to combating growing healthcare costs through a comprehensive health management system that blends Viverae's industry-leading wellness programs with Concentra's best-in-class occupational and urgent care services. Together, this new relationship will yield a number of additional services designed to help clients strengthen their employee health management strategy, improve employee engagement, identify and manage chronic health conditions, and ultimately bend the curve in healthcare spending.

"Our companies share core principles that include strategic, cost-effective health approaches and high-value medical care, along with proven abilities to impact large populations," said Jim Trimarco, chief sales officer at Viverae. "By focusing on the participant experience, we will improve individual outcomes using successful care plans that appeal to the entire population and drive continuous program engagement."

"Working with companies across the country, Concentra has helped leading employers make a significant difference in the health of their workforce," said Keith Newton, president and chief executive officer at Concentra. Through this alliance, we have the opportunity to offer more comprehensive, fully-integrated health programs to help companies to take an active role in their employees' health, and furthering the growth of business operations in the U.S."

Viverae's integrated disease and health management solutions target and engage employees in a relevant, logic-based format to improve their daily health habits. As employees require occupational, urgent, or rehabilitative care, Concentra will deliver quality and trusted medical care, maximizing an organization's investment with on-site clinic use. With a seamless integration, both companies will utilize the strengths of each other's platforms to enhance the healthcare experience and deliver integrated, clinically-focused programs, ultimately resulting in a large population impact through measured outcomes.

The cornerstone of Concentra's service offering is the ability to deliver healthcare services at an employer workplace, through community-based medical centers, or a combination of services. By teaming up with Viverae, clients can realize a more complete healthcare offering that includes a vital wellness and disease management component.

Both Viverae and Concentra believe that the single greatest impact on the health crisis can be made through expertly executed workplace health and wellness programs. With nearly 50 years of combined experience in health management, the partnership will strengthen their already expansive national footprint. Concentra's 500+ clinics operate in more than 39 states and correspond with Viverae's national screening locations.

About Viverae

Dallas-based Viverae is a total population health management provider and an industry thought leader. Our comprehensive solutions help employers build healthy cultures and manage healthcare costs. Our configurable programs manage engagement and incentives with our proprietary application, MyViverae®. This secure, simple yet powerful app integrates third-party claims and member health data to personalize wellness programs and create an engaging experience.

Viverae's health management programs are compliant with Affordable Care Act requirements and applicable law, and National Committee for Quality Assurance and national health advocacy group standards.

About Concentra

Concentra, a division of Select Medical, is a leading health care company focused on improving the health of America's workforce, one patient at a time. Through its affiliated clinicians, the company provides occupational medicine, urgent care, physical therapy, and wellness services from more than 300 medical centers in 40 states. In addition to these medical center locations, Concentra serves employers by providing a broad range of health advisory services and operating more than 170 onsite medical facilities. www.Concentra.com

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150901/262843LOGO

SOURCE Viverae