Soldier has grown proud to be a veteran in the years since his 1968 return

Click through this slideshow of each video we've done to represent our Vietnam veterans in this series.

Lewis Finch rummages through yellowed, faded photos of his time in Vietnam in the late 1960s. His favorite photos are those of his young 20-year-old self holding a little girl and grinning at her.

Her smile is also wide because he has just given her a piece of candy. Another photo shows the crumbled shack she lives in with her family.

"She was so cute. I loved kids," Finch said.

Finch remembers sitting in a cab on his way home after he finished his one-year commitment in-country in 1968 and someone asked him, "How many women and children did you kill?"

He was surprised that they would ask such a thing. Finch wanted to say something like, "Well, I didn't kill the guys because they were carrying guns. They would shoot back. So I went after the kids."

Welcoming them home Thank you: Community members are invited to thank Vietnam veterans for their service at 599-1218. Leave a voice message, which will be used in a story. Use this call button to have the service call you so you can leave your thank you message. Share your story: Vietnam veterans who have stories to share, with a focus on Vietnam homecomings, can call 669-5050 ext. 530.

He had expected a glad hand and a welcome home.

"It was so dumb. There were times where I just shook my head," he said.

Finch married his pregnant girlfriend in 1966 and was drafted into the Army soon after.

"If you had a heartbeat, they drafted you," he said. He was a classification 1-A, which meant his number was up quickly.

He said it was hard to find jobs because employers knew he would be drafted. So he worked at a junkyard and got free gas and car parts.

Once he was drafted, he enlisted for an additional year because it was more likely the Army would pay for his choice of college.

"So many people were so mean, nasty at us when we came home. They didn't realize my wife organized a church drive and sent 20 boxes of clothes over for the kids. But that stuff never got in the paper.

Advertisement

"What got in the news was how many we killed today and how many of our own we lost," he said.

He went to a dinner with his wife's family after returning from Vietnam and someone asked him what Vietnam was like.

Before he could respond, his father-in-law cut in with a story about how he himself had flunked his physical the first time during the Korean War. He worked hard and passed it the next time.

Finch asked him if he had been to Korea, and the man said, "No, no I didn't get drafted."

Finch was exasperated that he hadn't been allowed to tell his own story.

"No wonder he didn't respect me," Finch said. "It was weird, it was a strange time." He stopped talking about the war to avoid controversy.

He and his wife divorced in 1973. They tried to make it work but they were young and hadn't spent much time together.

Now, he's proud to be a veteran. "It's OK now," he said. He loves being part of the local veterans clubs and Elks Lodge.

He said that it's funny that he can find Vietnam veterans anywhere in the country but he never finds anyone who was a protester during that war.

He went to see the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Wall in Washington, D.C., a few years ago.

"It was very emotional, all those pictures and flowers. I just stood on the hill and didn't want to go down there. I finally forced myself to," he said.

From everyone at the Reporter-Herald to veterans who have served: Thank you for your service and welcome home.

Note from the Editor: This is the fourth in a series of weekly articles on Vietnam veterans. Veterans Day is Nov. 11 and the theme this year is a welcome home to Vietnam vets. Look for feature stories on Vietnam veterans every Monday through Nov. 11. Community members are invited to thank Vietnam veterans for their service at 599-1218.

Jessica Benes can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 530, or jbenes@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @JessicaBenes. Read her blog at jessicabenes.com.