The new mandatory vaccination laws for kids attending childcare are now in place in NSW. Pictured are (L-R) Ava Shaw(4) and Matilda Lamaro(3) at Kidz on Regent Child Care Centre in Regents Park.

PARENTS who refuse to vaccinate their children must be stripped of childcare payments unless their care is quarantined to the family home.

The Productivity Commission’s report into childcare has adopted a tough line on vaccination on the basis that all ­parents must play a collective role in protecting children from preventable diseases.

Mirroring The Sunday Telegraph’s successful No Jab, No Play campaign that has forced all governments to act, the report warns access to childcare rebates “must be conditional on the child being fully immunised, ­unless care ­occurs in the child’s home”.

The message is stronger than current arrangements that offer a range of exemptions for vaccine refusers who argue they are conscientious objectors.

In NSW, childcare centres can ban children who are not vaccinated and other states are considering similar reforms. Parents are required to vaccinate children as a condition of the childcare benefit but can seek ­exemptions as conscientious objectors or “vaccine refusers” if a GP signs a form to show the parents are aware of the risks.

Social Services Minister Scott Morrison said he was happy to consider any calls to toughen current protections.

“The commission makes some very important suggestions in this area. I am open to everything in the report. I am not ruling anything in or out”

“The commission makes some very important suggestions in this area. I am open to everything in the report. I am not ruling anything in or out,” Mr Morrison said. “There have been positive outcomes from those types of linkages. There’s nothing to suggest that what has been done in the past wouldn’t be continued.”

Labor leader Bill Shorten went further, backing the commission’s call for action as a commonsense measure.

“Kids deserve to grow up safe and healthy. I’m not comfortable with the idea of subsidising people who put kids’ health at risk,” he said.

“Childcare support should go to people who are doing the right thing by their child and the children they play with. Families who do the right thing by immunising their child shouldn’t have to worry about whether their child is going to pick up a preventable illness at their childcare centre.

“This shouldn’t be a political issue, it’s common sense.”

Mr Morrison has called for a bipartisan approach on childcare, encouraging Labor to sit down with the government to reach agreement in the Senate and help Australian families with rising care costs.

Mr Shorten said the four conditions that would guide Labor on childcare were improving affordability, accessibility, quality and participation.

“If there’s a good idea we’ll sign up to it, but we’ll fight any unfair cuts to childcare support,’’ Mr Shorten said.

“The Liberals have made plenty of mistakes when it comes to childcare, but if they are finally serious about doing something positive on this, then we’re prepared to work with them. The first thing that Tony Abbott can do is reverse his ­billion-dollar cut to childcare in the last Budget and the $6000 families around Australia were slugged — that’s the equivalent of three months’ worth of childcare.”