Supporters of Republican presidential hopeful Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) (from left) Gregory Tapis of Davenport, Bianca Richards of Ankeny, and Patrick Finnegan of Des Moines cheer as the candidate speaks Saturday, June 27, 2015, in the Sheslow Auditorium at Drake University in Des Moines. (Photo: Scott Morgan/Special to the Register)

The story goes that, as delegates were leaving the 1787 Constitutional Convention, a woman asked Benjamin Franklin what kind of government its members had designed. Franklin is reported to have said, “A republic, if you can keep it.”

And so they had. The Constitution did not create a system where one ruler can govern by fiat. Nor did it create a pure democracy, where the masses decide everything. Instead, we got a republic designed to ensure the passions of the people at any given time do not override either good policy or minority rights. We got a government designed to work slowly and incrementally, responsive to the results of elections, but not so responsive as to be whipsawed any time “the people” changed their minds.

And yet, voters from Council Bluffs to Davenport, and everywhere in between, ask with passion: "Why didn't we get what we voted for?" We elected [insert name of preferred party] to control the [presidency/Congress] and that leadership did nothing. Instead of [repealing/expanding] [insert least favorite policy that was not repealed/most favorite policy that wasn’t expanded] we got nothing. Just a bunch of out of touch Washington politicians who refuse to do what we want.

The complaint comes from both sides. From the Democratic left comes frustration that Obama didn’t do enough “hopey-changey things” (as Sarah Palin called his promises) failing to bring a new era of progressive politics. For many in the GOP, the betrayal by McConnell/Boehner/and now Ryan is clear. Despite overwhelming the Democrats in 2010 and 2014, Obamacare has not been repealed. And most recently the GOP-led Congress even went so far as to compromise with Obama on a new budget bill. That’s not the change they voted for either.

Candidate promises like the ones today driving voter despair are as old as elections. In some systems winners can carry out their plans with little interference. But in ours? Not so much. Despite candidate rhetoric and voter desire, any single election is not likely to suddenly turn the country in a new direction. Why? Because we have a system of separate branches of government sharing powers. Neither a GOP-controlled Congress nor a Democratic president (or vice versa) can do whatever they want. Our system is designed to require compromise and cooperation.

But as I listen to voters at campaign rallies around Iowa, it is clear many do not understand this, or if they somehow do, they reject it. Instead, large numbers are buying into the idea that simply electing the right person will immediately change everything. All it takes is the will to get it done on Day 1. So both GOP and Democratic candidates continue to promise accordingly.

Attending separate Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz events recently, I was struck by each one’s laundry list of things he will do on the first day. The crowds loved the recitation of this litany, believing in the power of the presidency if only it is wielded by the right person. Of course, for sheer chutzpah about what he will do by the force of his own will, we only need to turn to Donald Trump. It will be special, the best, the greatest, the most superlative doings that have ever been done. And he will do them himself.

Not to leave off the Democrats. Asked at a recent Iowa town hall what he’d do on his first day, Bernie Sanders told the crowd he would “end the disappearance of the middle class.” On his first day. That will be quite a feat. And apparently the feat is to be carried out through a political revolution that will just happen, as per a Sanders’ debate response in November.

In a polarized hyper-partisan environment there is nothing to be gained by saying, as Joe Biden often did in 2008: I will get things done in D.C. by negotiating, compromising, and making the best possible deal. That’s a losing message. Instead, candidates promise more and more dramatic change, giving false hope to the voters who follow them. I’m not talking about policy promises as much as the underlying promise that everything will simply change virtually immediately.

Buy Photo A crowd gathers around Vermont U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders after his speech at Sheslow Auditorium at Drake University Friday night. (Photo: Danielle Ferguson/ The Register)

Presidents do have power. Some of that power is formal: One example is the executive orders GOP candidates claim to despise, but would surely use in office. But most of the power of the presidency is constrained by the two other co-equal branches of government, and by the simple realities of implementing change in any large organization. Long ago Richard Neustadt argued for a more realistic power of the president: to persuade. Samuel Kernell thinks a president can “go public” by making his or her case to the people. But neither of these powers sounds particularly sexy on the campaign trail, and neither will satisfy those looking for a monarch (or a dictator) rather than a president.

What I hear at events is the desire of many voters on both sides for a system where the president can break through gridlock all on his own, like a leader who can issue orders that must be followed. But, in our republic, if we can keep it, these voters will be perpetually doomed to disappointment if they think electing a president will suddenly change everything. It simply won’t.

David Redlawsk is a fellow at the Harkin Institute at Drake University and a professor of political science at Rutgers University. Contact: redlawsk@rutgers.edu

David Redlawsk (Photo: Special to the Register)

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1P543Bi