Buy Photo June Nicholaus of Manchester has been reunited with her dog Annie after she went missing in November of 2012. Manchester, NJ Wednesday, February 18, 2015 Doug Hood/Staff Photographer @dhoodhood (Photo: Gannett)Buy Photo

No one really knows what the shy, coal-eyed Yorkipoo endured during the past two years of her life.

Annie — a roughly 7-year-old Yorkshire terrier-poodle mix — managed to survive on her own since she went missing in the Whiting section of the township in November 2012.

Two years and three months after her disappearance, Annie was reunited last week with her owner June Nicolaus, 76, of Whiting.

"I never thought I'd see her again," Nicolaus recalled Wednesday as she cradled Annie in her lap. "After months and months, I just gave up."

Annie's disappearance is not unique: About 15 percent of dog and cat owners lost a pet in the previous five years, according to a survey by the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. But few animals are found years after they disappear.

The year Annie disappeared, Nicolaus had left the dog with her sister-in-law in Whiting so she could travel to Texas and visit her daughter. Annie — who is frightened by strangers — bolted from the woman's house when a relative opened the door, Nicolaus said.

Watch: Keeping your dog safe in winter

Between then and June 2014, no one knows what Annie was doing or where the dog was staying. But last summer, a Crestwood Village resident discovered Annie living in the woods near the Whiting retirement community and began feeding the animal, according to Manchester Township Police, who described Annie's story on the department's Facebook page.

On Feb. 10, the Crestwood Village resident contacted Manchester Township Animal Control, and Animal Control Officer Margaret Dellapietro lured Annie into a humane trap using a partially consumed breakfast sandwich, according to Manchester Police. Dellapietro said she could not immediately comment Wednesday without approval from her supervisor.

Though Annie's collar and identification had disappeared during her two-year absence, Dellapietro was able identify the dog through an implanted microchip by Annie's hip, according to police.

"I feel everybody that has a furry animal should have a chip put in," Nicolaus said. "It works."

Annie returned to Nicolaus matted and dirty, with weeds tangled in her curly fur. The dog was infected with Lyme disease, and has a new scar on her back that might be a healed bite or burn from hiding under a car, Nicolaus said.

Photo gallery: Westminster Kennel Club 2015 Dog Show

"She was just awful looking... I did not recognize her immediately," Nicolaus recalled of her first glimpse of Annie in more than two years. "(Then) I saw her eyes and said 'That's Annie.' "

The dog's time in the wild was not marked with complete hardship. Annie, who weight 10 pounds in 2012, gained 4 pounds during her absence, Nicolaus said.

Annie "had to be in somebody's care because she never would have survived two winters," said her owner.

Now that the dog is home, she remembers where her crate and food dishes are. She follows Nicolaus from room to room in the Whiting house, climbing onto the woman's lap or nestling behind her back in the dining room, just like she did before her time in the woods.

"I take a step. She takes a step," said Nicolaus. "She will not leave me."

Read more: Is your dog waste bag really biodegradable?

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1EpNfRR