Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton unify the Democratic Party and four other reasons to be glad that you watched the Democratic debate.

1). Democrats Come Together To Discuss The Real Issues

Bernie Sanders was asked about the data breach. He apologized to Hillary Clinton and his supporters.

Sanders said that there were two previous data breaches with the vendor, and his staff did the right thing. Sanders said the DNC vendor screwed up and his staff did the wrong thing and looked at that information. Sanders followed up by blasting the DNC for shutting off their data, and said that he looks forward to working with Sec. Clinton on an independent investigation.

Sanders apologized to Hillary Clinton and his supporters. He said that this is not the kind of campaign that he is running. Sanders also promised that anyone else who is involved will be fired. Clinton said that the American people aren’t interested in the data breach and the want the candidates to discuss the issues that matter.

The segment ended with Democratic candidates coming together and agreeing to discuss the issues.

2). Sanders And Clinton Both Call Out O’Malley For Lying About Their Records on Guns

O’Malley accused Clinton and Sanders of decades of flip-flopping on guns and the two leading Democratic candidates told O’Malley to calm down and tell the truth. Interestingly, both the Clinton and Sanders campaigns went after each other for previous votes on guns. The Clinton campaign pointed to a 1993 House vote when then Rep. Sanders voted to create the “Charleston Loophole” that allows anyone to buy a gun if their background check isn’t completed in three days. The Sanders campaign pointed to a quote from the 2008 campaign where Clinton rejected blanket federal gun laws, “What I favor is what works in New York. You know, we have a set of rules in New York City and we have a totally different set of rules in the rest of the state. What might work in New York City is certainly not going to work in Montana. So, for the federal government to be having any kind of, you know, blanket rules that they’re going to try to impose, I think doesn’t make sense.”



3). Democrats Talked About The Issues That Terrify The Republicans

The Democratic candidates demonstrated why they are in position to win in 2016 when the debate moved to the economy and the middle class. Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton got to engage in what Clinton called, “the kind of debate we need to take to Republicans in the fall.” Sanders shined while discussing the true state of the middle class and the struggle of American working people to survive. Clinton struck a more moderate tone, but also talked about raising wages, creating jobs, and growing the economy.

Sanders pointed out that corporations won’t like him as a president, and Wall Street will like him even less.



4). ABC Asks A Loaded Biased Question About Obamacare

Martha Radditz claimed that Obamacare is broken because premiums have gone up 67% in the last five years. The healthcare marketplace didn’t open for enrollment until October 2013. Raddatz’s question used data from before Obamacare was fully implemented. Her question was built on the biased mainstream media notion that Obamacare is “broken.” Even during a Democratic debate, the corporate media can’t resist pushing bogus Republican talking points.

5). Democrats Bluntly Talk About The Systemic Racism In America

The candidate were asked how to bridge the divide between civilians and law enforcement, and Hillary Clinton talked about the systemic racism in our society and the immediate problems in the criminal justice system. Clinton called for criminal justice reform. O’Malley talked about his own record and how he reduced crime and incarceration rates as governor of Maryland. `

Sanders said we have more people in jail than any other country in the world and talk about the need to end institutional racism. Sanders said that police officers shouldn’t be shooting unarmed people predominately African-Americans. Sanders talked about the need to make police departments look like the communities they serve in terms of diversity.

Racism and criminal justice reform are two topics that have never been discussed in a Republican debate, as Democrats demonstrated that they are the only party that is interested in dealing with the real problems facing the American people.