Even today, outsiders’ view of Dallas and the state is bound up in distorted Hollywood stereotypes of cowboys, the Wild West and misogynistic oil tycoons.

Those of us who live here know better, but many of those moving here don’t. And more than 1,000 people a day decide to come to Texas, many because of corporate relocations. Companies based outside Texas certainly understand the economic benefits of moving to the state, given its low taxes, abundant natural resources and cheap labor. And that’s why they come.

But deciding to relocate a company to Texas is just the first step in what can be a daunting transition for company executives, their employees and families. Ed Curtis, a former banking executive who experienced a bit of cultural shock when he moved from New York to Dallas in 1993, believes he has found a way to smooth this transition.

In January 2013, he stepped away from his banking career and started a company called YTexas with the purpose of helping incoming CEOs of new companies, their employees and families feel welcome in Texas, become a part of their communities and most of all succeed here.

“I can tell you most people outside of the state do not think Dallas or Texas is modern, and that is surprising to me,” said Curtis, 46. “We are trying to let people know that Dallas is innovative and as modern a city as anywhere else.”

Currently YTexas has a network of about 50 CEOs based in Dallas, Fort Worth, Austin, San Antonio and Houston. Unlike the Chambers of Commerce, this network is not trying to recruit companies to Texas. Instead, it provides a conduit to connect newly relocated companies to community leaders and other executives.

Also, YTexas is a statewide organization, whereas most chambers focus only on their communities, Curtis said. CEOs must be invited to join the network, and then they pay an annual fee of $5,000. They don’t charge the companies they help.

“Transitioning a large group of people to a new city is difficult,” Curtis said. “They are uprooting their lives, so our CEOs are trying to lend a helping hand.”

They help with issues about housing, schools, what sports are available or whether a spouse can get a job.

Networking events

When leaders of incoming companies better understand the cities they are moving to, they have a much better chance of bringing their key people along with them. Typically, when a company relocates, employees are given an option as to whether they move or not, so it’s important that most of the key people agree to make the change, he said, or otherwise the company will lose a lot of talent.

Ralph Hawkins, who is chairman of HKS Architects Inc. in Dallas and a part of YTexas, said connecting with this network allows incoming company executives to have access to corporate executives from every key industry in Texas.

“Just think about moving into Texas and have this connection and network of major CEOs throughout the state. That is a pretty powerful thing to create,” Hawkins said.

CEOs from such industries as energy, health care, aerospace, hospitality and aviation will make themselves available to incoming company leaders to answer questions or help in any way they can. Also, YTexas hosts quarterly networking events for incoming executives and sponsors forums on various topics.

For example, Joel Allison, chief executive of Baylor Scott & White Health, has given presentations on how companies new to Texas can navigate the Affordable Care Act. This is critical to companies because health insurance is one of their biggest expenses, and incoming CEOs can then go back to their employees armed with solid information on this topic.

2-way street

And this is a two-way street. New companies can invite YTexas executives to their headquarters to learn about them. For example, TopGolf, which moved its headquarters from Chicago to Dallas in 2012, invited YTexas CEOs to one of its facilities for a presentation and to hit golf balls. TopGolf uses golf balls that have microchips to track accuracy and distance.

“All the CEOs got to play at TopGolf, and it was a lot of fun,” Hawkins said. “So they all found out about TopGolf, whereas before YTexas it might have taken them a year or so to find out about it.”

Since its inception, YTexas has reached out to more than a dozen new companies, but Curtis expects that pace to pick up dramatically in the coming months. He wants to increase the number of participating CEOs to about 200 by the end of next year.

“If you are moving your company to Texas, we want you to be part of the entire community,” Curtis said. “And that means having an understanding of the specific issues we face.”