BEGIN TRANSCRIPT

RUSH: To the phones. Marianne, Williamsburg, Virginia, great to have you on the program. Hi.

CALLER: Hi, Rush. Listen, I'm gonna get right to the point. Mr. Snerdley made that clear. I gotta tell you -- oops, I'm on the expressway. I just pulled over. I'm so excited. Here's the deal. You said you were gonna summarize in maybe a paragraph why this Trump phenomenon is happening. And I have the answer, in 13 words, Rush. Here it is. The Trumpsters believe that he cares more about the welfare of the United States than himself.

RUSH: Now, that's an interesting theory. And if that's what you think, it makes you right, you see. If that's how you interpret Mr. Trump, then you're right. He certainly wouldn't disagree with you on it. What I meant was, I meant a six-month review of the things that I have said that explain the inexplicable to people, the connection Trump has, why does it exist with people, what is it that is different about Trump's campaign than others and so forth.

I've spent six months analyzing this for people. And I thought maybe I could summarize it in a paragraph or two. Maybe I'll give that a shot at some point.

BREAK TRANSCRIPT

RUSH: Sean in Philadelphia, you're next. Great to have you on the program. Hi.

CALLER: Hey, Rush. It's great to talk to you. I've been listening to you since '89.

RUSH: I'm glad you made it through, Sean. Thanks so much.

CALLER: Thanks. I just wanted to make a point, at least my perspective on the support of Trump. I reluctantly support him but I do straight... I mean, I do support him, and it's not about conservatism. It's not, as some people say -- and I've heard it on your show, too, from a lot of callers calling in. It's not really about, "Well, you know, people are being fooled that he's not really conservative." It's not. I know he's not a conservative. The fact is, to put it simply, Trump will fight. Not only will he fight, he'll fight dirty, and the thing is we gotta get that. We have to have someone that's gonna fight in the mud, 'cause that's where our opponents are. That's where our opponents have been.

RUSH: Fight who?

CALLER: The Democrats. I mean, look at what happened after 9/11. Remember it was like a month or two after that, and then Kennedy came out and he started slamming George Bush. You know, all of his supporters were waiting for him to stand up and defend himself, and he didn't. For eight years, he just let the Democrats plaster him. And then what happens? Obama gets elected, and he rams Obamacare down our throats. What were Reid and Pelosi doing? They were locking people out of committee meetings, remember that?

What was our response? Did we fight back? No. We didn't fight back. So then what did we do? We have a landslide victory. We give them the House. Do they do it? Do they repeal Obamacare? No. They do nothing. They say, "Well, we can't do anything 'cause we don't have the Senate." Okay, we give you the Senate. What do they do? "Oh, you know, we're not gonna do anything 'cause we're gonna take our only weapon off the table before we do battle with these people."

We're sick and tired of fighting with people who won't fight, and when it comes to down to Cruz, you know, my instincts with Cruz is that, yeah, he's a nice guy. And don't get me wrong, if he magically wins this nomination, of course I'll support him. But the problem is, I suspect he won't fight. Three days ago there was an article in Breitbart where he's being interviewed and he said, "You know, if I'm elected, "he said something to that effect of, "I'm not gonna get personal. This is gonna be about issues."

Okay, great. You just handed them the election, 'cause you know what they're gonna do? They're gonna make it personal against you and you're gonna be like the new George Bush just sitting up there like Jeb. You won't fight. You'll just sit there and take it and we're gonna lose again. And the thing is, Trump, you know what? I disagree with probably 80% of the stuff that he believes in, or he purports to. But the thing is, I think we're facing an existential crisis. It comes down to immigration, illegal immigration --

RUSH: Okay.

CALLER: -- and Obamacare.

RUSH: Stop. You don't need to say any more. You just said everything in about five words. "I don't agree with 80% of what I think Trump stands for, but I'm voting for him." That is why the Republican establishment is about ready to commit harakiri. They can't figure this out.