Shorten expected to win Labor leadership Anthony Albanese is the people's choice, but it appears Bill Shorten will win caucus support for ALP leader.

LABOR'S Anthony Albanese will offer Tony Abbott a deal to set the carbon tax rate to "zero" immediately if he wins the ALP leadership ballot today - but only if the Coalition agrees to introduce an emissions trading scheme.

The surprise tactic is designed to defuse accusations Labor is preparing to play carbon tax kamikaze and defy the new government's mandate to abolish the tax.

Caucus votes on leader in Labor ballot

But it is likely to be rejected by the Prime Minister, ensuring a stalemate on carbon tax relief for families extends until the new Senate takes its place after July 1, 2014.

Labor will announce the result of the leadership ballot between Mr Albanese and Bill Shorten today, but with both contenders vowing to block the abolition of the carbon tax, a showdown over the Coalition's mandate is certain.

The Sunday Telegraph can reveal the Prime Minister is preparing to recall parliament on November 12 to introduce legislation to abolish the carbon tax.

He has pledged families will be $550 a year better off under his plan.

Anthony Albanese gets huge boost to Labor leadership hopes

The nine- week wait after the September 7 election result was designed to allow time for officials to finalise the complex legislation.

While Bill Shorten secured an estimated 62 per cent of federal MPs' votes during Thursday's secret ballot, Mr Albanese was on track to secure a similar margin among the party's 30,000 members who voted, leaving the result on a knife's edge.

"Win, lose or draw it's been a good process,'' Mr Shorten said yesterday.

But his supporters believed Mr Albanese was more likely to win, on the basis of early counting of ALP membership votes.

Labor prepares to unveil opposition leader after month-long campaign

Mr Abbott told The Sunday Telegraph that regardless of who won the Labor leadership ballot the ALP was on a collision course over the carbon tax.

"Mr Albanese and Mr Shorten both want to keep the carbon tax - that means they want Australian families to pay higher electricity prices for longer,'' Mr Abbott said. "It's as simple as that.

"It's the same old Labor, addicted to higher taxes that put up the cost of living for families and in denial about the election result."

Labor leadership battle a real rank and file revolution

Mr Albanese told Labor MPs in Thursday's ALP caucus meeting that Labor should offer the Abbott government a deal to reduce the carbon tax to "zero" immediately if the Coalition agreed to introduce an emissions trading scheme.

For the first time, Labor has opened up the leadership vote to ordinary members instead of just federal MPs, with about 30,000 ALP members casting their vote.

"We will do the final count tomorrow morning,'' ALP secretary George Wright said. "Clearly there is an appetite for this kind of participatory democracy."