AUSTIN — In the Texas Legislature, a successful session is like beauty — in the eye of the beholder.

For instance, shortly after the 84th Texas Legislature adjourned last Monday, House Speaker Joe Straus called it a success.

“I’m proud of the way we addressed core issues,” Straus, R-San Antonio, said in a statement.

“We improved education and addressed transportation,” he said. “We cut taxes. And we made our budget more transparent and our government more accountable.

“Members have had the chance to address the issues that are most important to them and their constituents, and I think they can return home proud of what they have achieved,” Straus added.

Other legislators, mostly in the Republican camp, felt the same way.

“It’s always a mixed bag,” said state Rep. John Smithee, R-Amarillo, dean of the Texas Panhandle/South Plains delegation. “In every session the Legislature never accomplishes everything that’s on its plate.”

Although overall the session deserves a good grade, some unfinished business includes a school funding bill, more state oversight of payday lenders and reforming the criminal justice system so 17-year-olds accused of a crime are tried as juveniles rather than as adults, he said.

“I would have liked to have done something with payday lending and I was disappointed that we were not able to do anything with the ability the Obamacare legislation gave Texas not to require employers to have to provide abortion coverage” to insured employees, Smithee said.

“We could very easily have done it but we didn’t. ... But we got the budget; it passed rather easily.”

The session was also a mixed bag for some Democrats.

“While I believe that this legislative session began and ended with a focus on the wrong priorities — tax breaks and guns instead of education and health care — we were able to stop some extremely bad proposals altogether, while working with the majority to improve other measures,” said state Sen. Jose Rodriguez, D-El Paso.

The “bad proposals” Rodriguez listed included the sanctuary cities bill, which would have outlawed local ordinances aimed at protecting unauthorized immigrants; a proposal to repeal a 14-year law that allows some undocumented students to get in-state tuition at public colleges and universities, and legislation that would have discriminated against gays, lesbians and transgender people.

For his part, Houston state Rep. Gene Wu said he was disappointed legislation that would have raised the age at which teenagers accused of a crime can be tried as adults — from 17 to 18 years old — did not pass.

Nonetheless, since the proposal came close to passing, he is hopeful similar legislation can pass in the 2017 session, Wu said.

“It’s what is best for our youth, counties and the state,” he said.

“And it’s the right thing to do.”

Other perennial proposals that failed again include a texting-while-driving ban, gradually outlawing red,light cameras, school vouchers, Las Vegas-type casino gambling, drug testing for some welfare applicants, overturning municipal plastic bag bans, and constitutional carry.

State Rep. Four Price said he was not surprised those bills failed to pass.

“There are always things that you like to see accomplished,” said Price, R-Amarillo. “But it is impossible to satisfy everybody in a 140-day session.

“But with respect to most pressing needs that we came into the session wanting to achieve, I think we accomplished that,” he said.

“With respect to tax relief and infrastructure demands that have now been dealt with to a large degree and the needs of the state have been met.”

The $209 billion budget the Legislature approved in the final days of the session included a $3.8 billion tax cut, mostly for business owners.

However, there was one issue most lawmakers seemed to agree on: They don’t expect Gov. Greg Abbott to call them back for a special session, unless the Texas Supreme Court rules in favor of the more than 600 school districts suing the state and the ruling requires the Legislature’s immediate attention.

The ruling is expected next year, more likely in late spring or in the summer, several months before the 85th Legislature convenes.

The lawsuit — filed 3½ years ago, followed by a state district judge siding with the plaintiffs in two separate trials — contends the Legislature is in violation of the Texas Constitution because it is not adequately funding the public school system.

“A special session on school finance is always a possibility every time we are sued,” Smithee said.

The current school funding lawsuit is the sixth since the mid-1980s.