Obamacare turns five. These business owners and employees are definitely not celebrating its birthday

Obamacare turns five today and while the Administration might be celebrating, many business owners and their employees — or former employees, as the case may be — definitely are not.

To mark five long years under the Affordable Care Act, we decided to take a look at five ways the law and its mandates have impacted real people.

1. Steve Womack used to own 16 IHOP restaurants in Indiana and employ more than 1,000 employees. But thanks to Obamacare and the mandate that he would need to provide insurance for all of his full-time employees, Womack had to sell off his businesses.

“Let me state this bluntly. This law will cost my company more money than we make,” Womack told Congress back in 2011.

And that’s exactly what happened. Faced with projections that it would cost him $7,000 to provide health care coverage for each full-time employee, the Daily Signal reported that Womack had a few options — cut costs, eliminate staff, reduce hours or get out altogether.

“We felt that environment was not the place to be for the next 10 to 20 years,” he told the Daily Signal.

2. After the Obamacare employer mandate kicked in, this Baptist daycare could not afford to offer low-cost childcare and still pay its 30 employees, leaving both its employees and its families with nowhere to go.

3. Small business owners tell a similar story over and over again. Their profits don’t cover the added costs brought on by Obamacare. Pizza franchisee closed his doors thanks to the law as well.

Watch the latest video at video.foxnews.com

4. The medical community was not spared. The Daily Caller reported in 2014 that four Georgia hospitals over the course of two years had to close due to severe financial difficulties caused by Obamacare’s payment cuts for emergency services.

The federal government has historically made payments to hospitals to cover the cost of uninsured patients seeking free medical care in emergency rooms because the law mandates that hospitals must care for all patients regardless of their ability to pay. But since the Obama administration believed that the Affordable Care Act meant that they had forced all states to implement the Medicaid expansion, Obamacare vastly cut hospital payments, the Associated Press reported.

When the Supreme Court ruled that states could reject the Medicaid expansion in 2012 and states started to take advantage of this, emergency care in hospitals suffered greatly.

5. It’s not just small businesses that are feeling the heat from Obamacare. The Affordable Care Act provision that requires large employers to offer health insurance to staff working more than 30 hours a week has Staples holding its employees to a very tight schedule.

Employees are facing the threat of job loss if they work more than 25 hours a week, Buzzfeed reported, and most are now working far fewer hours than before the provision kicked in this year.

Here’s wishing you a Not-so-Happy Birthday Obamacare…