ELKTON — The pool of candidates who filed in Maryland’s 1st Congressional District vying to unseat current Republican Rep. Andy Harris are an assortment of familiar faces and newcomers.

On the Republican side of the ticket, Harris leads a pack that also includes former Cecil County delegate Michael Smigiel Sr., past candidate Jonathan Goff Jr. and newcomer Sean Jackson.

Meanwhile on the Democratic side, former Salisbury mayor and current City Councilman Jim Ireton will face newcomer Joe Werner, a Harford County attorney.

Finally, Matt Beers, a Libertarian candidate from Cecil County, will join the two primary election victors in the general election fray in November.

The primary elections will be held on April 26.

Harris, who was first elected to Congress in 2010, said he’s not worried by the multitude of candidates he will face in a primary election this year.

“We’re seeing, nationwide, the public unrest toward their leadership, which convinces many to run for office,” he said last month. “These are people who just want to make a difference and want to get involved. I welcome people who get into the race and debate ideas. I’ve served the 1st District well and I hope to continue to receive the support of voters in the upcoming elections.”

Harris pointed to his office’s involvement in the fight for poultry on the Eastern Shore, getting involved with the U.S. Department of Agriculture and getting an assignment on the Agriculture Subcommittee. He also pointed to his involvement with the seafood industry and processing facilities, protecting them and ensuring they continue to have the necessary employees for their operation, as evidence that he’s committed to the district.

“We’re going throughout the district all the time and we’ve heard the frustration from the people,” he said.

Harris said he is currently meeting with congressional Republicans about their opposition to President Barack Obama’s goal to relocate Guantanamo Bay prisoners from Cuba to America.

“We’re not going to give the president money to move dangerous war criminals from Cuba to America,” he said. “Most of them were detained on the battlefield under wartime laws, so they were not Mirandized as we would expect here as Americans. As soon as they step foot on American soil and are put into American prisons as the president is requesting, they are subject to American civil law. These are dangerous war criminals and they should be treated as such.”

Smigiel, a former state delegate who was elected to represent Cecil, Kent, Caroline and Queen Anne’s counties from 2000 to 2014, put Harris in his sights early in the campaign, announcing his run in June, long before any other candidate.

“He’s got $600,000 from out-of-state interests including Exelon, the pharmaceutical industry and anesthetists,” Smigiel said. “If he stops running from having a debate, we can look at his voting record versus my record.”

Smigiel said he firmly believes in the Constitution and states’ rights, and will never shy away from answering a voter’s question.

“I have no problem with someone who votes the way they say they will, but the hypocrisy is what irks me,” he said. “I’ve never had a political question that wasn’t made clear by the Constitution.”

While Harris has campaigned against abortion, Smigiel said his vote for the 2014 omnibus spending bill actually expanded such rights to members of the Peace Corps, a group not previously covered for abortions.

Smigiel also criticized Harris for voting for the North American Energy Security and Infrastructure Act of 2015 in December, a bill that seeks to remove state approval for water quality certificates and replace them with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. That congressional bill, which still awaits a vote in the U.S. Senate, comes at a time when Exelon is having difficulty earning Maryland’s approval to relicense as operator of the Conowingo Dam.

“He voted with Exelon, one of his biggest campaign contributors, over the Maryland Department of the Environment on water quality standards,” he said. “That speaks about what Harris stands for.”

Jonathan Goff

Goff, a longtime landscaper, was Harris’ only opponent in the 2014 Republican primary for the same seat, but was defeated after winning only 22 percent of the vote. He said he has been inflamed by Harris’ resistance to defunding the Affordable Care Act, as well as what he perceives as an overflow of foreign workers taking American jobs.

“These congressmen, they can’t get their act together, they can’t talk to each other,” he said. “Absolutely, (Harris) is completely disconnected with the people.”

Goff also said he does not support the Iranian nuclear deal brokered by the Obama administration, and that he believes generally that America should be focusing on itself and rehabilitating its own economy and society before wading into the foreign affairs of the global community.

“America, and Americans, should come first, before we rebuild other countries,” he said.

Sean Jackson

Jackson, a retired state police barrack commander and U.S. Marine Corps sergeant, said he sees a lack of leadership in the 1st District, characterizing Harris as a good foot soldier for the Republican party line but not a leader.

“Andy has a pretty good voting record in terms of voting the party line but he could be doing more in handling his position,” he said Tuesday, noting the incumbent could have taken harder stances on the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs scandal, for example. “We need someone who will be more passionate.”

Jackson said he has been traveling the 1st District since announcing his campaign in October, visiting with many constituents.

“A lot of people want to get back to conservative values, far-right values, a polar opposite of the Obama administration,” he said, something he supports.

Jackson said he believes national security is the biggest national issue confronting the nation, and is concerned about Syrian refugees relocating here after seeing the horror stories coming out of Europe. He also would like to see Obama’s Affordable Care Act rolled back and replaced with “more of a free trade market in the health care industry so that the public have more options,” especially between states. He believes in Second Amendment rights, and believes the federal government can do more to foster firearm registration reciprocity between states.

“For the good, legal gun owners, I’m all for opening avenues of access,” he said.

Jim Ireton

Ireton, the former mayor of Salisbury, has been hitting the road since announcing his campaign at the end of January. He’s already visited Harford County three times and visited with the Cecil County Democratic Central Committee and Kilby Farm in Cecil County.

So far, Ireton’s said that he has found that residents from Worcester to Carroll counties are the same.

“What we see on TV is screaming between the far left and far right, but in our communities the public just wants Congress to get back to work,” he said.

Ireton is already positioning himself to be the antithesis of the incumbent, who he said should be challenged on his positions.

“Congressman Harris has waged a scorched earth campaign against the word ‘liberal,’” he said. “His position seems to be a longing for a past utopia that he wants to go back too. His attitude of everything seems to be ‘Just say no.’”

Ireton said his campaign stands on the goals of protecting Affordable Care Act, which today provides 60,000 people on the Eastern Shore with access to health care, and aiding family farms while achieving the environmental goals laid out for the Chesapeake Bay.

“There is technology out there that could solve nitrogen and phosphorus in the Bay, and we see farmers like the Kilbys stepping up to aid in that effort through ideas like anaerobic digestion,” he said. “We should stop the arguing back and forth and say, ‘What do I have to do in Congress and with the U.S. Department of Agriculture to move these techs into a broad-based solution?’”

Joe Werner

Werner, a Bel Air attorney, sees himself as the progressive candidate in the mold of Democratic presidential candidate U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders. Werner said he believes the electorate of Maryland’s 1st District is quite moderate, a contrast from the “very conservative” actions of Harris in Congress.

Income inequality is the biggest issue he wishes to focus on during his campaign. He would like to try to reverse the “troubling” redistribution of wealth pattern that has developed recently in the country. He said the working class should not be making the wealthy people of America wealthier.

Werner also said he supports some realistic gun control reforms, such as background checks, but also believes in the Second Amendment’s value. Marijuana also should be legalized to free up more money and time for police to pursue other criminals, he said.

“I feel I have more in common with the district, and I really have a better understanding of America,” Werner said. “I’m not someone who is just trying to do this for my own ego and enrichment. I feel Andy Harris is very much a conservative and he’s not really in step with the district.”

Matt Beers

The only third party candidate, Beers, a Libertarian, said if he is elected he will be open and willing to work with people from both sides of the aisle, free of the partisan problems that plague candidates from both major parties in Washington. Since Beers is running unchallenged within his party, he will not be included in the April primary elections, but is already guaranteed a spot on the final ballot in November.

Beers, 25, said his age should not be a discouraging factor for voters, but rather the opposite. He said an aging Congress is removed from the problems they create, whereas his generation of Americans will have to handle the fallout of current policies.

“One of the biggest reasons that I am running is to provide a voice for the generations of Americans that are going to have to deal with these issues,” he said. “The current congressman and people currently seeking this political office are unprepared and unmotivated to do so.”

An Elkton native who is pursuing a degree in secondary education at Cecil College, Beers joined the U.S. Navy in 2009 and served aboard the USS Hartford, attaining the rank of petty officer second class. With a military background, he said Harris’ inconsistent foreign policy positions have “negatively impacted the nation, and made us less safe.”

Beers also said he supports a strong immigration system, plus he strongly believes in the Second Amendment and disagrees with President Obama’s recent executive actions on gun control.