BUFFALO — The state Republican party has just nominated Wendy Long to become, in all likelihood, the first person in New York history to lose to both sitting U.S. senators.

In a year when the party's resources are focused on keeping control of the New York State Senate, and its energy on the existential questions raised by the presidential primary, finding a candidate to challenge U.S. Sen. Chuck Schumer was mostly an afterthought.

Long, a judicial activist and onetime Supreme Court clerk, was the only person to present herself as a prospective candidate in recent months. Her announcement was met with a resounding response of have a ball.

Long's selection today at the Republican convention here puts her on a path to become the most qualified candidate to be trounced by Schumer, four years after being trounced by U.S. Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand.

"Trounced" may seem like a strong word to employ so soon after Long has been selected by her peers. But it's the right one.

Gillibrand won 72.2 percent of the vote against Long in 2012 — a record margin for a statewide candidate. And Schumer appears even more powerful this year than Gillibrand did back then.

He is poised to become leader of Senate Democrats, which if his party re-takes a majority in that chamber would make him one of the most powerful leaders in Congress. He has $24.2 million in his campaign account, and counts as supporters prominent Republicans like Alphonse D'Amato, a lobbyist who 18 years ago served in the U.S. Senate (and lost, in the end, to Schumer).

By contrast, Long still owes $282,547 from her last run. No one from the regular roster of Republican political consultants in the state has signed on to her effort (some are still bitter that they're owed money) and she's turned for help to Jay Townsend, a strategist who is in fact best known for getting trounced by Schumer, in 2010.

In September, Schumer — perhaps weighed down by his agonizingly unspooled decision to oppose the pending treaty to restrict Iran's nuclear development — saw his favorability ratings slip to their lowest level in years. But those numbers were hardly damning: 54 percent of those surveyed by Quinnipiac approved of his job performance, and 56 percent said they were prepared to re-elect him. Democrats re-nominated him on Monday with nary a whisper of dissent.

Unlike the last two U.S. Senate races, where several Republicans vied for the nomination, Long was designated by the party by acclimation. If nobody tries to petition their way onto the ballot in coming weeks, there will be no primary in June.

“They won't even roll out the machines,” longtime counsel Jeff Buley said, pausing. “We do anticipate that scenario.”

So what's Long doing? People close to her, including Conservative Party chairman Mike Long — whose influential party is expected to cross-endorse Wendy Long on Saturday — say she's driven by a desire to provide an intellectual counterpoint to Schumer. She's known for her willingness to devote herself to a cause, even when it's not popular and a bit odd. She was forceful in stating her opposition to abortion during a 2012 debate against Gillibrand, and according to political operatives, once threw holy water on a campaign aide who was driving too frantically.

But Friday was Long's day, and members smiled and cheered in a hotel ballroom here as she unveiled her critique against Schumer.

He's a big phony, Long said, who has focused on meaningless issues like caffeinated peanut butter and airline legroom as people and jobs have left New York State. He has supported tax hikes and the Affordable Care Act, which Long said is hurting new Yorkers through higher health insurance premiums even as it has provided coverage to hundreds of thousands who were previously uninsured. He didn't do enough to stop the Iran deal, even though he voted against it. She said she would stand up for Second Amendment rights, scrap the Common Core and push for a system of school vouchers.

Long and her validators cast her as an outsider in the style of Trump, and Republicans willing to make an on-record claim that she has a path to victory said it would be as part of his wave of populist, anti-establishment support.

“It is time, my friends, that we the people, not the special interests, had a senator who represents real New York values,” Long said. “I'm here to speak for those who say the American Dream isn't working for them, because I know it isn't. I'm here to say it's not your fault: the ruling class … has failed you. Chuck Schumer is the face of the ruling class.”

But even in their public praise for her candidacy, Republicans here were closer to thanking Long for signing on to an unenviable task than predicting success.

Laura Ingraham, the syndicated radio host and a friend of Long's since they were students at Dartmouth, said, “It takes great courage and great internal character to stand against the machine, and stand against the establishment, to say, 'We're going back to basics.'”

“Is it going to be hard? It's going to be really hard. But this is a fight worth having, this is a cause worth getting behind,” said Rep. Chris Gibson, a Kinderhook Republican who is exploring a gubernatorial bid. “It's important to keep the faith.”