Topics: aol_on, Conservatives, Devin Nunes, government funding, Government shutdown, Harry Reid, House Freedom Caucus, House Republicans, John Boehner, Nancy Pelosi, Planned Parenthood, Republicans, News, Politics News

With the government skidding towards yet another shutdown due to the inability of the Republican congressional leadership to control its own members, some familiar fractures in the House GOP caucus are once again being pried open. The Hill notes that conservatives in the House are plotting yet another bound-to-fail coup against John Boehner over the Speaker’s unwillingness to hold government funding hostage until Planned Parenthood’s federal subsidies are nixed. The right-wing House Freedom Caucus has announced that it won’t back any bill that retains funding for Planned Parenthood, and if Boehner tries to move ahead with funding the government over their objections, then they’ll set in motion the conspiracy to boot him from the leadership.

Boehner’s allies don’t seem too concerned, but they’re nonetheless piqued at the House Freedom Caucus for stirring up this trouble and undermining Boehner’s authority. House Intelligence Committee chairman Devin Nunes talked to The Hill and offered a characteristically blunt assessment of the Republican insurgents:

And House Intelligence Committee Chairman Devin Nunes (R-Calif.), who is part of Boehner’s close-knit circle, attempted to turn the tables on members of the conservative Freedom Caucus, denouncing them as “right-wing Marxists” who have empowered House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) by undermining Boehner. “The right-wing Marxists have teamed up with Pelosi. They’re the ones who always team up with Pelosi. They are the Pelosi Republicans,” an infuriated Nunes said in an interview. “The Freedom Caucus is an arm of Pelosi.”

Nunes is known for his colorful and creative insults, and he has little tolerance for these shutdown antics. In 2013 he described the Republican lawmakers responsible for the Obamacare shutdown fight as “lemmings with suicide vests.” But aside from the self-contradictory “right-wing Marxists” jab, he’s largely correct about what the House Freedom Caucus is accomplishing with the Planned Parenthood crusade – they’re handing the Democratic opposition power that it wouldn’t otherwise enjoy.