Arrowhead's Tedy Orlando talks about the play of the defense in the Warhawks' 35-7 victory over Waukesha West.

By of the

Town of Merton — Trust Tedy Orlando. The victories in the Classic 8 don't come as easy as Arrowhead makes them appear at times

"There are no games that are guaranteed in this conference," the senior cornerback said. "Everyone is going to come out hard and being like Arrowhead and teams like Waukesha West there is always a target on your back, so every week you've got to bring it."

Orlando and the rest of his Warhawks teammates did just that Friday night.

Fueled by a dominant night from the offensive line, an impressive effort on defense, the sleight of hand by senior quarterback Johnny Duranso and the nifty footwork of senior Nick Bastien, Arrowhead made a showdown of the area's top two ranked teams a one-sided affair.

The Warhawks' 35-7 victory over West at home gave top-ranked Arrowhead (4-0, 2-0) victory No. 1 in a three-week stretch that will go a long way toward deciding its fate in the league. Up next will be Mukwonago on the road Friday and then back home for No. 3 Catholic Memorial in Week 6.

The Warhawks rolled up 421 yards against West and scored on four straight possessions during the final three quarters to blow open the game. Bastien, 5 foot 8 and 160 pounds, gained 166 yards and scored twice in 23 carries. Duranso added 68 rushing yards and a 6-yard touchdown run in the first quarter in 12 carries in addition to completing 7 of 13 passes for 121 yards and two touchdowns.

Those scores were bookends to halftime as Arrowhead turned a 7-7 game into a 21-7 advantage. Duranso hit senior Tyler Jones for a 15-yard play with 35 seconds in the first half and connected with senior Andy Miller on a 6-yard play with 6:49 left in the third to complete the first possession of the second half.

"I think that gave us more energy to come with that intensity in the second half," Duranso said of the touchdown drives. "That is what we set out to do. The game plan was to come out with more intensity and I think we accomplished that."

Those possessions boiled down to physical football and tempo. Arrowhead coach Greg Malling let his offensive line of seniors Ben Bredeson, Mike Olsen and Nels Anderson, junior Andy Biwer and sophomore DJ Dean call the first two plays of that final possession of the first half. They chose to run the ball. The first call got stuffed for no gain, but junior Spencer Papandrea broke the second one for a 7-yard gain.

The rest of that drive was marked by Duranso either handing to his backs or working the option. In fact it was his fake to a back up the middle that created enough space for him to hit Jones over the middle for the touchdown.

To start the second half, Arrowhead ran the ball 12 straight times to set up first and goal. On both drives Arrowhead pushed the tempo.

"We learned that against Hudson that we're better the faster we move," Malling said, referring to the team's near-loss two weeks ago. "We just learned that they smell blood and they go after it."

For West (3-1, 1-1) the game was a story of what could have been. The team opened the game by driving 75 yards to the Arrowhead 6 but came away with no points after quarterback Conor Blount was sacked by junior defensive back Noah Harvey and junior Jake Powell for a 15-yard loss. Then senior kicker Tyler Remmers missed a field-goal attempt from about 35 yards that hit off the cross bar.

There also was an ill-fated fake punt that went incomplete and gave Arrowhead a first down at its own 41 and led to the Warhawks' touchdown to end the half. In the third quarter, West had a failed conversion on fourth and 1 at the Arrowhead 21 down by 14 with about 4 minutes left in the third quarter.

"Against a good team you've got to score points when you get the opportunity," West coach Steve Rux said.

The good news for West is that last season they suffered a blowout loss to Muskego but came back to win a share of the league and reached the Division 2 state final.

Both Arrowhead and Waukesha West know there is a long way to go, especially when you play in what many consider the area's most rugged league.

"The season is a marathon, not a sprint," Rux said. "We lost this one, but we'll bounce back."