It's not about 'us versus them'

Longmont Police recruit Grant Jansen loads rounds into a magazine in between training sessions at the shooting range on Dec. 28. (Matthew Jonas)

A new crop Longmont police recruits have begun the arduous four month journey toward becoming full-fledged officers, and the public safety chief said they were selected for the job, in part, based on their willingness to do "community policing."

"It is a philosophy of policing that is the antithesis of 'us versus them,'" Public Safety Chief Mike Butler said.

Butler said prospective Longmont police officers are chosen in part by their willingness to sustain long lasting relationships with people they have never met and their interpersonal communication skills.

"Once we hire people, they automatically enter into a culture in which that way of doing business is a philosophy integrated throughout the entire culture of our police services," he said.

The recruits are just beginning field training which will last about four months and include working different shifts and learning the ins and outs of working for Longmont police. They have already completed the academy.

Recruit Greg Styles said the interviewing process to join the department lasted several months. After working as a mental health counselor for about 20 years, he wanted to bring the skills he acquired to a law enforcement capacity.

He said that he believes that through his prior career, he has learned how to solve problems, resolve conflicts and just talk to people. He added that he was attracted to the variety that law enforcement work will provide.

Advertisement

"I wanted to use my skills in a different way, a more immediate way," Styles said. "I wanted to impact the community on the front lines rather than downstream."

Butler said that community policing involves working with other agencies including nonprofits, businesses and schools to bring about public safety and other problems facing the community as well as individual community members.

"That takes all of us to resolve those issues," he said. "That's in essence what community policing is."

Recruit Garret Hultgren said that to him community policing means engaging with people to solve problems, something he hopes to do as a patrol officer, a position he hopes to make a career out of.

"Community policing is something I definitely think is important in law enforcement these days," recruit Garret Hultgren said. "Longmont seems to be a department that truly practices that."

Butler said that faith-based organizations also play a role, and Recruit Esteban Lopez said he was drawn to a career in law enforcement after spending time mentoring and teaching at church.

"I've always worked with the community in different ways," he said. "I just got kind of curious about doing it through a law enforcement avenue."

Butler said the command structure of police services has been "flattened" to give officers more responsibility day to day. They are expected to continue striving toward building relationships with community members throughout their careers.

"You have to involve the community," Butler said. "You can't be isolated. You can't hide behind a fortress."

Recruit Grant Jansen said he is looking forward to the community policing, in part, because he grew up in a military family and has lived in a slew of locations. That semi-nomadic upbringing made it easy for him to make friends.

"I'm easy going, and I'm easy to talk to," he said. "I'm able to connect with different people and different cultures. I'm easy to talk to if you are willing to talk."

John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@timescall.com or twitter.com/johnbearwithme