Note pad (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Help to calm the violence

TERESA CLEMMONS

Muncie

There is just too much violence in the world, and right now in our own community. A Better Way, and others like us, have been working on reducing violence via prevention efforts, in addition to the intervention we have been doing for many years. We are grateful to have been funded by the Indiana Criminal Justice Institute to establish the Community Coalition Against Violence. They allowed us to designate staff to address this very issue by involving community peers with common purpose, to bring safety to our community.

We have several active members, including representatives from A Better Way, Ball State University, BY5, Delaware County Probation, Department of Child Services, Meridian Health Services, Prevent Child Abuse, Project Leadership, Ross Community Center and Youth Opportunity Center. We are happy to have others at the table. Please contact us at A Better Way if you are interested.

Stutzman for Senate

FRANKLIN WEYL

Muncie

Marlin Stutzman votes Hoosier values not Washington values; he is focused on protecting America. His values reflect those of our Founding Fathers, our Declaration of Independence, and our U.S. and Indiana constitutions. He has a 91.4 percent conservative voting record. He voted to end Obamacare, reduce government spending, secure our border and to deny illegal immigrants the right to become U.S. citizens. He opposed increases to the national debt ceiling, to replace Boehner as Speaker of the House, for a balanced budget, opposed Common Core Education. He stands for religious freedom. His vision is rooted in restoring a culture of life and liberty. He is a farmer and he is concerned about you, me, and our families.

His opponent has a 75.4 conservative voting record while consistently voting the values of Washington and big donors like the Chamber of Commerce and big union bosses. He is a member of the powerful Republican Establishment Elite that gives everything to Obama, Pelosi, and Reid. He appears to be Democrat lite. He is not looking out for the little guys like you and me.

Read or Share this story: http://tspne.ws/26BjOvN