As dignitaries spoke in somber tones of service and sacrifice, Cub Scout Vincent Gambaro of St. Petersburg darted about the sprawling Bay Pines National Cemetery on Monday. He was picking up small American flags — placed at grave sites for the annual Memorial Day ceremony — that had fallen over in a sometimes stiff breeze.

“The other flags were still standing,” said the 9-year-old member of Cub Scout Pack 334, explaining his hectic dashes among the graves. “It's not fair that they had fallen down.”

All told, there were about 34,000 tiny flags, one for each grave. Some date to the Civil War, and there are men and women buried here from every subsequent conflict.

The flags were planted to honor those who wore the uniform of the U.S. military. Some died in combat; others were killed during training and other line-of-duty missions; and some took their own lives or had fallen ill. Many had come home after serving their country, lived full lives and were buried here, as was their right for having raised their hand and heeded the call.

For Gambaro, a third-grader at Windsor Prep Academy, the Bay Pines Memorial Day ceremony was his second day in a row at the spacious campus that also includes one of the nation's busiest Veterans Affairs hospitals and one of its busiest Veterans Benefits Administration regional offices.

A day earlier, he helped plant the flags that on Monday he raced around to keep upright and waving.

“These are people who served our country for our family,” said the Cub Scout. “I wanted to do something to help them.”

Gambaro's quest was the theme of a day that saw thousands listen to speeches by hospital staff, U.S. Rep. David Jolly and Annette Kirk, an Army veteran whose life changed forever on Aug. 8, 2010, when her son, Paul O. Cuzzupe II, was killed in Afghanistan.

Jolly noted there are two key moments that stand out in the lives of those who die for their country: The moment they raise their hand to take the oath and the moment they realize they are taking their last breath because of their actions.

“That's why Memorial Day stands apart from each and every other day of the year,” Jolly said.

Kirk recalled those moments vividly, saying she felt “the same knot in her stomach” on the day her son enlisted as she felt when she left home for her eight-year hitch in the Army.

And then there was the moment she found out that her son, a combat medic affectionately called “Doc” by his fellow soldiers, had given his last breath for the nation.

Cuzzupe and four others were riding in an armored Stryker when it hit a 200-pound improvised explosive device. Cuzzupe, 23, was the only one killed.

“Imagine everyone calling for 'Doc' and there was no one there to answer,” said Kirk.

After the speeches came another moment that choked up many.

Kirk, Kim Allison, Hermanda Wykoff, Yolanda Mercado and Cynthia McConville walked slowly and purposefully to place the ceremonial wreath at the memorial monument.

From different backgrounds and spanning a range of generations, the women had at least one thing in common. They were all Gold Star mothers, those who have lost a child in military service. They proudly, and sadly, wear the Gold Star, no matter how their child died.

“I am very honored that so many people came out today,” said Allison, whose son, Army Spc. Zachary Shannon of Dunedin, was 21 when he was killed March 11, 2013, when his Black Hawk helicopter crashed in Afghanistan.

haltman@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7629

@haltman