Architect April Magill (upper right) uses cob oven workshops as a hands-on approach to teach about the construction method that originated in Wales about 1,000 years ago.

When architect April Magill quit her traditional architecture job after eight years at the age of 30 to pursue “natural building” and “sustainable architecture,” she wasn’t sure how much work she would get out of Charleston.

If you go What: Intro to Cob & Natural Building: How to Build a Cob Oven When: 8:30 a.m.-6:30 p.m. Saturday and 8:30 a.m.-4 p.m. Sunday Where: Romney Street Urban Garden, Charleston Cost: $75 (children ages 14 and under are free) for both days; $55 for Saturday only; $45 for Sunday only. (Content taught on Saturday won’t be repeated on Sunday due to time constraints.) Register: www.lowcountrynaturalbuilding.com/news/upcoming-workshops/

Today, four years after that gutsy decision, Magill gets so many requests both here and beyond that she’s having to turn down jobs through her business Root Down Designs.

“There’s huge demand and I’m always pleasantly surprised about the interest in it both in South Carolina and the Southeast,” says Magill. “I see it as a trend that’s growing and growing rapidly.”

Natural building methods includes an array of methods, from rammed earth, adobe, straw bale and cob, all of which use “earthen materials,” such as clay, sand, straw, rocks, bamboo and more.

The millenium-old methods also seek to use materials that are local, salvaged or recycled. Buildings are oriented on property to make the most use of sun and shade to minimize energy consumption.

In the same vein, her specialty extends to designing “tiny houses,” defined generally as homes less than 1,000 square feet. People seek the homes to simplify their lives, use less energy and spend less money.

“Whether it’s an earthen method or a conventional method, I am always incorporating passive solar design methods, working to reduce square footage, looking at locally sourced and milled materials, viewing the project in a holistic way, using the ethics of permaculture and always trying to incorporate it with nature and plant life to the best of my ability,” she says.

Magill, working with local structural engineer John Moore, has designed the first officially permitted rammed earth building in South Carolina. The building, set for construction in spring 2016, will be a classroom for the Barclay School at Columbia College in Columbia.

She has constructed several cob ovens, including one used for making wood-fired pizzas at Awendaw Green, an outdoor, live music venue .

And while she is busy designing and building structures, spreading the word about natural building in the Lowcountry remains integral to her mission.

Next weekend, she will hold her latest “Intro to Cob & Natural Building: How to Build a Cob Oven” at the Romney Street Urban Garden, aka RUG, located on a quarter acre owned by New Israel Episcopal Church. Youth leaders in the church want to include the oven in its urban garden in an effort to revitalize the blighted area.

“This is a very positive project, as the youth group of the church decided to take this blighted dead end and turn it into a healthy, community space,” says Magill, noting that the project has the approval of city building officials and is being funded by the Historic Charleston Foundation.

Cob, aka cobb or clom, construction originated in Wales and involves building with a mixture of sand, clay and straw packed into small round lumps. It is inexpensive, resistant to earthquakes and fireproof.

Magill says cob ovens are ideal to demonstrate the building method and can be constructed in backyards in the same vein as barbecue pits and oyster roasters.

Part of the beauty of the workshops, Magill adds, is that they are hands-on learning experiences that brings people together, which results in a long-lasting structure.

“People get stoked when they can build something with their own hands,” says Magill.

Reach David Quick at 937-5516.