Around the nation, according to a recent Robert Wood Johnson Foundation report, hospitals are experiencing high turnover in new hires — 17.5 % in year one and 33.5% in year two — who have just graduated from nursing school and passed their licensure exam.







While new grad turnover is less dramatic in Northeast Ohio, it's still a concern.







“It (turnover) doesn't just impact hospitals' finances, it impacts productivity, efficiency and team moral,” said Joan Kavanagh, associate chief nursing officer in the nursing education and professional development office at the Cleveland Clinic.







“Some (new grads) feel ... so overwhelmed that they leave nursing altogether,” noted Gail Bromley, co-director of nursing research and a nurse educator at University Hospitals Case Medical Center, which has had a transition-to-practice program, called a nurse residency, in place since 2008.







The high turnover rate for new grads is due to two related realities.







One is that health care “is an ever-evolving, moving target,” said Kimberly Kerr, director of professional practice, development and research for the Akron General Health System. The care needs of today's hospital patient, technological advances, changes mandated by the Affordable Care Act and the explosion of health-related data are all making the field increasingly complex.







The other is that the academic preparation nurses get — regardless of whether they come out of a two-year associate of arts or a four-year bachelor of science in nursing program — often falls short of hospitals' and patients' real-world needs.









Returns on investment

“There's a very real gap between what new grads know and what hospitals want their new hires to know when they come in,” explained Pam Waite, director of the health care work force and the Northeast Ohio Nursing Initiative (NEONI) at the Center for Health Affairs.Local nursing schools are working collaboratively to share best practices to address the shock that comes when new grads land their first job. They are trying to find ways to improve students' clinical experiences with more hospital rotations, case studies, simulation labs and externships and to improve students' soft skills in such areas as communication, punctuality and appearance.In addition, said Waite, “just about every hospital in the region is doing some kind of transition-to-practice program, too.”Locally, the programs go by many names: nurse residency; nurse mentorship; nurse internship or externship; and nurse fellowship. Depending on the type of program, and where they are done, they vary in length from several months to a year.“All (the programs)” said Tracey Galvin, residency coordinator at MetroHealth Medical Center, which has both a nursing residency and nursing internship program, are professional development programs.”And, no matter which hospital is doing them or their length, the programs are evidence-based, focused on building technical and critical thinking skills and customized to engage and connect the new nurse to the institution and to the profession.

Due to the fact that programs are institution-specific, “there's no one-size-fits-all program,” stressed Kavanagh. However, the programs' retention rates have proven their worth.







“The first year we did our (nursing residency) program, we had 99% retention during the first year of practice ... (It) has varied a bit from that, since then, but it's never been lower than 90%,” said Bromley. At MetroHealth, retention rates for those in the residency program have always been well over 90% since the program began, and the retention rate in the internship program was 100% this year, said Nancy Cichra, director of nursing education and professional development at MetroHealth Medical Center.





While hospitals do transition-to-practice programs to build skills and retain costly-to-replace nurses, those who go through them see them in another light.Nick Frank, a registered nurse, says that while the additional classes and labs, mentoring and other experiences he had in University Hospitals' residency program three years ago made him a better new nurse, what he really got out of the program was a career path.“It introduced me to the real impact that research can make,” he said, “and it helped me discover that I had a very real passion for end-of-life care, which up till that time I really hadn't thought about.”Funding for transition-to-practice programs can often be iffy.At MetroHealth, said Cichra, their programs are paid for out of the hospital's nursing budget and it “changes, based on the needs of the hospital.”At Akron General, they “utilize money that's built into orientation and reallocate it,” Kerr said.And some hospitals, said Waite, have used their foundations to fund their programs.