I was sitting in a bar the other evening having a warm toddy to stave off the cold when the woman across from me made the most startling comment.

“Fiction is nothing but escapist bull—-,” she vehemently declared. I was certainly taken aback, as she knows my background of writing and teaching. But her declaration also reminded me of a student comment from my teaching days that spurred an ongoing curiosity for me. He simply asked, “Why do we have to read this stuff?”

We used his comment to further class conversation. This was a composition class of college-age students, and many of them said they simply saw no point in narrative. Their time was short; they were busy. They did not care about the writer’s experiences. They wanted facts and figures.

Not long after, I ran across a 2010 University of Michigan study on the decline in compassion among college students. Apparently since the 1980s, and specifically after 2000, the ability of young people to empathize with others had dropped by 40 percent. The reason behind the change was unknown, but theories included electronic communication, desensitization via violent media, and — as my students said — lack of time to care.

Although I’m certain there are many layers involved in this devolution, I couldn’t help but consider my students’ comments and wonder how their lack of interest in reading and narrative might play into this decline.

The correlation between literature and empathy is becoming increasingly strong as researchers examine the issue. In “The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence has Declined,” Steven Pinker states that the “human capacity for compassion is not a reflex that is triggered automatically by the presence of another living thing.” But he goes on to discuss how being exposed to the stories — both fictive and non — of others does encourage adopting those people’s vantage points. And it’s that adoption, that understanding of such, that breeds compassion and empathy.

Pinker concludes, “Technological advances in publishing, the mass production of books, the expansion of literacy … all preceded the major humanitarian reforms of the 18th century.”

Switching fields of study, according to an NPR report in November 2007, neuroscientists have found correlations between those who read fiction and those carrying a higher number of mirror neurons, which they believe to be the “biological key to empathy.” And this is where I think the relatable theories begin.

There has been a considerable decline in the ability of our country’s citizens to read over recent years. Reasons given are many, from socio-economic status to the exponential increase of access to electronic gadgets. Either way, Americans are not reading, not taking in the stories of others. Thus, I’m wondering if we may be facing a severe breach in our ability toempathize.

Back in the late ’90s, I was asked to teach a new class called Social Issues in Contemporary Literature for the criminal justice department at our university. Law enforcement officials were concerned that street officers would lack an understanding of the neighborhoods they would be patrolling. Yet they didn’t want factual, cultural accounts of history or food or such. They wanted me to teach them stories.

If law enforcement, one the most notably conservative entities of our society, is open to story-telling to increase empathy among people, I think it’s certainly a theory worth considering.

Shawna Bethell is a freelance writer in Silverton.