FOREVER BEAUTIFUL: Best of the beauty freebies!



Every Monday, Elsa answers a reader's big beauty query and presents the best buys to perk up your week...



I see these ‘gifts with purchase’ offers around and I’m often tempted — but are they value for money or am I falling for a marketing ploy?



Yvette, 39, Liverpool



If you look carefully there are some great bargains out there

This is a favourite trick of almost every brand: enticing you to buy an extra product or spend more than you meant to for a free gift.



But if you look carefully, there are some great bargains out there. Most gifts-with-purchase tend to be seasonal: the beginning of the summer holidays and Father’s Day on Sunday means there are some good deals around.



Offers can be limited to one particular outlet. I found an Estee Lauder gift with purchase which is available only at Harrods or harrods.com.



Buy two or more Estee Lauder products, one to be moisturiser, eye care or repair serum, between June 16 and July 12 and you’ll receive a bag of goodies containing Re-Nutriv Crème Cleanser, Lift Age Correcting Crème, a compact containing six eyeshadows and two blushers, an eye pencil, mascara, lip gloss and lipstick.



Bear in mind these are mini-sized products, but they’re handy for travelling, and they come in a lovely bag.



Dr Perricone online also has a good value offer. The Perricone Sub-D Kit costs £39.99 plus £4.95 postage and packaging (subd.co.uk), and contains Cold Plasma Sub-D (to improve elasticity on the jawline and neck), worth £55, and High Potency Amine Face Lift, £40, saving you a total of £55 — plus you’ll get the Discovery Collection, worth £45, for free.

It’s also worth looking out in stores for savings, such as the Soleil Protection Pack from Superdrug, which is half-price at £11.49 until July 29. It contains full-sized bottles of SPF30 and SPF15 sun lotions, plus children’s SPF30 suncream and an aftersun.



Spend £3.99 on Collection in Superdrug and get a free Mardis Gras Lipbalm

There’s also a Bourjois offer during June — buy three products in the ‘three for two’ range to get a free pair of sunglasses. And if you spend £3.99 on a Collection product in Superdrug, you’ll receive a free Mardi Gras Lip Balm.



Buy any two products from a Lancome counter nationwide, with one being skincare, and you’ll receive a lovely Jenny Packham-designed cosmetic bag containing a selection of Lancome travel-sized products.



For something a bit different, buy 50ml of Agent Provocateur Fatale perfume, from £46 (Boots), from June 30 and get a free pair of Agent Provocateur hold-ups.



There are some great offers around for men, which would be good gifts for Father’s Day.



For the launch of Montblanc Emblem aftershave, there’s a free toiletry bag with any 50ml purchase from Superdrug and The Perfume Shop.



ClarinsMen has a Grooming Essentials Kit containing four products, including Exfoliating Cleanser, Super Moisture Balm, Smooth Shave and Shampoo and Shower for just £35 (clarins.co.uk) — a saving of £21.85 — and it comes with a free washbag.

MY ANTI-AGEING HERO: LINDA BARKER

MY MIRACLE WORKER: Stratum C Menopause Protect Cream, 50ml, £85 (harveynichols.com)

I’ve always looked after my skin and, with a TV career as a designer, I tried to use the best skincare I could. But despite this, I was taken unawares by the impact of the menopause, and had started to develop more lines and wrinkles. Stratum C products have been created for menopausal skin and seem to leave it plumper and firmer.

More great skincare for menopausal women:

Dermol 500 Lotion (£11.94, lloydspharmacy.com)

Replenish Day Cream SPF 15 50ml (£12.95, nurtureskin care.co.uk)

Murad Resurgence range, (from £23 muraduk.com)

UNSUNG HERO



Garnier Ultimate Blends 7-in-1 Dry Shampoo, £3.99 (Boots)

How did we manage without dry shampoo? It’s magical on mornings when you don’t have time, or just can’t be bothered, to wash your hair; it’s also great for adding body to hair. There is no powdery residue and it has a lovely vanilla fragrance that lasts all day. I’m happy with anything that makes my blow dry last longer and if it smells nice, it’s a bonus.



BARGAIN BUY



I love the affordable e.l.f. range of more than 1,000 products. Stand-outs are Eyelid Primer, £1.95, which makes eye shadow last longer, and the California Baked Eyeshadow Palette, £10. And lipstick goes on smoothly with Lip Exfoliator, £3.95. eyeslipsface.co.uk

FACE TIME

One of the most effective exfoliators around is Dermalogica’s Microfoliant, £40.30 (lookfantastic.com). Now there’s an alternative — Indeed Labs has launched Facial Powdered Exfoliator, £19.99 (Boots). It’s brilliant for sloughing off dead skin without causing any irritation.