On a clear day Peyton Manning can pass forever.

Sunday afternoon in Denver was brilliant and bold, and so was The Maestro.

With less than two minutes remaining in the first half and the Broncos at their 14-yard line, Manning threw an arc of covenant toward the precipice of the left sideline, where Demaryius Thomas was striding and lunging. One of football’s premier receivers clutched the ball and ran unrestricted to the end zone to complete an 86-yard touchdown play.

Nobody was paying attention as Arizona Cardinals cornerback Antonio Cromartie walked the few feet to the bench, removed his helmet and slammed it into the wall. “It’s not my best day,” he would say.

But Cromartie wasn’t the first to be beaten by Manning.

Five hundred and two times defenders had fallen before him on touchdown passes. And many more will fall before Manning’s work is done.

Manning is the epitome and embodiment of Dorian Gray and Benjamin Buttons. Although 381/2, the Broncos quarterback really is the ageless wonder. He’s 14 and playing with his brothers in the front yard of the Manning home in the Garden District of New Orleans.

All he did Sunday was pass for his 500th touchdown, then Nos. 501, 502 and 503. Ol’ Rocky Top also threw two more touchdown passes that were called back. Brett Favre’s record total of 508 is going down in October.

When Manning signed with the Broncos it was for five years. Everybody went “wink-wink.” He might play two seasons, perhaps three. Before the first season Manning surprised me with: “I’m basically treating it as a one-year contract. If I don’t play that well or don’t pass my physical next spring, this could be it.”

Manning is in the third year. Whenever I ask him how much longer he plans to play, he shrugs. Tom Brady and Drew Brees have openly discussed playing into their 40s.

Why not Peyton?

PHOTOS: Arizona Cardinals vs. Denver Broncos

If the nerve in his arm continues to improve and the nerve in his approach to the game continues to be the same, the man could play until he’s 50. He certainly will finish his five-year contract.

His mind wins over matter.

Ask the Cardinals. Manning threw for a mile high and a personal all-time high 479 yards with 31 completions. The Broncos dumped their mediocre running game and did what they do best in the league — pass.

Yes, Peyton threw a couple of interceptions. Richard Petty brushed a few fences. Willie Mays hit into some double plays. Mozart penned a few lousy compositions.

After the game, Manning was his normal humble self. When asked if he keeps the footballs that set records, Peyton said: “You know what. I’ve never kept a football .”

There’s a reason. Another record is waiting. Before he’s finished in 2016, ’17 or ’22, Manning probably will possess every record except the one he wants.

Yet, he still has time to win more Super Bowls.

And he still has time to have fun. And he still has time to give the NFL the most exciting and enthralling games. People like Peyton.

For a moment late Sunday afternoon, Peyton showed his age. “I don’t think there are any players still playing (who were playing) when I threw my first touchdown . . . I do think about how many people have helped me throughout my career. Football is the ultimate team game, so I guess one man kind of has to accept it — not really accept it — on behalf of coaches and teammates.”

Peyton needs to be reminded how many people in football he has helped.

Ask Julius Thomas, who caught the 500th. Ask Demaryius Thomas, who recorded 226 yards and two touchdowns — and another that was nullified. Slump? I don’t think so.

There was a moment in the first half Sunday when the Cardinals’ offense was moving. During a timeout, Manning was signaling to the Broncos’ defense what to expect. He was working the whole room.

“Yeah, I thought those guys were awesome,” he said of the defense.

Perpetual Peyton played some awesome, too.

Woody Paige: wpaige@denverpost.com