By Danielle E. Gaines, The Frederick News-Post, Md. McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

Aug. 20 --A Thurmont woman who pleaded guilty to stealing more than $25,000 from her employer was sentenced to probation Tuesday.

Judge Theresa M. Adams said she hoped the sentence would allow Colleen Bryan LePrevost to pay restitution to the business, Designer Surfaces Inc. , more quickly than if she were jailed.

"This is an incredible breach of trust," Adams said. "I don't know how a business snaps back from something like this."

Adams said during her time as a judge, she's come to think of businesses as people trying to get by and provide for their families.

That's what Bryan LePrevost , 50, told Adams she was trying to do when she took the money to begin with.

Bryan LePrevost said she took the money to help pay for medical care after her minor daughter became ill. She said she did not have health insurance through her job and made too much money to receive it through the state.

Defense attorney Jason W. Shoemaker showed Adams copies of $20,000 in paid medical bills.

Bryan LePrevost pleaded guilty in April to theft scheme between $10,000 and $100,000 . The Frederick County State's Attorney's Office agreed to postpone sentencing to allow Bryan LePrevost time to save money for restitution. On Tuesday, she brought $800 .

Prosecutor Jason S. Shoemaker said the amount was "a slap in the face." Bryan LePrevost began stealing from the company about a month after she started working there, he said.

He asked for one year in jail.

Bryan LePrevost spoke briefly during the hearing and said it would be difficult on her children, an 18-year-old daughter and a 16-year-old son, if she were incarcerated.

"This has been very difficult for my family," she said. "I take full responsibility for my actions."

During five years of probation, Bryan LePrevost must repay $25,170 and complete 100 hours of community service. If she violates the terms of probation, she could face a 10-year suspended sentence, Adams said.

Follow Danielle E. Gaines on Twitter: @danielleegaines.

___

(c)2014 The Frederick News-Post (Frederick, Md.)

Visit The Frederick News-Post (Frederick, Md.) at www.fredericknewspost.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 350

[jetpack-related-posts]