David Amerson expressed remorse for missing a team meeting last week, vowing that the sequence of events that led to his one-game suspension will not happen again.

Amerson, one of the Redskins’ starting cornerbacks, was unaware that a meeting had been moved to early in the morning. He had not arrived at Redskins Park in time to attend the meeting, leading to his benching for the 17-13 loss at San Francisco on Sunday.

The team also fined him an undisclosed sum for his actions.

“As unfortunate as the situation was, I mean, at the end of the day, I am responsible to be here on time, no matter what the circumstance is,” Amerson said. “I definitely learned my lesson, and like I said, I’ve just got to take it upon myself — and, no matter what, make sure I [get] here and be at work. It’s definitely a lesson.”

The Redskins cycled through cornerbacks in the loss to San Francisco, leaving the situation even more unpalatable for Amerson. E.J. Biggers left the game in the first quarter with a concussion, forcing strong safety Trenton Robinson to take snaps as the nickelback, and Tracy Porter, who replaced Amerson as a starter, strained the AC joint in his right shoulder and did not return.

Undrafted rookie cornerback Greg Ducre, who had played in two games on special teams, shuffled into the lineup to replace Porter. Strong safety Phillip Thomas also saw his first snaps on defense, filling in late with free safety Ryan Clark leaving the game after experiencing a stinger.

“I think it was the best thing to do,” said defensive coordinator Jim Haslett. “Maybe it wasn’t the best thing to do at the time because of who we were playing and we needed him, but I think it was the best thing for this team, and for him as a player. I think it was important that we did what we did.”

Amerson, who started the first 10 games, will be back on the field Sunday when the Redskins visit Indianapolis.

“I feel like I was letting the whole organization down with me not being here and not being able to play, especially with all the injuries that went down,” Amerson said. “I think — I knew — I felt it the most out of anybody in the organization. It was unfortunate, but it won’t happen again.”