“Tonight Show” host and funnyman Jimmy Fallon sent a message Wednesday night that his show isn’t a playground for liberal bullies to stomp on Republicans, as Fallon took several jabs at President Barack Obama for his signature healthcare law and wimpy foreign policy.

In a skit starring President Obama and Russian President Vladimir Putin — played by Fallon — during “The Tonight Show,” the Affordable Care Act and president’s less-than-stellar leadership during the crisis in Ukraine became the butts of Fallon’s jokes.

The comedic assault begins with Obama placing a call in to Putin to discuss the increasing tensions between Ukraine and Russia. The duo begins discussing their stressful weeks as Obama takes a sip of beer from a bottle. Putin, to the contrary, swigs straight vodka.

“Look, don’t you see what you’re doing, though? You’re forcing people to accept something that the majority of them don’t even want,” Obama tells Putin of his country’s attempt to take power over Crimea.

“Yes,” the faux-Putin responds. “In Russia, we have word for this. Obamacare. Does Obamacare cover burns?”

The world leaders continue discussing Russia’s takeover of the disputed peninsula — after busting out a rendition of “Insane in the Membrane” as “McCain in the Ukraine” — and Obama tells Putin to let his desire to take control of Ukraine go.

Of course, the presidents sing a foreign policy-laced version of “Let It Go” from the Disney film “Frozen.”

Fallon then takes a jab at President Obama’s failed leadership over the conflict between Ukraine and Russia.

“Vlad, Vlad, just to recap our call, no progress was made here, right?” faux Obama asks.

“None at all,” responds Putin.

When Fallon first took the helm of late-night’s signature show, many criticized him for going soft on the Obama administration. During his first week of hosting, the “Saturday Night Live” alum was joined by fellow funnyman Will Ferrell and First Lady Michelle Obama to promote her “Let’s Move” campaign and the Affordable Care Act.

Fallon has been known to go easy on Democrats while slamming Republicans.

Watch “The Tonight Show” skit below.