The federal government forms for applying for health coverage are seen at a rally held by supporters of the Affordable Care Act, widely referred to as "Obamacare", outside the Jackson-Hinds Comprehensive Health Center in Jackson, Miss., Oct. 4, 2013. (REUTERS/Jonathan Bachman)

3942029

A California company whose CEO has ties to President Barack Obama was granted nearly $1.3 million to provide health-care navigator services in California and Illinois, despite past allegations of misconduct.

The East Los Angeles Community Union, known as TELACU, was granted $980,000 from Covered California, the state’s Obamacare health-care exchange. The company, which is a nonprofit organization with for-profit subsidiaries, was also awarded a $294,000 grant to provide navigator services for the state of Illinois, though the company has since declined that contract.

Despite being awarded the grants, which requires navigators to inform the public about their health coverage options under Obamacare, the company has been accused of bribery and influence peddling.

In 2009, two San Bernadino city councilors accused the company of trying to sway their vote on a downtown housing project.

“We were offered a bribe,” said former San Bernadino Councilwoman Esther Estrada at the time.



Estrada explained further in an interview with The Daily Caller News Foundation, saying that in 2009 a “henchman” for TELACU’s CEO David Lizarraga approached her saying “that TELACU was ready to do whatever” in exchange for her vote on the project.

“I suspect that if they did that with me then they did that with other people,” said Estrada.

Another San Bernadino city official told TheDCNF that the TELACU’s tactics on that 2009 vote “underhanded” and “distasteful.” Wendy McCammack, a city councilwoman who is also a mayoral candidate, said that a government affairs rep for TELACU offered her and other councilmembers “whatever you need” in exchange for a yes vote on the project.

Despite the bribery accusation, last year Obama appointed Lizarraga to a key position on the Community Development Advisory Board, which falls under the control of the U.S. Treasury Department. The board advises the director of the Community Development Institutions Fund on community development project decisions.

According to OpenSecrets.org, TELACU and TELACU Industries employees gave $55,750 to political campaigns in 2012, including $10,250 to Obama. According to FollowTheMoney.org, in 2006 company employees contributed $1,000 to Rod Blagojevich, the former Illinois governor who is in prison for corruption.

As one of the states that set up its own exchange, California was given nearly $37 million in federal money to help implement Obamacare. Nearly 50 organizations, including TELACU, will use that money to educate Californians about their health care options.

The 36 states that chose to take part in the federal marketplace were given $67 million by the Washington to provide navigator services. Over 100 organizations throughout the country will provide navigator services in those states which include Illinois.

TELACU originally submitted applications for navigator grants for a total of six states on the federal or partnership exchanges. But the company was awarded only the Illinois and California grants, and decided to focus only on its work in California.

“Since this is not what we proposed, and since providing services in Illinois was only a portion of our overall strategy, we declined the Navigators grant,” said Michael Lizarraga, the CEO of TELACU’s industrial segment, in a statement to TheDCNF.