Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton accepted an endorsement from the political arm of Planned Parenthood Sunday.

Click to watch News 9's coverage

Clinton accepted the endorsement in front of more than 500 people at Southern New Hampshire University.



"Planned Parenthood should be funded, supported and appreciated, not undermined, misrepresented and demonized," said Clinton.

This endorsement is the first time the organization has ever endorsed a candidate in a presidential primary, and it's the third time the organization has ever endorsed in a presidential race.

The secretary of state and first lady said she has always fought to protect women's reproductive rights, a fight she promised to continue in the White House.

Planned Parenthood provides health care to thousands of people in New Hampshire every day.

"If a Republican wins this election and gets the chance to stack the Supreme Court with right wing justices, together they will accelerate the move to take America in the wrong direction on so many issues that you and I have fought for and many Americans take for granted," said Clinton.

Clinton's endorsement was announced by Planned Parenthood Action Fund President Cecile Richards.



"We don't need just a friend, a solid vote or supporting statement. We need a fighter," said Richards.

"Hillary Clinton understands the lives of women and she has been fighting for women and families her entire life," said Richards.

Richards told News 9 there are several reasons why the organization chose to endorse Clinton.

“Our supporters and millions of people around the country are extremely focused on this election, earlier than ever before. And, I think that, in large part, it’s because there are so many folks running for president on the Republican side who have pledged to undo decades of progress for women in America and so folks are ready to get going, and Secretary Clinton is such a champion, not only for Planned Parenthood, but for women and women’s rights, equal pay, all issues that Planned Parenthood has fought for more than 100 years,” said Richards.



Richards said the organization is making the early endorsement to remind voters about what it calls "extreme positions" from Republicans on women's health.

"They have all vowed to ban safe and legal abortion, they have pledged to repeal the Affordable Care Act -- ending insurance coverage for birth control for 55 million women in America -- and they have sworn to block Planned Parenthood access for millions of patients in this country," said Richards.

"Access to health care is so important, and it's a right and it can't be taken away," said Clinton supporter Amy Dattner. "And Hillary will work very hard to make sure that it's not taken away."