In 1914, the Colorado Mountain Club brought Arapaho elders from their Wind River Reservation to Estes Park to try to identify geographic features using the original Indian names. From left are wrangler Shep Husted, Arapaho elder Sherman Sage, Arapaho elder Gun Griswold, interpreter Tom Crispin and host Oliver Toll. ( Courtesy of Estes Park Museum )

In 1914, one of the most unusual events in the region's history was an invitation tendered to two Arapaho elders living on the Wind River Reservation by the Colorado Mountain Club. Gun Griswold and Sherman Sage were selected by Colorado Mountain Club during a trip to the reservation. It was believed that these individuals had lived in the Estes Park region before it was settled.

The purpose of the invitation was to have them take a two-week long pack trip through the mountains and to record what they could remember about the area, especially names and events. During their progress, they documented Arapaho names for local landmarks. The elders, interpreter Tom Crispin, host Oliver Toll and wrangler Shep Husted crossed the Continental Divide four times.

Oliver Toll kept a detailed journal of the trip and 48 years later, published his journal as "Arapaho Names and Trails." The first edition came out in 1962 and the second improved edition was published in 2003. Although colorful, it is anything but a scientific journal. It links the past occupation of the area by Indians to the present.

Gun Griswold, 73, was the oldest of the Indians, and the trip was hard on him. He was eventually examined by a doctor. Sherman Sage was 63 and in contrast to Griswold, was quite active.

This was an extremely ambitious trip starting at Marys Lake where an old Indian camp was examined. They rode their horses into what would become Rocky Mountain National Park to the ranch in Upper Beaver Meadows owned by Pieter Hondius.

Advertisement

They climbed up over Trail Ridge down to Poudre Lakes and then up to the crater at Specimen Mountain. The party crossed the Continental Divide at Milner Pass.

They spent the night at "Squeaky" Bob Wheeler's ranch along the Colorado River and followed the river past Lulu City and over Thunder Pass. They climbed a shoulder of Sawtooth Mountain and here they traced an old Indian trail. They traveled to Grand Lake, and using the North Inlet Trail, they made their way over Flattop Mountain and part way up Hallett Peak.

Arapaho elders Gun Griswold, left front, and Sherman Sage, right front, visit with members of the Pieter Hondius family at their ranch in Upper Beaver Meadows. (Courtesy of Estes Park Museum)

Using Mill Creek, they returned to Estes Park. After a night's stay, they rode up over a ridge to West Creek returning to via the Devil's Gulch Road.

The final leg of the trip was by stagecoach to Fort Collins to visit the agricultural college, now Colorado State University.

Toll recorded what he could of the Arapaho language, giving it specialized symbols in his attempt to create a written language. In the process, he discovered that it was a difficult language to document because the way a single word was pronounced could convey different meanings.

In addition, Toll encountered a certain protocol. No matter how long an elder talked, interpreter Crispin could not reply until the entire story was finished.

The trip was not nearly as informative as Toll had hoped. He commented, "The information itself was often rather vague. A name might be applied to several places." Toll went on to talk about the lack of details for a battle, the date or the number of Indians involved.

Toll noted that Arapaho names for physical features reflected their life. At times, the name given was in reference to the animals found in that area. The names could reflect their nomadic ways and constant quest to kill game.

Names could also apply to events in the oral history of the Arapaho. An example is the trail up Tombstone Ridge. The Arapaho called it the "Child's Trail" for it was so steep that children had to dismount and walk.

During the course of the trip, the elders told of battles with the Shoshones and the Apache. The steep rocky hill west of the Hondius Ranch was locally known as an Indian Fort.

The two Indians confirmed that a battle had taken place, in fact, Sage's oldest brother was wounded in the fighting. An Apache war party of around 50 had come into the park and was met by the Arapaho in Beaver Meadows. Sage spotted a pile of stone that looked like an Indian monument. It marked the beginning of the battle where the first brave was killed.

Conclusive or not, this expedition has gone into the pages of the history of Rocky National Mountain Park.

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years. This year his columns will focus mainly on the history of Rocky Mountain National Park.