Developer, in face of opposition, says 'It's a goner'

Winchester Park, a newly proposed permanently affordable apartment development in Gunbarrel, will not come to fruition, the project's developer said Friday.

A month after submitting plans for Winchester Park — an 80-unit apartment complex at 7077 Winchester Circle in the Gunbarrel Tech Center — developer Andy Allison said he's nixing the project after receiving several complaints from the owners of the neighboring industrial buildings.

The city of Boulder does allow for residential development in industrial zoning districts. Winchester Park did not meet the Gunbarrel Tech Center Planned Unit Development guidelines for "light-industrial development;" however, city planning staff members supported modifying the development standards for the affordable housing project to move forward, according to review comments issued May 23.

Although city officials responded favorably to the proposal, the opposition was too stiff, said Allison, owner of Allison Management LLC.

"We had five or six letters from owners of companies and buildings (in the area) who didn't want a residential development," Allison said. "It's a goner."

Winchester Park was proposed as the receiving site for the affordable units required at 970 28th St., the second phase of Landmark Lofts, according to city planning documents. All of Winchester Park's 80 units were proposed to meet the city's affordable housing guidelines.

Advertisement

The 7077 Winchester Circle site — a 3-acre property with a two-story, 25,000-square-foot building where Paladin Press, the Boulder-based publisher of militaristic and self-defense books, has based its operations for more than a decade — is located on the northeastern edge of the Gunbarrel Tech Center and is bordered by open space to the north. Across 71st Street to the east are a line of single-family homes.

The Gunbarrel Tech Center houses businesses such as Micro Motion, Encision and Vindication Brewing.

Allison said he's exploring other opportunities in Boulder and Gunbarrel.

"The city only has one affordable unit in Gunbarrel; they're very supportive of affordable housing out there," he said. "That seemed like a good fit. The problem is, there is not a lot of residential land. It's a challenge."

The Winchester Park shelving makes Allison "0 for 2" in recent efforts to build an affordable housing development in Gunbarrel. He and his partners looked to develop the 2.2-acre parcel at 6035 Longbow Drive, but met opposition from neighboring business owners.

"A lot of the industrial users or owners aren't really excited about residential next to them," he said.

Gunbarrel's in the throes of a development boom. About 550 apartments are expected to result from three projects that are under construction. Additionally, Avery Brewing is moving forward on a $27 million, 90,000-square-foot brewery and restaurant off Nautilus Court South.

Contact Camera Business Writer Alicia Wallace at 303-473-1332 or wallacea@dailycamera.com