WASHINGTON — No matter what happens in Syria, voters will tune it out when they vote next year, according to the New York Democrat plotting the party's longshot attempt to win back control of the House of Representatives.

Wishful thinking? Bloodless pragmatism? Whatever, that's the Tuesday take of Rep. Steve Israel, head of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee.

The Democrats need to take back at least 17 Republican-controlled seats to regain a majority of the 435-member House. The overriding conventional wisdom at the moment is that it won't happen, especially with declining approval ratings for President Obama, high unemployment and the complex introduction of Obamacare.

But Israel spoke to a breakfast group of reporters and asserted flatly: "2014 won't be a referendum on Syria. It will be one on solutions, who is willing to get things done, whose ideas are helping the middle class."

For sure, that's in sync with his attempt to recruit candidates he calls "solutionists," or ones downplaying ideology and underscoring how to improve local predicaments, like crumbling infrastructure, or how to roll out Obamacare in a successful way, as opposed to either just praising or bashing it.

The latest Russian overture to perhaps solving the Syrian crisis was an unavoidable topic since, for the moment, it has complicated the previously simple question obsessing the capital: Bomb Syria or don't bomb it? That proposal will presumably be broached by Obama during his seemingly high-stakes address to the nation Tuesday night.

"We need to engage the Russians robustly and rapidly," said Israel, a liberal on social issues who tends to lean the other way in foreign affairs. If their proposal is credible, go for it, he said.

And if there's anything that has been the least bit surprising to him in the overall Syria debate, the Democratic partisan said it was this: "Does anybody believe that if Mitt Romney had been elected, and had asked for the same as Obama has, that House Republicans would oppose it in the way they do now?"

"Their level of hypocrisy amazes me," said Israel, whose formal title with the DCCC means that he's the only House Democrat who finds himself referred to by solicitous reporters here as "Mr. Chairman."

Personally, he supports a forceful but limited strike that somehow impacts Syria's chemical weapons capabilities. If that were to happen, "I don't think many people in 2014 will be talking about a debate on a limited military operation in 2013."