Our 159,000 combined followers on Twitter ( click here for that ) and on Facebook ( then click here to subscribe to that )

know that on weekday afternoons we regularly share a selection of that

evening’s late-night jokes before broadcast. Usually, we publish a

collection of these and other jokes early each week.

Conan: A couple let the Internet vote to name their daughter. So watch for the birth of the beautiful little girl named “Cat Fail Bieber.”

Conan: A Japanese company has bought the Jim Beam Whiskey distillery for $16 billion. Of course, this morning, the Japanese company woke up in an alley and said, “I did what?”

Fallon: Yesterday, a Southwest Airlines plane with more than 100 passengers actually landed at the wrong airport in Missouri. On the bright side, at least passengers met up with their luggage.

Conan: Manufacturers are testing a new drug that increases a woman’s sex drive. The drug is actually taken by men, and it makes them do the dishes.

Fallon: Gov. Chris Christie unveiled his 2014 agenda this week. Asked

what he plans for the next year, Christie said, “I’ll close that bridge

when I get to it.”

Conan: A Southwest Airlines flight landed at the wrong airport in Missouri earlier this week. A Southwest spokesperson said, “Close enough.”

Fallon: Michelle Obama turned 50 years old the other day. She had a

great party–especially when she blew out the candles on her birthday

kale.

Conan: Leonardo DiCaprio left his girlfriend at home to take his mother to the Golden Globes. Then, he dumped his mother for a younger, hotter mom.

Fallon: French President Hollande had an affair with a much younger actress. Under French law he could face up to 30 high-fives.

Leno: During that George Washington bridge scandal a two-block drive took an hour. In LA we call that making pretty good time. People kill for that kind of movement on the 405.

Letterman: Tremendous Golden Globes show–3 hours of actors thanking their agents. Meryl Streep didn’t win, so her goons shut down the Ventura Freeway.

Letterman: New vending machine is out to give you piping hot burritos. Nothing says fine dining like D-4. It’s for people who believe Taco Bell is too snooty.

Conan: Police are investigating that Justin Bieber egg-throwing incident. You know you’re a real gangster when police raid you looking for something from the dairy aisle.

Leno: Today was the fifth anniversary of Capt. Sully landing safely in

the Hudson River. To celebrate, a Southwest pilot tried to land in the

Hudson, but ended up in the Potomac.

Conan: Michelle Obama says she might consider getting plastic surgery. Said, “If Barack’s popularity keeps dropping, I do not want to be recognized.”

Conan: Legal experts say if Justin Bieber is convicted of a felony, he could be deported back to Canada. They also say if he’s found to have cocaine in his system, he could be elected mayor of Toronto.

Fallon: ‘American Idol’s’ 13th season. Starts with thousands, narrowed to 20, then 10, five until finally, there’s only 1 person…left watching the show.

Leno: Justin Bieber is in trouble for throwing eggs at a neighbor’s house. Could be big trouble. The DA wants to charge him as an adult.

Letterman: Police raid Justin Bieber’s house after his altercation with a neighbor. Now there’s a five-day waiting period for him to buy eggs.

Conan: A new study shows that heavy drinking can speed up memory loss in middle-aged men. Not only that, but a new study shows that heavy drinking can speed up memory loss in middle-aged men.

Conan: Oprah’’s movie “The Butler” was not nominated for Best Picture. Oprah is said to be very disappointed, but she’s being comforted by her 700 real butlers.

Fallon: Trace Adkins was on a country music cruise and got into a fight with a Trace Adkins impersonator. Nasty brawl! I heard it took five Elvises to pull them apart.

Fallon: New research has found that having a drink every day can hurt your memory. Or as that’s also known, “the point.”

Leno: Health experts warn that pot smoking can cause apathy. They did a poll and found pot smokers could care less.

Leno: Southwest Airlines is bringing back one of its most popular promotions: 2 for 1. Buy a ticket to one airport, they’ll take you to two others.

Letterman: The Academy Award nominations are out. Meryl Streep was nominated. About time. Woody Allen was nominated, which means we’ll get another angry tweet from that Sinatra kid.

Letterman: A lot of people think the new Pope has gone power crazy. I heard a couple weeks ago he had his uncle executed.

Leno: Did you see this? President Obama wants all the private phone data collected by the NSA stored with a third party. The bad news: The third party is Target.

Fallon: New data says sex actually makes you smarter by improving brain function. Confirms what I’ve always believed — Stephen Hawking is a slut.

Conan: The Patriots and the 49ers were bummed about losing out on the Super Bowl until they realized now they don’t have to go to New Jersey.

RELATED:

Barbara Bush confesses: ‘I love Bill Clinton’



Obama’s addiction to speeches: The more he talks, the less we listen

Obama threatens Iran with the same sanctions he’s imposed on U.S. economy