First Nations Development Institute (First Nations) recently launched its First Nations Native Agriculture and Food Systems Scholarship Program to encourage more Native American college students to enter the agricultural sector in Native communities.

First Nations will award six $1,000 scholarships annually to Native American college students majoring in agriculture and related fields, including but not limited to agribusiness management, agriscience technologies, agronomy, animal husbandry, aquaponics, fisheries and wildlife, food production and safety, food-related policy and legislation, horticulture, irrigation science, plant-based nutrition, and sustainable agriculture or food systems.

Complete information and a link to the online application can be found at First Nations.org.

All applications must be completed and submitted by 5 p.m. Mountain Standard Time on Monday, November 17, 2014.

To be eligible, applicants must:

Be a full-time undergraduate or graduate student majoring in an appropriate field at any recognized college or university, including all tribal colleges and universities.

Be an enrolled member of a current or terminated federal or state tribe, and able to provide documentation.

Have a GPA of at least 3.0.

Demonstrate a commitment to helping his or her Native community reclaim local food-system control.

Applicants will be asked to complete an online application and provide other required information, including tribal documentation, college enrollment verification, unofficial transcripts, a letter of recommendation from a faculty member, and a short essay submission.

“Simply put, we believe that reclaiming control over Indian agriculture in general and local food systems in particular is critical to ensuring the long-lasting health and economic well-being of Native people and their communities, so that’s why we’re launching this program,” said First Nations President Michael E. Roberts. “Native food-system control has the potential to increase food production, improve health and nutrition, and eliminate food insecurity in rural and reservation-based communities, while also promoting entrepreneurship, economic development and even cultural revitalization. We hope many more college graduates will gravitate toward this area as a career choice.”

About First Nations Development Institute

For 34 years, using a three-pronged strategy of educating grassroots practitioners, advocating for systemic change, and capitalizing Indian communities, First Nations has been working to restore Native American control and culturally-compatible stewardship of the assets they own—be they land, human potential, cultural heritage or natural resources—and to establish new assets for ensuring the long-term vitality of Native American communities. First Nations serves Native American communities throughout the United States.