Her excitement was evident over the phone. Tate Schroeder was on an airplane, preparing to fly from Florida to Wisconsin to check out the women’s tennis program in Madison.

The first of Schroeder’s four official college visits further supported her decision to transfer from Centennial’s Arapahoe High School to IMG Academy in Bradenton, Fla. She made the move in 2014 following her sophomore year at Arapahoe, after winning the Class 5A No. 1 singles title.

“Everyone excels at their sports at IMG, so it’s kind of like going from a big fish to a small pond to a bunch of big fish in an even bigger pond,” Schroeder said. “It’s definitely a really competitive atmosphere, but ultimately it makes everyone be a better athlete and makes you want to exceed even more.”

Schroeder began her senior year of high school last week at IMG, where she produced a 3.90 grade-point average as a junior. She is ranked 59th among 2016 college recruits and hopes to turn pro after college.

IMG Academy recruits the best of the best in nine sports, including tennis, and Schroeder has become a five-star college recruit. The 17-year-old — the daughter of prominent Denver-area singer Jake Schroeder, formerly of the band Opie Gone Bad — also will take official visits to Ole Miss, Mississippi State and Missouri. Ohio State is making a big push too.

“Tate is keeping all her options open,” said Dave Shear, her stepfather and longtime personal coach. “She’s developed a pro-style ground stroke — offensive, very aggressive — so her game is a more physical brand and more conducive to certain coaches, certain schools. She wants a big program that can develop her game.”

Shear is a retired Denver police officer who moved to Florida with Tate and her mother before the 2014 school year. Teresa Shear, Tate’s mother, is the director of alumni relations at IMG. Teresa used to be an executive with the Broncos.

Ideally, Teresa would like her daughter to sign with Colorado or the University of Denver; both have solid tennis programs.

“She still talks to CU and DU and feels the hometown connection with those schools,” Teresa said. “Anytime a coach reaches out to her, she responds and sees if there’s any kind of rapport there. She’s got a lot of great opportunities. It’s a good time for her.”

Jake Schroeder, the executive director of the Denver Police Activities League, said Teresa’s work with IMG balances out the financial burden of sending a child to the elite academic and athletic institution. Tate is on a partial scholarship at the school she wanted to attend since picking up tennis at age 8.

A school year at IMG costs about $70,000, depending on the sport, and includes tuition, equipment, boarding and meals.

“As a little kid, she wrote IMG a letter and basically said, ‘I’ll sweep floors or whatever it takes to go to school there.’ So she’s always wanted to go there, and her mom was able to make it work,” Jake Schroeder said. “They really uprooted their lives, and I’m very appreciative of what they’ve done. I couldn’t have done it, with my ties in the community, my work and having two other children. So I’m grateful that her mom and stepdad could do all that.”

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers

Great Tate

Tate Schroeder’s key numbers

1 Finish among 2014 Class 5A girls No. 1 singles players

3.90 Grade-point average last school year at IMG Academy

25 Strength-of-schedule ranking among 2016 college freshmen

59 Ranking among 2016 college freshmen

Mike Chambers,The Denver Post