Customers looking for art and furniture are looking for things that are both old and new, a paradox that requires creativity, some NOTO arts district store owners are reporting.

Lisa Cusick, who owns Two Days Market, 829 N. Kansas Ave., with Coralee Evans, said younger customers aren’t as interested in antiques as older generations were, but they are looking for something distinctive. Often, that means old things that have been repurposed to serve as furniture or decorations, she said.

“I think Topekans are really good recyclers,” she said. “They want to buy something useful.”

Some of the things they, or artists who sell with them, have remade include a large tire made into a table, a filing cabinet made into a planter and old oil containers reminiscent of the Tin Man’s hat that have been turned into unusual lighting fixtures. Some of the items have stories behind them, and that often makes the sale, Cusick said.

“There’s an old saying: Grandma had it, Mom threw it out, I’m buying it back,” she said.

Younger people rarely buy things like souvenir spoons for collections anymore, Evans said, but they do look for furniture and seasonal decorative items that will be different from what their friends have.

“If people buy a table, they’re going to use it,” she said.

Sandy Martin, Debbie Geist, Erin Hatton-Landwehr and Carol Ingenthron own 4 Girls Garage, 837 N. Kansas Ave. Many of their projects involve taking something old and either refurbishing or repurposing it, Geist said.

“We like rustic. We like old. We like unique,” she said. “We find that the repurposed pieces are pretty popular.”

Some of the projects they, or artists who sell with them, have done include turning old doors into headboards for beds; bedsprings into decorations for outdoor lighting; flour sacks into pillow cases; a chimney flue into the base of a table; and wine bottles into citronella oil lamps.

They also sometimes sell shutters, doors and other odds and ends to people who want to do their own projects, Geist said. One woman has asked them to keep an eye out for a mixing attachment used in bakeries and cafeterias so she can use it to complete a project, she said.

“We save them the shopping legwork sometimes,” she said.

Many of the customers are collectors and people from outside Topeka who want something distinctive, Martin said, but they also get some customers who are just looking for sturdy, inexpensive furniture.

The owners often shop together to share ideas, but sometimes they buy distinctive things without a clear idea of what they could become, Martin said.

“I look for unique things about the piece” when making buying decisions, she said. “We just store them and we wait.”

Cora Spencer, owner of The Eclective, a store that sells cut metal art and has areas for other artists to sell their projects, said some of their artists turn bicycle tires, bottle caps and bits of wire into jewelry; plastic shopping bags into purses and wallets; and metal odds and ends into sculptures of spiders and crabs.

The Eclective, 900 N. Kansas Ave., has been in NOTO for three years, Spencer said, and she has seen an increase in “treasure hunters” and people interested in finding odds and ends they can use for their own artistic projects.

“I feel like that’s what this area calls for,” she said.

Repurposing isn’t just about artistic expression, though, Spencer said. The building The Eclective occupies was once a grocery store, and she decided to freshen up the existing counter and to turn the produce cooler into a display case instead of buying new fixtures. They also got used flooring that had been in Payless stores to lay over old tiling they couldn’t easily remove because it contained asbestos, and turned things like wooden pallets and a bingo card box into displays, she said.

“It’s really fun and I think for us start-up, small business types, it’s a more affordable option,” she said.