Jared Abbrederis caught two passes for 74 yards and a touchdown and fumbled before suffering a head injury late in the first quarter. Credit: Mark Hoffman

SHARE Video Loading... Badgers Chat Monday, Oct. 14

UW FOOTBALL

Jeff Potrykus, beat writer

Read Transcript

By of the

Madison — Wisconsin's final offensive play of the first quarter Saturday was also the last action of the day for senior wide receiver Jared Abbrederis.

The Badgers led, 7-3, after Abbrederis atoned for an early fumble with a 63-yard touchdown catch.

Late in the first on third and 4 from the Wildcats' 39, Abbrederis dropped a back-shoulder throw and Northwestern's Ibraheim Campbell intercepted it to end the drive. As the Wildcats took possession, Abbrederis, who went down hard on the play, made his way to the locker room to be examined for a head injury.

A turnover and the loss of Abbrederis could have been the 1-2 punch that sent the Wisconsin offense reeling, but the Badgers emerged 35-6 winners against 19th-ranked Northwestern. Instead of stalling without their star receiver, Wisconsin's offense found new ways to move the ball as eight players — the most this season — caught passes after Abbrederis' injury.

"That's been the challenge," coach Gary Andersen said. "We've talked about it all year long; having a couple wide receivers step up and help Jared out. Well today there was no Jared, so they had to help our offense out. We're getting better in that area."

The Badgers set the tone on their first possession without Abbrederis, who returned quickly from his medical evaluation and watched the rest of the game from the sidelines. Joel Stave hit four different targets — Jordan Frederick, Jeff Duckworth, James White and Melvin Gordon — and went 5 for 5 for 52 yards on the Badgers' 11-play, 75-yard touchdown scoring drive.

Overall, Stave was 13 for 20 for 145 yards and threw two touchdowns and an interception after Abbrederis' exit.

"You never want to see one of your better players, one of your senior leaders, come out of a game like that," said Stave, who was 17 for 28 with 241 yards, three touchdowns and two interceptions overall. "That being said, we've got a lot of confidence in the other guys.

"That's what you want as a quarterback — guys getting open, guys making plays down the field — and I thought we did that today."

Two of the pass catchers who stood out were seniors — receiver Jeff Duckworth and tight end Jacob Pedersen. Duckworth finished with just two catches but led all receivers after Abbrederis' injury with 36 yards. Considering Duckworth, who suffers from bulging discs in his lower back, hasn't been 100% for quite some time, his effort against Northwestern especially impressed Andersen.

"Duck comes back in there and he continually makes plays for us," Andersen said. "He catches some big balls and he's a young man that has to prepare himself the right way.

"And a lot of it during the week is mentally because he can't go out there and take a Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday practice. He can't do it."

Pedersen is also dealing with injuries, including a left knee that kept him out two weeks ago against Ohio State. Entering the game, Pedersen was one of Stave's favorite targets and it showed that the quarterback was glad to have him back. Pedersen led the team with four receptions for 30 yards and a touchdown.

"He's a great player, not only in the run game, but also in the pass game as everybody knows," Stave said. "Just having him as another option to throw to is big for us."

Stave wasn't the only one who was glad to see No. 48 on the field. Gordon, who ran for 172 yards with a lot of those coming behind Pedersen, couldn't say enough about the senior tight end.

"He's a big part of our offense," Gordon said. "He made some big plays today on third downs. He's an extremely good player and we definitely need him as a senior."

To alleviate the pressure on receivers and tight ends with Abbrederis out, the Badgers also turned to their backfield to produce in the passing game. White caught three passes for 29 yards, and Gordon, Corey Clement and Derek Watt also recorded receptions, with Watt catching the final touchdown pass.

"It was part of the game plan," White said. "Running backs are always a part of receiving the football. Whenever the ball's getting thrown to us, we need to catch it and make plays with it."

After the game, Andersen said Abbrederis looked good and he expects him to take the field next week against Illinois. That's a good thing, too, considering last year Abbrederis torched the Fighting Illini for 117 yards and a touchdown on seven catches.