On Monday, The Blaze reported that some troops on Facebook have shown their opposition to a potential military strike on Syria.

Photos posted on Facebook show what appears to be uniformed military personnel holding signs that say they did not join to support Al Qaeda in Syria. The troops' faces are all covered, possibly due to military regulations prohibiting certain political activities by uniformed service members.

One photo, for example, shows an Army sergeant in fatigues with a sign telling Obama he will not deploy "to fight for your Al-Qaeda rebels in Syria." That picture has been liked and shared over 2,200 times.

Another photo shows a Marine sergeant in dress blues holding a sign saying he did not join the Corps to "fight for Al Qaeda in a Syrian civil war."

According to The Blaze, the Uniform Code of Military Justice says officers and NCOs could face court martial for such actions.

Article 88, for example, says:

Any commissioned officer who uses contemptuous words against the President, the Vice President, Congress, the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of a military department, the Secretary of Transportation, or the Governor or legislature of any State, Territory, Commonwealth, or possession in which he is on duty or present shall be punished as a court-martial may direct.

Article 92 says those who fail to obey a lawful order can be punished as "a court-martial may direct."

According to The Blaze, the photos have appeared all over the Internet, and have received thousands of "likes" on Facebook.

On Friday, ABC News said that 50 percent say the U.S. should not strike Syria, but 50 percent said they would support a strike if it was "limited to airstrikes using cruise missiles launched from U.S. naval ships that were meant to destroy military units and infrastructure that have been used to carry out chemical attacks."

Related:

----------------------------------------------------------------

If you like this article, you can follow Joe on Twitter @jnewby1956, visit and like his Facebook page, or subscribe to receive email updates when a new article is published.

For hard-hitting conservative commentary, please visit Joe's blog, the Conservative Firing Line. You can also find Joe's articles at Right News Now, Tea Party Tribune, Newsbusters, Liberty Unyielding and PolitiCollision.

Be sure to listen to "Grit and Grace" every Thursday from 6-8 p.m. Pacific Time on Blog Talk Radio, where you can hear Joe discuss current events.