People Moves of the Week: Blackhill Partners, William Blair, McGlinchey Stafford

Blackhill promotes two bankers; William Blair hires new managing director; McGlinchey Stafford taps Richard Pelliccio for the firm's Albany, N.Y., office

BDA Partners — Howard Lee has joined the investment bank as head of BDA Seoul, overseeing BDA's growth in South Korea. Before joining BDA, Lee led the M&A division at Korean investment bank Samsung Securities for four years. Past clients include the Carlyle Group LP (Nasdaq: CG), CVC Capital Partners Ltd., Goldman Sachs Group Inc. (NYSE: GS), Korea Telecom, Standard Chartered (LON: STAN) and Visteon Corp. (NYSE: VC). Between 2004 and 2011, he advised on M&A deals for Macquarie Securities, also in Seoul.

Blackhill Partners LLC — The Dallas investment bank has promoted Lance Gurley to director and Joel Brown to vice president. Prior to joining Blackhill, Gurley was a senior vice president with consulting firm Butler Snow Advisors, a subsidiary of Butler Snow LLP, while Brown was vice president of research and data strategies at Goldman Sachs in London.

Blank Rome LLP — Michelle Gervais has joined the Philadelphia firm as a partner in the consumer finance group, representing large national and international banks, as well as subprime mortgage lenders. She will be based in Tampa.

Fifth Street Finance Corp. (Nasdaq: FSC) — The Greenwich, Connecticut-based lender has promoted Todd Owens to chief executive officer. Owens joined Fifth Street from Goldman Sachs in September as president. Leonard Tannenbaum resigned as FSC's chief executive officer after six and a half years in that role. The board also appointed Ivelin Dimitrov to president of FSC. Dimitrov joined Fifth Street in May 2005. Fifth Street won Mergers & Acquisitions' Lender of the Year Award in 2014.

Gibson Dunn & Crutcher LLP — Y. Shukie Grossman has joined the New York office as a partner and co-chair of the law firm’s investment funds practice group. Grossman is the former co-head of the U.S. private funds group at Weil Gotshal & Manges and, before that, was at Skadden Arps Slate Meagher & Flom from 1996 to 2000. He began his legal career as an attorney with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission from 1994 to 1996.

Hilco Global — Steve Feldman is returning to the Northbrook, Illinois, financial services firm as senior vice president, sourcing deals and managing asset acquisitions. Feldman, who has been running his own firm, SJF Auctions LLC, since 2013, originally spent 11 years at Hilco as manager of machinery and equipment appraisals from 2001 to 2012.

Houlihan Lokey —K. Raj Dayalan has joined the Los Angeles investment bank’s media and telecommunications group as a director. Dayalan will focus primarily on advising companies in the Internet space. He joins from UBS AG, where he was an executive director overseeing the Internet investment banking efforts within the firm’s global TMT group. Prior to UBS, he worked in a number of roles, including Deutsche Bank’s technology group and Salomon Brothers’ media and telecom practice, where he began his career.

K&L Gates LLP — Karsten Seidel joined the tax practice of the law firm's Frankfurt, Germany, office as a partner. Previously, he worked at Hong Kong-based law firm King & Wood Mallesons. Before that, Seidel was with the tax department of Ernst & Young.

Kobre & Kim LLP — The New York law firm added Daniel Zaheer as principal in San Francisco where he will work alongside Michael Ng, who launched the office in January. The two previously worked together in Kerr & Wagstaffe LLP’s intellectual property group, also in San Francisco.

Linklaters LLP — Michael Kent, who currently heads the New York financial adviser's global financial regulation group, was named head of finance and projects, effective May 1. Kent has been a partner at the firm since 1999.

McGlinchey Stafford — Richard Pelliccio (pictured) has joined the New Orleans law firm in Albany, New York, as of counsel. Pelliccio, who has practiced commercial litigation for two decades, began his career in the aerospace insurance department at Assicurazioni Generali, from1999 to 2001, in London.

McGuireWoods LLP — Penny Zacharias is joining the Richmond, Virginia-based firm's debt finance practice as a partner. Working out of Pittsburgh, Zacharias was previously at Buchanan Ingersoll & Rooney PC, where she began her career in 2002.

Nixon Peabody — The Boston law firm brought in Charlie Burckmyer, one of the co-founders of private equity firm Knob Hill Partners, as director. Burckmyer will take a lead role in sourcing companies that are seeking financing, as part of the firm's Capital Connector program.

Paul Hastings LLP — The New York law firm's São Paulo branch hired three partners from Allen & Overy LLP. The team includes Robert Kartheiser, chairman of the global project finance practice; Cathleen McLaughlin, previously head of A&O's New York capital markets group; and Bruno Soares, who currently has a Brazil-based project finance practice but will be in New York until he receives final regulatory approval to joine São Paulo.

Perkins Coie LLP — Fabricio Vayra has joined the Seattle firm's intellectual property practice as a partner. He was most recently assistant general counsel for intellectual property with Time Warner Inc. (NYSE: TWX), where he spent nearly a decade advising on intellectual property and Internet policy issues. Vayra has also managed corporate restructuring deals, including acquisitions/divestitures, pertaining to trademarks.

William Blair & Co. LLC — The Chicago investment bank hired James O'Connor as a managing director to source deals with startups. O'Connor comes in from MVC Capital, where he led originations on venture capital, private equity and debt recapitalizations. O'Connor is a co-founder of 1871, a Chicago digital co-working space, and is founder of the Chicago Entrepreneurial Center. He also co-founded Motorola Ventures and has worked at various firms, including A.T. Kearney, Ariel Capital Management and Sidley Austin LLP.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: