Smart Talk is a daily, live, interactive program featuring conversations with newsmakers and experts in a variety of fields and exploring a wide range of issues and ideas, including the economy, politics, health care, education, culture, and the environment. Smart Talk airs live every week day at 9 a.m. on WITF’s 89.5 and 93.3. Listen to Smart Talk live online from 9-10 a.m. weekdays and at 7 p.m. (Repeat of 9 a.m. program) Host: Scott LaMar

What to look for on Smart Talk Monday, March 17, 2014:

Electronic cigarettes are being marketed as a safe alternative to traditional smokes. But are they?

E-cigarettes aren't approved by the Food and Drug Administration in part because there has been very little research into how or whether they affect human health.

An e-cigarette or cigar may or may not look like it's tobacco-filled counterpart. Some resemble a pen or tire gauge. They're battery powered and activated when the user inhales through a mouthpiece. A heater vaporizes liquid nicotine into a small cartridge and also produces what looks like smoke. Some don't contain nicotine.

Appearing on Monday's Smart Talk is Dr. Jonathan Foulds, a Professor of Public Health Sciences and Psychiatry at Penn State Hershey to discuss what he's learned about e-cigarettes.

Researchers from Penn State University are conducting an online survey to improve understanding of electronic cigarettes. Electronic cigarette users may complete the survey anonymously, or can provide contact details at the end if interested in participating in a laboratory study of electronic cigarette use.

Please click on the link below to complete the survey.

https://redcap.ctsi.psu.edu/redcap/surveys/?s=v94cbA

Dr. Jonathan Foulds

Also, patient portals could be the next big thing as part of the Affordable Care Act.

Patient portals are on-line tools where patients can go 24 hours a day to schedule appointments, check medications and doctor's notes, and get answers to common health questions.

witf reporter Ben Allen has studied patient portals and will let us know what he's found.

Listen to the program: