Here's a troubling thought: more kids and young adults are intentionally hurting themselves -- sometimes lethally.

"The biggest news here is that there is a startling jump in the number of kids hospitalized for suicide and self injury between 2006 and 2011," said Celeste Torio, PhD, MPH, scientific review officer, Office of Extramural Research Education and Priority Populations (OEREP) at the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ).

The data on self-injury and suicide come from a report, published in American Pediatrics that found inpatient visits for suicide, suicidal ideation, and self-injury rose by 104% from 29,000 in 2006 to just below 59,000 in 2011, while "all-cause" children's hospitalizations have not increased.

The spike in hospitalizations was most pronounced among 10- to 14-year-olds, showing a 151% increase, and in 5- to 9-year-olds with a 130% increase. Children ages 10 to 14 also visited the hospital 50% more for "all listed mental health conditions," the report noted.

While the researchers chose time periods before and after the Great Recession, the report itself provides only a "snapshot of findings from the data," and "based on the analysis we can't make any conclusions," Torio said.

"Mental health needs could be greater or they could be being treated more seriously than before, but we can't speculate on those reasons without more information."

The report is based on the 2006 and 2011 AHRQ's Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP) which sources data from two national databases that estimate hospital visits and analyzes patterns of emergency department use.

The report also drew on the 2006 and 2011 Medical Expenditure Panels Survey (MEPS), a household survey where parents describe health conditions that affected their children that year.

The report has several limitations including the failure to elucidate the geographic areas that have the most vulnerable children. It also failed to provide data on the job status of parents of the hospitalized children, Torio said. For that kind of detailed information, more research is needed, she said.

Torio said she hoped the report will be used to assess improvements related to components of the Affordable Care Act around children's mental health.

"The report should serve as a measuring stick to gauge the effectiveness and impact of those [ACA] provisions."

Key Takeaways

Kelly Kelleher, MD, a pediatrician and researcher at Nationwide Children's Hospital, wrote a commentary in response to Torio's study, also published in Academic Pediatrics.

Kelleher wrote that the administrative claims data used by HCUP have "many problems," the MEPS survey has a small sample size, and that using two specific calendar years rather than a longer window of time doesn't capture year-to-year variation. Still, he found the study's basic message real.

"This is very large numbers of kids presenting to the emergency rooms around the country with suicide attempts," he told MedPage Today.

And the issue is being ignored, he said.

"We are sweeping this problem under the rug, because if this ever happened in cancer or heart disease or even infectious disease, the country would stop. People would demand action immediately," Kelleher said.

But because children with mental illness lack a "vocal and visible constituency" there hasn't been an outcry.

Kelleher said community health services, even those specifically developed to reduce child hospitalizations, are failing.

Disparities in Mental Health

In his commentary, Kelleher noted that the poorest children had the greatest increase in hospitalizations for mental health conditions.

Lacking resources, poor families often delay treatment, he said. When a child finally does see a doctor, his or her condition is more severe. Lack of exercise and poor nutrition also influence mental health conditions. Trauma, exposure to violence, having a teenage mother, "every one of these is an additive factor," he said.

"Poor children are just subject to a lot more of those insults, and so when something bad happens it tips the scale for them," Kelleher said.

Reaching for Solutions

One thing that's needed is interventions to teach parenting skills such as "how to correct children without anger or emotion," Kelleher said.

"We expect people to know that, but that's not a natural talent if you've never seen it."

Interventions, such as those developed by accountable care organizations, have also shown results, Kelleher said.

"We can prevent a significant portion of mental disorder for children and adolescents," Kelleher said.

"If you start them early at young ages and work on parent and family structures in the community and early school interventions, kids respond. Kids do well," he said.

John Straus, MD, medical director of special projects at the Massachusetts Behavior Health Partnership (MBHP) in Boston and the founding director of the Massachusetts Child Psychiatry Access Project (MCPAP), noted another important aspect of preventing hospitalization is behavioral health screenings in primary care offices. These tools can be used to connect children in the earliest stages of a problem to alternative services.

"If people are attached to community-based services, such as therapeutic mentors and family partners, the families do better and things don't get to be in crisis that requires someone leaving their home," he said.

Straus also voiced concern that some providers choose the most accessible intervention rather than the most appropriate one. This issue is most patently illustrated in the rise of antipsychotic medications among children.

"I think people are trying to use antipsychotics for treating behaviors that could be managed by environmental supports rather than medications, but those environmental support services often don't exist or are not available or are not paid for."

Kelleher added, "If one-third of all our medical costs from kids are going to antipsychotic drugs, we have an issue here."

Investing in Change

Torio's study reported that the annual cost of childhood mental health conditions was $247 billion, which includes outpatient and inpatient care. Healthcare costs for children with mental health conditions are roughly double that of other children.

Most providers agree that to address this problem, lawmakers and health systems are going to have to rethink care design.

One problem is that mental health parity laws, don't go far enough, Straus said. Because the behavioral services are so unique, there isn't anything to compare them with on the medical side, he said.

In Massachusetts, where Straus practices, supports such as mobile crisis services allow children in crisis to get help at home or school or a doctor's office. Medicaid beneficiaries can receive in-home behavioral health services for autism, and family-partner support services are available, but they're not required.

"[A]nd those are the services that keep people out of the hospital and out of emergency rooms," he said.

They're also "not cheap," he adds.

Even the savings built from "reasonably reducing" hospitalizations wouldn't pay for the type of community services he described. The return on investment for these interventions might not be realized until years later, but that isn't a reason not to use them, he said. "It's better for the kids, better for their long-term health than putting them in a hospital."

In his commentary, Kelleher wrote that in theory, the Affordable Care Act "encourages value-based systems" and approves of the concept of preventive care.

Potential interventions that might curb these hospitalizations include incorporating parenting classes into Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) programs, Head Start, and pediatric practices. Another support for school-age children is the Good Behavior Game, which "rewards kids' pro-social behavior" and teaches self-discipline. The game reduces classroom disruptions and is associated with increased graduation rates, Kelleher said.

But at the moment, funding problems persist. Without true investment in preventive care, the number of emergency room visits will continue to grow.

"There's no federal response. The jails are warehousing kids with psychiatric problems and drug use. The special [education] programs aren't about treatment, they're about education," he said.

"When families have nowhere to go, the emergency rooms and the hospitals are going to fill up."