Virginia 'Ginny' Pulliam was described as 'a very courageous person'

Ginny Pulliam ( Picasa )

Loveland philanthropist Virginia "Ginny" Pulliam loved people, and she loved planning gatherings with her family and friends, even after she moved into a nursing home at age 100.

"She's a great little grandma," said Ginny's granddaughter, Jenny Kelly of Littleton. "She was classy, witty, sharp as a tack, giving and generous."

Ginny died on Wednesday, Jan. 8, 12 days shy of her 104th birthday.

"For all purposes, she really is 104 years old," said Sandra "Sandy" Olson, Pulliam's daughter and Kelly's mother.

Ginny was an only child born in Indianapolis, Ind., and went to high school and college there, studying teaching.

In 1941, she moved to Denver and taught for 23½ years at Graland Country Day School. She held other jobs since, including serving as a probation officer at a juvenile court in Denver and as a hostess at a ranch in Creede.

Ginny married her second husband, David Rice "D.R." Pulliam, in 1967. D.R, a rancher, banker and land developer, was the son of pioneers D.T. and Lillian Pulliam, who had five children. He died in 1990 at age 89.

After they married, the Pulliams moved to a ranch near Masonville to run cattle, staying there until the Big Thompson flood of 1976.

Ginny later sold the 2,600 acres of ranchland to Fort Collins, creating the Bobcat Ridge Natural Area that opened to the public in 2006. The D.R. and Virginia Pulliam Charitable Trust made it possible for all fifth-graders in Thompson School District to travel to the natural area to study its environment and history.

Advertisement

"They would have parties there," Sandy Olson said about the ranch. "She loved to cook, and would do a lot of cooking for these parties."

During the 1976 flood, their home and swimming pool were destroyed, Sandy Olson said.

They moved to the highest point in the loft of the tack room, and as 22 feet of water broke into their house, D.R. grabbed a central beam and she clasped onto him, Sandy Olson said. The two were swept up to a cottonwood tree and held on, staying there for three or four hours until help came, she said.

"She was a very courageous person," said Lynn Hammond, an attorney in Loveland. "She handled that like it was something you had to go through."

Hammond recalled Ginny's "remarkable memory for detail" and ability to remember conversations weeks after the fact.

"She was considerate," Hammond said. "She was concerned about the other person."

Ginny and D.R. moved to Lake Loveland after losing everything in the flood, not having flood insurance. Starting over, they got a boat they named "Grandchildren's Bait" to lure Sandy Olson's daughters, Kelly and Julie Olson, over for a visit and some jet skiing.

"When I brought friends, (Ginny) would always cook, making sure they had seconds and thirds," Julie Olson said. "She just tried to make everyone happy and comfortable."

Julie Olson, who lives in Denver, described Ginny as generous and thoughtful.

"She had a great sense of adventure and shared a lot of her travel stories with me," Julie Olson said, adding that Ginny brought back dolls to give to her and Kelly from every country they visited. "It was her way of sharing her adventure."

Ginny ate healthy foods, cooked from scratch and, even at 100 and beyond, did not take any medications. But she did drink four pots of coffee a day, Kelly said.

"She ate like we were supposed to eat," Julie Olson said.

Ginny also was described by many as caring and giving.

Her family donated land and helped fund the construction of the Pulliam Community Building, completed in 1939 and renamed in 1988.

She donated $1 million over five years to the Loveland Boys & Girls Club, serving as its namesake for the Pulliam Youth Center.

During the grand opening of the clubhouse, she gave a talk, which she didn't prepare in advance.

"It was a good talk," Sandy Olson said. "At age 99, that's pretty amazing."

The grand opening was on Ginny's birthday, said Kathi Wright, executive director of the Boys & Girls Clubs of Larimer County.

"She was just so tickled," Wright said. "She honestly was like a kid."

Wright described Ginny as a delight to be around.

"She had the most beautiful blue eyes," Wright said. "I just loved to sit and talk with her."

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@

reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm.

Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.

wordpress.com.