ST. PAUL, Minn. — University of Denver freshman defenseman Blake Hillman is from Elk River, about 40 miles from the Xcel Energy Center. He had about 10 family members in the seats among the sparse crowd Sunday for the NCAA West Regional championship game against unheralded Ferris State. He doesn’t look old enough to drive, plus he came into the weekend with one goal in 36 games this season.In other words, he’s an unlikely pre-tournament guess to be the Regionals’ Most Outstanding Player.

Did he even dream of that?

“No way,” he said after the game. “Not a chance.”

Yet Hillman had a goal, including the tie-breaker with 4:32 remaining, and two assists and indeed was named the weekend MOP as the Pioneers beat the Bulldogs 6-3 and advanced to the Frozen Four for the first time since winning back-to-back NCAA titles in 2004 and 2005.

The 25-9-6 Pioneers will meet National Collegiate Hockey Conference rival North Dakota in a 6:30 p.m. semifinal on April 7 at Tampa’s Amalie Arena, the home of the NHL’s Tampa Bay Lightning.

“It’s kind of a dream come true to come back here and play,” Hillman said of St. Paul. “Growing up in Minnesota, you always dream about coming to the Xcel and playing in the high school hockey tournament. I never made it, but I think I made up for it this weekend.”

That’s probably an understatement, since he also had a goal in the Pioneers’ 7-2 rout of Boston University in the Saturday semifinal and his score was the game-winner Sunday. It helped eliminate the possibility that DU would come up short in a quirky game it mostly dominated against the fourth-place team from the lightly regarded Western Collegiate Hockey Association.

Pacific Rim linemates Danton Heinen, Dylan Gambrell and Trevor Moore each had a goal in the Pioneers’ win. Gambrell and Heinen also had two assists.

“This time of year, you need your great players to play great,” said DU coach Jim Montgomery. “They did.”

Yet it was 3-3 going in to the final minutes, and one bounce could have made the Pioneers rue not putting it away sooner. But Hillman took a pass from Heinen and scored from the top of the slot to put the Pioneers ahead, and Nolan Zajac and Quentin Shore added insurance goals in the final minutes.

“‘Heinz’ got it in the corner and made a great play,” Hillman said. “Our coaches were preaching about how the D-men would be wide open, so I just walked in the slot wide open. I just made sure I didn’t hit the guy who was trying to block the shot, and luckily it went in.”

How quirky was this one? The Pioneers got the first 10 shots of the game and outshot the Bulldogs 15-3 in the first 20 minutes, yet were locked in a 2-2 tie after the opening period. The Bulldogs — with school president David Eisler, a world-class clarinetist, playing in the pep band tucked in one corner of a lower balcony — got goals from Gerald Mayhew and Corey Mackin among their three shots. Mayhew’s was on a breakaway after Hammond fell, Mackin’s on a power play when his shot from a tough angle to DU goalie Tainner Jaillet’s left went off Hammond and in. Each of those pulled the Bulldogs into ties, matching the DU goals from Heinen and Gambrell.

“We just talked about how anything worth winning, you’re going to have to right through adversity,” said Montgomery. “We weren’t having any puck luck and they were. We just talked about sticking with the process and how we were owning his game and they were fortunate to be in it.”

Moore, sprung for a partial breakaway by a Hillman pass, made it 3-2 early in the second, but Kyle Schempp tied it up again for the Bulldogs at 7:17 of the third, setting up the Pioneers’ three-goal burst in the final minutes.

“The growth of this team through the year has been incredible,” said Montgomery, in his third season with the Pioneers. “It’s just fun to be part of something like that and to be able to get to the Frozen Four and to be able to add to the great tradition of Denver hockey is awesome. But we’re only halfway home.”

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or @TFrei