CRUZ DELEGATES CRUMBLE – WHY MARCO hasn’t endorsed -- NEW WORRY FOR HILLARY – B’DAYS: “Morning” Mika Brzezinski, Steve Elmendorf, Jesse Rodriguez, Rick Stengel

By Mike Allen (@mikeallen; mallen@politico.com) and Daniel Lippman (@dlippman; dlippman@politico.com)

CONVENTIONWATCH -- “GOP shuns electronic ballots at open convention: Republicans opt for tradition over tech to maximize drama for national audience,” by Darren Samuelsohn: “[Senior party officials — worried about hacking and Internet reliability in the overcrowded Cleveland arena and eager to preserve the live television drama surrounding a drawn-out roll call — are ruling out a change to convention bylaws that would allow for electronic voting [and] will follow the old-fashioned, traditional practice in which each state delegation takes its alphabetical turn calling out its picks.” http://politi.co/1Tf0M4n

Story Continued Below

TRUMP’S PLAN B, per AP’s Julie Bykowicz: “Outside groups, including one led by ... Roger Stone, and a loose collection of colorful supporters such as ‘Bikers for Trump’ are organizing ahead of the July convention … soliciting money to pay for their transportation and housing … already trying to influence the mood of the convention with a social media campaign saying that anything short of a Trump nomination would be ‘stealing.’” http://apne.ws/1Tfou0m

IF YOU READ ONLY 1 THING: One of the best pieces yet for UNDERSTANDING TRUMP ... Andrew Sullivan is back, with the cover story in New York magazine, “Our Democracy Has Never Been So Ripe for Tyranny -- The Case Against the People” with the online headline: “Democracies end when they are too democratic. And right now, America is a breeding ground for tyranny.” http://nym.ag/1X42nzY ... See the cover. http://bit.ly/1NhWbSR

MONEY QUOTE – In a WSJ B1 story by Keach Hagey and Nick Niedzwiadek, “Election Race Lights a Fire Under CNN,” CNN Worldwide president Jeff Zucker says: “I think it was a legitimate criticism of CNN that it was a little too liberal ... We have added many more middle-of-the-road conservative voices to an already strong stable of liberal voices. And I think that we are a much more-balanced network and, as a result, a much more inviting network to a segment of the audience that might not have otherwise been willing to come here.” http://on.wsj.com/1rqzthi

SCOOP – “Obamacare’s November surprise: Health plans hit by Obamacare losses could raise rates just weeks before the election,” by Paul Demko http://politi.co/1X4hzND

RUBIO STRATEGERY – “Why Marco Rubio hasn’t endorsed Ted Cruz,” by Florida Playbook author Marc Caputo: “Rubio has already helped Cruz by renting him his fundraising list, ... withdrawing his name from the primary ballot in select states so as not to siphon votes from Cruz ... [S]aid one Rubio insider[:] “What Marco isn’t going to do is just endorse Ted, watch Trump win anyway and then, in four years, watch Cruz use Marco’s endorsement against him if they both run for president again.’” http://politi.co/1SWMNGz ... Subscribe to Florida Playbook http://politi.co/1JDm23W

--Drudge banner, “CRUZ DELEGATES START TO FREAK! FEAR CONVENTION CIRCUS” – Links to National Review’s Brendan Bordelson, “Cruz Delegates Waver as Trump Gains Momentum” http://bit.ly/1UrGb26

“OFF THE RESERVATION” – Nick Gass: Trump needles Clinton for telling CNN’s Jake Tapper that she has “a lot of experience dealing with men who sometimes get off the reservation.” Critics slammed Clinton for insensitivity to Native Americans -- #OffTheReservation. Amanda Renteria, the campaign’s national political director, tweeted that Clinton “meant no disrespect.” Trump piles on with a “Crooked Hillary” tweet: “Actually, she has done poorly with such men!” http://politi.co/1SFMv4N

JEFFREY TOOBIN in The New Yorker, “The Showman: How U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara struck fear into Wall Street and Albany”: “It seems likely ... that he would welcome an offer to be the U.S. Attorney General in a Democratic Administration. Such an appointment would make him the boss of James Comey, now the F.B.I. director, for whom Bharara worked when he was an A.U.S.A.” http://bit.ly/1NO56LM

FIRST LADY MELANIA -- “The Model American: Melania Trump is the exception to her husband’s nativist politics,” by The New Yorker’s Lauren Collins: “Melania will become the first foreign-born First Lady since Louisa Adams, though Louisa Adams doesn’t really count, as her father was an American ... Like Donald, Melania doesn’t drink. She never breaks ranks, not even with a teasing criticism. ... Melania is as imperial as her husband, if not more so ... positions herself as aspirational, playing ice queen rather than soccer mom. Not only does she never joke about her husband; she is entirely self-serious.” http://bit.ly/1Z222fu

WEST WING ARRIVAL LOUNGE -- Carl Woog to the NSC – “After nearly six years at the Department of Defense, this month I am taking a new assignment at the White House working on the communications team for the National Security Council. I am excited about the opportunity to help the administration finish out the year strong and get to work everyday with so many great friends and professionals. Before I left the Pentagon, Secretary Carter had my family in for a farewell celebration. ...

“I’m particularly grateful for Secretary Carter and his encouragement to think ‘outside the five sided box’ - as the cake said! I am extremely proud of all the initiatives we launched together from building bridges with Silicon Valley to opening up more opportunities for women and all to serve in our armed forces - and there’s much more to come. It’s been an extraordinary honor in every way to work alongside the military and see them do what they do best around the world. Thanks to all of you for helping keep us safe.”



** A message from BP: We give our offshore teams 24/7 support from onshore experts – so we have extra sets of eyes on our wells every day. See our Houston Monitoring Center and latest safety improvements: on.bp.com/HMC **

COMING ATTRACTIONS – Director Rob Reiner and Castle Rock Entertainment has a film in the works about the former Knight Ridder journos Warren Strobel, Jonathan Landay, John Walcott and Joe Galloway who wrote stories disputing the WMD intel pre-Iraq. The working title is “Shock and Awe.” On a recent Sunday Strobel and his former colleagues met for about 7 hours at the Four Seasons in Georgetown to go over the script “page by page” with Reiner, his wife Michelle, financier Johnson Chan, and scriptwriter Joey Hartstone.

--BACKSTORY -- Warren told Playbook: “About 2 years ago, Rob Reiner actually called us and told us he’s been wanting to do this movie for awhile and we’ve been working with him and a script writer for the last two years and things have really accelerated in the last few months. ... It tells the story of how me, Landay, Walcott and Joe Galloway challenged the Bush Administration’s case for war. ... The movie very much tries to show the cost of what was Bush’s decision. ...

“The movie does have financing, the script has been written and is being tweaked and we have every indication that this project is going to go forward. ... There is no casting yet.” Strobel says he never thought at that time that there could ever be a movie made about the reporting. “I think I speak for all four of us [that this] is surreal and surprising. ... We’ve talked a lot and joked a lot about who might play the four of us.” He also hopes to go on set for at least part of the shooting.

--About the message of the film: “This has been cast often in the public sphere as an intelligence failure but I’m hoping the movie will make clear that it really wasn’t an intelligence failure. That these people wanted to go to war long before the intelligence was clear one way or the other. We also hope that it serves as maybe what ‘Spotlight’ did to motivate young journalists and show what investigative journalism is like and how important it is.”

MILESTONE -- “20 Years Later, Welfare Overhaul Resonates for Families and Candidates,” by Clyde Haberman for NYT’s Retro Report: “In a sense, this is a “Back to the Future’ presidential campaign, with candidates revisiting a specific time in the past to explain — and often lament — where the country is today. ... One ‘Back to the Future’ issue from the ’90s has received relatively scant attention, but the next president may have a hard time avoiding it, for it affects millions of Americans. It involves the welfare system, overhauled in 1996 by a Republican Congress and a Democratic president.” http://nyti.ms/1rbTbNu

SPOTTED: Vice President Biden at Cafe Milano on Saturday chatting with fellow Scrantonian Kim Kingsley ... Biden on Sunday walking out of the West Elm on 14th Street wearing a University of Delaware wind breaker checking his phone

SEND YOUR SPOTTINGS to dlippman@politico.com

HOT VIDEO -- “This [WHCD] Blooper Reel Highlights All Of Obama’s Most Awkward Moments” – 6-min. video http://huff.to/26JHo9O

WASHINGTON, INC. – “Political Operatives Find Demand for Their Skills in Business World,” by WSJ’s Patrick O’Connor: “American business is borrowing more of the bare-knuckle tactics that are a hallmark of American politics. In a sign of how that shift has created new opportunities for political professionals ... America Rising ... has launched a for-profit venture aimed at helping companies, trade associations and wealthy individuals push back against detractors and navigate sensitive shareholder or public-policy fights.” http://on.wsj.com/1Tf2gM3

TV TONIGHT -- On The O’Reilly Factor, Jesse Watters will address his altercation with HuffPost’s Ryan Grim at the MSNBC party (which ironically happened at the U.S. Institute of Peace).

--@kenvogel: “3 adds: 1) @jessebwatters tried to delete @ryangrim’s video 2) he didnt succeed 3) he comes across v poorly in video” http://wapo.st/1SFrCqu

#THISTOWN – During WHCD weekend, Michelle Fields and Megyn Kelly, two journalists who have had tussles with Trump or his campaign, met and hugged. Pic of them embracing http://bit.ly/1Tpdtdd

--Fields’ new book, “Barons of the Beltway: Inside the Princely World of Our Washington Elite--and How to Overthrow Them,” comes out June 21. $17.44 on Amazon http://amzn.to/1rbTTKK

MARK PRESTON, executive editor of CNN Politics, is interviewed for this week’s “The Gaggle Podcast” with David Helfenbein. www.thegagglepodcast.com

#WHCD PARTY CIRCUIT: Robert and Dr. Elena Allbritton hosted their annual WHCD Sunday brunch in the backyard of their Georgetown home, with a French theme and menu that included shellfish bouillabaisse, four cheese tortellini, wild field mushroom dumplings, pork pot stickers, spicy tuna tartare, and a French cheese plate. Pic of the tent http://bit.ly/1W2G7rh ... The many macarons http://bit.ly/1SX2223 ... Slideshow with 22 pics http://politi.co/1VGGHdV

SPOTTED: Valerie Jarrett, Tina Tchen, Bret Baier, Tony Blinken, Wolf Blitzer, Michael Chertoff, Reps. Jim Clyburn and Debbie Dingell, Sens. Chris Coons, Amy Klobuchar and Tim Scott, John Dickerson, Deesha Dyer, Josh and Natalie Earnest, Julius Genachowski, Tammy Haddad, Andrea Mitchell and Alan Greenspan, Savannah Guthrie, Alex Wagner and Sam Kass, Gayle King, Sylvia Burwell, Norah O’Donnell and “Chef Geoff” Tracy, Reince Priebus, Jen Psaki, Jessica Rosenworcel, David Simas, Gene Sperling, Chris Wallace, Bob Woodward.

OUT AND ABOUT -- Huffington Post editor-in-chief (and newest member of the Uber Board) Arianna Huffington hosted a book party to celebrate “Sleep Revolution” Sunday morning at the Four Seasons in Georgetown. There was a bed in the middle of the room on which Arianna posed for pictures and signed copies of her book (there was also a cake in the shape of a bed and Sleep Revolution cookies). Huffington spoke to the crowd about the importance of sleep and why it’s critical to take care of our bodies, not just our smart phones, especially in a place like Washington, D.C. $13 on Amazon http://amzn.to/1NhtMw5

SPOTTED at CNN’s “Political Hangover” brunch at the Long View Gallery: Ryan Coyne, Chris Bedford, Brian Danza, Zeke Miller, Matt Dornic, Sean and Rebecca Spicer, Ron and Sarah Bonjean, Bryan Cranston in deep conversation on a couch with Jake Tapper and Dana Bash.

PICS from Saturday’s Yahoo/ABC cocktail reception http://gtty.im/26H0ihD ... Tracy Sefl and Greta Van Susteren discovered on Saturday night that they were wearing the same suit http://bit.ly/1W0lH1m

OUT TOMORROW – Pete Hegseth, an alum of Vets For Freedom and Concerned Veterans for America, has written “In the Arena: Good Citizens, a Great Republic, and How One Speech Can Reinvigorate America”: “The book uses a Teddy Roosevelt speech from 1910 (‘Citizenship in a Republic’ commonly known as the ‘Man in the Arena’ speech) as the frame to argue for how renewed and vigorous citizenship at home and American leadership abroad are the keys to ensuring the 21st century is an American century. The book is ... meant to inspire the next generation to get ‘in the arena’ for America.” He speaks at noon today at Heritage. RSVP http://herit.ag/26K2ll4 ... NYC event hosted by RJC tomorrow http://bit.ly/26K2qFe ... $18.12 on Amazon http://amzn.to/1O9XttQ

WEEKEND WEDDINGS -- Audrey Gelman, co-founder & CEO of The Wing and alum of SKDKnickerbocker, Hillary Clinton 2008 and former press secretary to NYC comptroller Scott Stringer, was married Saturday night in Detroit to Ilan Zechory, co-founder of annotation start-up Genius. Stringer toasted the newlyweds, and told guests he was just grateful he didn’t have to follow bridesmaid Lena Dunham in the toasting order. Pic of the bride and bridesmaids http://bit.ly/1rcpwUk

SPOTTED: Michael Grynbaum, Juli Weiner, Alana Newhouse and David Samuels, Annie Karni, Ted Mann, Jazmine Hughes, Jenna Weiss-Berman, Will Rahn, Hilary Moss, Katherine Bernard, Vogue’s Chloe Malle, Lena Dunham, Jack Antonoff, Elyse Stringer, Sascha Owen, Dan Gilbert, Julie Wood.

-- Brian Zuzenak, Gov. Terry McAuliffe’s political director, and Krista Jenusaitis, fundraising events guru at the DCCC, tied the knot in an all-night party on Saturday at the New Haven Lawn Club. McAuliffe officiated a ceremony the couple wrote themselves, peppered with the Governor’s wisecracks about Kansas City sports teams and throw pillows. They met on a DCCC canvassing trip. Pic http://bit.ly/1NO2woU

--SPOTTED: on the non-stop dance floor: Gov. McAuliffe and wife Dorothy (a birthday girl today), Adam Broder, Missy Kurek, Stephen Carter, Kevin McKeon and Jacqui Newman, Lavar Stoney, Jen Pihlaja, Jordy Ziegler and Brian Lenzmeier, Todd and Lindsey Schulte, Corey Platt, Lucinda Guinn, Chris Bigelow, Laura Rose Wilson, Doug Little, Sarah Cotton, Nicole Eynard, Michael Long, Rachel Thomas, Jossie Steinberg, Jenna Kruse, Stella Ross, Sabrina Singh and Mike Smith, Emily Bittner. Mary-Kate Barry.

SARAH DOOLIN and Dave Roy were married this weekend in Saint Theresa Beach, Florida. Sarah is the director of communications for the Partnership for a New American Economy and Dave is a web developer for Showtime. The Hamilton-loving couple originally met at the Broadway Ball in NYC and got engaged at Lincoln Center after Dave took her to see her favorite ballet. They’re heading off to Mexico for their honeymoon today. Pic http://bit.ly/1pWvEz1

--Ben Jarrett, a political analyst for the Embassy of Israel in Washington, on Sunday married Chelsea Whalen, office manager for Appropriations Chairman Hal Rogers, for whom she has worked for 7 years. Their wedding was on Martha’s Vineyard; Jarrett is 28 and a native of Massachusetts, while Whalen is 27 and a native of Kentucky. Pic http://bit.ly/1Z21SEY

WELCOME TO THE WORLD -- Adam and Cindy Sharp had a baby girl, @SharpGirl (not publicizing name for now), on Friday at 12:15pm. She was early, but is doing great, weighing in at 5 lbs 4 oz and 18 inches. Adam, a Hotchkiss and Northwestern grad, is head of news, government and elections at Twitter. Cindy used to work at AP TV in DC, until Adam and Cindy left DC a year ago and moved to Adam’s hometown of Stamford, Conn. “Mom and Dad Sharp are over the moon!” Pics http://bit.ly/1NhrQUD ... http://bit.ly/1TpcYjh

--Kaylan Lehotsky Schreffler, a public affairs specialist at Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) at DHS and a Bush 43 WH alum, posts on Facebook: “Paul, Logan and I are happy to announce the (fashionably late) arrival of Baby S #2, David Robert. Born on April 29, he tipped the scale at 8 lbs. 10 oz., with a length of 20.5 inches. ... A special thanks to Grammy Beth for taking care of Baby Bird and our fuzzy kids for the past few days.” Pics http://bit.ly/1W1Do0z ... http://bit.ly/1X47sYX ... http://bit.ly/1pWC1T2

BIRTHWEEK (was yesterday): Ninio Fetalvo, RNC APA press secretary and Pollie award winning actor ... Michael Freedman, SVP of comms. at University of Maryland University College

BIRTHDAYS: “Morning” Mika Brzezinski ... Jesse Rodriguez, senior producer of “Morning Joe” and the pride of Miami, spotted everywhere in D.C. this weekend ... Kyle Downey … Virginia First Lady Dorothy McAuliffe … U.S. Commerce Secretary Penny Pritzker ... Rob King, SVP for SportsCenter and news at ESPN and an AP board member ... CBS News correspondent Julianna Goldman, a Bloomberg alum and the pride of Bethesda ... Steve Elmendorf, partner and co-founder at Subject Matter and the pride of Madison, N.J., celebrating by asking everyone on his Facebook page to donate to HRC (h/ts Erik Smith, Alex Slater and Jon Haber) ... Gabe Cahn, senior strategist at West End Strategy, celebrating 2-6 in Brooklyn (h/t Gabe Brotman) ... Rick Stengel, currently Under Secretary for Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs at State, formerly the managing editor at Time Magazine, and a lover of all things Hudson, New York (h/t Mary deBree) ... Arielle Goren, newly minted press secretary for the Bay Area/NorCal for Hillary for California and a Cuomo and Schumer alum ... former USAID contractor Alan Gross, imprisoned by Cuba from 2009 to 2014, is 67 (h/ts Jill Zuckman, who led the communications effort to free him and Jewish Insider) ... Lindsey Held Bolton, chief comms. and policy advisor to Sen. Ron Wyden and the Senate Finance Committee (h/t Haber) ...

... Politico’s Brett Russell (h/t colleague Dani Feldman) ... Rep. Peter Welch (D-Vt.) ... Emily Tisch Sussman, campaign director at CAP Action Fund ... Doug Gordon, founder of DSG Strategies and FitzGibbon Media alum ... Courtney Snowden, DC’s Deputy Mayor of Greater Economic Opportunity, and former principal at The Raben Group, and her twin sister, Crystal Snowden, are 37 (h/t Courtney’s perfect little seven year old, Malik) ... Joel Payne, VP at Quorvis Communications (h/t Jonathan Kott) ... Tracy Terrill, SBA’s chief digital officer and former CTO for LegalZoom, is 41 (h/t Miguel Ayala) ... Raul Celso Paez Montoya, a Kyrsten Sinema alum and incoming Georgetown Institute for Politics and Public Policy board member, is 21 (h/t William Schuette) ... Dean Stephens, anchorman at WCIV in Charleston ... N.Y. Assemblyman David Weprin ... Stacie Paxton Cobos (we jumped the gun yesterday) ...

... Rush E. Baker IV, alum of The Easton Group, Deutsche Bank and State ... Stephen Schatz, director of comms. at the Maryland Dept. of Natural Resources and NRF alum ... Sheila Grant, chief of staff for Rep. John Carney (D-Del.) ... CJ Frogozo Stromquist, a Fitzgibbon Media alum … Conchita Cruz, a Jared Polis alum now a student at Yale Law … former Rep. Robert L. Turner (NY-09) … Kathy Barks Hoffman, an AP alum now senior account exec at PR firm Martin Waymire ... Bridget O’Meara … Lauren Azar … Joe Jongewaard ... Sarah Curtis ... Will Bohlen, VP at the Podesta Group ... Ben Barber ... Ben Austin, founder of Parent Revolution and policy and advocacy director at Students Matter ... Alon Ben-Meir ...

... Leo Cendrowicz, scribe covering Europe and chocolate for The Independent and others ... Joe Jongewaard ... Lauren Azar (h/ts Teresa Vilmain) ... Amanda Aulds Sherzer ... singer Engelbert Humperdinck is 80 ... former International Olympic Committee President Jacques Rogge is 74 ... Bianca Jagger is 71. ... Larry Gatlin is 68 (h/t Josh) ... Donatella Versace is 61 ... wrestler-turned-actor Dwayne Johnson (AKA The Rock) is 44 ... David Beckham is 41 ... actress Kay Panabaker is 26 (h/ts AP)

** A message from BP: Safety is never being satisfied – and always working to be better. That’s why at BP, we’re working every day to improve our training, our technology, our culture. See real examples of our progress: on.bp.com/safety **

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/1M75UbX ... New York Playbook http://politi.co/1ON8bqW ... Florida Playbook http://politi.co/1JDm23W ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/1N8zdJU ... Brussels Playbook http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX