You don’t have to look any further than Baltimore and Ferguson, Mo., to see what happens when broad segments of the population feel marginalized, brutalized and left behind.

“Baltimore — that can happen in every single city,” said Bill Generett, CEO of Urban Innovation21, a public-private Hill District tech center.

While police violence was the flash point for the unrest in Ferguson and Baltimore, larger lessons and strategies for combating such problems were among the discussions during one of the sessions at the CEOs for Cities cluster workshop held Thursday at the Sen. John Heinz History Center in the Strip District.

CEOs for Cities is a nonprofit that connects community leaders across the country through workshops and competitions. About 275 participants from 40 cities attended the three-day Pittsburgh workshop that began Wednesday and focused on strategies for fostering economic inclusion.

According to a report published by the Washington, D.C.-based Urban Institute in 2014, Pittsburgh’s poverty rate increased from 10.3 percent in 2000 to 12.8 percent in 2012. More than three-quarters of those living below the poverty line consist of African-American, Hispanic or Asian minorities.

Some community leaders at the session Thursday openly admitted to not being able to figure out how to stimulate both economic growth and economic inclusion. Brad Whitehead, president of the Cleveland nonprofit Fund for Our Economic Future, said that sometimes the areas with the largest job growth also can be the areas with the greatest increases in poverty and crime.

Erin Flynn, associate vice president for strategic partnerships at Portland State University, said one of the biggest challenges is making economic inclusivity systemic. She noted the investment required is often a 10- to 20-year commitment, which is longer than the time most politicians and bureaucrats spend in office.

“It’s a hard game and a long game,” she said. “If you’ve been in this game long enough, you can see that we’ve been working on these issues for a long time.”

Valerie Patton, executive director of the St. Louis Business Diversity Initiative, said the riots in Ferguson and St. Louis propelled her city to look further into the barriers preventing economic mobility.

Those barriers aren’t just racial or cultural — often they are physical.

Ms. Patton described the Delmar Divide, named for Delmar Boulevard, a major four-lane highway that runs east-west through St. Louis. The south side is majority white with well-kept homes and an $80,000 median income. To the north, there’s entrenched poverty — and the neighborhood is 99 percent black.

City advocates and investors hoping to chisel at the barrier are focusing resources on that divide, starting with LaunchCode, a St. Louis nonprofit founded in 2013 that sets up paid technology apprenticeships at businesses across the city. More than 90 percent of apprentices in the program have found full-time employment.

LaunchCode is also renovating a new community center on Delmar Boulevard, with plans to open in 2016.

Despite the challenges, participants in Thursday’s session did offer strategies. Mr. Whitehead mentioned using philanthropy to stimulate economic inclusion and searching for qualified people for jobs that don’t require academic credentials.

Mr. Generett described his organization’s internship program, which gives local college students the opportunity to work at sci-tech companies in the Pittsburgh area. More than 400 interns have gone through the program — 40 percent are African-American, 60 percent are women and 50 percent are first-generation college students.

“This is work is not popular,” he said. “It’s not sexy. It’s not fun. There’s no silver bullet.”

Eddy Wang: cwang@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1969.