CHESTER >> The city is holding Obamacare Enrollment “Sign up Chester” days through Sunday, Feb. 15 at various locations.

Low cost or no-cost health insurance is available for everyone, and you cannon be turned down for pre-existing health conditions. Here is a partial listing of approved “Sign up Chester” locations:

Fare & Square Grocery, U.S. Tax Pros, Cambridge Restaurant, Rasheedah Beauty Salon,

Crozer-Keystone Health System, Boys & Girls Club, People’s Choice Barbershop, Westside Check Cashing (fliers only), Mt. Pleasant Baptist Church, Chester House of Restoration, Shiloh Baptist Church, Juice Place, 405 Avenue of the States, Chester City Computer Lab, Chester Branch of the NAACP. You can also enroll at www.signupchester.com

Advertisement

If you want your business, organization or church to be included, email al@ihubinsurance.net or al@signupchester.com, or call 855-276-2557.

Adult yoga class at Ridley Park Library

RIDLEY PARK >> The library will sponsor an adult yoga class 10 a.m. Fridays at borough hall, 105 E. Ward St.

The dates are today and Feb. 13, 20 and 27. Participants should bring a yoga mat, towel and water.

The class is free but registration is required. Call the library at 610-583-7207 to register. Music and a meal at Marple

NEWTOWN SQUARE >> The award-winning Marple Newtown High School Jazz Band hosts a dinner 6-9 p.m. Saturday in the cafeteria at the high school, 120 Media Line Road.

Tickets are $15 for adults, $12 for seniors and $10 for students, and include a menu of antipasti, chicken piccata, spaghetti, meatballs, lasagna and assorted desserts. There will also be music throughout the evening by the Tiger Jazz Band.

Reserve your tickets now at 610-613-8177 or Bandaramamnhs@aol.com

All proceeds support Marple Newtown High School bands.

Flyers goalie to sign autographs at Carl’s

HAVERFORD >> Carl’s Cards & Collectibles, 22 W. Eagle Road, Havertown, hosts an in-store autograph signing with Flyers goalie Rob Zepp 6:30-7:30 tonight.

Autograph tickets are $20 each, or two for $35. Tickets can also be purchased at the store, or visit www.carlscards.com and find the PayPal link under the Events and Signings tab. Or call the store at 610-789-4996 and reserve tickets for later pickup.

Customers are welcome to bring their own item(s) to have signed. There will also be 8-by-10 pictures, pucks, mini helmets and more for sale.

Poets and Prophets feature award-winning poet

SWARTHMORE >> Poets and Prophets present Mel Brake in a poetry reading in honor of Black History Month 7 p.m. Tuesday at the Dew Drop Inn, 7A S. Chester Road.

Brake is a Philadelphia-based award-winning poet/singer/songwriter. He has appeared in Philadelphia, New York and beyond. He feels that poetry and arts are the foundation to a well-balanced and sustainable community and world. He has committed his work to reaching one person at a time within their own time and space, and music.

For more information, visit www.poetsand prophets.com or call 610-328-POET. Donations requested.

Celebrate spiritual music

CHESTER >> Senior Community Services’ Chester Senior Center, 721 Hayes St., hosts “INSPIRA: The Power of the Spiritual Live Performance” 1 p.m. Thursday.

Enjoy a lively performance of song and instrument that includes spirituals, jazz, spoken word, West African rhythms, classical music and poetry. Written by and starring Dr. Amanda Kemp, the show features Francis Wong, Matthew Armstead, and Michael Jamanis.

For more information or to register, call 610-497-3550.