She may be considered a long shot by the political chattering class, but Carly Fiorina this week showed other Republican presidential frontrunners what being a thoughtful candidate looks like.

Instead of rushing to endorse or condemn Indiana Gov. Mike Pence – a move that some candidates surely regretted after Pence then called for clarifications to his state’s new religious protections law – Fiorina waited, and, in fact, recommended early in the week that everyone “step back and cool off here and look at the facts, on both sides.”

How incredibly refreshing, and how wonderfully consistent with something that Republicans are supposed to stand for: the right of state governments to work out most issues without interference from the feds.

Later in the week, Fiorina articulated an appropriately more nuanced view of the issues at hand (when compared not only to the rest of the Republican field, but to voices on the left as well). She spoke about the difficult topic with clear compassion for the views on both sides, of both gay couples and religious business owners. She reminded us that ours is a great country that surely ought to have room and tolerance for both views as we have what she calls a “clarifying debate.”

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

Again, how refreshing.

But perhaps the most delightfully fresh thing that Fiorina did this week was something all too rare for Republicans these days: She held corporate America to account.

In interviews with CNBC and USA Today, Fiorina highlighted the fact that big business has a habit of quickly caving to the “Twitterverse.” How true. Corporate America will change any position, it seems, to keep a PR kerfuffle at bay. Meanwhile, Fiorina pointed out, companies are not adequately dealing with substantive, chronic problems like the under-representation of women in the tech sector or the treatment of women and gays in the countries where these large American corporations do business. She even said that “crony capitalism is alive and well" in her interview with Chris Wallace on "Fox News Sunday."

As a former corporate CEO herself, Fiorina’s critique of corporate America is not only highly relevant, it is politically smart, as most Americans tend to have only sightly more confidence in big business than they do in Congress.

[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Economy]

Meanwhile, Fiorina is the only Republican presidential hopeful consistently talking about one of American’s favorite groups, small business. And she is doing so in a way that indicates real understanding and empathy, as well as appropriate economic alarm over the fact that small business is declining while big business thrives. I suspect the small-business voting bloc, one that tends to vote Republican, has noticed this.

And if you are a Republican, Christian, caterer/baker/florist who hopes to not get sued out of existence should you turn down a piece of gay wedding business, Fiorina's understanding of your struggles as a business owner just might trump another candidate’s passing of a religious litmus test.