The security relationship between the U.S. and Saudi Arabia took an ominous turn for the worse last October when Congress began exercising new oversight powers for “the first time” to track U.S. arms shipments to the Kingdom. These new powers were granted by the Naval Vessel Transfer Act of 2014, which amended the Arms Export Control Act. Previously, the law only required the President notify Congress of pending arms sales to a foreign nation. With passage of this amendment, the president now must notify Congress in advance of pending arms shipmentsas well. For context, the White House notes Saudi Arabia has approximately $97 billion in “open and active” arms purchases from the U.S. From now on, Congress now has the right to delay, or block, the delivery of these procured items.

The Senate Foreign Relations Committee recently exercised this new authority at the behest of several human rights organizations that have been lobbying Congress to suspend arms transfers to Riyadh. These groups charge that the Saudi-led military campaign in Yemen has led to “indiscriminate attacks” on civilians. However, according to the 1977 Additional Protocol 1 to the 1949 Geneva Conventions – the international treaty that governs the protection of civilians in armed conflict – incidental civilian loss of life in war in and of itself is not unlawful. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, the former Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, observed the following in a report on the U.S. invasion of Iraq:

“Under international humanitarian law and the Rome Statute, the death of civilians during an armed conflict, no matter how grave and regrettable, does not in itself constitute a war crime. International humanitarian law and the Rome Statute permit belligerents to carry out proportionate attacks against military objectives,[1]even when it is known that some civilian deaths or injuries will occur. A crime occurs if there is an intentional attack directed against civilians (principle of distinction) (Article 8(2)(b)(i)) or an attack is launched on a military objective in the knowledge that the incidental civilian injuries would be clearly excessive in relation to the anticipated military advantage (principle of proportionality) (Article 8(2)(b)(iv).”

In Iraq, where at least 165,000 civilians are now known to have been killed since the U.S. invasion in 2003, Moreno-Ocampo refused to launch a formal investigation because: “The available information did not indicate intentional attacks on a civilian population.”

The critics of the war in Yemen have also argued that Saudi airstrikes have violated the principle of proportionality. However, the Oxford University’s Institute for Ethics, Law, and Armed Conflict has found proportionality to be subjective, overly vague, and contradictory because it tries to reconcile two mutually incompatible objectives: the protection of civilians and gaining military advantage. Consequently, proportionality is generally considered the Achilles heel of the law of war.

The decision by Congress to exercise its new oversight powers opens the U.S. to charges of hypocrisy. For example, the U.S. is one of only six countries that have refused to ratify the 1977 Additional Protocol to the 1949 Geneva Convention, the treaty that outlaws indiscriminate attacks on civilians. In contrast, 174 countries have ratified the treaty. Therefore, Congress’s decision to review the arms shipments to Saudi Arabia is particularly bizarre since it is voicing concern for behavior—“indiscriminate attacks”—that it itself refuses to ratify as a war crime.

Moreover, the allegations of “indiscriminate” attacks are disproved by looking into the full list of the $1.3 billion arms purchase by Saudi Arabia. The breakdown, from the Defense Security Cooperation Agency, shows that many of the items are precision-guided “smart” bombs, such as Joint Direct Attack Munitions, i.e., ordnance designed to destroy targets with greater accuracy than general purpose “dumb” bombs. Had the Saudis intended to indiscriminately target civilians, as is alleged, they would not have gone to the trouble to procure so many GPS and laser-guided munitions, which are by their very nature discriminating in their target selection. If anything, this is all the more reason to sell the Saudis more, not fewer, precision munitions.

More troubling is the disproportionate authority now conferred on just four members of Congress. Under the new law, the President is now required to notify Congress of pending arms shipments if the chairman and ranking member of either the Senate Foreign Relations Committee or the House Committee on Foreign Affairs requests such notification. In other words, all it takes is for lobbyists to persuade just TWO key members in either the House or the Senate to invoke this new authority.

Giving Congress oversight on arms shipments may lead to costly litigation over breach of contract. In 2010, Iran filed a $4 billion claim against Russia at the Court of Conciliation and Arbitration after Moscow cancelled an $800 million sale of S-300 surface-to-air missiles to Tehran. The fact that the Kremlin was compelled to cancel the sale after the passage of UN Security Council Resolution 1929—which banned arms sales to Iran—did not deter Tehran; to the contrary, Iran’s aggressive tactics worked. The Iranians only agreed to withdraw the suit after the Russians delivered the missiles last December. Using Iran’s 1:5 ratio as a template, should Saudi Arabia file suit against the U.S. for breach of contract, damages sought could reach $500 billion.

Andrew-Mziray (ngana@praxeologics.com) is a former U.S. Army officer and was a military analyst at the State Department until September, 2015. Zogby (ben.zogby@praxeologics.com), is a lawyer. Their firm, Praxeo Logics LLC, is a defense trade consultancy.