Football is a game. Roulette.

Are we throwing our sons into this fray and gambling that they’ll come out without a life-altering brain injury?

We should rethink letting boys play football, at least until high school. It’s time to step away from our obsession of the game and evaluate whether youth football is worth it.

Yeah, I get it — football is the most popular thing going. Football teaches teamwork and hard work and all that stuff. Football is what Dad played. But it just seems bizarre that parents, who devote their lives to making sure their kids are healthy and safe, would allow their boys to jump into the lion’s den that is football.

During the past decade — according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention — child and adolescent emergency room visits for sports-related traumatic brain injuries, including concussions, increased by 60 percent. Numerous studies show that football, of all sports, has the most concussions.

“The horror stories that I am privy to, I’d absolutely think twice about a child being exposed to that sort of trauma,” said Chris Nowinski, author of “Head Games: Football’s Concussion Crisis.” “While I encourage youth activities, we have to recognize things that are unique to football, and the guarantee that the average child will be hit in the head one to 300 times, that you know that (many) youth programs don’t have any medical personnel on the sideline — which means that most concussions won’t be identified — that (children) have biomechanical disadvantages that come from having a giant head on a small body and that the developing brain is more sensitive to trauma.”

So really, there are two looming questions:

1. Should a boy younger than 15 play tackle football?

2. Should anyone risk playing football, as we learn more about the effects of concussions?

“With the lack of great data that we have, what this becomes is your own personal interpretation of the research that’s available,” Nowinski said. “Nobody five years ago would have thought that 34 of the first 35 donated brains studied of former NFL players would be positive for (major brain trauma).”

The “surely it won’t happen to my kid” theory prevails. My kid, people might think, won’t be Andre Waters, the 44-year-old ex-player who killed himself and had a brain that, said a forensic pathologist quoted in The New York Times, “resembled what one would expect in an 85-year-old man in the early stages of Alz heimer’s.” My kid won’t be one of the 4,500 concussed ex-NFL players whose lawsuits were recently settled with the league. Or, my kid won’t be one of the innumerable faceless victims who proudly played at lower levels but still suffered life-altering brain injuries.

Asked about being hesitant to let a son play football, Broncos running back Knowshon Moreno said Monday: “When I was younger, my grandma didn’t want me to play, but she kind of gave in. Those things just happen, so I guess you let the kid do what they want to do, and then see what happens after that.”

If you’re picking your poison, I say at least wait until a boy is in high school to play football. It worked for safety Duke Ihenacho, who led the Broncos with 11 tackles last Thursday. Ihenacho said he would implement the same rules for his son.

Perhaps the future of youth football is flag football. I know that sounds sacrilegious, but it’s still football, and at least your kid will wait until his teen years to start turning his brain into mashed potatoes.

Many youth organizations are trying to reduce the number of hits in practices. And many leagues do their best to provide medical attention. But is it enough? And does it matter?

Concussions are just part of American sport. You take your chances.

Benjamin Hochman: bhochman@denverpost.com, twitter.com/hochman