Bill Clinton touts wife's presidential qualities to students in Johnstown

Former President Bill Clinton told hundreds of college students Wednesday that his wife, Hillary Clinton, is the best presidential candidate to tackle inequality in America.

“She's the best single change-maker I've ever known,” Clinton told a small, but packed room at the University of Pittsburgh at Johnstown.

Moreover, he told attendees the Democratic Party is the party that best represents the United States.

“You cannot let us go back to having a right-wing president, a right-wing Congress and a right-wing Supreme Court,” Clinton warned. “You will not recognize this country in four years if you do.”

Hillary Clinton, a former U.S. Senator and Secretary of State, faces U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont in Pennsylvania's Democratic primary on Tuesday.

During a roughly 35-minute speech, Bill Clinton highlighted his wife's plans to tackle income inequality and the high-cost of a college education, which he dubbed one of the barriers that keep people from participating in the economy.

“Too many people who want to work, can't work,” Clinton said. “And too many people are stuck in dead-end jobs and will never get a pay raise.”

He said income inequality isn't as much “Main Street versus Wall Street” as it is the fault of corporations that post big profits but return the money to shareholders rather than increasing workers' wages.

He said Hillary Clinton would tackle college affordability from several angles.

“Anybody that goes to a school with reasonable tuition and a decent graduation rate should qualify for help,” Clinton said. “Everybody that needs free tuition should get it.”

He said lower-income students should get the most assistance, but that middle-income students would be helped by his wife's plan to increase funding for work-study jobs, which allow students to work in part-time roles on campus.

And he said she plans to help anyone with student loan debt by allowing student loans to be refinanced the way homeowners can refinance a mortgage to get better rates and repayment options.

Students in the audience were a mix of Clinton, Sanders and Trump supporters. Many said they came to the event simply because it was a chance to hear a former president speak.

Sophomore marketing major Samantha Christine, of York, said she was “still on the fence” about whom she'll cast a ballot for in her first presidential primary. “This should help,” she said of Clinton's speech.

Jordan Noble, a senior from Somerset County who's heading to medical school in the fall, said she was listening for Clinton's health care plan. She said she's grateful to be on her parents' insurance but thinks “health care is not affordable at all.”

“I'm interested in how we bring everyone up to the same standard of care,” Noble said.

Clinton's speech touched on the success of the Affordable Care Act in offering insurance to more Americans, but noted “there are some gaps.”

“Co-pays and deductibles in the individual market are too high,” he said to loud applause.

Clinton also highlighted the epidemic of drug overdose deaths, which he said his wife would treat as a mental health crisis. He said he recently made his fifth condolence call to friends who lost a family member to a drug overdose.

He highlighted the benefits of the overdose-reversal drug naloxone and credited Pennsylvania with being the first state to allow every school to stock the drug on site.

That message spoke to Amber Boozer, a sophomore from Central City.

“I didn't know how against drugs Hillary was. That's really great, especially around here,” said Boozer.

Although she's undecided about whom she'll vote for, “that stood out a lot out of everything he said.”

Her friend Alyssa Bollinger, a sophomore from Bedford, agreed.

“His personal experience made you feel like you could connect,” Bollinger said.

Clinton ended by touting Hillary's ability to unite people, even opponents.

“She knows how to get people together,” Clinton said. While campaigning is political, “once you take the Oval Office, the blaming is over. It's on you.”