After deleting the tweet, the Virginia Democrat’s account tweets a mea culpa. Pol deletes 'Snowbamacare' tweet

Call it a snow-pas.

Sen. Mark Warner’s office blamed a staff snow day “#fail” for a deleted tweet Thursday morning that made a joke about the Virginia GOP and the winter storm that shut down Washington.

Story Continued Below

“Just a matter of time: waiting for the @VA_GOP to claim this winter storm was caused by The Affordable Care Act. #Snowbamacare,” the account tweeted, deleting it 26 seconds later, according to an archive of deleted tweets kept by the Sunlight Foundation.

Though the tweet existed less than half a minute, it was enough time for Republicans to pounce.

Is our “radical centrist” Senator @MarkWarner tweeting partisan political attacks from his official account? https://t.co/7ZLgGEFbpY #vasen — Michael C. Short (@michaelcshort) February 13, 2014

After deleting the tweet, the Virginia Democrat’s account tweeted a mea culpa, calling it a staff “#fail” on a snowy day.

Oops. Staff #fail on a snow day. Removed as quickly as possible. Enjoy the rest of your snow day.— Mark Warner (@MarkWarner) February 13, 2014

Warner’s Senate account bio says tweets come from both the senator and staff.

Warner’s communications director took responsibility for the errant tweet.

“It was my mistake. I acknowledged it as quickly as possible, and I apologize,” Kevin Hall said in an email to POLITICO.

Up for reelection in 2014, Warner recently picked up a challenge for his seat from former RNC Chairman Ed Gillespie, with Republicans looking to put pressure on what before Gillespie’s entry looked like an easy seat for the Democrat to retain.

The National Republican Senatorial Committee sought to capitalize on the mistake Thursday afternoon.

Hey Sen. @MarkWarner, less tweeting offensive jokes & a little more shoveling would be appreciated by your neighbors pic.twitter.com/Iq6LOkdy4r — NRSC (@NRSC) February 13, 2014

NRSC spokesman Brad Dayspring confirmed the tweet was a picture of Warner’s home sidewalk.

Authors: