NSA Spied On And Blackmailed Supreme Court Justice Member Over Obamacare, Says Activist Attorney

"Let's take this possibility," Klayman said. "Why did Chief Justice Roberts at the eleventh hour change his decision [on his Obamacare vote]? He was going to side with the other justices and find that Obamacare was unconstitutional. Is it something that was dug up on him by the NSA or the CIA? Was that used against him to blackmail him?"

May 02, 2015 12:03 PM EDT

Judicial Watch Chairman Larry Klayman speaks during a news conference for FBI Special Agent Robert G. Wright to disclose the FBI's negligence and obstruction of counterterrorism criminal investigations involving Hamas and al Qaeda on May 30, 2002 at the National Press Club in Washington, D.C. (Photo : Getty Images)

The NSA and CIA spied on "hundreds of federal officials and judges, including Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Ruth Bader Ginsberg," and may have even blackmailed Roberts to approve Obamacare, according to a new legal brief filed by activist and attorney Larry Klayman, WND reported.

Klayman, also the founder of government accountability groups Judicial Watch and Freedom Watch, is known for successfully suing the National Security Agency in 2013 over the collection of telephone metadata from Verizon Wireless customers.

He brought forward a witness, Dennis Montgomery, who has been "directly involved with software development for intelligence agencies and knows a great deal about how and to what extent intelligence agencies violated the U.S. Constitution," according to a court filing by Klayman.

Montgomery is willing to provide evidence to the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia that intelligence agencies spied on and collected private information on Supreme Court Justices John Roberts and Ruth Bader Ginsberg, according to WND.

Klayman previously posited, on the Aaron Klein radio show, that Roberts may have been blackmailed to approve Obamacare.

"Let's take this possibility," Klayman said. "Why did Chief Justice Roberts at the eleventh hour change his decision [on his Obamacare vote]? He was going to side with the other justices and find that Obamacare was unconstitutional. Is it something that was dug up on him by the NSA or the CIA? Was that used against him to blackmail him?"

The judge presiding over Klayman's spying lawsuit against the government ruled in 2013 that the program was likely unconstitutional and ordered the government to stop collecting data on the two Verizon customers, but stayed his injunction pending appeal.

On Wednesday, Klayman filed a reply in support of motion to lift that stay, saying the government has continued to spy on Americans, rendering the injunction ineffective and necessitating an opinion from the court, reported WND.

That's when Klayman proposed that the court interview Montgomery in secret so he can provide information "about the unconstitutional and illegal surveillance conducted by the National Security Agency and the Central Intelligence Agency that is highly relevant and of crucial importance."

Montgomery is also supposedly in poor physical condition, which why it's so important that he testify as soon as possible, Klayman told the court.

"It is therefore crucial for this Court to lift the stay so that the parties can begin discovery and determine the full extent of Defendants' constitutional violations, as well as to put a stop to this 'almost Orwellian' tyranny," Klayman wrote in his filing.

He continued: "This Court, which is also courageous and which has protected the constitutional rights of Plaintiffs and all Americans, must respectfully also take a strong stand, particularly given the huge delay, caused in large part by the obstructionist tactics of the Obama Justice Department, which has prevented the D.C. Circuit from timely reaching the merits of the administration's appeal of this Court's preliminary injunction order of December 16, 2013. If the judicial system does not stand in the breach to protect the rights of Americans, then the citizenry is left defenseless and revolution, as occurred in 1776, is at hand. Plaintiffs do not advocate this, but revolution is inevitable if our judges do not timely enforce the Constitution. By lifting the stay now, the Obama Justice Department will have to move for a stay before the D.C. Circuit. If nothing else, at least this will cause the D.C. Circuit to now reach the merits of Your Honor's preliminary injunction."