The Festival of Trees at Somerset County Park Commission's Environmental Education Center at 190 Lord Stirling Road has dozens of trees decorated by local groups to tell a message or honor a cause

Buy Photo The Long Hill String Band performed country renditions of Christmas songs and traditional Appalachian music on Dec. 20. One of the players had a wooden puppet. (Photo: PAMELA MacKENZIE/STAFF PHOTO)Buy Photo Story Highlights The Festival of Trees at the Somerset County Park Commission's Environmental Education Center has been a favorite way for local groups to tell their story or champion a cause for decades.

The Somerset County Park Rangers got hold of a child's jeep that they painted to look like one of their own vehicles. Then they put large Teddy bears in it and placed it next to their very large tree.

Two Girl Scout Cadets have created a "Hug a Hero" tree to thank veterans and raise awareness for Valley Brook Village, an affordable home for veterans.

The Festival of Trees lasts through Dec. 28, with musical performances on Dec. 27 and 28.

The annual Festival of Trees at the Somerset County Park Commission's Environmental Education Center in Lord Stirling Park has been a favorite way for local groups to tell their story or champion a cause for decades.

This year, the collection of trees included four from the commission's own departments, as well as many from Girl Scout and Boy Scout troops, local businesses, families and other causes. On weekends, the commission has invited musical groups to play as visitors strolled through the display.

And behind the performance area is a small self-help cafe where visitors can enjoy cookies and hot beverages as they listen to music or chat about the trees. The display can be viewed through Dec. 28.

Parks Commission trees are a hit

For some people, this event is a well-kept secret.

Jay Tiwar of Morristown was there on Dec. 20 with his wife and children. He said his wife saw something about it on Facebook.

"I ride my bike on this street all the time, but I have never been inside the Environmental Education Center before," Tiwar said as he sat down to listen to the music after taking pictures. He said his family enjoyed the trees and the music very much.

Rose Bernstein of Bedminster said she came for the first time this year, too, after seeing a note in town. Her favorite tree was the "Smokey Bear tree," which was decorated by the Somerset County Parks Commission Park Rangers.

Christa Wood, a naturalist at the center, said the Park Rangers were the first department to jump at the chance to do a tree. One of them got hold of a child's jeep that the Rangers painted to look like one of their own vehicles. Then they put large Teddy bears in it and placed it next to their very large tree, which is the only one in the collection that rotates. Instead of a star, it has a park ranger helmet on top. It's a favorite in the display.

Another showstopper is the Environmental Education Center's own display about identifying animal tracks in the snow. Although its tree might be the smallest in the collection, the display itself includes a hill of snow and a beautiful fox from the center's taxidermy. The fox normally is found in the center's library.

The Stables at Lord Stirling Park has another eye-catching display of a horse-drawn sleigh with a live tree in the sleigh in one of the largest windows at the center. The tree has burlap over the root ball. The horse, of course, is not live.

The final tree from the Parks Commission is from the Recreation Department and has ornaments depicting different activities in Somerset County Parks. Also represented with trees of their own are the Raptor Trust and the Friends of the Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge.

Trees reflect Scouting activities

Many Boy Scout and Girl Scout troops decorated trees of their own. Cub Scout Pack 54 has an "Adventures in Scouting" tree that illustrates many of the activities that the boys enjoy.

Bernie Babitsky of South Bound Brook said his Cub and Boy Scout Troop 42 took about an hour decorating their tree, which didn't have a particular theme but was a lot of fun.

Brownie Troop 41103 used the theme of their favorite movie, "Frozen," to create up-cycled ornaments, and Girl Scout troop 60163 created a Summer Wonderland tree showing all the sports they participate in. Two Girl Scout troops, 60989 and 61268, decorated a tree to raise awareness about recovery called "Peace, Love & Cure." Other themed trees from Girl Scouts and Brownies included a mitten tree to illustrate lending a hand, and an Eco Elephants tree from Girl Scout Troop 60651 to support an elephant shelter in Tennesssee.

Girl Scout Cadets from Troop 60988 who working on their Silver Award, the highest award they can earn, created a "Hug a Hero Tree." The girls, sisters Elizabeth and Emily Perna, are demonstrating leadership, community service and more by raising awareness about the veterans at Valley Brook Village on the grounds of the Veterans Administration's Medical Center at Lyons in Bernards. The girls' tree has attracted significant contributions to help the vets. A local accounting firm gave them $3,000 to buy winter coats for all of the residents at Valley Brook. They've also received gift cards for Stop & Shop, underwear and socks, and other needed supplies.

The girls created a website, https://hugahero.shutterfly.com, where people can learn more about their efforts and make secure donations online. The girls hope to find a local nonprofit organization that can take over the website and keep it going indefinitely.

Music and more

Other trees at the festival have been decorated by businesses, families and other civic groups. Room to Read has a tree about global literacy, Hope Autism Solutions has a Hope Tree with snowflakes made of puzzle pieces, and Fast Lane Distribution has a NASCAR Christmas tree. Ridge Family Dentistry's tree has the theme "May your holidays be as bright as your smile," and the Fortenbacker Family has a "Good Tiedings" tree decorated with neckties.

Music groups are performing at the Festival of Trees each weekend. Three music groups performed on Dec. 20 (the Matheny Bell Choir from the Matheny Medical and Education Center in Peapack-Gladstone, the Long Hill String Band from Long Hill Township and the Sweet Adeline group, Synergy, based in Freehold). The Long Hill String Band played country music with an Appalahcian flair, and one of the players also had a wooden puppet that danced during one of the numbers.

If you haven't been to the Festival of Trees yet, you have three more days to enjoy it. Closed Christmas Day, the display reopens Dec. 26. At 1:30 p.m. Dec. 27, singer-songwriter Jeannie Sarantos will perform., and at 1 p.m. Dec. 28, the last day of the festival, you can enjoy singer Priya Rotchondhury. The Somerset County Parks Commission's Environmental Education Center is at 190 Lord Stirling Road, in the Basking Ridge section of Bernards. Suggested admission is $5.

For more information, contact the Environmental Education Center at 908-766-2489 or NJ Relay at 711 for individuals with a hearing or speech impairment, or visit www.somersetcountyparks.org.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/16QG62e