The battle over the redevelopment of a dilapidated house in the Jefferson Park neighborhood is not only a matter of property rights, but also of an elected official’s abuse of his power to pressure city employees to bend to his will.

Jim Sonneleitner, the owner of the property at 2329 Eliot St., has earned the right to sell his property to whomever he chooses, including Adams Development, which wants to develop 18 for-sale townhomes in a neighborhood that has just six new homes available for sale. It also comes at a time when other developers are rampantly building massive apartment projects that do little to preserve the character of a neighborhood.

Sonneleitner took the appropriate steps to have the house he’s owned for 25 years certified as non-historic so it can be demolished to make way for new homes that will vastly improve the neighborhood.

What right does City Council member Rafael Espinoza have to prevent that?

Espinoza used his position as an elected official to pressure the city’s Landmark Preservation Commission to accept his application for historic status after the deadline had passed and after normal business hours — treatment that would not have been granted to a member of the general public.

Yes, there is anti-development sentiment throughout the city — a platform Espinoza based his campaign on. But Espinoza, who lives just a few blocks away from Sonneleitner’s property, has only talked to the select few of his neighbors who are opposed to the development. What kind of representation is that?

Another issue holding up progress on the project is a dispute over an alley reconstruction that would be great for the neighborhood. As it is, the alley is a breeding ground for crime. Adams’ plan to widen and reconstruct the alley will help prevent graffiti and drug deals, as well as improve access to neighboring properties and provide more parking.

Though there was some initial opposition to vacating the alley, the developer and neighbors have reached an agreement that satisfies everyone; 20 neighbors have signed a petition indicating their support for the project. Yet, despite neighborhood support, a council member is delaying action on the issue.

As a community, we want to see responsible development. That can only happen with cooperation and collaboration between developers, city officials and the people who live in the neighborhoods where development is occurring. As a growing city, we must embrace change and support residential development if we want to continue to attract a strong workforce, which in turn attracts the companies that bring jobs to our region.

We must not abuse the historic designation process to ensure outcomes that benefit only a few. Taking a reasoned approach to development will ensure that Denver remains a vibrant community we all want to live in.

Nick Garcia is a real estate investor, landlord and agent who has owned property in the Jefferson Park neighborhood for nearly a decade.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.