The latest issue of the New Republic includes an essay by Mark Lilla, cited in a pessimistic column by my colleague David Brooks, that’s one of the richer takes on our present political-cultural big picture that I’ve read in some time. I’ve been looking for a news peg on which to hang some comments on Lilla’s argument, and I think I’ve found one in the news that the ISIS terrorist organization, a.k.a. the de facto government of eastern Syria and western Iraq, has taken the high-risk step of actually declaring a reborn caliphate in its conquered territory. The connection here is that one of Lilla’s themes is the way our ongoing end-of-history era has constricted the Western political imagination, leaving us unable to reckon with the complexities of a wider world where liberal democracy isn’t obviously spreading anymore:

… During the cold war, scholars convinced of democracy’s absolute and unique goodness abandoned the traditional study of non-democratic forms of government, such as monarchy, aristocracy, oligarchy, and tyranny, and took instead to distinguishing regimes along a single line running from democracy (good) to totalitarianism (bad) … This way of thinking gave rise to the naïve assumption that after the collapse of the Soviet Union, countries would naturally begin making “transitions” from dictatorship and authoritarianism to democracy, as if by magnetic attraction. That confidence has now evaporated, and our political scientists have seen that under the cloak of elections many unpleasant things can grow. But they still want to hold on to their little line and so they write articles about electoral authoritarianism, competitive authoritarianism, clan authoritarianism, pseudo-democracies, façade democracies, and weak democracies. And, just to cover the bases, “hybrid regimes.” But in the mind of America’s political and journalistic classes, only two political categories exist today: democracy and le déluge …

[And yet] the truth is that billions of people will not be living in liberal democracies in our lifetimes or those of our children or grandchildren—if ever. This is due not only to culture and mores: to these must be added ethnic divisions, religious sectarianism, illiteracy, economic injustice, senseless national borders imposed by colonial powers … the list is long … So the only sensible question to ask when thinking about today’s non-democracies is: what’s Plan B? … if the only choices we can imagine are democracy or le déluge, we exclude the possibility of improving non-democratic regimes without either trying forcibly to transform them (American-style) or hoping vainly (European-style) that human rights treaties, humanitarian interventions, legal sanctions, NGO projects, and bloggers with iPhones will make a lasting difference. These are the utterly characteristic delusions of our two continents. The next Nobel Peace Prize should not go to a human rights activist or an NGO founder. It should go to the thinker or leader who develops a model of constitutional theocracy giving Muslim countries a coherent way of recognizing yet limiting the authority of religious law and making it compatible with good governance. This would be a historic, though not necessarily democratic, achievement.

As with many points in the essay, I’m in what you might call very strong partial agreement. The intellectual constriction Lilla is describing is quite real: To pluck a minor example from the world of punditry, you can see it at work in the way the word “autocracy,” a perfectly serviceable term for a system of government that formally concentrates power in a single individual, is now routinely employed to describe just about any regime (from Moscow to Beijing to Caracas) that isn’t liberal and democratic, thereby effacing crucial distinctions between what are usually actually different forms of oligarchy — some more meritocratic, some more clannish, some more ideological, etc. (The irony is that it’s been neoconservatives, whose long-ago and mostly-correct critique of a certain strain of realism was that it was often blind to the strategic implications of the differing nature of regimes, who have been most inclined to collapse categories this way.) And Lilla is right that Western policymaking has suffered, in Iraq and elsewhere, from a deep failure of political imagination, which (among other things) has made it harder to figure out what kind of non-liberal regimes it’s in our interest to accept or support.

But — and here I’ll let my Fukuyaman sympathies show — is it really right to imply that this constriction is exclusively an American and European intellectual phenomenon? Aren’t we also responding to the fact that most non-Western regimes themselves don’t want to abjure the democratic ideal, and instead either aspire to or pretend to represent some variant on our system? Even when they’re really tyrannies, almost every government on the planet at least calls itself a democratic republic; almost every military coup, from Thailand to Egypt, is accompanied by promises that democracy will eventually be restored; almost every dictator or ruling clique feels an obligation to hold some sort of elections to rubber-stamp their rule. We have, as Lilla says, many functional oligarchies and pseudo-monarchies and combinations thereof around the world, but we have many fewer that self-identify that way, and even many states that do make some sort of distinctive self-identification — notably Iran, with its presiding theocratic guardians — still tend to also ground their claim to legitimacy in some version of democracy, some kind of ballot box procedures.

There are, yes, full exceptions: The Gulf monarchies are actual monarchies, and the Chinese regime, notwithstanding the “people’s republic” label, doesn’t hold potemkin presidential elections or consistently pretend that a democratic transition is just around the corner. But China’s exceptionalism is also incoherent: It represents an alternative system of government, but it’s an alternative that cannot speak its name, because acknowledging its real status as a quasi-meritocratic corporatist (fascist?) oligarchy would require stripping away the faded patina of Marxist-Maoist orthodoxy, with uncertain and unsettling consequences for the regime. And nobody setting up a new government looks to the gulf monarchies as a model; they’re treated as either necessary anachronisms or relics of barbarism by just about every contending party. We don’t see major monarchist parties emerging dictatorships unsettled by the Arab Spring, and none of today’s populist authoritarians have followed Napoleon’s example and crowned themselves as emperors or kings. For all the windy nationalistic theorizing and “Holy Alliance” ambitions associated with Putin’s regime, he’s still President Putin, not Tsar Vladimir IV.

Now there’s a chicken-and-an-egg issue here: Non-western states don’t want to explicitly identify as illiberal or non-democratic in part because it’s still (mostly) in their interest to remain in American and European good graces and at least pretend to play by the international community’s (Western) rules, so you can’t just say that we’re responding to their choices; we’re obviously shaping those choices as well, and who gets the Nobel Peace Prize is the least of the ways in which we do. But non-Western agency is still a very important part of the story here, and it’s one of the reasons why the democracy-or-the-deluge framework is so intellectually resilient. It isn’t that that we can’t envision alternatives; it’s that even where they half-exist, nobody else wants to take full ownership of one either, or to attempt to ground their government’s legitimacy in a completely different form of soil.

Except, as of the last week, for the ruthless gentlemen of ISIS. I do not expect that their caliphate will long endure, but their declaration points to a deeper truth. If anything happens to shake the Western elite’s post-1991 assumptions about liberal democracy and its rivals, it probably won’t be an intellectual shift within our own ranks. Rather, it will take the emergence of a rival that isn’t merely different but fully owns its difference, and that finds a way to prove, against what I still think are reasonable Fukuyaman assumptions, that a regime that’s truly and self-consciously different can actually succeed.