Rahway Branch Executive Director Rodger Koerber (Photo: The Gateway Family YMCA) Story Highlights Koerber sees “tremendous growth opportunities” at Rahway Branch.

Koerber wants to reach out further into the community.

Rahway Branch recently completed $3.4 million renovations including new art programs.

Grand opening June 8; public open house June 8-14.

Rodger D. Koerber is the new executive director of the Gateway Family YMCA Rahway Branch, managing day-to-day operations at the newly renovated facility.

“Along with extensive experience, Rodger brings strong leadership and vision to the association,” said Melynda A. Mileski, the EVP/COO of Gateway Family YMCA.

Kroeber has a bachelor’s degree in science and a sports management concentration from Slippery Rock University in Western Pennsylvania, and has past experience managing YMCAs, including his most recent position as CEO of the Ocean County YMCA, and positions in the YMCAs of Western Monmouth County and Altavista in Virginia.

“I’m excited about the opportunity,” Koerber said.

Koerber said that he sees “tremendous growth opportunities here” and that he hopes to branch out to other locations within the city.

“I’d like to see how far through the community we can reach,” he added.

The new executive director said he wants to “step out of the boundaries of the Y,” and use his organization’s expertise to help other venues within the town, including churches, firehouses and community centers.

In addition to trying to transform the community outside the walls, the Rahway Branch has also finished its own transformation.

The recently completed $3.4 million, 16,938 square foot renovation has brought the arts to the branch with the addition of five studio lofts on the top floor which, along with the two floors below it, had not been in use since being destroyed in a fire in 1981.

“This branch is beautiful,” said Koerber of the renovations.

The renovations also include the restoration of two old locker rooms as well as the addition of two new family/wheelchair-accessible locker rooms, a wheelchair-accessible entrance, wheelchair-accessible lift for the pool and four new multi-purpose rooms to be used for YMCA programs and classes, community events and for rental space for various other community activities such as birthday parties or church groups. One of the multi-purpose rooms currently being used for an art class.

The facility is one of a few YMCAs to offer art programs. The branch’s position in the Art District of Rahway adds weight to the additions made by the renovations.

The final stroke on the canvas for the Rahway Branch is the hiring of the branch’s first Arts Director, Lara Kennedy, in January of this year. Koerber said that Kennedy is creating a new program for the arts.

Although usual YMCA Arts programs such as dance, messy arts and arts and crafts have been offered at the Rahway facility in the past, these new programs will offer members a higher level of programming.

“The YMCA has made a full commitment to integrating the arts into our traditional wellness programming,” said John Ludington, the Gateway Family YMCA board president in a prepared statement. “This renovation allows us to initiate a specialized arts program for youth and adults.”

Koerber said that he hopes the branch will have an impact on the community through the new arts program, a feature which he says makes the Rahway Branch unique among the YMCAs he has managed in the past.

“I see us growing in the number of people we serve,” he said.

The grand opening of the Rahway Branch is scheduled for June 8, and it will host an open house for the public from June 8 to 14.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1bSQtV8