MIAMI — There’s no team better on Christmas than the Miami Heat.

Chris Bosh scored 30 points and grabbed 10 rebounds, Dwyane Wade added 19 points, and the Heat survived some shaky moments late to beat the New Orleans Pelicans 94-88 in overtime on Friday.

The win was Miami’s seventh straight on Christmas and moved the Heat to an NBA-best 10-2 all-time on the holiday.

Hassan Whiteside had 17 rebounds for Miami, which is 9-1 against teams from the Western Conference — and only 8-10 against Eastern Conference opponents.

Anthony Davis was stellar in his Christmas debut, leading the Pelicans with 29 points and 15 rebounds. But he missed a contested jumper on New Orleans’ final possession of regulation, and the Heat controlled the extra session.

Ryan Anderson scored 18 points, including a tip-in with 1:45 left in regulation that gave New Orleans its first lead, and Eric Gordon finished with 16 for the Pelicans. Gordon’s four-point play with 31 seconds left in overtime got New Orleans within four, but they got no closer.

The Heat had 18 turnovers in the game — and New Orleans scored on only one of them. Miami outrebounded the Pelicans 57-45.

Davis had more points than his teammates combined in the first half, the reason why New Orleans still had a shot.

New Orleans’ largest first-half deficit was 13 points, which was trimmed to 42-38 going into intermission after Davis’ follow-slam closed the scoring. He had 20 points, 10 rebounds, three assists and three blocks at the break — according to STATS, no player had done that in any half since at least the start of the 2002-03 season.

Friday’s game started a Miami’s first and only stretch of four contests in five days this season. The Heat play 26 times in 47 days going into the All-Star break.

TIP-INS

-Pelicans: There have been two noon starts in the NBA this season and the Pelicans were the visitors in both, the other being a loss at New York in November. … This was the first of three consecutive one-game trips for the Pelicans, who are back in Florida on Monday to play Orlando. … Gordon celebrated his 27th birthday.

-Heat: Miami (.833) moved past Portland (14-3, .824) for the NBA’s best Christmas record. … Instead of leaving quickly for Orlando after the game as usual, the Heat gave players and staff a few hours for extra holiday celebrating before planning to convene in the evening for the 30-minute flight north.

WADE’S HISTORY

The Heat are now 10-1 when Wade plays on Christmas — no player has a better record — and only seven players in NBA history have appeared in more Dec. 25 games than the Heat star. Wade ranks among the top five all-time in Christmas Day points (277), assists (70) and steals (19).

“HOME STRONG” MOMS

Miami has honored soldiers before home games for years as part of its “Home Strong” program, and Friday’s instance was a family affair. Heat guards Tyler Johnson and Josh Richardson presented their mothers, U.S. Air Force Master Sgt. Jennifer Johnson and Lt. Col. Alice Richardson, with the plaques and commerative coins that the team gives servicemen and women as a thank-you for their service to the country.

COLE’S HOLIDAY STREAK

Pelicans guard Norris Cole, in his fifth pro season, played in his fifth Christmas Day game. His first NBA game was on Dec. 25, 2011 when he and the Heat — the team he spent parts of his first four seasons with — opened what became a championship season with a win at Dallas.

UP NEXT

-Pelicans: Host Houston on Saturday.

-Heat: At Orlando on Saturday.