David Cox, the chief financial officer of Marin General Hospital, has resigned and will be leaving his position sometime in July.

Cox's resignation comes as Marin General Hospital Corp., which manages the hospital's day-to-day operations, is attempting to finalize an agreement with the Marin Healthcare District for a long-term lease of the hospital facilities and the land they occupy.

"David announced his resignation so we're looking to bring in an interim person and do a national search for a new CFO," said Jon Friedenberg, the Greenbrae hospital's chief administrative officer.

District board member Jennifer Rienks said, "David had some other opportunities he wanted to pursue."

Cox could not be reached for comment.

Late Monday, Marin General announced that Ronald Sperling will begin serving as the hospital's interim CFO beginning June 23. Sperling has served as CFO/VP of Finance for Legacy Health System in Portland, Oregon; Bon Secours-St. Joseph Healthcare Group in Port Charlotte, Florida; Multicare Health System in Tacoma, Washington; and Swedish Medical Center in Seattle, Washington.

In a prepared statement, Marin General CEO Lee Domanico said Sperling's experience in the development of long-range capital and finance plans "will be very useful as we are in the midst of undertaking the construction financing for the new hospital."

In November, Marin voters approved a $394 million general obligation bond measure to help rebuild Marin General Hospital. The bond measure is expected to cover a big chunk but not all of the estimated $650 million needed to complete Marin General's building plan.

Cox, who was hired in 2009, is the second highest-paid employee on the hospital's staff. According to the hospital's 2012 tax filing, Cox received salary and other benefits totaling $542,997 that year — second only to Domanico, who received $1.3 million in salary and other benefits in 2012.

Friedenberg said he understands the departure of the hospital's chief financial officer may raise questions in some people's minds as to the hospital's health; but he said there is no reason for concern.

"We're on budget. We're in the black," Friedenberg said. "Things are going well at the hospital."

In May, Cox presented the Marin Healthcare District Board, which provides oversight to ensure that the hospital is maintaining certain standards of quality care and management, with the results of the hospital's independent, 2013 audit.

"It was clean. There are no issues," Friedenberg said.

In 2002, Cox helped to expose a multi-million scam by hospital administrators at Fletcher Allen Health Care in Burlington, Vermont, where he had served as chief financial officer. Cox was fired from that job when he refused to take part in the scheme; he supplied valuable information to investigators after they subpoenaed him.

Friedenberg said now is a difficult time for any hospital to have to replace a key financial officer, due to the many changes taking place in connection with implementation of the Affordable Care Act. Hospitals are being asked to accept lower insurance reimbursement rates and pioneer new approaches for generating revenue by helping patients avoid hospital care.

"On the other hand," Friedenberg said, "there isn't a sense that the difficulties that the industry is in are going to change any time soon. In the life of Marin General, it is probably as good a time as any."

The Marin Healthcare District board's Tuesday meeting will feature a public hearing on a proposed new 30-year lease of the hospital grounds and facilities by Marin General Hospital Corp.

The deal calls for the hospital nonprofit to pay the district $500,000 in annual rent. Currently Marin General is paying the district $457,419 in annual rent.

The term sheet also states that the nonprofit, Marin General Hospital corporation, will have to pay the district some additional percentage of its profits if those profits are sizable enough and if the hospital is deemed financially healthy enough, based on its credit rating and cash on hand.

Additional public hearings will he held on the proposed lease before the district board votes on it. Under state law the final agreement must be approved by district voters, so the plan is to put it on the November ballot.

"It is a below-fair market value lease for lots of good reasons — since we're the parent company," Rienks said. " It's not like we're leasing it some entity that is trying to make a bunch of money off of it. We've constructed a lease that is going to leave as much money as we can in the hospital."