John Boehner told House Republicans that he was finishing plans that will waste millions more taxpayer dollars on a lawsuit against President Obama’s immigration executive actions.

Politico reported:

House Speaker John Boehner’s leadership team is preparing a resolution that could authorize further legal action against the Obama administration over its moves on immigration; he told his colleagues Tuesday morning. The resolution, which Boehner discussed in a closed Republican meeting Tuesday, could authorize the House to take several different forms of legal action against the administration, but no final course of action has been decided. For example, the resolution could authorize the House to join a lawsuit that states have filed against President Barack Obama over the executive action. “We are finalizing a plan to authorize litigation on this issue — one we believe gives us the best chance of success,” Boehner said in the meeting.

House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi blistered Boehner for not governing, “Republicans control both houses of Congress, but Speaker Boehner still doesn’t have the wherewithal to legislate. House Republicans’ latest lawsuit against the President is an embarrassing admission of failure. Republicans’ radical anti-immigrant legislation is dead on arrival. Once again, House Republicans are crawling to the courts to relieve them of their responsibility to govern. Republicans should stop wasting millions of taxpayer dollars suing the President, and start showing some seriousness for the security of the American people.”

House Republicans announced yesterday that they were delaying a vote on their border security bill because of the blizzard, but the real reason for the delay is that Speaker Boehner doesn’t have the votes to pass the bill. Boehner has refused to govern most of the time, but when he has tried to pass legislation, he often doesn’t have the votes to pass his own bills.

John Boehner can’t govern, so he is going to sue President Obama for using his executive powers. Speaker Boehner’s Obamacare lawsuit is costing taxpayers $500/hour in attorney fees. Instead of passing legislation, Speaker Boehner’s answer to everything is to abuse the court system by filing frivolous lawsuits against President Obama.

The lawsuit strategy was born out of Republican desperation, ineptitude, and failure. Speaker Boehner’s lawsuits are an attempt to distract the country from the fact no matter how big of a majority Boehner has in the House, Republicans remain unfit to govern.