Topics: Books, Girls, hannah horvath, Lena Dunham, New Yorker, not that kind of girl, ocd, therapy, Entertainment News

When Lena Dunham first announced her memoir, “Not That Kind of Girl,” bloggers balked at the prospect of a 20-something writing a book that promised “frank and funny advice” — especially one netting nearly 4 million dollars. They interpreted it as a kind of highbrow millennial entitlement, exactly the kind projected by “Girls” characters Hannah, Shoshanna, Marnie, and Jessa, and picked apart by tiresome New York Times trend pieces. Gawker published decontextualized lines from Dunham’s book proposal: “I went to my first Women’s Action Coalition meeting at age three”; “I’ve been in therapy since I was seven”; “When I got to college I suddenly had the sense that my upbringing hadn’t been very ‘real.'” In these snippets, Dunham comes across as a coddled, privileged and self-absorbed kid, enduring the same criticisms as her TV character. What can a memoir coming from that perspective offer a larger world of readers?

A few things, it turns out. In an excerpt from her book, published in The New Yorker, Dunham writes candidly about her struggles with Obsessive Compulsive Disorder. Since childhood, she has endured hundreds of distracting and disturbing thoughts every day. As usual, she manages to poke fun at herself while writing about the disorder:

The first doctor, a violet-haired grandma-age woman with a German surname, asks me a few simple questions and then invites me to play with the toys scattered across her floor. She sits in a chair above me, pad in hand. I have the sense she will gather all kinds of information from this, so I put on a show that I’m sure will demonstrate my loneliness and introspection: bootleg Barbie crashes her convertible with off-brand Ken riding shotgun. Tiny Lego men are killed in a war against their own kind. After a long period of observation, she asks me to share my three greatest wishes. “A river, where I can be alone,” I tell her, impressed with my poeticism. From this answer, she will know that I am not like other nine-year-olds.