“When you think it can’t get any worse, it does. This year, I’m sorry to tell you, the United States Senate is going to be voting on a constitutional amendment to repeal the First Amendment,” malfunctioning Shrinky-Dink Ted Cruz announced to a rapt crowd full of horrified pastors at Watchmen on the Wall, a Family Research Council sponsored event this Thursday.

Say what, Ted Cruz? Is this true? The First Amendment? The right to free speech and freedom of the press and freedom of religion? Our very first amendment? And it’s gone entirely unnoticed by anyone other than you? My goodness! Do go on!

“I am telling you, I am not making this up. Sen. Chuck Schumer has announced the Senate Democrats are scheduling a vote on a constitutional amendment to give Congress the authority to regulate political speech, because elected officials have decided they don’t like it when the citizenry has the temerity to criticize what they’ve done. They don’t like it when pastors in their community stand up and speak the truth.”

Color me intrigued, Ted Cruz. What is this constitutional amendment about? Will I, a political blogger, have to fear for my life? Can I be thrown in jail for my opinions? What is going on here?

“I’ll note this amendment, which has 41 Democratic senators as co-sponsors – 41 Democrats have signed on to repealing the First Amendment. It explicitly says nothing in this new amendment shall abridge the freedom of the press. So the New York Times is protected, but it doesn’t say the same thing about the freedom of speech. It doesn’t say the same thing about religious liberty, what is says it that politicians in Washington have unlimited constitutional authority to muzzle each and every one of you if you’re saying things the government finds inconvenient.”

Oh my land! My goodness gracious! What on earth could this terrible amendment be? Is this the thing where we throw all the Christians–eighty-three percent of the population–into terrible FEMA camps? Tell me, what is it?

OH. WAIT. It turns out that the amendment the Senate is proposing is one which would overturn the Citizens United and McCutcheon decisions and render them unconstitutional. Two of the most ghastly SCOTUS decisions in our time. Two decisions which, essentially, sealed our fate as a plutocracy and gave all the political power to the rich. This amendment, proposed by Tom Udall (D-NM), would once again allow federal and state governments to regulate the raising of money during elections. It would mean that corporations no longer get to be “people.”

Now, given that we went over 200 years without the First Amendment meaning that rich people get to buy elections, this whole “repealing the First Amendment” statement seems a bit hyperbolic. In fact, I’m pretty sure that most Americans would be entirely on board with any amendment that could do something about them.

Unfortunately, the amendment is very unlikely to pass, as it would require two-thirds of the House and Senate to back it, and with the Republicans controlling the House, that’s not happening. However, the main purpose of proposing the amendment is to highlight GOP support of unpopular decisions like Citizens United and McCutcheon.