CLEVELAND – Jim Jordan is in his element.

The fifth-term congressman from Ohio stands on stage last Tuesday in an upstairs room of Hofbräuhaus, a German microbrewery downtown, speaking at a fundraiser for the wrestling team at Cleveland State University.

Jordan, a four-time high school state champion and two-time collegiate national champion wrestler, rattles off a few jokes, including one about the time a Mongolian heavyweight dripped sweat on him in a sauna in the Soviet Union, which he calls the “low point in my life,” or another about the time a former opponent came up to him at a Big Ten tournament and said, “Hey, Jordan, I hope you’re president some day ’cause then I can tell everyone, ‘I kicked his ass.’"

But he also gets serious, talking about discipline and life lessons learned on the mat and how they apply to his work in Congress. He mentions his favorite quote from his former high school coach: “Discipline is doing what you don’t want to do when you don’t want to do it.”

“There’s something about wrestling, all that’s involved in it, getting your tail kicked in front of your family and in front of your peers, how dealing with all that, it’s good for a person,” Jordan told RealClearPolitics in an interview at the Cleveland event. “So hopefully that makes a difference in the way I try to fulfill my responsibilities as a member of Congress. I hope it means I just try to do what I told the voters I was going to do."

“Do what I told the voters I was going to do” is a common refrain from Jordan, one he repeats often – including at least six times in his interview with RCP.

That attitude has helped him accrue significant influence in the House, which led to the creation of the House Freedom Caucus, a group of roughly three dozen conservatives who have pushed congressional Republicans to the brink on a number of issues, from the 2013 government shutdown over the Affordable Care Act to the near temporary closure of the Department of Homeland Security in February over the president’s immigration executive orders to the departure of Speaker John Boehner earlier this year.

Jordan, the group’s recently re-elected chairman, has been at the center of each of those fights. His fellow Freedom Caucus members said it’s a group effort but praised Jordan’s ability to keep the three dozen members together. Rep. Mark Meadows (R-N.C.) said that Jordan keeps his opinions quiet when helpful, but steps in forcefully when needed, calling his style “an iron fist and a velvet glove.”

Asked what led to Jordan being re-elected unanimously, Rep. Mick Mulvaney (R-S.C.) put it succinctly: “Why change the coach if you’re winning?"

Rep. Dave Brat (R-Va.), who ousted then-Majority Leader Eric Cantor in a primary last year, headlined a county Republican barbecue in Jordan’s district last week. He said Jordan called him shortly after his election, volunteering to be his mentor, and has helped him carve out a space in the House in his short tenure. Brat said that much of the Freedom Caucus’ success can be attributed to Jordan’s leadership.

“It’s everything by consensus, we all get along, everyone likes everyone in the group,” Brat said. “Whoever the leader of that group is, when everybody likes each other … there’s 40 politicians or whatever and there’s no backstabbing, that’s called leadership.”

The Freedom Caucus’s influence within the conference put them in a powerful position when Boehner announced his resignation, and their eventual support of Paul Ryan helped persuade him to take the speaker’s job. Jordan praised Ryan in the interview with RCP, saying the Wisconsin lawmaker is off to a great start and is “one sharp individual” who’s the right person to voice House Republicans’ message. It’s only been a month however, and major deadlines and issues lie ahead.

Back in Ohio

Jordan’s political career started in the Ohio General Assembly in 1994, where he served three terms before running for state Senate, winning the primary over a Republican that most of the state party had coalesced around. Matt Huffman, a longtime friend and political ally of Jordan’s, said that while his opponent racked up high profile endorsements across the state, Jordan went door to door, meeting voters and gaining their support. He won the race and served for six years before making the leap to Congress in 2006.

At an Allen County Republican dinner last week in Lima, a city of 40,000 in Jordan’s district, many of the attendees said their congressman is always visible back home. They call him a “bulldog,” a “pit bull” and a “fighter.” Several brought up the recent hearing of the Select Committee on Benghazi, praising Jordan’s aggressive line of questioning of former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.

“What I like is he does what he says he’s going to do and I think that’s what people are tired of in politics, just all the verbiage of people saying [things], then nothing ever happens after that, but I believe Jim Jordan [when he] says what he’s going to do,” said Lisa Kroehler, a small business owner from Lima.

As for being labeled a pit bull and bulldog, Jordan joked, “They could say worse things about me.”

His methods have, in fact, ruffled feathers on Capitol Hill. Many in his own party, including former Speaker Boehner, have criticized Jordan and fellow conservatives for being unrealistic about halting the Affordable Care Act or blocking executive orders using government funding, calling the strategies unhelpful and damaging to the party.

In 2013, just prior to the government shutdown over the ACA, a strategy that Jordan and other Freedom Caucus members supported (though the group had not yet formed), Rep. Devin Nunes (R-Calif.) labeled them "lemmings with suicide vests."

Boehner, shortly after announcing his retirement to avoid another protracted battle over government spending, this time with defunding Planned Parenthood as the goal, didn't specifically criticize the Freedom Caucus, but said some Republican members were unrealistic about what could be achieved.

"The Bible says, beware of false prophets. And there are people out there spreading noise about how much can get done," Boehner said, adding that the shutdown strategy to get rid of Obamacare in 2013 "never had a chance."

"We have got groups here in town, members of the House and Senate here in town, who whip people into a frenzy believing they can accomplish things that they know, they know, are never going to happen."

In Lima, the heart of Jordan’s district, the message is a little different.

“Back home here, I get the complete opposite of his critics,” said Allen County GOP Chair Keith Cheney. “I get the ‘Hey, way to go Jim,’ ‘Glad he’s hanging in there for us, glad he’s standing firm with us.’ That’s the way his constituents back home believe."

Moving Forward

Jordan and his fellow Freedom Caucus members are pleased with the changes coming from Ryan, including shuffling the panel that selects committee assignments for members, opening up the floor for amendment votes and consulting with individual members on big policy decisions.

Jordan, who was friendly with Ryan before his colleague became speaker, said he’s been “great” so far, and praised Ryan’s decision to get out in front on messaging, increasing his media presence and being a voice for House Republicans.

Jordan and Ryan have a similar vision for major policy proposals: significant tax reform, an Obamacare replacement plan, welfare reform and others. These ideas likely won’t pass the Senate and almost certainly won’t be signed into law by President Obama, but will allow House Republicans to set the tone on major policies in a presidential election year.

“Demonstrating how we would do things different, I think that’s critical,” Jordan said. “And if we could pass them in the House, they probably won’t get 60 votes in the Senate, but at least it’s out there helping frame the debate.”

First, however, they’ll have to get through next week. Government funding runs out on Dec. 11 and Congress will have to pass an omnibus appropriations bill before then to keep the lights on. Though the spending levels are set by the budget deal from earlier this year, policy riders – defunding Planned Parenthood and blocking Syrian refugees, among others – could throw a wrinkle into the process.

Jordan said there will need to be “significant policy changes” to get conservative members on board with the increases in spending, though it remains unclear at this point what will actually be added to the bill next week.

Republicans hope to avoid the contentious and divisive past fights over government funding. One key to keeping things from blowing up this time is communication between conference factions.

It starts with weekly lunches featuring Ryan, Jordan, fellow Freedom Caucus member Mulvaney, moderate Reps. Charlie Dent (R-Pa.) and Bob Dold (R-Ill.), and Ryan allies Jeb Hensarling (R-Texas and Tom Price (R-Ga.).

Brendan Buck, a spokesman for Ryan, said the lunches are designed to keep the lines of communication open and to make sure there are no surprises on where different factions of the conference stand.

“I think when everybody understands where everybody is coming from it makes it easier to get the type of outcomes we’re all seeking,” Buck told RCP. “The speaker understands that Mr. Jordan has a lot of credibility and he’s earned it, and there are people who are going to look to him for clues on which way to go on things and that’s why it’s important that we’re working together as a team on these things.”

Buck said that Jordan’s buy-in will lend credibility to Ryan’s vision for the conference to draft major policy proposals and try to set the agenda.

Next year will mark a decade on Capitol Hill for the Ohio lawmaker, who said he plans on staying in the House for now. He says he likes the camaraderie within the Freedom Caucus and his committees, where he’s grouped around like-minded people with similar goals.

So what are his expectations for the Freedom Caucus next year?

“Stay focused on the goal, and the goal is, all the people who feel like Washington has forgotten ’em,” Jordan said. “Stay focused on doing what we told them we were going to do so that they don’t think the town has forgotten them.”