Police are looking into a possible case of false imprisonment following an online date. NBC 6's Ari Odzer reports. (Published Wednesday, Aug. 27, 2014)

Police are looking into a possible case of false imprisonment following an online date.

Miami-Dade investigators said 19-year-old Jazzima Barnes, who is listed as homeless, made arrangements through an online dating service to meet 25-year-old James Myles at his Southwest Miami-Dade home over the weekend.

On Tuesday, after three nights of staying at his home, Barnes told Myles she wanted to leave, but he didn't let her, according to police. Barnes told police that she tried to leave through the front door, but he grabbed her backpack and dragged her away, saying, "You're not going anywhere, you're not leaving!" according to the police report.

Police said Myles then stuffed her mouth with a window curtain to muffle her screams, but she continued to scream, so he covered her face with a pillow from the couch.

A struggle ensued, during which Barnes bit Myles' finger as he was trying to cover her mouth, the police report said. Eventually, Myles allowed Barnes to go to the restroom, but she instead tried to run to another part of the house, so Myles punched her repeatedly in the head and locked her in his bedroom, the report said.

After some time, Myles left the home, and Barnes was able to dial 911 on her cell phone. She stayed on the line with police for several hours since she did not know where she was, police said.

Officers said they heard Barnes being assaulted by Myles during the 911 call. Eventually, officers searching the area found Barnes and arrested Myles, who was standing outside, and charged him with kidnapping.

Myles' sister told police that she saw him push Barnes into his beroom and that she could hear screaming from inside, the report said.

Barnes suffered a cut above her right ear, and had bruising and swelling to her right wrist, police said.

It is unclear if Myles has an attorney.

Stay with NBC6.com for updates.