Of all the things to be thankful for this season, a comfortable, roomy home surely tops the list — unless you’re a member of the Tiny House Movement, which, despite its very small stature, has somehow gripped America.

The term “tiny house” is used to describe dwellings under 1,000 square feet, though Jay Shafer — the owner of Tumbleweed Tiny House Company and Four Lights Tiny House Company, who is often credited as the forefather of the contemporary Tiny House Movement — says tiny is about efficiency, not size. For him, a tiny house is “any home in which all of the space is being used well.”

Tiny isn’t new. Shafer cites Henry David Thoreau who, a century and a half ago, went into the woods for a two-year, two-month and two-day stay at a cozy, 150-square-foot cottage that cost about $836 modern-day dollars. Thoreau wanted “to live more deliberately,” he explains in “Walden,” the aftermath of his ordeal, a critique of Western culture published in 1852 that explored (still-pressing) problems like rampant consumerism and a growing disconnection from nature.

Before that, Native Americans, like all indigenous people, lived in little dwellings called teepees, wigwams, adobes, huts, etc. Later, during the industrial revolution, American workers inhabited crude, makeshift shacks with dirt floors. Today, some 20 million people occupy trailers across the United States, which have been around since 1910 and are frequently associated with poverty. For the vast majority — Shafer and Durango-based builder Greg Parham included — tiny homes remain a factor of financial necessity, not choice.

The Tiny House Movement was thrown onto the radar of America’s elite and middle classes in March 2013, when The New York Times ran a minimalist manifesto by Graham Hill, a single, wealthy man who was so moved by his travels abroad he ditched a lucrative West Coast gig and sprawling urban manors for an untethered life in the most practical, 420-square-foot New York apartment money could buy.

Well, the price tag wasn’t so simple: After purchasing the apartment for $287,000 in 2009, Hill spent $365,000 renovating it, according to Curbed. Earlier this year, he put that micro-home on the market for $995,000 — $2,369 per square foot — transforming Thoreau’s Tiny House Movement of yesteryear into something appealing to folks who, much like myself, adore the idea of simple, eco-friendly living, but lack the wherewithal to actually go into the woods to find it.

Forbes recently examined the steep cost of tiny homes, which typically range from $200 to $400 per square foot — far more than the average single-family Denver home, which was valued at $174 per square foot in September 2014. And, that tiny house pricetag doesn’t usually include land. In Montecito, Calif., a perfectly austere 510-square-foot “Artist’s Retreat” raked in nearly $1.2 million. Canoe Bay, a manufacturer of recreational vehicles, makes a 400-square-foot RV called the “Escape,” that ranges from $79,000 to $124,900.

I know. We can’t generalize to an entire group based on a few people. Surely some tiny housers are “driving life into a corner, and reducing it to its lowest terms,” as Thoreau set out to do. These folks represent the heart of the movement, but probably not the mass. Kristen Moeller, who teensified in Conifer after her original, regular-sized home was destroyed in the 2012 wildfires there, told reporters, “I don’t believe a true tiny life is a sustainable lifestyle for most people.” After all, even Thoreau came back.

Its unclear exactly how big the tiny movement is, and Shafer says it’s hard to pinpoint demographics within it because tiny house statistics don’t exist. Many tiny homes are built discreetly and hidden since they’re illegal under most zoning codes, Parham adds.

Here’s what is clear: The Hill camp doesn’t buy tiny to connect with nature or live sustainably. The simplicity they seek is a materialistic interpretation of simple focusing on embellished, over-the-top minimalist aesthetic, and it succinctly captures the tiny contradiction, which is that its possible to live a simple life in a teeny, tiny home because, heck, if you’d like to toss the majority of your possessions into a landfill, you can always buy more disposable, offshore stuff later.

To be fair, Hill isn’t the only one to feel burdened by resources. I’ve laid awake imagining a life without five junk drawers filled with green Whole Foods rubber bands and Apple chargers and missing puzzle pieces, action-sized dinosaurs and socks. “There is an inherent attraction, whether you are rich or poor, to a boiled down version of simplicity,” says Shafer. If only the heart and mind could sync up.

Technically, tiny isn’t what most of us want — it’s what we wish we wanted. Americans aren’t trading McMansions for souped-up, cardboard-box sized quarters. Over the last 40 years, the average home has increased in size by more than 1,000 square feet, from 1,660 square feet in 1973 to 2,679 square feet last year, according to the U.S. Census Bureau.

Meanwhile, the average household size has declined from 3.01 persons per household to a record low of 2.54 persons per household during the same period. With the average new house in the United States getter larger at the same time households are shrinking, the square footage of living space per person has increased a whopping 91.2 percent since the 1970s.

Now for an incongruity: Schafer estimates two-thirds of the tiny house plans he sells are intended for backyard retreats — essentially, additions to existing homes.

The Tiny House Movement isn’t the only manifestation of the notion that Americans have so much we literally need nothing. In the 1990s, “Saturday Night Live” ran a game-show- style skit where a man from a developing nation was competing for a goat to bring back to his village. He floundered, though, when asked about the word used to describe a person who has enough food but won’t eat it.

If “anorexia” is tricky for those with less to understand, I wonder how the glitzy portion of the Tiny House Movement is perceived.

Perhaps mainstream tiny, as distinguished from situational tiny and authentic tiny, is merely another (very sneaky) form of consumerism begging us to ditch the things we already own and buy shiny-new, better stuff. The key to genuine simplicity, though, isn’t finding something that makes you happy. It’s figuring out how to be happy with what you’ve got.

I’m all for living deliberately, and I love the potential of tiny. It’s the execution that’s troubling because the inherent message is that having plenty isn’t good enough.

If there’s a way to live more consciously while simultaneously acknowledging and appreciating how great we have it — well, that’s a movement I’d rather get behind.

Jamie Siebrase is a Denver-based freelancer writer and journalist specializing in arts, culture, and parenting. She is a member of the 2014 Colorado Voices panel.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.