RoughRiders' running back, Loveland safety were ket part of conference title teams

The Reporter-Herald's All-Area defense is led by Loveland free safety John Freismuth (front right), who is joined by (from left) Thompson Valley's David Eusea and Jack Varuska and Roosevelt's Spencer Roberts and Alize Garcia. Completing the defense in the back row (from left) are Thompson Valley's Danny Highland, Resurrection Christian's Brock Buxman, Roosevelt's Omar Rivera and Loveland's Cameron Bale, Jake Weinmaster and Tristan Seymour. Not pictured are Jake Lohr and Cole Watson of Resurrection Christian. (Chris Stark)

Sometimes statistics tell the story, and sometimes they don't.

But ask any true competitor, and they'll tell you there's only one number that really matters.

Wins.

Leading the way in that critical column this year were Roosevelt and Loveland, a pair of football programs that continued their winning traditions by capturing at least a share of their conference title before advancing to the quarterfinals of their respective state playoffs.

While both squads have a long list of valuable contributors, two individuals in particular were vital to the success of their team.

For the RoughRiders, it was running back Randy Molinar, the centerpiece to Roosevelt's ground-and-pound attack. For the Indians, it was John Freismuth, a physically-gifted safety who set the tone for Loveland's hard-hitting defense.

The Reporter-Herald's All-Area offense is led by Roosevelt s 1,500-yard back Randy Molinar (30). Joining him from left are Loveland's Ryan McCloughan, Keagan Aschenbrenner, Kade Keefauver and Mike Zweigle. In the back row, from left, are Berthoud's Nick Dietz, Mountain View's Jerrod Klug, Adam Baumann and Camden Nichols and Roosevelt's Ryan Flynn and Desmond Hamby. Not pictured is Cory Wiggins of Resurrection Christian. (Chris Stark)

For filling those indispensable roles, the duo leads the 2013 Reporter-Herald's All-Area football team, with Molinar the offensive player of the year and Freismuth the defensive player of the year.

Joining Molinar on the All-Area offense are fellow backs Ryan McCloughan (Loveland) and Cory Wiggins (Resurrection Christian); receivers Jerrod Klug (Mountain View) and Nick Dietz (Berthoud); quarterbacks Mike Zweigle (Loveland) and Adam Baumann (Mountain View); and linemen Kade Keefauver (Loveland), Keagan Aschenbrenner (Loveland), Ryan Flynn (Roosevelt), Desmond Hamby (Roosevelt) and Camden Nichols (Mountain View).

Advertisement

Joining Freismuth on the defense are fellow defensive backs Brock Buxman (Resurrection Christian), Jack Varuska (Thompson Valley) and Omar Rivera (Roosevelt); linebackers David Eusea (Thompson Valley), Jake Weinmaster (Loveland), Jake Lohr (Resurrection Christian) and Spencer Roberts (Roosevelt); linemen Tristan Seymour (Loveland), Danny Highland (Thompson Valley), Cole Watson (Resurrection Christian) and Alize Garcia (Roosevelt); and specialist Cameron Bale (Loveland).

While Freismuth was an absolute force on offense, turning just 26 receptions into 675 yards and 11 touchdowns, the LHS senior was perhaps even more invaluable on defense from his free safety spot. His statistics don't pop out at you (85 tackles and one interception), but his play on film does.

"He was a dominant figure in the middle. He really helped us taking care of the middle, not only on pass but on run," LHS coach Wayne McGinn said. "To me the most important position on our defense is our free safety, because he's not only pass but also a run defender. We relied on him a lot being back there the whole time."

Jake Lohr

At 6-foot-4 and 205 pounds, Freismuth took pride in playing a physical brand of ball, making sure he and his teammates forced the opposition to earn every inch. The CSU-bound athlete is also incredibly fast for his size, creating headaches for those game planning against the Indians this year.

"I know he was a threat offensively, but defensively he was definitely more of a concern for us," Mountain View coach Bart Mayes said. "For us, he did a lot more damage defensively, just with his size and his speed and the amount of field he was able to cover."

While Freismuth's defensive stats weren't necessarily overwhelming, Molinar posted numbers that few in the entire state could even compare to. The senior racked up 1,557 rushing yards and 20 touchdowns, and he did it all by hardly playing a full four quarters, as seven of the Riders' eight wins were by at least 20 points.

Cole Watson

Just once all season did Molinar have 20 carries in a game. But because of his robust 11.8 yards per carry, he still ended up third in 3A in rushing and second in rushing touchdowns.

"He only played in about half our games ... because we get up and we pull him out. He doesn't play half the third or the whole fourth quarter. I'd be curious to see his numbers if he were to play the whole games," RHS coach Noland Eastin said. "If we don't have Randy, we don't win near as many games.

"Randy's a blocker, he does it all."

Like most elite backs, Molinar was the beneficiary of a dominant offensive line that included four seniors and a junior. And like all good teammates, he's quick to give credit where it's due.

"I think the coaches were saying this was one of the biggest lines we've had," Molinar said. "They really made my job easy, following those big guys made the yards come easy to me."



Offense

Aschenbrenner -- The Loveland senior helped protect for an all-area quarterback and open holes for an all-area back. He missed the end of the season because of injury, but was still a major part of a unit that paved the way for three ball carriers who rushed for at least 400 yards and five touchdowns.

Baumann -- The Mountain View junior quarterback nearly matched last year's school-record passing total and was more efficient, completing 63 percent of his passes for 1,293 yards and 17 touchdowns. He was also among the area's best runners, totaling 621 yards and 10 touchdowns on the ground.

Dietz -- The Berthoud senior receiver had at least 200 yards rushing (294), passing (214) and receiving (433). He also accounted for seven total touchdowns, had 42 receptions and averaged nearly 20 yards a kick return.

Flynn -- The massive Roosevelt tackle was one of four seniors on a physical RoughRiders' offensive line that produced 3,587 rushing yards and 42 touchdowns.

Hamby -- Another key cog in the Riders' heralded O-line, the senior guard helped his team rush for at least 200 yards in every game but one, leading to another Tri-Valley championship and a first-round playoff victory.

Keefauver -- At 6-foot-3, 275 pounds, the Loveland senior was the leader up front for an offense that averaged 33.5 points. The first-team all-Northern Conference selection was also considered the best at his position in the league.

Klug -- The Mountain View junior finished tied atop the 4A leaderboard with 11 touchdown receptions. He also had 35 catches for 451 yards.

McCloughan -- The versatile senior receiver was perhaps Loveland's offensive MVP, totaling 483 rushing yards, 370 receiving yards and 289 returns yards.

Nichols -- The Mountain View senior lineman was the anchor up front for an offense that averaged 31 points and 382 yards a game.

Wiggins -- The Resurrection Christian senior back ran for 10 touchdowns, three of which came in a near upset of top-ranked Buena Vista in the second round of the playoffs. He also had 81 tackles, two interceptions, a sack, a blocked punt and a fumble recovery on defense.

Zweigle -- The senior quarterback was the epitome of a dual threat, throwing for 1,423 yards while rushing for 561 more. Perhaps most impressive was that he totaled 23 touchdowns (15 passing, eight rushing) with just two interceptions.

Defense

Bale -- Loveland's senior punter led the state with 14 punts downed inside the opponent's 20 and ranked second with an average boot of 43.8 yards. He was also a solid contributor at linebacker with 58 tackles, two fumble recoveries and seven tackles for loss.

Buxman -- The Resurrection Christian senior defensive back racked up 125 tackles, three sacks, six interceptions, three of which were returned for a touchdown.

Eusea -- The Thompson Valley junior linebacker led the team with 102 tackles, including 65 solo and five for a loss. He also caused a fumble and recovered two.

Garcia -- The senior defensive tackle provided an invaluable presence in the middle for the Roosevelt defense with 7.5 sacks.

Highland -- The Thompson Valley junior defensive end had 54 tackles, two tackles for loss, 1.5 sacks, an interception and a fumble recovery.

Lohr -- The senior Resurrection Christian linebacker totaled 74 tackles, two sacks, an interception, a fumble recovery and a forced fumble.

Roberts -- The Roosevelt senior linebacker led his team with 96 tackles, adding a pair of sacks and an interception, which was returned for a touchdown in the Riders' playoff win over Frederick.

Rivera -- The versatile Roosevelt senior defensive back had 59 tackles, five interceptions -- one returned for touchdown against Loveland -- 10 passes defended a fumble recovery and a forced fumble.

Seymour -- The senior defensive lineman was a disruptive force for Loveland, totaling 11 tackles for loss among his 60 total stops. He was also valuable piece up front offensively as a tackle.

Varuska -- The Thompson Valley junior defensive back had three interceptions, five passes defended and 35 tackles. Was also a difference-maker on special teams, averaging 32 yards a punt return and 35 yards a kick return.

Watson -- The Resurrection Christian defensive end ranked third in 1A with seven sacks, also caused and recovered a fumble. Was also a threat in the passing game as a tight end with more than 300 receiving yards and three touchdowns.

Weinmaster -- Loveland's junior linebacker ranked third in 4A with 12.5 stops a game for a total of 125, 31 of which were against Monarch in the playoffs. He also led the Indians with 12 tackles for loss, and was a standout running back as well, gaining 516 yards and 11 touchdowns.

Sean Star can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 512, sstar@reporter-herald.com or on Twitter @seanvstar and @Rhpreps.