December 9, 2013, at 5:02 PM | By Matthew Archbold |

Recently, Georgetown University’s McCourt School of Public Policy co-hosted a forum titled “Public Policy Forum 2013: The Implementation of the Affordable Care Act – Opportunities and Challenges,” which featured two keynote speeches from Catholics who were wildly supportive of the legislation despite clear opposition by the U.S. Bishops over it’s pro-abortion, contraceptive and sterilization provisions.

The first keynote was by Pres. Barack Obama’s chief of staff Denis McDonough and the second keynote was former senator and abortion rights advocate Tom Daschle.

McDonough, a graduate of Georgetown's foreign service master’s program, represented the Obama administration—the most radically pro-abortion rights administration in the country’s history.

LifeSiteNews.com has described former Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle as “one of the US’s most outspoken and determined ‘Catholic’ abortion-supporting politicians.”

Daschle once even wrote a fundraising letter on behalf of the National Abortion Rights Action League, (NARAL), which clearly stated his efforts as majority leader to further their agenda. In 2003, The National Catholic Register reported that Bishop Robert Carlson—then shepherd of the Sioux Falls (S.D.) Diocese where Daschle resided—ordered the politician to stop identifying himself as Catholic in his official biography because Daschle’s pro-abortion rights record was so extreme.

A panel discussion followed the two keynotes speeches. The panel included former congressional candidate and Georgetown professor Judith Feder, who ran for congress in Virginia as an outspoken advocate of both abortion rights and same-sex marriage.

Diane Lewis—executive board chair for Washington, D.C.’s Health Benefit Exchange Authority, which earlier this year approved grants for hundreds of thousands of dollars to Planned Parenthood, was also featured on the panel.

“We are excited to create these partnerships with trusted organizations that have deep roots in the communities that make up the District of Columbia,”Lewis stated in a press release announcing the grants in August 2013 “The new health law offers essential benefits that will improve the health and security of the residents of our city. It is critically important that we have trained experts available to help ensure those benefits reach the people who need them.”

Former Republican Senator Robert Bennett, who moderated the panel, pointed out its lack of ideological diversity. Bennett said he was the only dissenting voice, but admitted that he too was supportive of the individual mandate.

Catholic Education Daily is an online publication of The Cardinal Newman Society. Click here for email updates and free online membership with The Cardinal Newman Society.