SAN FRANCISCO, Oct. 22, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Hippocrates told us "Let thy food be thy medicine." Even if you don't know that guy, you can't say your Mom didn't tell you to eat your vegetables. Yet, over 90 percent of adults fail to eat within recommendation dietary guidelines, and 90 percent of people who lose also gain back all their weight by year end, contributing to high rates of diet-related diseases like diabetes and coronary disease, according to national health statistics.

Perhaps that's why the United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPTF) recommended that those who are obese, or who are overweight and have cardiovascular disease risk factors like high blood pressure or LDL cholesterol, need to receive nutrition counseling. Starting in 2016, the Affordable Care Act mandates that health plans must pay for USPTF recommendations (letter grade A or B).

Zipongo-'Eating Well Made Simple'- is hosting a webinar with AHIP to share which nutrition approaches can drive lasting results, and which do not, on Friday, October 23rd, 2015 at 2:00 PM ET. The webinar will highlight more refined uses of technology to improve behavioral economics and create long-term engagement, behavior change and lasting changes in health outcomes.

Sponsored by America's Health Insurance Plans (AHIP), the webinar is intended for health plan management teams, CMOs, clinical leaders, actuaries, sales leaders and employer account managers.

"Studies have shown people use their mobile phones 110 times per day-- and make over 226 food decisions per day. It's not a wonder then as to why it's now been shown that diet is the top cause of death, disease and health cost globally--and also the largest programming deficit where there's an opportunity to make a large impact on outcomes and costs," said CEO and Founder Jason Langheier, MD, MPH, who will host the webinar. "We've seen that you can use a combination of existing enrollment best practices linked to mobile applications that change help members change their own behavioral defaults through personalized meal plan, recipes, grocery list, discount, menu and ordering recommendations that foster healthier eating decisions."

The 60-minute webinar will review the most recent statistics on costly, preventable, diet-related chronic disease, and highlight how health plans can apply data analytics to personalize messaging and drive member engagement. Langheier also will explore:

- Key principles of behavioral economics and the "built environment" that influence our food decisions

- Strategies for driving member engagement by focusing on food and nutrition

- How consumer-focused design increases member participation

Please join the session by registering at

http://eventcallregistration.com/reg/index.jsp?cid=57545t11

About Zipongo

Zipongo is a San Francisco-based digital health company that makes it easy to eat well. We work with employers, health plans and other wellness partners looking for an easy way to engage their members in healthy and sustainable eating habits that drive positive results. Zipongo's proprietary MealRx™ personalization engine delivers individualized recommendations tied to convenient, real-time actions that enable healthy eating at home and at work, including healthy recipes, meal planning tools and discounts and incentives to healthy groceries. We provide a HIPAA-secure, easy-to-implement software-as-a-service platform that runs on web, mobile and tablet. Learn more at www.zipongo.com.

Media Contact

Todd Stein

Amendola Communications for Zipongo

916.346.4213

tstein@acmarketingpr.com

SOURCE Zipongo