May is Mental Health Awareness month, and Tyndall Air Force Base's mental health clinic is on a mission to kick mental health stigma aside and offer up valuable information instead.

"What we're working hard to do is kind of dispel the stigma and myths that go along with mental health," Psychiatrist Letitia Chukwumah said. "Once we're able to provide education to our active duty members, we hope that they would feel more comfortable coming to us."

The National Institute of Mental Health says mental health concerns affect one in 10 Americans, but many, especially troops, don't seek treatment for it.

"We like to say that everyone experiences stressors in life, so it's totally normal to have a concern, and it's very normal to want some help," Clinical Psychologist Shannon Branlund said.

Post Traumatic Stress Disorder and suicidal thoughts are the main concerns for military members returning from war. To help combat these issues before they start, troops go through a series of procedures before deployment.

"We have mental health training to kind of prep members for things they may see or experience while in a deployed setting," Chukwumah said.

Troops are also examined upon arriving back home.

"When our members return we meet with them once again to talk about how it went. The medical group is available for all kinds of encounters," Branlund said. "We'll meet with them as part of the standard deployment return, but also the PCM's will talk with them about any concerns they have."

The Mental Health Clinic not only helps the troops, but they also reach out the families.

"Tyndall Air Force Base does offer a specific children's course where they can learn what their parents are going to be going through for deployment, and kind of come to understand a little children's version of what pre- and post-deployment is like," Branlund said.

Branlund encourages military members and their families to walk into the clinic at any time if they feel they need help.

The base has several outreach events scheduled for the month of May, mental health officials will meet with specific units throughout the month. Awareness will continue into June with special guests speakers coming to the base as well.