Editorial: Fix education, fix income inequality Texas lawmakers can address the income gap that divides us by funding education.

Photo: MICHAEL STRAVATO, STR Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Ed Miller, who is recovering from congestive heart failure, crouches next to a cot in a homeless shelter in Texarkana, Texas, May 19, 2014. The poor living on the Arkansas side of Texarkana gained health coverage when the state accepted the Medicaid expansion in the Affordable Care Act, but the poor a few blocks across the border in Texas did not. (Michael Stravato/The New York Times) less Ed Miller, who is recovering from congestive heart failure, crouches next to a cot in a homeless shelter in Texarkana, Texas, May 19, 2014. The poor living on the Arkansas side of Texarkana gained health ... more Photo: MICHAEL STRAVATO, STR Editorial: Fix education, fix income inequality 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

The Lone Star State is home to at least 40 billionaires and 50 Fortune 500 companies, we're proud to say. We're not so proud to note that Texas also has more uninsured, more minimum-wage jobs and more people living in poverty than almost any other state.

Should it matter that the gap between the big rich and the rest of us is reaching Palo Duro Canyon proportions? Should it be of any concern that the ever-widening gap between the big rich and the rest of us suggests an economy associated with rickshas and mint tea on the veranda in some colonial outpost a century ago?

Income inequality doesn't matter if you're Gov. Rick Perry. "We don't grapple with that here," he told The Washington Post in a recent interview.

The state's longest-serving governor is riding off into the sunset - or toward the White House - so he doesn't have to grapple with anything he doesn't want to, but the rest of us probably ought to try to get our arms around a problem that's going to have an increasingly negative effect on mobility, worker productivity, public investment and the health of the economy in general.

Texas isn't the only state where income inequality is increasing. A report released last week by the Pew Research Center found that the income gap between the country's top 20 percent of earners and the rest of America has grown to its widest point in at least three decades. Mark Bittman of the New York Times has pointed out that from 2009 to 2012, some 95 percent of new income has gone to the top 1 percent. He also noted that the Walton family (that's WalMart) has as much wealth as the bottom 42 percent of the nation's people combined.

According to research by Mark Frank, an economics professor at Sam Houston State University, Texas ranks fifth in income inequality among the states. In the 1970s, the top 10 percent accounted for about a third of the income, Frank told the Fort Worth Star-Telegram recently. In 2011, he said, the top 10 percent earned about 48 percent of all income in the state. "For 2012," he added, "I wouldn't be surprised if we cross the 50 percent threshold for the top 10 percent."

A distorted income gap is not merely about justice and morality. An economy with too much money concentrated at the top can't function if the vast majority can't afford to buy a house or invest in education for their children or start new businesses. The economy stagnates. In Texas, with its reliance on sales and consumption taxes, income inequality means that the revenue the state needs for public investments can't keep up with needs. (Driven on our highways lately?)

Another disturbing component of the inequality gap is a growing racial and ethnic chasm, in Texas and elsewhere. According to Pew, whites in this country registered a median wealth of nearly $142,000, 13 times the net worth of African Americans and 10 times that of Hispanics. If minority Americans feel they're stuck at the bottom, then anger, frustration and despair are sure to follow.

Texas lawmakers proudly disdain a number of potential solutions to the income inequality problem. When they head to Austin next month, they won't be pushing for a higher minimum wage; they're not likely to reform the tax system, so that it's no longer skewed to the benefit of higher-income households and corporations; they're unlikely to look with favor on unions, which were key to a growing middle class in decades past.

What Texas lawmakers can do is invest in education, beginning with early childhood education. "Education really correlates with income inequality," economist Frank told the Star-Telegram. "That's the education gap we face in Texas, and closing the gap is a real challenge."