Air Force One, left, and the back-up aircraft, await the arrival of President Barack Obama at Andrews Air Force Base, Md. at sunrise, Saturday, Nov. 17, 2012, for his trip to Southeast Asia. (AP Photo/Cliff Owen)

Have you heard? President Barack Obama and Vice President Joe Biden are scheduled to travel to Knoxville today, to Pellissippi State Community College, then on to Clinton to visit Techmer PM, a manufacturing concern. Many are a bit ga-ga about this.

No doubt, a presidential visit is a big deal. The first coming of Obama to Knoxville will set leftist legs tingling and progressives into paroxysms of hope. For the 64 percent of Knox and Anderson voters who voted for the other guy in 2012, liberal ecstasy must be tolerated for a day.

Tennessee’s top Republicans said they plan to respect the office of the presidency. Even your cranky, conservative columnist respects the president’s emphasis on education and welcomes his focus on jobs.

The president will inspire college students, a good and great thing since educational attainment is the surest path to the American Dream. Yet, I must detour into reality. Obama may pump the kids up only to have the real world let them down.

The Obama economy has been a disaster for young adults. In November, the Millennial Jobs Report by the nonpartisan advocacy group Generation Opportunity reported the effective unemployment rate for 18-29-year-olds stood at 14.5 percent, 2.5 times the overall, unadjusted rate of 5.8 percent. Generation Opportunity cited the U-6 report, which adjusts for the number of workers who have dropped out of the workforce. Obama will likely ignore the lowest labor participation rate in three decades and praise recent job growth.

“It’s always encouraging to hear about people getting back to work, but it’s important to remember that young people are still suffering out there and we still have a long way to go to rebuild the kind of dynamic economy that will allow my generation to create and innovate,” said Patrice Lee, director of outreach for Generation Opportunity.

Obama’s words may inspire, but his policies impede. The Congressional Budget Office reported last year Obama’s Affordable Care Act will cause the aggregate number of hours worked to decline, reducing full-time equivalent workers by more than 2 million. Higher costs for employers will mean less hiring, and the ACA will be a disincentive for workers, particularly lower-wage workers.

The ACA is only one job-killer. Environmental regulations stifle job creation. Onerous oversight of banks stymies business borrowing. The National Labor Relations Board protects politically powerful union members at the expense of younger workers. We are becoming Europe.

In Clinton, Obama will tout manufacturing. His record? In 2009, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, almost 12.6 million Americans worked in manufacturing. In November, after six years of Obama, only 12.2 million do.

America sent Obama a message in the midterms. “The American people and young people in particular told Washington that we believe far more in our own ability to create opportunities for ourselves than we do in government-centric solutions to grow the economy,” Lee said. As usual, this president refuses to listen.

Greg Johnson’s columns appear on Wednesdays, Fridays and the second Sunday of each month. Follow him on Twitter @jgregjohnson. Email him at jgregjohnson@hotmail.com.