WASHINGTON — Top Veterans Affairs leaders are asking Congress to approve a plan that would delay spending on dozens of construction projects nationwide — from the Bronx, N.Y., to Honolulu — to help pay for massive cost overruns at an unfinished hospital in Aurora, which is expected to cost $1.73 billion to build.

In a letter last week to lawmakers, Sloan Gibson, deputy secretary of the Department of Veterans Affairs, outlined the agency’s latest proposal to cover an $830 million shortfall in Aurora.

“Access to care is at the forefront of VA’s mission and will continue to hold precedence moving forward,” wrote Gibson in a letter dated April 21.

He added that funding for the dozens of affected projects would be prioritized in future VA budgets, although Gibson’s pledge may not assuage federal lawmakers.

Ever since the VA in March dropped the bombshell that the cost of the Aurora hospital had jumped to $1.73 billion — or more than $2 billion if the cost of equipment is included — Congress and the White House have argued about the best way to pay for it.

The administration wants to take $830 million from a $5 billion fund established last year to make the VA more efficient.

But that proposal already has taken heat from lawmakers. Some have suggested the VA take money from elsewhere in its budget while others have raised concerns about the impact on hometown projects — a concern reinforced by the April 21 letter.

At a hearing last week in Colorado, U.S. Sen. Richard Blumenthal, D-Conn., questioned the VA’s strategy as he waved a list of projects that would be impacted.

“I know in West Haven, Conn., that this project on primary care facility upgrades has been delayed for years and years and years,” he said, “and I don’t want to see any veterans across the country have to sacrifice because of the incompetence or worse on the part of past VA administration.”

He said the VA should find a different path to fund the Aurora medical facility.

Among the projects in the VA’s cross hairs are plans to upgrade an ambulatory care clinic in Honolulu, replace an air handler in the Bronx and remodel a laboratory in Des Moines, Iowa.

Colorado wouldn’t be spared either.

The VA Medical Center in Grand Junction saw three projects totaling about $4.2 million trimmed, mostly repairs to its infrastructure, after meetings with Washington officials last week that looked at which plans could be put off.

“The VA is a team,” said Paul Sweeney, spokesman for the medical center. “These are projects that will need to be done eventually but can be postponed, though not indefinitely. If they had to make choices (for cuts), they made the right ones.”

The trims Grand Junction said it could handle was a $1 million replacement of underground steam pipes and nearly $2 million to renovate portions of the hospital’s fourth floor to accommodate doctors and other health-care providers, Sweeney said.

He said there was no immediate impact to patient care, although “eventually it might if they’re not funded” in a few years.

The impact on projects nationwide, and the likelihood of a congressional fight, is one reason why U.S. Rep. Mike Coffman, R-Aurora, has suggested taking money from the VA bonus account to pay for the hospital.

“The cost overruns need to come out of VA’s hide, which is why my plan uses VA bonuses to complete the hospital,” said Coffman in a statement.

Administration officials have pushed back against that idea, noting that the fund pays employees who put in long hours, such as doctors and nurses.

Mark K. Matthews: 202-662-8907, mmatthews @denverpost.com or twitter.com/mkmatthews