On July 30, 1965, President Lyndon B. Johnson signed into law legislation that established the Medicare and Medicaid programs. In the late '50s and early '60s, it was recognized that many people over the age of 65 could not afford the high cost of health insurance, and there was a growing recognition that the federal government needed to step in and help the nation's elderly. Prior to the passage of Medicare, there were about 19 million people over the age of 65 without medical coverage.

Medicare was created to help the nation's aging population while Medicaid was created to help cover low-income families with children, as well as help cover the aged, blind and disabled.

The passage of Medicare and Medicaid has had a tremendous impact on the health of millions of Americans who otherwise would not have access to affordable care. Today more than 50 million Americans are enrolled in Medicare and 68 million in Medicaid. That is in excess of one-third of the U.S. population.

As a Medicare insurance specialist, I have witnessed firsthand the benefits of Medicare with my own clientele. Over the years I have worked with many people who prior to Medicare were reluctant to seek treatment for a particular aliment due to no insurance or insurance with high cost-sharing. However, once on Medicare people are able to obtain comprehensive coverage at a relatively low cost.

Over the years Medicare has remained relatively true to its roots. However, there have been some notable changes over the past 50 years that have augmented the benefits.

For example, in the 1980s Medigap (Medicare supplement plans) were brought under federal oversight. I see this as a big benefit in that insurance companies must provide coverage based on the rules and regulations of the federal government, thus creating plans with standardized benefits in their plans.

In addition, when a person becomes eligible for Medicare, there is a six-month period during which insurance companies are not permitted to ask applicants medical questions or refuse to cover pre-existing conditions.

In the 1990s we started to see the development of the Medicare Advantage program, or Medicare Part C, giving people access to private insurance coverage with additional benefits such as prescription drug coverage.

In 2010, with the passage of the Affordable Care Act, many preventive services were added to Medicare, allowing the Medicare beneficiary to have tests such as cancer screenings, annual wellness physicals and flu shots, to name a few. These tests and many others are at no cost to the Medicare beneficiary.

Overall, it can be said that the Medicare and Medicaid programs allow our nation's aging population, along with the critically ill, disabled and impoverished, access to care that they would unlikely receive without the federal programs. That being said, the system is not perfect. People can easily become frustrated due to the confusing and bureaucratic nature of the system and some of the red tape one must jump through to access benefits.

There are many resources available for people to get information so that they can take full advantage of the benefits. The best resource is online at medicare.gov. The website is full of valuable information. In most cases, a simple Google search of a question will provide the answer as a link back to the website.

Additionally there are trained counselors to answer questions about Medicare and Medicaid. They can be accessed through the Apprise Helpline at 1-800-783-7067.

The Medicare and Medicaid programs are there for those who need it. Because the programs are funded by taxes and utilized by more than a third of the population, there is no doubt in my mind that in 50 years they will still be around for the 100th anniversary. At that time, I will be in my 90s and taking full advantage of the program.

Daniel Banks is president Silver Crest Insurance, Bethlehem.