A cancer-stricken Nevada woman whose health insurance coverage was delayed due to enrollment troubles with her state’s Obamacare-mandated health care exchange has died.

Linda Rolain, who has battled an aggressive brain tumor but didn’t receive insurance coverage until it was too late — despite numerous attempts to enroll in Nevada’s problem-plagued insurance exchange — succumbed to her cancer Monday, the Las Vegas Review-Journal reported.

Rolain, who was 64, first attempted to sign up for health insurance in November 2013 through Nevada Health Link, the health insurance marketplace for the state of Nevada setup under the guidelines of the Affordable Care Act, but experienced “repeated” sign-up problems, according to the Review-Journal.

Rolain ultimately was able to purchase a plan that was supposed to take effect in March 2014. But her effective coverage date was delayed due to numerous communication problems with Xerox, the company contracted by the exchange to conduct enrollment.

The delay became a serious problem for Rolain and her family after she was diagnosed with a brain tumor in January 2014.

Rolain’s husband Robert has alleged that his late wife’s tumor was treatable when it was discovered but became fatal after his wife was unable to receive medical attention for several months, the Review-Journal reported. (Facebook)

Rolain was unable to receive insured care until her coverage started in May, her family has claimed, because of the complications stemming from the enrollment snafu.

Rolain’s husband Robert has alleged that his late wife’s tumor was treatable when it was discovered but became fatal after his wife was unable to receive medical attention for several months, the Review-Journal reported.

The Rolains, along with 150 other Nevada residents who experienced serious problems with enrolling in insurance purchased through Nevada Health Link, ended up suing the state, they disclosed during a press conference last month. (KTNR)

The Rolains, along with 150 other Nevada residents who experienced serious problems with enrolling in insurance purchased through Nevada Health Link, ended up suing the state, they disclosed during a press conference last month.

“We are worried that this is the first of many Nevadans who have life-threatening issues that may end up in such tragic circumstances. We urge all Nevadans to verify that their insurance is active and in place in light of the many problems that hundreds, if not thousands, of Nevadans have gone through,” Rolain’s lawyers said in a June 19 statement.

Matthew Callister (pictured), with the law firm of Callister, Immerman and Associates, is one of those working on a class-action lawsuit against Xerox, the contractor for Nevada Health Link. (KTNR)

The board of Nevada Health Link, which has been blasted for poor management of its exchange, voted in May to replace Xerox as its primary contractor.

Representatives for Xerox and Nevada Health Link could not be reached for comment.

Calls and emails to the U.S. Department for Health and Human Services, which was charged with implementing the law and helping to create the exchanges, weren’t immediately returned.

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? CLICK HERE TO WATCH THE VIDEO.