This isn't the first time the NNU has stirred the pot. Nurses union at center of Ebola storm

With the infection of two nurses treating an Ebola patient at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas, National Nurses United has jumped into the spotlight. The union has been very aggressive in leveling public accusations of safety gaps at the hospital, consistent with NNU’s bare-knuckled style.

On a conference call Wednesday, NNU raised eyebrows when its expert Lisa Brosseau, a professor of environmental and occupational health at the University of Illinois at Chicago, said “there’s a strong possibility” that the Ebola virus might be transmitted through the air — even though no such transmission has yet been observed.

Story Continued Below

Ebola is transmitted only through the bodily fluids of patients already displaying Ebola symptoms. Although, in theory, mutations could cause Ebola’s transmission method to change, medical experts have been careful to note that no human virus of any kind has ever been known to switch from fluid to airborne transmission.

( POLITICO Pro: CDC director is grilled on Ebola at Hill hearing)

Brosseau’s comment wasn’t the first time the NNU, which boasts of being the nation’s largest union of registered nurses, stirred the pot. Created in 2009 by a merger of three nurses unions, NNU made headlines early on by opposing Obamacare, which most health care unions and industry sectors supported, and by insisting it would support only single payer health care. In the Ebola crisis, some officials at other unions say, NNU is once again not coordinating its response with other union leaders.

The group has also been strongly opposed to the use of electronic health records, which have been installed around the country with funding from the 2009 HITECH Act. Other professional nursing associations have raised problems with the records systems, but in a much more measured way.

In many ways, NNU is an extension of its executive director, RoseAnn DeMoro, a former Teamster union organizer, who is not herself a nurse but made her name leading the California Nurses Association, one of NNU’s three forerunners. In that capacity, DeMoro won big when California became the first state in the country to pass a law establishing a nurses-to-patient ratio.

Unlike other union leaders, DeMoro hasn’t been a particularly reliable ally for Democrats or for market-based health care reformers. In 2000, CNA endorsed Ralph Nader over Al Gore, and in the early 2000s CNA helped kill then-Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger’s health plan, which resembled the one Mitt Romney instituted in Massachusetts.

( Also on POLITICO: CDC chief: ‘Porous’ borders in Africa would undermine travel ban)

After forming NNU in 2009, DeMoro crafted a strategic organizing alliance with the Service Employees International Union and pledged to stop funding a new union of former SEIU dissidents, the National Union of Healthcare Workers, then fighting SEIU in a turf war over California’s largest hospital chain, Kaiser Permanente. But in 2011 and again in 2012, NNU broke with SEIU and went on strike at Kaiser Permanente to call for better staffing and safety conditions. The following year, NNU hitched its wagon once again to NUHW.

“Their MO is to get publicity,” one senior labor leader told POLITICO.

The leader said that playing up “hysteria” over Ebola to promote NNU’s agenda over the interests of other unions is “just the perfect example of how she dictates to all these [other] nurse unions.”

But DeMoro’s confrontational style draws praise in some quarters. “Behind her militancy,” says Nelson Lichtenstein, a labor history professor at the University of California Santa Barbara, “is the knowledge that she has the workforce that will in fact confront the boss and go on strike.” Lichtenstein said the union is feeling its oats because it has been successful in organizing new workers and pressuring hospitals to address safety concerns.

( Also on POLITICO: Carney: Halt flights to send message)

“It’s not bluster,” Lichtenstein said. “It’s based on a solid organization.”

After the outbreak at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital, NNU accused the hospital of providing inadequate protective gear, including improvised biohazard suits fashioned from gowns, gloves and booties that left nurses’ necks and wrists exposed. The CDC has said that the infection’s spread to members of the nursing staff clearly indicates some failure to take proper protective measures. CNN reported Wednesday that officials transferred a nurse infected with Ebola from Dallas to Atlanta out of fear that nurses at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital would walk out if the patient remained there.

But Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital on Thursday issued a detailed rebuttal to NNU’s allegations and said it followed CDC’s recommendations. NNU’s “assertions do not reflect actual facts learned from the medical record and interactions with clinical caregivers,” it said in a news release.

Brosseau’s gaffe about airborne Ebola transmission would appear to violate an admonition that DeMoro laid down in an internal NNU email sent out on Oct. 12. In the email, DeMoro told union members not to address how Ebola “infects, mutates, etc.” DeMoro said that was “a slippery slope and we do not want to get dragged into a factual dispute when we have a much larger agenda.”

( Also on POLITICO: Romney: Obama fail on IRS, CDC)

“Our strength,” DeMoro’s email continued, “is patient advocacy and disease containment. If you speak inside of that parameter, we win. Speak of our families, of your job and the consequences in exposing others, especially the more physically vulnerable. Speak as a nurse. It is your strength; it will win us this battle. We need to be cognizant that we are bargaining for health and safety in the press.”

Health and safety problems are a major concern within the health care industry. According to a study of OSHA data released last year by Public Citizen, health care workers are more than four times as likely to suffer an injury on the job as the industry with the second highest rate of injuries — manufacturing.

NNU spokesperson Chuck Idelson said that other unions had not been critical enough of hospitals for their safety records.

“We already heard their message defending the hospitals,” said Idelson. “Labor-management partnerships silenced too many unions from advocating for the public interest for 20 years.”

Brett Norman and Arthur Allen contributed to this report.

Authors: