SALEM — Gov. Kate Brown and other political forces in Oregon are standing behind a landmark request for $100 million for new affordable housing that will face off against budget realities and concerns about whether now is the time for that kind of investment.

If the funds are approved, Oregon would create a program involving state-ownership of as many as 4,000 new housing units that developers would build using money from the Oregon Housing and Community Services agency. The state wouldn’t act as landlord, the agency says, but it would own the units and work with developers who build them and contractors that manage them.

Any money toward the request would go to build housing to address a need that lawmakers and agency officials say is prevalent and growing in every corner of the state. Despite the need, it’s uncertain how much money the Legislature will agree to give to the effort when lawmakers consider all bonding and budget requests in coming weeks.

Margaret Van Vliet, director of Housing and Community Services, said the money would act as a catalyst for developers currently creating affordable housing in Oregon.

“I’ve said to everybody, I’ll take every dollar I can get. The need is huge,” Van Vliet said in a recent interview with The Bulletin.

Bend’s rental vacancy rate is less than 1 percent, but the town, and its surrounding neighbors in Central Oregon where the market is similarly tight, aren’t alone.

Communities across Oregon — including Portland — have thousands of residents who can’t afford to rent a home in the private market, Van Vliet and others say, and state officials fear the lack of housing can lead to other social issues such as homelessness and poor health that can strain public resources.

The agency estimates $100 million would be enough for 3,000 to 4,000 new units, though the number has fluctuated and still has skeptics.

Even if all units were built, that’s a small ways toward addressing the overall need in Oregon, but it would mark a significant increase over the estimated 1,300 units per year built through the agency.

If the Legislature approves the request, Van Vliet says the agency would encourage private developers who compete for the money to use it in a way that spreads each dollar to build as many units as possible.

“There is extreme pressure among low-income people. There’s extreme pressure and it’s really hard. Any new units will make a difference,” Van Vliet said.

The request was initially unveiled in the proposed budget of former Gov. John Kitzhaber in December. Gov. Kate Brown has picked up where Kitzhaber left off after succeeding him after he resigned in February, offering her support to the agency’s request during her State of the State address.

Her office, says Brown’s housing and human services policy adviser, Dani Ledezma, is committed to advocating for the package in the Legislature this session.

“Making sure that there’s an array of housing affordable to Oregonians is a top priority for her. She’s prepared to really carry a lot of the weight and wanting to make sure that together with the Legislature we have more resources for affordable housing,” Ledezma said.

The money would be a new source that would come with fewer restrictions and requirements attached to federal tax credits and other money for affordable housing development, agency officials and the governor’s office said.

That would make it easier for the state to approve money where it’s needed and quickly get the new units built.

With the $100 million, which would come from the sale of bonds around 2017, the state wants to inject money into projects designed to help alleviate some of the need while the overall housing market evens out over time and rent goes down.

The state will also look at what other money and grants it can pair with any new bonding money to compound the effect of the program.

Brown and the agency are also backed by dozens of local housing groups, including in Central Oregon, and from other key players in the Legislature, like House Speaker Tina Kotek, D-Portland.

“I think this kind of fits in that category of pushing ourselves to think of this as a public good,” said Kotek, who noted she was initially “skeptical” about the request.

Kotek said the $100 million “is very much in line with what the crisis is” and that the request could have been bigger.

While no one questions whether there is need for more affordable housing, some caution the state needs to be diligent before approving such a large sum.

Sen. Richard Devlin, D-Tualatin, who heads the state’s budget committee, has said the request may be reduced while it competes with other bonding requests. He said any bonding authority that is approved “will be an obligation of the state for the next 20, 30 years.”

“In many of the areas, the actual need is not in the tens of millions, or the hundred millions, it’s in the billions,” Devlin said. “If we make the wrong decisions here, we won’t be able to make the right decisions later.”

Devlin’s caution as head budget-writer isn’t surprising. He said he’s not an adamant opponent or proponent of the Housing and Community Services request. But he urged care in part because of the innovative nature of the state ownership and because the request is large.

The agency overall has come under scrutiny from Bend’s Republican legislators, who filed bills to mandate how the agency spends money it handles and tried to highlight the agency’s past inability to get money out the door and into building projects.

The Legislature in 2009 created a $15 fee collected by counties to generate money for affordable housing, and later added a $5 fee to help veterans with housing. Together that document recording fee has raised nearly $58 million.

Central Oregon Republicans and some housing officials said the agency wasn’t spending the money quickly enough and lacked transparency despite a growing need across the state.

Sen. Tim Knopp, R-Bend, said he could get on board with the size and scope of the request “under certain circumstances,” though he didn’t endorse the request.

“I think the most important thing with any expenditure — whether it’s $100 million for housing or bonding for transportation — that there are the appropriate sideboards and accountability,” Knopp said, adding he hadn’t kept up with the latest updates for the request.

Scott Cooper, executive director of Redmond-based NeighborImpact, said he fears with additional building, community action groups would be stretched too thin on the services they provide.

“We are fully committed on the housing stock we’ve got. So any conversation about housing capital investment needs to be accompanied by a conversation about services,” Cooper said.

Van Vliet said her department acknowledged decisions by past officials at the agency led it to build up money before spending it, which is a policy she said she’s since changed. She said the agency now doesn’t stockpile money in all its accounts and can forecast how much it can spend.

She said the money for new units now would help vulnerable families that would eventually take stress off of other social safety programs.

“I think that while we couldn’t quantify it today, I think we can reasonably assume … that it’s a good public investment beyond just the real estate. That it will help families stabilize,” she said.

— Reporter: 406-589-4347,

tanderson@bendbulletin.com