It's not a ranking anyone in Nevada is proud of. Our state sits near the very bottom of the list when it comes to the number of doctors in our community. But News 3 found out that steps are being taken to fix that.



Negotiations are still going on with the county to acquire two pieces of property, the site of the old health district and conveniently located near two hospitals.

Wednesday healthcare leaders are took a look at how our state is doing when it comes to health-related issues and one is of the agreement is that we need more doctors.

"There's a huge need", said UNLV Dean School Medicine Dr. Barbara Atkinson.

Dr. Atkinson doesn't sugar coat the problem facing health care in southern Nevada.

"There's no liver transplant program, or bone marrow transplant program, or heart failure program here," said Dr. Atkinson.

Ranking 47th in the nation when it comes to our doctor to patient ratio, Nevada is scraping the bottom in every specialty except plastic surgery. Something UNLV's School of Medicine is out to change.

"Part of our educational model is to have students take care of Medicaid patients under the supervision of faculty. So we're planning three big clinics like that in areas where there are large numbers of Medicaid patients. We're working with the hotel school to make it a very hospitality like practice," said Dr. Atkinson.

Experts say while the numbers of patients while the number of patients seeking treatment went up nationwide under the Affordable Care Act, the number of doctors, did not.

"That problem is I don't think a lack of medical schools, we'll have four very soon, but it's the lack of being able to keep residents who come here to do their residency to stay here," said SN Health Director Dr. Joe Iser.

Dr. Iser is Chief Health Officer for the southern Nevada health district. Wednesday a briefing was held on where Nevada stands county by county when it comes to health care. Looking at everything from children living in poverty to DUI deaths.

"We're not doing as well as many states on a variety of measures," said Dr. Iser.

The UNLV School of Medicine is set to open with 60 students in the fall of 2017 and Dr. Atkinson says the governor's budget includes 10-million dollars for seed money to start new residency programs.

"We shouldn't have anybody have to leave this state," said Dr. Atkinson.

All of the pieces falling into place to accomplish one simple goal: sick people get the help they need right here at home.





Find Denise on social media. Follow Denise on Twitter or find her on Facebook.

RELATED LINKS:

New medical school should help with doctor shortage



UNLV takes critical step in creation of fledgling medical school



UNLV School of Medicine inches closer to debut class