Like glory, happiness can be fleeting – especially when 40 government goons show up at the airport to arrest you, your husband and your two small children, which is precisely what Reuters, CNN and other news outlets are reporting happened Tuesday to Meriam Ibrahim, the Sudanese woman who until Monday had been jailed and under a sentence of death over her refusal to renounce her Christian faith.

Upping the ante, the Sudanese government has now apparently chosen to also arrest her husband, who had previously not been charged with any crime. But he is an American citizen and, as such, is entitled to some measure of protection from the U.S. government, regardless of the crime he may or may not have been charged with.

[SEE: Cartoons on President Obama]

It is time now, Mr. President, for you to lead. In 2008, you promised the American people you would rebuild what you called the nation’s tattered reputation among the people of the world. You said you would rebuild the bonds of trust and friendship among the world’s leaders that what you and your allies described as George W. Bush’s misadventures in Iraq had destroyed.

Well, sir, the penny has dropped and the debt has become due. You were at one time willing to stake your international prestige on an ultimately unsuccessful attempt to bring the summer Olympic Games to Chicago. Will you please now, over something much more important – the life and liberty of a woman devout in her faith and potentially the lives and liberty of her American citizen husband and two small children – publically call upon the Sudanese to release Ms. Ibrahim and her family? And will you ensure that, once released, they are all able to leave the country by sending a plane to pick them up along with a special presidential envoy to make sure nothing accidental happens to spoil her escape? Former Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton springs to mind as the ideal choice, if you can get her away from her book tour for a few days. As devoted as she is to the cause of equality for women around the world, and because you asked, I think she would go.

[SEE: Cartoons on Iraq]

In the meantime, it’s important the Sudanese – who desperately want to be welcomed back into the global family of nations after years of being listed as official sponsors of terror and excoriated for the genocide in the Darfur region – be on the receiving end of some pressure to do the right thing. It’s bad enough that they sheltered Osama bin Laden in the years prior to 9/11 – and someone, someday should ask Obama national security adviser Susan Rice about that whole episode. They need to let these people go, now.

So if you happen to have some free time and are so inclined, you can reach the Sudanese Embassy to the United States at (202) 338-8565 or by email via this contact page on its website. Send them a simple message: #FreeMeriamIbrahim. You’ll feel good about it if you do – trust me.