Last week, Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, generated a lot of social media about his stance on "net neutrality," faster than the Road Runner. His YouTube video, “The negative consequences of net neutrality explained in 2 minutes,” offered a well-produced, but somewhat simplistic, response to Democratic Minnesota Sen. Al Franken’s turgid attack on Cruz’s knowledge of the issue.

Cruz argues that the Communications Act of 1934, the interpretation of which is at the heart of this debate, was meant to regulate landline phones not smartphones or broadband. The senator makes some good points, although his smartphone metaphor doesn’t apply; the cellphone industry would be exempt from a public utility approach.

[SEE: Political Cartoons on Republicans]

Cruz’s video targets the public, but it really doesn’t matter what they think. This is an "inside-the-Beltway" conversation over which industry shapes the future of the Internet. Consumers have been excluded from the conversation. No one has yet to explain to them succinctly how the status quo or net neutrality (the assumption that all types of data on the Internet are treated equally by Internet service providers) will affect their wallets. Yes – there’s been a lot of talk about innovation and a free and open Internet, but it’s mostly ambiguous rhetoric. Whatever opinion John Q. Public has about net neutrality, it’s probably the one his political party told him to take, not one arrived at through informed thought.

President Barack Obama made lots of noise when he recently made his big statement about net neutrality. Whatever he said doesn’t matter either. Not because there isn’t some substance to his argument, too, but because he surreptitiously gave himself an out from the start. He said that the decision is ultimately the Federal Communications Commission's alone, which isn’t true. He could put this issue to bed now by issuing an executive order. He is the chief executive. Presidents use executive orders, which are a component of their statutory and constitutional powers, to tell federal agencies how they want laws interpreted. He’s done this in the past, not only with his Affordable Care Act mandates, which where much bigger political footballs than this one, but also in presidential executive order 13616, in which he ordered the FCC to speed up expanding broadband to underserved communities.

[READ: The Future of the Internet Is at Stake]

FCC Chairman Tom Wheeler is tasked with hammering out a deal, but, according to an Appinions study many of the most influential people and companies in the conversation are the opponents of net neutrality. A Sunlight Foundation report also found that between 2005 and 2013 the telecommunications industry lobbied much more aggressively against net neutrality than did advocates such as Google, Microsoft Corp. and Dish Network.