SPRINGFIELD, Mo. – The Republican candidate trailing only Donald Trump in the overall delegate count pumped up supporters Saturday in Springfield.

Sen. Ted Cruz delivered remarks to a crowd of more than 2,000 people at Evangel University. Cruz focused his rally heavily on the billionaire front-runner.

He was introduced by David Limbaugh, brother of conservative radio host Rush Limbaugh, and state Rep. Eric Burlison, R-Springfield.

Cruz said he believes Sen. Marco Rubio and Ohio Gov. John Kasich are honorable men, but if Missourians want to defeat Trump, Cruz said he is the only choice Tuesday.

Cruz focused his remarks on jobs, freedom and security.

To aid the economy, Cruz said he would like to implement a flat tax of 10 percent and abolish the Internal Revenue Service. Cruz also drew cheers when he said he would “repeal every word of Obamacare.”

On freedom, Cruz reminded voters the next president will likely make at least one Supreme Court nomination and the senator said voters can count on him to appoint a strict interpreter of the constitution.

Cruz pointed to the importance of the Supreme Court vacancy and its implications for religious liberty when KOLR10 News asked the candidate about SJR 39, a controversial religious freedom proposal that is currently moving through the Missouri legislature.

On security, Cruz promised to be aggressive in combating terrorism.

Cruz criticized President Barack Obama for not uttering the words “radical Islamic terrorism” when referring to the threats to U.S.’ interests in the Middle East.

"I am convinced the most long lasting legacy of Barack Obama is going to be a new generation of leaders in the Republican Party who stand and fight for freedom, who stand and fight for the Constitution, who stand and fight for the Judeo- Christian values that built this great nation,” Cruz said.

Sarah Gregg, an 18-year-old college student, told KOLR10 News she will cast her first ever ballot for Cruz because of his values.

"I think it really secures us in our future,” Gregg said. “I think it makes us safer and feel more united as a country with someone that is so dedicated to the people."

Jeff Myers, a Republic resident, also mentioned the words values and Constitution when explaining his support for Cruz.

"I’m 50-years-old and I think he's our last chance,” Myers said. “Do I agree with everything he says? No. But I feel he is the best candidate to get this country back on track."

A poll performed on behalf of Missouri newspapers last week showed Trump has the edge on Cruz, but the sample used was too close to call the race for Trump.

52 Republican delegates are at stake when Missourians go to the polls Tuesday.