SAN JOSE -- Not too long ago, the five refrigerators at Sweet Passions Bakery in Little Portugal were filled with creamy cakes for weddings, quinceaneras and birthday parties. But now that the street has been torn up by an ambitious transportation project gone terribly wrong, only a few cakes sat on the shelves last week.

"Constant noise and dirt and dust," manager Romesh Vidanage fumed on the sidewalk outside his bakery. "Our customers can't even find our driveway, so they call in frustration and cancel their orders."

Jessica Carreira and David Costa watch from their soon-to-open Adega restaurant as construction crews continue working on Alum Rock Avenue the long-delayed rapid bus project Thursday afternoon, Nov. 12, 2015, in San Jose, Calif. The Valley Transportation Authority today began offering $1,000 to $50,000 in "relief" money to affected businesses as compensation. (Karl Mondon)

After several construction mishaps, a $114 million rapid-bus project that was supposed to be completed in October and improve transit service for San Jose's often-neglected East Side now could stretch into 2017. The bureaucrats and politicians in charge have apologized. And the Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority has approved "relief" grants of up to $50,000 to businesses hurt by the upheaval after an emotional public forum on the mess.

The estimated $1.5 million cost will come from the agency's reserve fund and not from ongoing or future projects, VTA spokeswoman Brandi Childress said.

"The community deserves a very sincere apology," Santa Clara County Supervisor and VTA board member Cindy Chavez said.

Advertisement

When it comes to rapid transit, the East Side has seen little: The VTA's light rail trains stop at the community's edge, and a Bay Area Rapid Transit line under construction will skirt the community on its way downtown. So when the VTA proposed rapid buses, Luis Fourenco and other merchants in Little Portugal welcomed the idea.

"I loved the project from the beginning," said Fourenco, who was born in the Azores and co-owns the Bacalhau Grill and Trade Rite Market, a Little Portugal institution since 1945. "But it was mismanaged from the beginning, and nobody listened or did anything after we complained."

By now, the plush and extra-long rapid buses in their own, greenlighted lanes were supposed to be running the 7-mile route between Eastridge Mall and Diridon Station in downtown.

The so-called Bus Rapid Transit line is part of a controversial VTA master plan for more dedicated bus lanes up and down Silicon Valley. Opponents of a $234 million rapid-bus line on El Camino Real from Santa Clara to Palo Alto are already taking notes on the Alum Rock fiasco.

"Not only do I think this is a bad idea, I don't believe it will be done in a manner better than what I am witnessing with Alum Rock," said Darren Pham, a Santa Clara resident who works in East San Jose.

It's hard to tell exactly what went wrong and who's to blame because the VTA and the general contractor, Goodfellow Top Grade of Livermore, have decided to part ways without pointing fingers, at least not in public. In a joint statement on the divorce, both sides listed "unmarked" or "unknown" utility lines as key issues. The agency is shopping for a new contractor.

According to Childress, the "last straw" for VTA came when construction workers hit a second natural gas line, this one near a Carl's Jr. restaurant in July.

"It was a safety concern for us going forward," Childress said.

The VTA listed other problems: The ground under the street turned out to be "unsuitable" for repaving, forcing crews to dig deeper and import new soil. Some utility lines had to be moved and a highway offramp needed to be redesigned, requiring special permits.

Brian Gates, president of Goodfellow, would only defend his company's performance and 25-year history in the Bay Area.

"We are one of the safest contractors in the area," he said. "It's our No. 1 core value. ... It's unfair how those businesses were impacted the way they were."

In any case, starting last spring, much of Alum Rock Avenue through this gateway to East San Jose became a swerving, two-lane obstacle course marked by orange cones. Bus stops suddenly appear in the middle of the street. Construction ditches and heavy machinery circled with yellow tape have wiped out curbside parking and obscured driveways and parking lots.

San Jose is well-represented on the VTA, which is overseen by 18 board members and alternates, all of whom are city and county elected officials. San Jose Mayor Sam Liccardo and five current City Council members all sit on the VTA board as members or alternates. Chavez and the two other county supervisors serving as members or alternates on the board are former San Jose council members.

Childress called the project's problems "unprecedented" as she stood in a field office the agency opened to hand out relief applications and push the project along.

"The community has been very patient with us," Childress said.

Ken Cortez was the first to walk in for an application last week. The 69-year-old mechanic and owner of K&M Tire and Automotive declined the free Mexican pastries on a corner table and started speaking his mind.

"I've lost at least $60,000," Cortez told Manolo Gonzalez-Estay, a VTA official. "We're a mom-and-pop, been on this street over 50 years. I had to get an equity loan to keep the business afloat. One tire supplier won't deliver to me anymore. I never had bad credit in my life and now I do."

Gonzalez-Estay listened intently and tried to assure Cortez without overpromising.

"We're not able to make you whole on this, but it will help," Gonzalez-Estay said.

The more than 220 businesses hurt by the construction on the street have three choices: They can apply for a quick $1,000 relief payment, submit more paperwork for $50,000, or go after the VTA in court for more.

"I'm going for the $50,000," Cortez said with a shrug later that day at his shop. "Hiring lawyers and suing them would cost money we don't have, and it could be buried for years."

Across the street, the owners of a new Portuguese restaurant were wondering who would show up if they open during the street construction.

"We could be the first restaurant to fold before we even open," said Carlos Carreira, adding that his family plunked their life savings into the new venture, named Adega.

Fourenco believes the relief payments are much too little for businesses that lost $100,000 or more. But auto shop owner Cortez just wants his relief check to arrive and the project finished.

"I want to leave my children and grandchildren a business that is profitable," Cortez said, "not a business that is bankrupt."

Contact Joe Rodriguez at 408-920-5767. Twitter.com/JoeRodMercury.