“The Gluten Lie and Other Myths About What You Eat” by Alan Levinovitz

Two recent pieces of media focus on gluten and the myths about what you eat, and whether you have to pay for birth control.

Nutrition

“The Gluten Lie and Other Myths About What You Eat” by Alan Levinovitz

Alan Levinovitz, author of “The Gluten Lie and Other Myths About What You Eat,” is not – and does not claim to be – a nutritionist. He’s an assistant professor of religious studies at James Madison University.

The connection between his day job and his new book? He sees our societal preoccupation with “good” and “bad” foods, our serial demonization of MSG, carbohydrates, processed foods, salt, cholesterol, sugar, gluten and so on as a cultlike obsession built not on science but on myths and superstition.

Levinovitz has written an angry, funny and highly readable condemnation of the “fearmongering” nutrition business – which he says is not just wrong but detrimental to public health.

“Every food is a potential demon,” he writes. “Talking about food this way . . . creates neurotic eaters who see foods as pure or impure, natural or processed, good or evil.”

And while he admits there is a “significant minority” of people who are healthier when they avoid gluten, he argues, “Anxiety about what you eat can produce precisely the same symptoms linked to gluten sensitivity.”

He recounts tales of scientific studies that don’t prove what policymakers say they prove, and he peppers the book with anecdotes such as the grain-abstaining monks of ancient China and a Duke University diet guru who whipped his female clients.

The book concludes with a 26-page, handsome presentation of his own “scientifically proven revolution in healthy eating!”: the UNpacked Diet, in which you eat all you want of anything as long as it hasn’t been packaged in plastic, aluminum foil or other “hazardous” modern materials. (Those would be pretty much anything except your grandmother’s glass jars.) It’s a hilarious, pitch-perfect parody – which he then debunks, point by point, in the same way he took apart paleo, gluten-free, rice, low-salt and other diets.

Contraception

“Still Paying for Birth Control? Stop That Right Now,” Women’s Health

It’s fair to assume that the editors at Women’s Health magazine are reasonably savvy about issues involving gynecology and reproductive rights. So when one of those editors called her new insurance company about a mail-order prescription for her birth control, she was surprised to have the company say that birth control wasn’t covered. She’d have to pay $200.

Actually, that’s against the law, as Korin Miller notes after relaying the anecdote on Womenshealthmag.com. “Under the Affordable Care Act, women with health insurance are entitled to important preventative services, such as birth control and well-woman visits with no co-pay or deductible,” she writes.

Apparently, a lot of women have been accepting similar rejections from their insurers. So last week the Obama administration issued a “guidance” to “eliminate any ambiguity,” the Health and Human Services Department said. “Insurers must cover without cost-sharing at least one form of contraception in each of the methods that the Food and Drug Administration has identified,” the directive says, “including the ring, the patch and intrauterine devices.”

For good measure, the guidance goes on to remind insurers that if a woman is at an increased risk for having the BRCA-1 or BRCA-2 cancer-susceptibility gene, the company must cover preventive screening, genetic counseling and genetic testing.

Read or Share this story: http://delonline.us/1Hi8y81