Vidi wins $200,000 at StartSLC pitch competition

by AJ Wilcox in Deals — February 2, 2015 5:00 pm

Action camera kit, Vidi, won $200,000 at the first-annual Utah Startup Awards, where it competed against 9 other companies in the state’s largest pitch competition.

The company won the Audience Choice Award and the grand prize. PlanGrade won $50,000 as the runner up.



Members of the tech industry, and startups of all shapes and sizes were present for StartSLC, which included a pitch competition with $250k in prizes, a keynote by PluralSight founder, Aaron Skonnard, and the naming of the winners of the Utah Startup Awards.

$250k Pitch Competition

1. Life-E

Feng Liu took to the stage to introduce his innovative new product and application for his company, Life-E. The company manufactures a special treatment on the already-exciting material grapheme, which allows for extremely efficient heat conduction. It installs its material in the flooring of homes to provide a form of radiant heat that drastically reduces heating bills.

2. AncestorCloud

There is a massive amount of interest around genealogy, but also a great deal of cost due to the nature of traveling to find records of ancestors. The company provides a marketplace to allow searchers to hire local genealogy experts to retrieve needed records and information on the searcher’s behalf.

3. Novi Security

Novi Security provides a low-cost, DIY, wireless home security system. Its sensor costs $199, and houses an HD camera, smoke detector, motion detector, and siren, and can be placed anywhere. The system can be armed, monitored, and controlled wirelessly by the mobile application. Monitoring service is not required, but available on a no-contract basis. The units are also capable of 3G failover, and cloud backup.

4. Nozzle

Nozzle presented its SaaS software that helps marketing agencies and in-house marketing departments analyze the keywords and channels that drive the highest ROI so to maximize return on marketing spend. The software is able to do this through integrations into analytics, CRM, ERP, etc. to identify the efforts that produce the highest value for the company.

5. PlanGrade

PlanGrade took the mic to introduce its health and welfare benefits compliance auditing software. The concept arose from the masses of health compliance regulations due to the Affordable Care Act, and the worry in Human Resources departments everywhere about how to get into compliance. PlanGrade takes care of all of the complex filings to bring companies within compliance, and out of risk of expensive penalties.

6. QuotaDeck

QuotaDeck proclaimed that cold calling by sales professionals is dead. As opposed to the 2% success rate of cold calling, it found that personal introductions between vendor and purchaser are 10x more effective. Having already raised $1.5MM in funding, as well as a 1st place prize at both Startup Weekend and Startup Next competitions, it aims to revolutionize the way that sales professionals and brands communicate. To prevent unwanted connections, the platform requires a double opt-in, warm intro.

7. Ramen

Product management software, Ramen, allows product managers to openly discuss ideas, ask questions, segment results, and communicate product feedback back to the development team.

8. RoomChoice

RoomChoice converts student housing from its analog dregs, to a fully digital student-facing portal, saving many hours of work for property managers. The software is free for managers to use, and costs are passed onto the student renters. It allows these students to invite roommates, secure amenities, meal plans, parking places, and more.

9. Tether

Dating app Tether shows how current dating apps start conversations, but don’t facilitate actually meeting up. The company created an app that is different, where singles can post dates, and other singles can respond if they’d like to participate in that activity. “Less chatting, more dating,” is the company’s tagline as it aims to quickly get singles meeting face-to-face in safe, group settings.

10. Vidi

Last up was Vidi, the action camera kit aimed at budget and impulse buyers. Its $99 kit includes a 720p HD video camera, 8 GB memory card, and all the mounts necessary. It is currently displacing established market leader GoPro in the surf/skate retail space. What’s more is that the cameras come with colorful designs that appeal to its core market. Having only been in business for 8 months, and having sold hundreds of thousands of units, it shows great promise.

Keynote

Following the pitch competition, Aaron Skonnard, founder of Farmington, Utah’s own PluralSight, energized the crowd with the company story, along with his 5 points of advice for entrepreneurs:

1. Follow your passions

2. Start lean and choose partners wisely

3. Pivot often

4. Don’t rush to funding

5. Culture trumps everything when scaling

Skonnard shared stories of multiple pivots, hard decisions, and running profitably for 10 years before taking funding.

Utah Startup Awards

Participants then gathered into The Depot to hear the winners of the Utah Startup Awards. The following were the category winners:

• Northern Utah Startup of the Year – Vidpresso

• Utah County Startup of the Year – Weave

• Salt Lake County Startup of the Year – Lucid

• Southern Utah Startup of the Year – BusyBusy

• Best Utah Non-technical Startup – Cotopaxi

• Best Utah SaaS Startup – InsideSales

• Best Utah Mobile Application – Studio

• Best Utah Health Startup – Tute Genomics

• Utah Angel of the Year – Robb Kunz (BoomStartup)

• Best Utah Bootstrapped Startup – DevMountain

• Best New Utah Startup Launched in 2014 – QZZR

• Best Utah Education Startup – Instructure

• Utah VC of the Year Award – Kickstart Seed Fund

• Utah Founder of the Year Award – Ryan Caldwell (MX)