All-Americans A list of the Colorado steeplechase runners who have earned all-American status over the years: Men Adam Batliner: 1998 Billy Nelson: 2007, 2008 Tom Reese: 1999 Steve Slattery: 2000, 2001, 2002 Aric Van Halen: 2012, 2013 Clint Wells: 1995, 96 Women Jenny Barringer: 2006*, 2007, 2008*, 2009* Emma Coburn: 2010, 2011*, 2013* Natalie Florence: 2005 Shalaya Kipp: 2010, 2011, 2012*, 2014 * Won national championship

Going into Saturday, Colorado junior Connor Winter had some nerves.

An accomplished distance runner, Winter gave the 3,000-meter steeplechase a shot for the first time at the Colorado Invitational at Potts Field.

"I've always been nervous and excited about it," Winter said.

During his race, Winter looked like a veteran, and by the end, he was getting hugs and congratulations from Olympians and American record holders.

"I thought, 'This is pretty cool,'" Winter said after winning the race, in 9 minutes, 10.60 seconds. "I just want to continue to build from what they did. They set the foundation and did the hard work."

CU doesn't have any big-name steeplers left on the roster, but the Buffs appear to be in good hands as they try to keep their rich tradition going in the event.

"We won't have a contender for the NCAA championship this year, but we'll have a very nice crew of young people in the development phase; they're going to be good in the future," CU head coach Mark Wetmore said.

Advertisement

CU's tradition of success in the steeplechase goes back to Clint Wells, who was the school's first all-American in the event, in 1995 and 1996. He is one of six CU men to reach all-American status in the steeplechase.

The women have had at least one all-American steepler for 10 consecutive years, starting with Natalie Florence in 2005. Jenny Barringer, Emma Coburn and Shalaya Kipp combined for six national titles and 11 all-American honors from 2006-2014.

Colorado s Erin Clark cruised to first place in 3,000-meter steeplechase on Saturday. (Paul Aiken/Staff Photographer)

"There's absolutely pressure," senior Blake Theroux said. "We put pressure on ourselves every day. Maybe a little bit of added pressure because you want to keep that tradition going, but it just keeps me sharp, keeps me on my toes.

"People do expect us to turn out good steeplers. I'm really looking to do my part in that."

Theroux didn't compete Saturday, but has been top three in the Pac-12 the past two years, including runner-up a year ago. He posted the nation's 15th-best time a week ago and won't compete in the steeplechase again until the Pac-12 championships next month.

Winter proved on Saturday that the Buffs now have a solid 1-2 punch.

"That was a very, very good debut," Wetmore said. "I'm not sure I've ever seen a Colorado debut that fast up here. He'll make rapid strides. He is going to have a good chance of making the NCAA final in his very first season running the steeplechase."

Freshman Adam Peterman was third on Saturday and Wetmore said he has a chance to be an NCAA qualifier this year, too.

"We have a lot of really good, fit guys," Winter said. "You add in that little bit of technique and then, boom, you have some really, really good guys. It's fun to be a part of it, and it's new for me."

Led by Barringer, Coburn and Kipp, the women have enjoyed the most success over the years, and there's hope of keeping that going with a young set of steeplers.

Freshman Eric Clark cruised to first place Saturday, in 10:33.27, with three of her teammates finished 2-3-4.

"Erin Clark ran a really nice time and we're pleased with that," Wetmore said. "The women behind her were pretty good for novices and they'll improve really fast."

Add in sophomore Melanie Nun, who is battling a "minor" back issue, and the Buffs like their chances of making a little noise on the women's side this spring, too.

"The kids keep the tradition going in everything," Wetmore said. "They make it happen. Billy (Nelson) helped Shalaya and Emma and then they helped Blake and the women coming around now, and it just feeds on each other."

For CU's young steeplechasers, it's inspiring to see how much growth previous stars made during their collegiate careers.

"It shows how much improvement can be made here if you do things right and follow the coaches' instructions," Clark said.

"There's definitely some pride in wanting to build upon the great steeple reputation that they already have here."

Brian Howell: howellb@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @BrianHowell33.