Spending, not saving, goes against the grain in Germany, but people are not realizing they’re losing wealth says Dr. Woehrmann. Bloomberg News

Germany must cut taxes to encourage its citizens to spend more and generate an economic recovery in Europe, according to the chief investment officer of Deutsche Bank’s asset management arm.

Dr Asoka Woehrmann, who directs investment strategies for Deutsche Asset and Wealth Management, which has over $1.2 trillion in assets under management, said that Germans must be forced to loosen their traditionally frugal approach to personal finances and start shopping.

“The thing you have to do is cut now the taxes,” he told the Wall Street Journal. “Cut now taxes, spend your money. That’s the message you have to give now… to enforce growth and stop people saving.

He is well aware that his advice goes against the grain of Germans’ reputation for financial prudence.

“It’s a cultural behavior,” he said of Germans’ propensity to save, in spite of record low interest rates and negative real yields. “People are not realizing they’re losing their wealth… I hate people neglecting real negative returns.”

He added Germans are duty bound to spend on goods and services from other European countries whose economies have stalled in order to help them out: “Germany can spend much more… Germany has much more room to be flexible in their model than other European countries and if you feel solidarity for other countries, you have to show it,” he said. “They have to enforce growth by consumer-led growth.”

So what taxes should Angela Merkel cut? Income tax, is Dr Woehrmann’s suggestion, as he views slashing sales tax, fuel duty or capital gains tax as too controversial. In his ideal world, he suggests that the government itself might also flash a bit more cash, mainly on infrastructure and education, but concedes that with the current fashion for austerity in the Eurozone, that is unlikely.

As for savers, his advice is fairly simple: “Buy and hold is over… If you own a G4 [government bond], sell it.