Fairness for a fine firefighter

Miami: Re “He’s a hunk o’ burnin’ love” (Nov. 24): As far as I can see, Jonathan Jesensky is a hero who deserves nothing less than our utmost respect. According to your own article, Jesensky “served a tour in Iraq with the Marines, and has had a stellar record.” He was originally hired by the FDNY as an EMT and quickly promoted to paramedic after graduating first in his class. Your article mentioned these accolades, but mostly concentrated on his career in pornography prior to joining the military or working for the city. He broke no rules of the FDNY or the City of New York. So what exactly was the point? It seems that the article was written to embarrass Jesensky with his fellow firefighters. I was glad to read that many of them don’t seem to care. It seems his fellow firefighters have the intellect to look beyond Jesensky’s past and concentrate on what is most important, his “stellar” career record. Rory Paull

Appalling applause

Garden City Park, L.I.: The audience in Florida that gave Bill Cosby a standing ovation must have been filled with rapists (“She was only 15,” Nov. 22). We all know the saying “innocent until proven guilty.” But come on — too many women are telling the same story. Lina Williams

Been there, done that

Washingtonville, N.Y.: I take strong exception to Mike Lupica’s column “No sense, just guilt” (Nov. 24) . I performed thousands of vertical patrols in the Pink Houses and other New York City housing developments during 21 years with the Housing Police and NYPD. I encountered numerous felons, exchanged gunfire and arrested hundreds of criminals. These stairwells are dangerous places. In 1988, Housing Police Officer Anthony McLean was shot and killed while performing a vertical patrol. While proper tactics would have entailed a police officer keeping his finger off the trigger, this apparently was not the case. What is certain, however, is that the deceased was not committing a crime and that the firearms discharge was unintentional. Further, questioning the officer’s “heart” before he has been officially interviewed is callous and inappropriate. Dave Moskowitz, NYPD captain, retired

Light in the darkness

Staten Island: As a retired 30-year employee of the New York City Housing Authority, I have something to contribute on how Akai Gurley’s senseless death could have been prevented. A police officer should not have his gun out of the holster unless threatened . Many times during blackouts, we helped people walk up the stairwells with flashlights — and no weapons. Were we scared? I’m sure some of us were, especially employees in high-crime developments walking back down all alone. Hopefully some good can come out of this — maybe some kind of restriction on taking guns out of holsters. Phil Santanello Jr.

Thanks for horses

Bremerton, Wash.: As part of my family’s yearly Christmas movie ritual, I watched the classic “Home Alone 2: Lost in New York” with my granddaughter. We watched as Kevin hides in a horse carriage to escape the bad guys. This was my granddaughter’s first time seeing the carriages. She was enthralled and now wants to ride in a carriage pulled by horses in the park, surrounded by skyscrapers. The identity of New York City is so tied to the iconic carriages. I hope when I come to New York to savor its sights and culture, I will be able to take my granddaughter on a horse-drawn carriage ride. Susan Sullivan

United in peace

White Plains, N.Y.: As co-chairs of the Building Bridges Dialogue of the Episcopal Muslim Relations Committee of the Diocese of New York, we join in condemning the brutal murder of four worshipers in a Jerusalem synagogue. Yet we condemn the Daily News’ use of incendiary language about “the true nature of Palestinian radicals” (“Murder unleashed,” editorial, Nov. 19). Not all Palestinians are radicals. We have worked for 23 years with Muslim Americans of Palestinian, Egyptian, Pakistani, Indonesian, Kashmiri, Indian and Lebanese descent, and African-American birth . We are all Americans, good citizens of this country. Drawing attention only to extremists serves no one and nothing, least of all peace. Our city and region are better because people of many religions are working together to make it that way. This is the work of the Kingdom of God. The Rev. Stephen C. Holton, Naz Ahmed Georgas

Playing defense

Trumbull, Conn.: So Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel was fired (“Chucked,” Nov. 25). Is anyone surprised? He was the only Republican in this administration. He was the only one to identify ISIS as the worst threat to our country after the President called them J.V. They have taken over most of Iraq, which Americans fought valiantly for, and are beheading American citizens. It just shows that if you disagree with the President, even if you’re correct, you’re out. Who will protect us now? Joyce B. Pinto

There’s the door

Cincinnati: Chuck Hagel, the just-sacked secretary of defense, represents the Peter Principle: He rose to a position for which he was unfit. I am not sorry to see him go. Paul Bloustein

Pattern of errors

Bronx: My husband was just told that he had to pay $40 for glasses, which he never had to do previously. He called his insurance and learned it was a “mistake.” My niece in Virginia suddenly had to pay $95 for her insulin. The pharmacy had to refund her $95 — another “mistake.” I checked and, reluctantly, the person I spoke to learned that someone had made a “mistake.” How many people are paying extra for things because of these “mistakes” — and blaming Obamacare? Juanita M. Johnson

A fee too far

Briarwood: While I understand the logic of using recyclable bags for some grocery shopping, if consumers did only that and nothing else, they’d still have to buy other plastic bags for trash, kitty litter, dog cleanup and all the other uses one has for them. How about doing more to educate folks about double-bagging, recycling and, yes, using environmentally friendly bags where possible? Renee Silverstein

A brand new bag

Bronx: If our boneheaded City Council passes a tax on plastic bags, I will just use the white garbage bags that I buy at the supermarket. They are stronger, and the flap tops tie up nicely to form a carrying handle. John Dennehy

Revisionist history

Staten Island: You say Chancellor Carmen Fariña has “spread the incendiary falsehood” that charter schools “inflate test scores by breaking the rules.” Let me refresh your memory: When our former mayor started changing our schools, he bragged that scores went up. Then we found out that was not true. I am sure the chancellor has her information correct. Phyllis Levy

Breaks, shmeaks

Staten Island: When I read Pete Donohue’s column, I nearly choked on my coffee (“Island of whinin’,” Nov. 24). Hey, Pete, I have a news flash for you: Staten Islanders have the longest commutes of anyone in the country. Regardless of the “breaks” we get, we are still subsidizing a service we don’t use. MTA should stand for “money taken away.” Robert K. Greco

Senseless waste

Bronx: To Voicer Lois Martano: Legalization of marijuana would eliminate the black market, which would eliminate the need for police to arrest people over it — saving taxpayers millions a year and saving many innocent lives. Government is the reason innocent people die over marijuana. Victor Colón

Inner beauty

Beverly Hills, Calif.: To Voicer Ruth Biller: Angelina Jolie is the most giving woman on the planet, and you’re putting her down for what she wore at an awards show? She also had a double mastectomy, remember? You also put down Laura Dern. She is a sweet, kind soul who helps shelter animals with her own money. Do you? So what if you didn’t like their outfits that night? Remember, we were born naked — not with Edith Head dresses on our bodies. Margo Kent