Emmanuel Mudiay’s brothers are his heroes. He’s the youngest of three. His father died of a heart attack when Emmanuel was 2. His brothers, Stephane and Jean-Micheal, quickly became his role models.

“They’re like my two fathers. They raised me,” Emmanuel said.

Their mother, Therese Kabeya, struggled to provide for her sons in the Democratic Republic of Congo, the birthplace of Emmanuel and his brothers. Two wars terrorized the country during the late 1990s and early 2000s. Jean-Micheal and Ste- phane recall hearing gunfire and screams throughout the night.

Kabeya headed to Arlington, Texas, in 2001 with dreams of providing a better life for her sons. A year later, her boys joined her.

Their primary outlet was basketball. Once Emmanuel was old enough, they played king of the court. But most games ended with the smaller Emmanuel on the ground suffering from the MMA-style physicality bestowed upon him by his brothers.

It didn’t take long for the competitive Emmanuel, now a Nuggets first-round draft pick, to catch up with his brothers. Jean-Micheal knew Emmanuel was special when he saw him playing in tournaments as a third- grader and he looked like a ninth-grader.

“We all went through it together,” Jean-Micheal said, “and we’re just happy one of us made it and we’re happy it was him.”

Stephane was the first out of the house. He received scholarship offers from a few Division I basketball programs, including the University of Denver. But a back injury forced him to play at a junior college before finishing his career at Texas Wesleyan.

Jean-Micheal was a star in high school, earning all-district honors his junior year, but he suffered a knee injury twice in a two-year span. He played at Western Texas College before he got a call from SMU coach Larry Brown with an offer to play for the Mustangs in Dallas.

Jean-Micheal knew it was a recruiting ploy to get Emmanuel to come to SMU too, but he didn’t care. For him, it was an opportunity to get the most important thing his mother wanted for her sons: a top-tier education.

Emmanuel did sign with SMU but never played for the Mustangs, instead signing a $1.2 million contract to play in China.

“He was supposed to come,” Jean-Micheal said, “but he left me. But I always knew how much my mom was struggling. I was the first one to tell him, ‘Go ahead and go.’ “

Brown, a former Nuggets coach, was hit hard by the decision. He called Emmanuel the best young point guard he had ever seen. But he still offered Jean-Micheal, who played only 24 minutes in two seasons, the opportunity to remain on the team.

His senior year was difficult for Jean-Micheal. Stephane and Kabeya moved to China with Emmanuel while Jean-Micheal stayed behind. But he talked to Emmanuel every day via FaceTime. Despite the 13-hour time difference, they watched each other’s games.

Jean-Micheal may have a future as a scout. He said Emmanuel’s best skill is his playmaking ability, and he doesn’t agree with the John Wall comparison.

“Russell Westbrook as far as athleticism, Derrick Rose passing skills. He reminds me of Baron Davis,” Jean-Micheal said. “But mostly he plays like Emmanuel.”

Cameron Wolfe: 303-954-1891, cwolfe@denverpost.com or twitter.com/CameronWolfe