When David Bauer and his wife moved to the Washington region nearly three years ago, they wanted a spacious home close to his new job at the Washington Navy Yard.

Their four-bedroom, two-car-garage home with a view of the Potomac River in the 300-acre resort community of National Harbor offered them that and, as a bonus, access to waterfront restaurants and shops, along with summer concerts and fireworks.

“We looked for single-family homes in Northern Virginia, Silver Spring, Bowie and just couldn’t find what we wanted that was a good balance between a big home and a reasonable commute,” said Bauer, a 29-year Navy veteran who moved to the area from Virginia Beach. By settling in this new southern Prince George’s County community, ­Bauer ­secured a desirable ­20-minute motorcycle ride to work.

“It was the perfect home,” Bauer said.

A popular destination for tourists and conventioneers, National Harbor is becoming a booming residential community. It has become a magnet for military families looking for housing near U.S. defense facilities and for families in search of an active lifestyle and new housing that is more affordable than in most affluent ­Washington-area neighborhoods.

Will Nuckols, right, and his wife Cecelia Prewett and 3-year old daughter Ava prepare to go outside of their 4-bedroom townhouse in National Harbor, Md. (Bill O'Leary/The Washington Post)

With the takeoff of residential housing, county leaders’ and developers’ vision for National Harbor as a true mixed-use community comes to fruition. It also solidifies its position as a destination for Washington-area residents and the kind of high-end town center that Prince George’s and its residents have long desired.

“It is becoming what we all thought it was going to become: a jewel,” said Thomas Himler, a top aide to County Executive Rushern L. Baker III (D). And one that generates $15 million to $18 million a year in tax revenue.

“It is continuing its evolution from just a tourist attraction,” Himler said. “It’s becoming a downtown, and that is a good thing because we want more people to move into the county.”

The new community provides many of the amenities typically found in a small town, including its own Zip code, a drugstore, an urgent-care center, a grocery store and dry cleaners.

Indeed, it has become a mini-city, with about 1,000 residents and 6,000 workers at 30 restaurants, six hotels and 150 retail stores. Thirty small companies have offices there and more than 12 million people visit annually.

“It is a place where people can live, work, eat and entertain — all in one place,” developer Jon Peterson said. “We provide an environment that you really can’t find anywhere else in the whole Washington metropolitan area.”

The community has its own Christmas tree lighting and attractions such as ICE, a winter wonderland. There are Cirque du Soleil shows during the summer. The arrival last year of a 180-foot Ferris wheel has been a regional draw, and the local bars are popular happy-hour spots for young professionals.

Will Nuckols carries 3-year old daughter Ava, during an outing to nearby Oxo Hill farm park in National Harbor, Md. (Bill O'Leary/The Washington Post)

But the waterfront lifestyle comes with trade-offs that could make it a difficult sale for some, including poor schools and limited public transportation.

Families at National Harbor face the dilemma of whether to put their children in the county’s troubled school system or pay for private schools. Maryland’s second-largest school system, with 125,000 students, has long struggled with low test scores, overcrowded classrooms and high turnover with teachers who leave after spending just a couple of years in the district.

County and business leaders acknowledge that if the schools were better, people might be less reluctant to make Prince George’s their home. The school system has been working to improve its academics and administration, aiming to attract the children of ­middle-class residents — many of whom send their children to private schools. County leaders say a recent overhaul of the system, including a new superintendent, will bring major improvements.

The main drawback of the community, however, may be its limited access to public transportation. Bus service, which comes every 30 minutes to connect the community to Metro’s Green Line, is not enough, some residents, workers and visitors say. They argue that efforts to bring better Metro access should be the top priority — though for now they would be happy with more frequent and extended bus service.

“What we really want is something that goes across the Wilson Bridge to Alexandria and back and forth,” said Bauer, noting that the Yellow Line across the Potomac is closer to National Harbor than the Green Line in Prince George’s. Some hope the arrival of the new MGM National Harbor casino resort will spur officials to increase transit options.

Metro last year proposed running its only bus line serving National Harbor across the Wilson Bridge to the King Street Metro station, but it abandoned the proposal after area residents and workers complained that the service came at the expense of cutting current service to the Branch Avenue Metro station. With limited funding, which comes from the jurisdictions Metro serves, the agency said it couldn’t do both. The county’s bus system also provides some service to the resort area, but the system doesn’t operate late evenings or on weekends.

Himler said the county understands that more transit options will be necessary as the Harbor continues to grow, but he said “it’s going to take time with all of our partners to find a solution.”

Still, the kind of “town center” experience offered at National Harbor is in demand in the Washington region, said Dan Fulton, an expert in the region’s housing market and senior vice president of John Burns Real Estate Consulting. Tysons Corner, Reston Town Center, and Rockville Town Center offer similar experiences.

But National Harbor’s easy access to the Capital Beltway and Interstate 295, and its proximity to the District and Northern Virginia, just across the Woodrow Wilson Bridge, make it especially appealing, Fulton said.

“It is incredibly convenient to get to essentially everywhere in the Metro area,” he said. And, because it is in Prince George’s County, where real estate is generally less pricey, housing is more affordable, he said.

Affordability was the top consideration for Will Nuckols and his wife Cecelia Prewett. They moved to the Harbor two years ago from a pricey apartment near Nationals Park. They had looked for a home in Capitol Hill, where they wanted to raise their 3-year-old daughter, Ava, but couldn’t find anything they liked in their price range. They also wanted a new, ready-to-move-in home with modern amenities.

Their four-level, four-bedroom brownstone in National Harbor’s Potomac Overlook neighborhood was “twice the size of what we were looking at for a couple of hundred thousand dollars less,” Nuckols said.

The development weathered the housing market crash, and a revival of home sales in the past two years has sped up the progress; National Harbor is at nearly 40 percent of its planned 2,500 housing units. Construction is underway on new brownstones that will be priced from the upper $400,000s to nearly a million dollars, and there are plans to begin construction of another residential building next year.

The Esplanade, a new apartment complex by Peterson Companies and the Bozzuto Group, adds the missing rental component to the mix of housing options. It has high-end amenities including a swimming pool, fitness center, movie theater, business center and a parking garage. Rents start at $1,710 for studios, $1,775 for one-bedrooms, $2,420 for two-bedrooms and $2,900 for three-bedroom homes.

Rents at the complex are higher than just about anywhere in Prince George’s. Still, National Harbor officials and real estate experts say the rates, with the level of amenities included, are competitive with those in other Washington suburbs and the District.

“We are excited to have another 400 or so residents next year,” said Stuart S. Prince, who oversees residential construction for Peterson Companies. “Our residents love the convenience of walking to the pharmacy or dining at the local restaurants. It is a unique, active environment. There is always something to do.”

There remain missing pieces, however. For example, families struggle to find play spaces for children.

National Harbor housing was originally marketed to couples, young professionals and retirees, but more families with children have moved into a neighborhood that has no playground.

Residents can use the waterfront area, where children play in the sand and near a carousel, but those public areas are primed for visitors, they say. They’re working with Peterson Companies to build a large playground and a dog park. The developer says it also is working on a central park with facilities that would add to the list of amenities for residents.

With about 80 acres still to be developed, much more growth is expected at National Harbor over the next few years, bringing with it the additional challenges of traffic congestion, particularly with the opening of the MGM National Harbor casino, slated to open in 2016.

Peterson said he expects growth will occur at a faster pace, riding the momentum created by recent successes, including the opening of Tanger Outlets last year and the approval of the $1­ billion luxury casino resort.

“Our opportunities have increased and we have to sit back and really look at what’s best for the future of National Harbor to make sure that it is a well-balanced community,” Peterson said.