Topics: DAME, Frances McDormand, Hollywood, Kim Novak, renee zellweger, Life News, Entertainment News

Last week I had one of those horrible colds that make you wish there was a worse word for it than a cold. Aside from the red nose, I noticed my eyelids were swollen—I call those Tippy the Turtle eyes. It occurred to me between bouts of self-pity that those eyelids might actually be a thing that will be permanent in my future. Today I’m 47, I say that with pride because on Saturday I’m going to turn 48. I started googling eyelid lifts and realized that, unless they started doing Kickstarters for vanity surgery, I was shit out of luck. I tucked it in the back of my mind where it stayed until yesterday when all of my social-media feeds were erupting in a frenzy over Renee Zellweger’s new face. (I had not realized this until yesterday, but apparently she’s been out of the public eye for four years.) And yes, I looked and I was bummed because I truly hate plastic surgery—my mom’s two older sisters had face lifts and eye lifts and I always thought (and think) that my mother is so much more beautiful and soft looking. But my mom lives in the woods, and squirrels don’t judge. And I am a writer who goes from sweaty gym clothes to jeans and a hoody that has my kid’s middle-school name emblazoned on the front, and rats don’t judge.

I know I used to mock celebrities who had excessive plastic surgery (okay, I still do but never publicly! And never on a Sunday!), but in the past couple of years I’ve had my turtle eyes opened. When Kim Novak was mocked at the Oscars and admitted how hurt she was, that she’d been terrified about appearing in public for the first time in years (she is FUCKING 81 YEARS OLD) and she just wanted to look her best, I felt heartbroken. I think after reading about her response, everyone got a grip and felt pretty bad.

More from DAME: “She Could Have Been Diane Sawyer”

Then last week, Frances McDormand came out against plastic surgery in the New York Times. “Something happened culturally: No one is supposed to age past 45—sartorially, cosmetically, attitudinally,” said McDormand, who has been married to director Joel Coen for 30 years, “Everybody dresses like a teenager. Everybody dyes their hair. Everybody is concerned about a smooth face.” And I loved her for saying it, but let’s face it, Frances McDormand and Renee Zellweger are two totally different people with two totally different kinds of careers. Frances was never the girl in Jerry Maguire. Renee was not Marge in Fargo.