Clint Didier, a former tight end for the Washington Redskins, is running for Congress in Washington state’s 4th congressional district on a limited government platform.

Among his other ambitions, Didier wants to eliminate the Department of Education and withdraw the United States from the United Nations. He also wants to fully repeal Obamacare and abolish the Federal Reserve.

Glenn Beck interviewed the former NFL player on his radio program Monday, and asked the man how he became so passionate about current events.

“I’ve got four children. I got five grandchildren. And I’ve lived the American dream,” Didier said. “I got to play in the NFL. Three Super Bowls. And it was all when Ronald Reagan was the president and this country was united. We had our first black quarterback by the name of Doug Williams, and I caught a pass from him in Super Bowl XXII. And since then we’ve been on a slippery slope going downhill.”

Didier said America has lost its direction, and that nobody looks at the Constitution for guidance anymore. He said he wants to be part of the equation to get the country “back on track” so America’s children and grandchildren can live their dreams, too.

“How would you expect to get the Department of Education and Energy eliminated?” Beck asked.

“Everybody thinks [the Department of Education] has been around a long time,” Didier responded. “It was brought into play when Jimmy Carter was president. And when it was brought into play, we ranked third in the world. Today we rank 36th in the world. We’re losing ground because we’re not teaching the core principles of education anymore. We are now in this Common Core that I’m absolutely set against. I want to give this back to the states.”

Didier said one of his main priorities is to “unshackle our industries and let them run again.”

“This is one of the reasons I’m running for this position,” he said. “My wife and I, we farm a thousand acres with two of my sons and daughter, and we are under attack. They have determined a White Bluffs bladderpod is an endangered species, and they are using that as a means to take away our water, as they’re doing all across America. The EPA was created December 2nd, 1970, by Richard Nixon, with an ‘R’ by his name. This agency doesn’t even have the authority over the American people because it … was supposed to be created through the legislature.”

Didier said lawmakers need to cut the funds of federal agencies doing harm to America, or we will be a nation that “will not pass down freedom to our children.”

Watch the complete interview, below.

Your browser does not support iframes.

The full episode of The Glenn Beck Program, along with many other live-streaming shows and thousands of hours of on-demand content, is available on just about any digital device. Click here to watch every Glenn Beck episode from the past 30 days for just $1!