SOUTH BEND — Just a day after Indiana Gov. Mike Pence signed the controversial religious freedom bill, members of the South Bend business community spoke out to say they are open for business — to anyone.

Organized by South Bend Mayor Pete Buttigieg, those who chose to stand against the new law gathered Friday afternoon at Le Peep restaurant in downtown. The goal was to promote that, no matter what the state does, South Bend is a community that doesn’t discriminate.

“For the last 24 hours Indiana has been getting the wrong kind of attention,” Buttigieg said at Friday’s gathering. “We are here to say that’s not us, that’s not South Bend.”

Pence signed SB 101 Thursday morning, which extends protections to businesses to deny service to someone based on religious beliefs. While supporters of the bill say it’s needed to protect people’s right to follow their religious beliefs, opponents are worried it’s opening the state to protected discrimination and sending the wrong message to the rest of the country.

“Our greatest challenge is to continue to attract and retain the most talented, the most diverse workforce we can, and this misguided legislation sends exactly the wrong message,” Greg Downes, of Gibson Insurance Group, said.

And before Pence had even signed the bill, organizations from across the country were threatening to pull business from the state. The gamer convention Gen Con, one of the biggest conventions Indianapolis hosts, said in a statement that discussions on whether to remain in Indy or move elsewhere have begun. Gen Con’s contract with the city runs through 2020.

The NCAA also chimed in saying the bill could damage Indianapolis’ reputation as a host of major sporting events. This year’s NCAA men’s basketball tournament finals are being held in Indy.

But even with pressure from organizations across the county, Pence defended signing the bill, referencing recent litigation stemming from the Affordable Care Act in which the University of Notre Dame filed lawsuits challenging provisions that require the institution to provide coverage that went against its religious views.

And Pence said in a statement, “This bill is not about discrimination, and if I thought it legalized discrimination in any way in Indiana, I would have vetoed it. ... In fact, it does not even apply to disputes between private parties unless government action is involved.”

Even though Pence’s statement isn’t giving South Bend business owners comfort, many say the new law won’t change anything. Joe Hart, president of the South Bend Cubs, said Friday that his organization has been working for the past few years to create a venue that is fan-friendly and that’s how things will continue.

“Please know the South Bend Cubs are very welcoming,” Hart said. “I hope we have proven that in the past years and that is certainly going to continue.”

And soon any area business that wants to show it is open to any customer can get a sticker from the city to display that says just that. The stickers are not ready yet, and the exact phrasing hasn’t been decided, but Buttigieg said they will soon be available through the business licensing department.

“We have worked too hard to build our economy and move our community into the 21st century to be dragged back in time by Indianapolis politicians more interested in a devisive social agenda than in the pressing issues of today,” Buttigieg said.

lwright@SBTinfo.com

574-235-6324

@LWrightSBT