It is often said that presidents get more blame and more credit than they deserve from the ups and downs of the economy, that economic forces are much larger than any president has the power to control.



Even so, recent interviews suggest that President Barack Obama believes he has received too little credit for all he has done, both to rescue the economy in 2009 and to put it back on track in the years since then.



The numbers show why Obama is feeling frustrated. Unemployment has fallen from a peak of about 10 percent during the depths of the recession to 5 percent. That’s lower than when Ronald Reagan left office. The economy has added 14.4 million new jobs over the course of 73 consecutive months of job gains. That’s a recovery of a record long duration.



Meanwhile, the federal budget deficit has fallen by about three quarters, and about $1 trillion of debt has been avoided as a result of shrinking deficits.



Gene Sperling, the former director of the National Economic Council, told The New York Times, “If we were back in early 2009 — when we were coming to work every morning with clenched stomachs, with the economy losing 800,000 jobs a month and the Dow under 7,000 — and someone said that by your last year in office, unemployment would be 5 percent, the deficit would be under 3 percent, AIG would have turned a profit and we made all our money back on the banks, that would’ve been beyond anybody’s wildest expectations.”



Yet despite these successes — the historic achievement of steering the nation away from an economic abyss — economic unease dominates the political season. “Jobs” is the battle cry, even though unemployment is low. The reason for this sense of persistent disquiet is based in broad economic trends that were not rooted out by Obama’s successful recovery program.



That reason can be seen in one number: Average family income has fallen since 2000 by $4,000. As millions of people are finding, getting ahead is harder to do when you’re struggling just to keep up.



The decline of the middle class has been one of the great themes of this election, and many reasons for decline have been heard. It is often said that American manufacturing is in decline, but the opposite is true. What’s different is that automation has eliminated jobs even as manufacturing has grown, and the declining power of labor unions has weakened workers’ ability to defend their own interests.



Recovery from the Great Recession has been slower than it need have been, but Obama had to contend with unanimous Republican opposition, as well as the reluctance of conservative Democrats to support a robust recovery program. A larger stimulus package might have brought the economy back sooner. Also, his focus on Obamacare diverted energy from efforts to push through an infrastructure program that might have given the economy an extra boost.



Hillary Clinton has sought to embrace the record of the Obama administration, banking on the fact that most people understand everything Obama had to contend with as he brought the economy back. Meanwhile, Sanders has been emphasizing the vast injustices that remain to be corrected. There need be no contradiction in their points of view, even if there are differences in specific policy prescriptions.



The Republican Party, meanwhile, has collapsed into the fantasy world of its chosen leader. No one knows what Donald Trump really believes because he changes positions on a whim. His main focus is to target scapegoats and stoke hatred — against Mexicans, Muslims, whomever.



At the dawn of the Obama era, Republicans found themselves in a difficult position. Their stewardship of the economy had resulted in misery and devastation, requiring an alternative approach, which Obama pursued. They faced many years in the wilderness as the Democrats cleaned up the mess, as Republicans did after the Great Depression. The alternative course was to sabotage Obama’s recovery and then blame him for the resulting difficulties.



Now their cynicism and nihilism have yielded Donald Trump.