Joe Biden has publicly acknowledged his pro-life beliefs on more than one occasion since assuming the vice presidency. Perhaps most vocally during his 2012 vice presidential debate with Mitt Romney’s running mate Paul Ryan. At the debate, he said the following:

“With regard to abortion, I accept my Church’s position on abortion as a de fide doctrine. Life begins at conception. I accept that position in my personal life.”

Yet, in the same discussion, he suggested women’s autonomy trumps the right to life:

“I do not believe that we have a right to tell other people, women that they cannot control their body. It’s a decision between them and their doctor in my view, and the Supreme Court. And I’m not going to interfere with that.”

Three years later, Biden’s abortion stance is just as confusing, and a bit hypocritical. With Pope Francis’s trip to Washington, D.C., America, a Jesuit-run outlet, took advantage of the opportunity to return to the topic on Monday. The publication asked the Catholic VP whether it’s been difficult for him to be at odds on the issue with the country’s bishops:

“It has been…I'm prepared to accept that at the moment of conception there's human life and being, but I'm not prepared to say that to other God­fearing, non­God­fearing people that have a different view.”

It is encouraging that he believes in life from conception, but Biden’s refusal to encourage others to acknowledge the same is somewhat disheartening.

The vice president was then asked whether the Democratic Party has room for pro-lifers. He gave an emphatic nod:

“Absolutely. Absolutely, positively. And that's been my position for as long as I've been engaged.”

While I appreciate the vice president’s optimism, he is, in my opinion, a bit naïve in his assumption. Time and again Democratic leadership has practiced a pro-abortion agenda that has no patience for anyone who takes the side of unborn babies over “women’s rights.” For instance, even a three-year investigation into Planned Parenthood’s barbaric practices has not stopped Democrats from defending the abortion giant. Congressional pro-lifers have tried repeatedly to pass common sense legislation to protect unborn life, as recently as Tuesday with the Pain-capable Unborn Child Protection Act. Democrats halted that effort despite the scientific fact that unborn babies can feel pain at 20 weeks gestation.

You can see why I’m a bit skeptical.

To be fair, three Democrats did join their Republican colleagues in that humane vote. Miracles do happen.