Olivia Lowe

It all started as a prank in 1907.

Mr. Rosebrough, owner of The Loveland Cash Clothing & Shoe Co., decided it was time to make way for new merchandise. He held a sale of old shirts as well as faded and out-of-style trousers. Several boys from Loveland High School invested in those shabby corduroys, donned them in the morning, and happily made their way to school.

Upon their arrival they were met with disdain and a sharp remark from Miss Nina T. Updyke, principal (who reigned over all), that boys should not come to school looking like a bunch of farmers. The boys took offense to the comment and did what any group of clever lads would do; they rallied and planned and plotted.

The next morning, which was the Friday before spring vacation, a much larger group of so-called farmers, "took the citadel by storm." This proved to be quite embarrassing for the staff as the Northern Colorado Teachers' Association was holding their third annual meeting at the school. Much to the chagrin of the staff, students pulled the same stunt the following year; and the next year, and the next, and the next.

Advertisement

Once the ritual of what came to be known as Rag Day took hold, it became organized. In 1916, the kids elected the first Queen of Rag Day, Miss Helen Schwartz. In 1920, Coach Bill Reed was hired. He organized Rag Day into a fundraiser for LHS athletics and the "L" Club. Rag Day, which still took place in March the week before spring break, went from being a one-day spectacle to three days of skits, a carnival and Vaudeville merriment. Awards were given for best costume, best historical character, best stunt, most original group, etc. Costumed students would parade down Fourth Street at noon. Skits would be performed during the day to the delight of a giddy auditorium. In the evening, the best skits would be on stage for the townspeople who purchased a ticket for twenty-five cents.

The money was initially used as "bumper insurance" for injured athletes. Years later it was used for athletic equipment and to cover the cost of travel. As an incentive to sell as many tickets as possible, the class that sold the most won the right to elect the Queen of Rag Day. In the early 1920s, a very proper member of the student council changed the name to Costume Day as she felt the original moniker was hideous. By the 1940s, the students were back to calling it Rag Day.

The tradition of "King" started in 1934. The title was automatically assigned to the current president of the "L" Club. In the 1960s, students decided there should be princesses of Rag Day and that every princess should have an escort. Subsequent classes altered the rules as they saw fit but the skits and costumes were a constant.

I read an account of the crazy get-ups written by a student in 1925 who, without a doubt, had a firm grasp on the English language. She emoted for a page and a half about the "cast of characters" she encountered in the halls. I will share with you only the last paragraph: "I was elevated to the highest stage of the human mind and found myself deeply interested in a discussion of the mysteries and wonders of the Electron, as represented by the ten red-clad figures. I looked up to find myself in the grasp of Old Father Time whose venerable aspect might have quieted my fear had I not caught a glimpse of Satan leering at me from behind. With a mighty effort I awoke and behold there was my dream before my very eyes, and a great man with flowing beard of raven hue and true Bolshevistic garb was calling to all to join the big parade downtown. Thus ended the greatest Rag Day of L.H.S."

In 1984, the tradition came to an end without much of an ado. I, for one, would not mind if Bill Reed brought the tradition back "home". All the world, after all, is a stage and who doesn't love a parade?

• Regarding the Aug. 16 story, "Loveland had vibrant car industry." Nick Davidson bought his Chevrolet dealership from Forrest Knox on Dec. 15, 1960. He was in business on 104 E. Fourth St. until March of 1963. Nick Davidson (turned 91 in May) still goes to the dealership everyday the doors are open for business. He is alive and still working at the same dealership he bought almost 55 years ago.

Olivia Lowe of Loveland writes about local history. "Stories Left to Tell" is sponsored by Wilbur's Total Beverage. Email her at