Next year will be a very busy time in Washington, D.C., with the 2016 presidential race, one-third of the Senate and all the members of the House of Representatives being up for election in November, not to mention 12 governors races and hundreds of state and local contests.

An election year can have a big impact on what gets done in the nation’s capital as Congress typically doesn’t get as many pieces of legislation passed. Despite a potential slowdown in what the federal government accomplishes in 2016, John McClelland, American Rental Association (ARA)vice president of government affairs and chief economist, says now is the time for ARA members to make sure their voices are heard.

This is important, he says, because throughout 2016 lawmakers will be working on policies like tax reform and health care that could have large impact on the equipment rental industry.

“You never know if something is going to get through in Congress. The last successful tax reform legislation that was passed happened in 1986, which was an election year. Stranger things have happened,” McClelland says.

The following are legislative issues that could be discussed by Congress in 2016:

Tax Reform:

• Section 179. On Jan. 1, 2015, the rate for Section 179 of the IRS tax code reverted back to a $25,000 expensing level with a $200,000 limit after a bill extending Section 179 and 50 percent bonus depreciation expired at the end of 2014. ARA and its members have continued to push Congress to make the Section 179 provision, which would allow small businesses to expense up to $500,000 on a purchase of qualifying equipment up to $2 million, a permanent part of the tax code.

“In the short term, it’s obvious that we want Section 179 and bonus depreciation to be extended through 2015 and 2016. That’s the minimum of what we want and I think there’s a really good chance that we’re going to get that,” McClelland says.

“Beyond that what we would certainly like to see is Section 179 become permanent at the levels that would allow people to expense $500,000 on purchases up to $2 million annually. We would also like to see it indexed for inflation,” he says.

• 50 percent bonus depreciation. Companies can use bonus depreciation on new equipment purchases once they’ve reached the $2 million limit in capital equipment purchases set by Section 179. Bonus depreciation is set at 50 percent and allows companies to deduct half the cost of the same capital equipment purchase right away instead of deducting a percentage of the depreciation over several years. McClelland says getting bonus depreciation signed into law could be more challenging than Section 179 because President Barack Obama has threatened to veto it.

• Section 1031 like-kind exchanges. Through Section 1031 of the IRS tax code businesses can avoid paying taxes on money they make from selling old equipment when they’re using the proceeds to buy similar new equipment. For example, if a skid-steer has been depreciated down to $0, but the owner is able to sell the equipment for $5,000, he or she can then use that money to buy another skid-steer without having to pay taxes on the profit from the old equipment. McClelland says Section 1031 has been in the tax code for more than 100 years, but that there has been talk in Congress about eliminating it from the tax code.

“It’s not likely that tax reform will be completed next year, but you have to start laying the ground work sometime,” McClelland says. “Next year may be a year of developing policies, but I think going into 2017 we’ll see more tax reform.

McClelland says it is important for ARA members to stay active in government affairs throughout 2016 while lawmakers are working on creating tax policies. If people wait to get involved until after the elections are over in November, it could be too late because lawmakers will continue to hear from other people throughout the year who may not share the same ideas on what’s important as those in the equipment rental industry.

Health care:

When it comes to health care issues, McClelland doesn’t expect much will be passed in 2016.

“Now that the Protecting Affordable Coverage for Employees Act (PACE) has been signed by President Obama I don’t see the other big health care issues getting passed because of money,” McClelland says.

• Affordable Care Act (ACA). McClelland says people should not expect to see the entire ACA repealed. The Republican-controlled House of Representatives has voted to repeal the ACA more than 50 times in 2015, but the issue was never brought to the Senate because legislation needs 60 votes to be debated in the Senate and there weren’t enough senators willing to vote for repeal.

“If you look at the political reality, repealing the ACA in 2015 or 2016 is something that’s not going to happen,” McClelland says.

• Health Insurance Tax (HIT). HIT is the tax paid on health insurance premiums. It’s one health care issue some lawmakers want to repeal. The Congressional Budget Office says the 10-year cost of repealing HIT would be close to $150 billion. If HIT is repealed, it would not repeal other provisions in the Affordable Care Act, such as ones that give people who have low income the ability to buy subsidized insurance policies. Without HIT money to pay for it, other provisions would have to come from somewhere else.

• More time for full time. Under the ACA, certain companies are required to provide health care coverage to their full-time employees. The act also states that full-time employees are those who work at least 30 hours per week instead of 40 hours per week, which is considered full-time in all other federal laws. ARA is a partner of the More Time for Full Time Coalition, which is pushing for the ACA to classify a full-time employee as someone who works 40 hours per week, not 30. The change in what classifies as full-time could leave 2.6 million part-time employees at risk of losing hours and wages, according to the Hoover Institution.

For the coming year, 2016 is shaping up to be a very important political year with big races being held throughout the country and Congress continuing to work on tax reform.

Selected ARA members will have a chance to voice their concerns about the issues in April during the ARA Legislative Caucus in Washington, D.C., but McClelland says it is something all members can do throughout the year.

Getting involved can include making sure employees have candidate and voting information or hosting an equipment rental store tour with a federal lawmaker as a way to meet your representative and share why issues like Section 179 are so important.

“I think whether it’s an election year or not you want to maintain your presence on Capitol Hill. Having ARA members establish and continue their relationships with members of Congress and talking about the issues is very important,” McClelland says.