PHOTO GALLERY QCIBT Sunday Most New Hampshire Union Leader photographs are available for purchase, as are full page reproductions of the newspaper.

Manchester West 56, Trinity 51

Lebanon 61, Dover 53

— There were points where the Manchester Central and Manchester Memorial boys’ basketball teams couldn’t hit a shot in Sunday’s Queen City Invitational Basketball tournament semifinal. Both teams endured dead periods throughout the game, leaving a spot in Monday’s tournament championship up for grabs for whichever club could heat up down the stretch...That team ended up being the Little Green, who found a second wind over the final four minutes of the fourth quarter. They outscored the Crusaders 19-7 during that span and collected a 61-51 win at Memorial...The catalysts for Central’s stretch run were Jaylen Leroy and Osiah Lewis, who scored 14 of the team’s 21 fourth-quarter points. Leroy scored eight of his game-high 18 points in the fourth quarter, while Lewis contributed six of his 14 in the frame. Jon Makori also added 14 points for the Little Green, who will get Exeter in tonight’s QCIBT final after the Blue Hawks trampled Bedford 85-55 in Sunday’s first semifinal...Central and Exeter are scheduled to tip off at 7:30 p.m. at Memorial. Bedford and Memorial will battle in the third-place game at 6 p.m. Earlier, at 4:30 p.m., Manchester West will play Lebanon for fifth place. The day will start with the Dover-Trinity seventh-place game at 3 p.m...Mike Roumraj was the leading scorer for Memorial with 13 points and Nick Philibert followed with 12.Central and Memorial traded leads of no higher than six points through the third quarter and the first four minutes of the fourth before Central separated itself. An 8-0 spurt to start the final four minutes proved to be the difference for the Little Green, as Leroy scored on a deep 3-pointer and a breakaway before Lewis capped the run with a trey...“The kids have no turnaround or rest here with these games,” said Central coach Dave Wheeler. “You (combine) that with dealing with playing down 10 and six early tonight and I think we responded pretty well to it all towards the end.”..Memorial indeed had Central on the ropes early on when it went on an 11-0 run over the first 2:30 of the second quarter to snag a 21-13 edge. The cushion dissolved quickly though, as the Little Green forced a slower tempo that created turnovers and a slew of ill-advised shots by the antsy Crusaders...“We do all of that off our defense,” said Memorial coach Jack Quirk of being able to sustain scoring spurts. “When we are getting them to turn it over like we did then we have to keep going, but we got out of it and backed off. It’s all just a learning thing at this point.”..Central will try to keep its momentum going against Exeter, which has plenty of momentum of its own after a strong start out of the gate Sunday against Bedford.The Blue Hawks started the game on a 10-2 run before finishing the opening frame with a 25-13 lead. Exeter’s advantage never fell below 12 after the opening quarter and kept growing in the second half, as its offense continued cruising and Bedford failed to keep pace...Cody Morissette provided 18 points for Exeter, while Tim Larkin and Bryant Holmes added 17 and 12, respectively. Bedford had just two scorers in double figures with Justin Hayes’ 13 points and another 12 from Colby Gendron...Despite a disadvantage to Bedford in height, Exeter found most of its success by way of scores off drives and second-chance opportunities off the close-range misses. Holmes, Morissette and Larkin continually drove the lane at 6-foot-3 Gendron and other Bedford big men with great success from the onset...Between swift ball movement and general movement from all five players at all times on each possession, the Blue Hawks always seemed to be a step ahead.“We’ve got some guys that can run,” Exeter coach Jeff Holmes said. “It’s really the strength of our offense, so we just want to go when we get it.”..While the decision to take it to the Bulldogs in the post was a surprise, the Blue Hawks’ ability to control the glass as a team on both ends was even more astonishing. Such toughness was best exemplified on a third-quarter possession that saw them collect four offensive rebounds before finally finishing the sequence with a Tim Larkin lay-in to make it 55-39...They never led by more than nine over the final two quarters, but the Blue Knights remained firmly in control on their way to defeating the Crusaders. West tipped the scales in its favor midway through the fourth quarter with a five-point swing that bumped its lead to nine points. Keenan Caron started the swing with a wide-open 3-pointer and Jacobee Burpee followed on next possession with a driving lay-in...“When we stay within ourselves and our offense, we end up getting the buckets we need,” West coach Danny Bryson said. “We just tried not to do too much. Having that poise and control is when we are at our best.”..Burpee and Caron led four Blue Knights in double figures with 13 points apiece, while Akok Akok and Corey Descoteaux each poured in 10 points. Justin Trickett was the high man for Trinity with a game-high 24 points...The Crusaders were within one point just seconds into the third quarter, but the Blue Knights never relinquished the lead.The Red Raiders earned an early advantage and made it stick down the stretch to sink the Green Wave. K.J. Matte bounced back well from a lackluster game Saturday with a game-high 17 points for the Raiders on Sunday, while Graham Chickering chipped in 11 points. Dover’s Griffin Young finished with 11 points and Devin Cady added seven points...jduball@unionleader.com..