Topics: Books, Editor's Picks, Mormon feminism, Mormon mommy blogs, Mormons, Religion, Life News, News

The week before I spoke with Joanna Brooks, a prominent Mormon progressive and feminist, Church authorities declared that children of same-sex couples would henceforth be ineligible for baptism. To some critics, it looked as if Mormon leaders were ready to punish kids for the sexual orientation of their parents.

If your sense of the Latter-Day Saints largely comes from Broadway and the Romneys, that move won’t seem surprising. Mormonism’s reputation as a conservative bulwark is strong—so much so that it’s easy to forget that the Church originated as a collection of mobile, marginal believers, committed to a non-traditional form of marriage—polygamy—and to the kind of communalism that’s associated more with socialist kibbutzim than Levittown suburbs.

That progressivism often extended to gender roles. Mormon women were among the first in the nation to vote. They ran community organizations and pursued advanced degrees. Early Mormons developed a unique theology of a female God figure—Mother in Heaven—and they had priesthood roles for women.

Much of this tradition was suppressed in the 20th century, as the Mormon Church became more bureaucratic, and its hierarchy more male. But in recent years, Mormon feminists have revived that suppressed history as they search for ways to reconcile the culture of the Church with their visions for equality.

In a new collection, “Mormon Feminism,” Brooks, along with co-editors Rachel Hunt Steenblik and Hannah Wheelwright, introduce critical documents from the past 40 years of that struggle. The result is a fascinating snapshot of a community negotiating its relationship with the past, with the future, and with American politics at large. The topic may seem niche, but the questions resonate outside the Mormon world: How do you balance the personal and the political? How can women best challenge power structures built by men? And how do you honor a tradition that you love, even as you hope for change?

Brooks is an associate vice president and a professor of English at San Diego State University, and the author of “The Book of Mormon Girl,” a memoir. (She is also on the masthead of Religion Dispatches magazine, where I am an associate editor; we had never communicated before this interview.) Over the phone, Brooks spoke with Salon about excommunication, same-sex marriage and why early Mormon women could be thought of as “gender radicals.”

Within the context of Mormon feminism, is there a particular definition of feminism that applies especially well?

Mormon women started calling themselves feminists at the very same moment that women in other faith traditions, and women who were not religious, started identifying as feminists as well. This was in the late 1960s. The women’s movement was in full flower in the United States. When [Mormon] women met in an inaugural consciousness-raising group in Boston to discuss their lives, they used feminist messages: the idea of women talking about their lives to gain new consciousness, and then organize for change.

Feminism for Mormon women is the process of critically examining what it means to be a woman in Mormonism, and what our experience teaches us about the necessity for changing the world to make it a more just, nourishing and equitable place for everyone.

What do Mormon feminists bring to the table that would look different from other strains of feminism?

What Mormon women brought to the table was a long history of gender progressivism. Women were writing about God the Mother in the 1840s, which was 50 years before the idea of a woman God was brought up in Elizabeth Cady Stanton’s “The Women’s Bible.” Mormon women were told by Church founder Joseph Smith that they would be organized as a kingdom of priests, and a form of priesthood was conveyed to them by Smith in the early days of the Church.

In the later 19th century, after the exodus to Utah, Mormon women across the entire territory were incredibly politically progressive. They were the first in the nation to exercise their right to vote. They had their own women-run newspaper, The Exponent, that was explicitly pro-suffrage, even as it was pro-polygamy. Mormon women organized, traveled, met and spoke alongside national suffrage leaders like Susan B. Anthony, who made uneasy peace with the fact that some Mormon women actually viewed the practice of polygamy as supportive of expanded life chances for women. Mormon women were sent by Brigham Young to medical school in the upper Midwest and the East.

So, this long history of incredible organizing belonged to the Mormon women who identified as feminist in the late 1960s. But what had intervened were decades of conservative retrenchment in the institutional church, as Mormonism left its isolated 19th century Utah era and entered mainstream American society in the 20th century.

Mormonism adopts this mainstream, conservative, Protestant ideal of the homemaker as the essential, defining role of women. So, in the late ’60s and early ’70s you find Mormon women wrestling with the contradictions between an incredibly expansive theology and the fruits of assimilation, which are a very conservative and constrictive and practical role for women in Mormon life. This contradiction fuels Mormon feminism to this day.

There’s the stereotype of Mormonism as such a conservative culture. Then you look back at the 19th century, and you see this wild, marginal movement.

The women who belonged to early Mormonism were seekers who wanted a better world. Women who joined this movement, were, in some forms, gender radicals. They were joining a marginal religious movement, walking into new territory to live their faith.

Did Mormon women understand polygamy in these progressive, radical terms?

Polygamy is a complicated story. There were women who found polygamy to support more expansive lives and shared childcare with a sister-wife. You could live in women-headed households. At the same time, the day-to-day lived realities of polygamy weren’t always so elegant, and they caused people a great deal of cognitive dissonance and shame.

Polygamy, as a theological principle, has not been rejected by the Church, officially. Plural marriages for the eternities, where a man can be sealed to more than one woman for eternity, and a woman can’t, continue to be performed in temples. It is a ghost that haunts us still. Mormon girls who are smart still realize that there might be polygamy in heaven, and no one is going to tell them for sure there won’t be.

Looking for a more equitable route, do critics talk about polyandry as well? Or just getting rid of the poly- altogether?

Mormonism has a very beautiful and complicated theology around family. Joseph Smith’s vision was of being united with his brother, who died young, through vicarious baptism—knowing that his brother could be with him in heaven through vicarious ordinances performed in this life by proxy. That doctrine grew and blossomed into this notion that we go to heaven in family units. In its most expansive reading, we all go to heaven together with our ancestors and those who will come after us. So heaven is a collective spiritual event.

At its most beautiful and elegant formulation, it is very inspiring. It was practiced in the 19th century through polygamy, which bears some very unfortunate parallels to, and is an expression of, patriarchy, which is not as spiritually satisfying.

In some ways, “Mormon Feminism” is a story of bureaucratization. There’s this enormous shift of power within the Church as it builds a bureaucracy.

Look, the Church was trying to move from being a marginal, radical sect that was bankrupted by the United States government over its practice of polygamy. It had to stage a quick entry into mainstream American life in order to survive. It designed itself as this marginal movement, and it went through a transition to becoming a Protestant church. In its assimilation, Mormonism became more aggressively male-dominated in its practice.

When that happens, where do practices of a female priesthood, or belief in Mother in Heaven, go? Are they forgotten? Suppressed?

There is a process called correlation through which this wide range of beliefs the Mormon movement had generated and sustained were bureaucratized in the mid 20th century, systematized, reduced, and made available for implementation in curriculum. Some of the gender stuff just never makes it in, and is repressed.

Women have had a glimmer of historical memory–from their grandmothers or great grandmothers. But it is nowhere in our church manuals. No one talks about it.

One of the greatest contributions that Mormon feminists made in the 1970s is that they undertook a huge process of historical recovery. A woman named Susan Kohler found, in Harvard’s Widener Library, the entire archives of the 19th century newspaper The Exponent. Laurel Thatcher Ulrich, who is now a Pulitzer Prize-winning historian at Harvard, recalls that discovery. She says, “We realized that these women were saying in the 1870s things we were just starting to think in the 1970s.”

How widely known is this history today?

It depends on who you ask. Just a few weeks ago, the Church released an essay online acknowledging the history of women in priesthood, and [another essay] acknowledging Heavenly Mother. And they did so deriving from work done by feminist historians. Even 20 years ago, when I was a student at BYU, talking about Heavenly Mother was taboo. A BYU professor, Gail Houston, was fired, effectively, for acknowledging in public that she had prayed to Heavenly Mother.

People are more familiar with these issues than they were five years ago. But many are really not aware of the depth of Mormon history on these issues.

Did the Internet help?

The movement in the Church in the 1930s, ’40s, and ’50s was to manage Mormons’ information and knowledge through a hierarchical chain of command. The Internet has created this terrific open-access horizontality. The knowledge is now available. Episodes of history that had been disowned or repressed are now out in the open for people to reckon with. There is no putting the genie back in the bottle—including on gender issues.