In seeking coverage under the Affordable Care Act, many Ohioans -- to borrow from the writer Graham Greene -- must embark on a journey without maps, thanks to a state government that seems of two minds about the new law.

Republican Gov. John Kasich wants to use part of the federal act to expand Medicaid in Ohio despite the opposition of GOP bitter-enders in the General Assembly. The latter seem to forget that the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the Affordable Care Act. They also forget Ohioans have twice now voted to make, and keep, Barack Obama, the Affordable Care Act’s prime mover, president.

Also to Kasich’s credit, he has deployed what is probably the best health-care policy team an Ohio governor has fielded. To cite just one example, Kasich’s administration on Tuesday premiered a new website, Benefits.Ohio.Gov, which can help Ohioans learn if they might be eligible for Medicaid or should shop for coverage in the new marketplace. Tuesday’s rollout is phase one of a new self-service Ohio Benefits portal and Integrated Eligibility system devised by Kasich’s Office of Health Transformation and the state Medicaid Department.

Still, Kasich -- the governor who wants to expand Medicaid, using the Affordable Care Act -- refused the chance to set up an Ohio insurance exchange, as also authorized by the act. Ohioans instead must resort to a federal exchange, though Ohio Republicans usually claim that government that’s closest to voters -- state and local government -- is the best government.

Meanwhile, the state Insurance Department, led by Kasich’s lieutenant governor, suburban Akron Republican Mary Taylor, seemingly wants as little as possible to do with the Affordable Care Act. Taylor has all but prophesied that the law won’t work. Still, Tuesday afternoon her department approved the Ohio Association of Foodbanks’ application to operate a navigator program; the association thanked “Taylor and [her] department’s dedicated staff for their consideration [and] hard work.”

Also as of Tuesday, if an Ohioan squinted, he or she could find on the Insurance Department’s website, in a column headed “Featured Links,” a “Federal Health Reform FAQ” tab. That "Frequently Asked Questions" tab offers a link to the federal exchange, but not much else.

About our editorials Plain Dealer editorials express the view of the Plain Dealer editorials express the view of the editorial board -- the publisher, editor and editorial-writing staff. As is traditional, editorials are unsigned and intended to be seen as the voice of the newspaper. • Talk about the topic of this editorial in the comments below. • Send a letter to the editor, which will be considered for print publication. • Email general questions or comments about the editorial board to Elizabeth Sullivan, opinion director for the Northeast Ohio Media Group.

For their part, earlier this year, Ohio’s Republican-run General Assembly made Affordable Care Act implementation unnecessarily complex. With votes from some of the legislature’s Democrats, the Ohio House and state Senate passed Substitute House Bill 3. The measure requires certification, by the state government, of Affordable Care Act “navigators” – people who’ll offer consumer-friendly information to Ohioans shopping for coverage in the health insurance marketplaces (exchanges) that the act creates.

There are several salient points to consider about House Bill 3. First, Congress, when in 2010 it passed the Affordable Care Act, required federal certification of navigators. Congress did not, however, require the states to certify navigators. House Bill 3 does so anyway, though Republicans always claim they favor less regulation, not more. In effect, House Bill 3 makes prospective Ohio navigators clear more hurdles than necessary.

Second, House Bill 3 forbids hospitals to be navigators if (as virtually all do) they receive payments (for example, for patient care) from health insurers. Yet next to insurers themselves, it’s difficult to imagine which Ohio enterprises could know more about health insurance coverage (and gaps) than hospitals. Meanwhile, the Kasich administration declined to apply for a federal consumer assistance grant that could have provided Ohioans with more navigators than it will likely have without the grant.

Yes, the Affordable Care Act is overly complex. That’s because Obama, to get any meaningful law passed, agreed to work with America’s insurance lobbies rather than seek a single-payer mechanism. It’s just as fair to say that political enemies of the president, and of the act, would rather magnify and maximize its complexity to discredit him -- and it. That is, partisans, to score debating points, want to put consumers in a crossfire, rather than serve them.

Trying to sabotage the law -- and it is the law of the land -- by slowing its implementation, failing to provide adequate consumer guidance, currying fear in the public or making it harder for those tasked with "navigating" average people through the sign-up process shows a pettiness and lack of concern for the taxpaying public that are truly shocking. It is time that Ohio came together to make sure that its citizens who need health insurance understand they now have the chance to obtain it, and that they also know how to go about doing so.