Topics: From the Wires, News

NEW YORK (AP) — In New York City, there’s no escaping the pressure to be taller and thinner — not even for the skyscrapers.

Changes in building technology and materials in recent years have made it possible to build slender towers that are among the tallest in the world. And some of these cloud-puncturing beanstalks are poised to transform the city’s iconic skyline.

So far, the thinnest of all is the recently completed apartment tower at 432 Park Ave. The stark white pillar, just south of Central Park, is 1,396 feet tall, but each side is only about 93 feet wide.

That’s higher than the Empire State Building, but only as wide as the length of a basketball court.

Plans are in place for another tower just a few blocks away that could be the skinniest skyscraper in the world. The tower, at 111 W. 57th St., would be about 1,400 feet tall and under 60 feet wide.

Those tiny footprints are a sharp departure from supertall skyscrapers of the past. The base of the Empire State Building, for example, occupies an entire city block.

“It’s a combination of advancements that allows us to build,” said Ahmad Rahimian, USA Director of Building Structures at WSP Parsons Brinckerhoff, an engineering firm that’s worked on these kinds of projects.

He pointed to high-strength steel and concrete, unavailable a couple of decades ago, which can support higher levels of stress; advances in computing that allows for better modeling and building simulations; and advancements in damping devices, like weights, springs and pendulums which counteract swinging. Damping systems are used in supertall buildings to help control how the structures move with the wind to make it more comfortable for the people inside.

Better engineering alone isn’t driving the race for thinner towers. In New York City, these days, there is very little land available for building. Buying up a whole block for a huge skyscraper could be prohibitively expensive.

“This is pretty unique to what’s happening in New York right now,” said Antony Wood, executive director of the Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat, a group that studies and promotes tall buildings.