Welcome to Capital Health Care, an early-morning email full of scoops and storylines that will inform the daily conversation in New York among health-industry insiders and high-information consumers. Sign up for our morning newsletters here.

SETTLED -– SUNY officials have reached an agreement with labor unions and community advocates that paves the way for the state to unload LICH. The unions and community groups will drop all charges of contempt and end any threats of litigation. In exchange, SUNY will rewrite and reopen the RFP, calling for new offers to take over the hospital. The settlement also allows SUNY to begin laying off staff at the hospital, which has had more than 1,400 employees despite only having about two dozen admitted patients. Full details of the settlement will be released today. http://capi.tl/1oXE1X0

THE TAKEAWAY -- SUNY agreed to reopen the RFP for only three weeks. That was important to SUNY because LICH is costing $13 million per month. In exchange for the very small window, the community groups will finally have a seat at the table. The new RFP will be heavily tilted toward medical services, according to two sources familiar with negotiations. Also, look for language that allows the community groups some type of voting power when the new proposals are scored. The question on the table: Is three weeks enough time for a new bidder to consider LICH, or will we end up with the same four developers offering essentially the same proposals?

RED HANDED -– A former Empire State Development Corporation employee violated state ethics laws by seeking state grants for a private health care company. S. Helen Daniels, former director of the ESDC’s Affirmative Action Unit, admitted that in 2009 she entered into a $15,000 contract with CarePath, a now-defunct New York City-based health care software company, according to a state press release. She agreed to pay a $5,000 fine as part of a settlement with the Joint Commission on Public Ethics. The contract called for Daniels to help CarePath obtain state grants and contracts. Here is a copy of the settlement: http://bit.ly/1fl4f1r

NOW WE KNOW –- Money makes parenting less meaningful, according to an article published in the Journal of Experimental Social Psychology. And it's not just having cash, the authors say. Just thinking about money diminishes the meaning people derive from parenting. That's because if you have lots and lots of money, the menial tasks of parenting just don't seem as exciting. The effects were found to be greater in moms than in dads. http://bit.ly/1bpINZM

WE'D LOVE TO HEAR FROM YOU: This roundup is for you so please tell us how we can make it even better. Send tips, news, ideas, calendar items, releases, promotions, job postings, birthdays, congratulations, criticisms and corrections to dgoldberg@capitalnewyork.com.

WANT MORE HEALTH CARE INFO THROUGHOUT THE DAY? Get bite-size “whiteboard" alerts that focus specifically on health care issues sent directly to your inbox. Please contact Lauren Englander at lenglander@capitalnewyork.com to learn more.

STATE GRANTS -– The New York State Health Foundation has awarded more than $400,000 to community-based organizations across the state as part of the National Diabetes Prevention Program. The goal of the program is to help people with prediabetes reduce their risk of developing diabetes through community intervention.

UNPROTECTED – Metro reports that the city's health department conducted a survey and found that the majority of New Yorkers continue to have sex without using a condom. The lowest rate of use, 14.2 percent, was found in Greenpoint, the article said. The highest rate of condom use, 43.3 percent, was in Central Harlem. The survey found that only 31.8 percent of sexually-active New Yorkers used condoms the last time they had sex, in line with numbers that have been documented for more than a decade. http://bit.ly/1jNYt8W

CALENDAR –-Sunday marks the beginning of National Eating Disorders Awareness Week. This year's theme is "I Had No Idea," meant to raise awareness toward the significant impact eating disorders have on individuals, families, and communities across the nation. http://bit.ly/OeNTxY

ICD-10 WATCH -– CMS has agreed to perform end-to-end testing, readying itself for ICD-10 implementation, which is a good thing, but does not go far enough, according to many in the medical community. MGMA urged CMS to “expand the scope of this testing approach to include any provider who wishes to test with them, as well as quickly disseminating results from all Medicare and Medicaid testing efforts.” The testing will take place in early March, which means it won't be long before we have at least a partial sense of how well this will work.

… MedPage Today is highlighting some of the sillier codes found in ICD-10, such as V97.33XD, which doctors should use for all subsequent encounters with patients who have been sucked into a jet engine. http://bit.ly/NeCygd

GET YOUR GOVERNMENT HANDS OFF —- House and Senate Republicans are demanding the Obama administration withdraw a rule overhauling Medicare Part D, according to Politico. “[F]ailure to reject this rule will force Congress to evaluate all legislative options necessary to ensure seniors are protected,” wrote Senate Finance Committee ranking member Orrin Hatch, Energy and Commerce Chairman Fred Upton and Ways and Means Chairman Dave Camp. The letter: http://1.usa.gov/1dRBJEt

WHAT WE'RE READING –- The New York Times magazine piece explaining how Obamacare will unlock jobs. “A Harvard Business School study in 2008 estimated that 11 million workers are affected by (job lock). Other studies show that when people don’t have to worry about health insurance, they are up to 25 percent more likely to change jobs. Obamacare was designed, in part, to fix this inefficiency in the labor market, and thanks to that association, job lock has become a political lightning rod.” http://nyti.ms/1mx1O16



MAKING ROUNDS –- Michael Fagan is now senior vice president of government relations and communications at Health Republic Insurance of New York. He was deputy commissioner of communications and community affairs at the New York City Administration for Children's Services. Fagan is joined by Chris Keeley who will be vice president of government affairs. Keeley was the political and communications director at Community Voices Heard. Bill Abrams is the new director of communications at Health Republic. He was formerly the director of communications for Centers Plan for Healthy Living.

TWEET DU JOUR –- NIH Budget (is) $30.9 billion. Facebook is paying $19 billion for an app. (h/t Dr. C. Michael Gibson)

BILL TRACKER -– Check out Capital's bill tracker, a daily guide to the flow of the New York state Legislature. http://capi.tl/1aqE6OB

TODAY'S TIP –- Comes to us from NYU Langone Medical Center which offers us this “health tip for Heart Month: Stop stressing! When you feel stressed, you may forget to eat well and exercise.”

STUDY THIS:

-RISKY BUSINESS –- CCNY psychologist Margaret Rosario has a new article in the American Journal of Public Health, which finds that LGBT youth are more likely to engage in cancer-causing behaviors. "Sexual minorities are at risk for cancer later in life, I suggest, from a host of behaviors that begin relatively early in life," Rosario said in a press release. "No sex or ethnic racial group is at greater risk or protected for these behaviors. Overall, the study underscores the need for early interventions."

http://bit.ly/1haXSMK

-POSSIBLE VACCINE –- Researchers at Rutgers University have modeled the structure of a hepatitis C surface protein, which they believe could assist in the development of a vaccine. The study published Wednesday in Nature shows how the virus evades the immune system. Rutgers researchers believe that by identifying the virus' outer protein, scientists might be able to develop a vaccine that targets the immune system to vulnerable regions of the virus in order to prevent infection. http://bit.ly/1mu3icz