4153447

Yes, President Barack Obama’s signature initiative, the Affordable Care Act, may be deeply unpopular and, yes, his foreign policy could be construed as a deeply unserious muddle.

Without question, though, the Obama project that has infuriated American parents and students most of all is the first lady’s dedication to “smaller and healthier” school lunches. The first lady’s lunch regime, they say, just doesn’t provide enough food.

The latest outbreak of famished frustration has come via Twitter, notes CBS DC. Here are some examples:

All we get for lunch today. Thank you Michelle Obama pic.twitter.com/1rACNXM9aP — . (@BradyJustice2) March 12, 2014

@MichelleObama so this is the “healthy school lunch”… pic.twitter.com/qgxL5ez9zh — Tyler Clements (@TylerClements6) April 3, 2014

@MichelleObama my school lunch while eating with my daughter. Only other choice was a scoop of salad. This is sad! pic.twitter.com/5iPvg2nsAa — Megan Howell (@Howelady) March 14, 2014

Under the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act, participating schools must provide lunches – including free or reduced price lunches – with minimum amounts of fresh fruits, fresh vegetables and whole grains. Also, the Hunger-Free Kids Act boasts calorie caps.

Under the program, students can only have one serving of meat or other protein. Servings of carbohydrates such as potatoes are limited. The bread is different. The milk has less fat than some kids are used to at home.

On the plus side, students can eat as many fruits and vegetables as they want.

Schools don’t have to participate in Michelle Obama’s signature 2010 child nutrition legislation, but they get federal subsidies if they do.

An eruption of aggravation about the state of school lunches in the Obama era is never far away. The most memorable one thus far occurred back in August when the stout denizens of Harlan County, Ky. came together at a school board meeting to discuss how kids were complaining about the Obama lunch fare.

“They say it tastes like vomit,” school board member Myra Mosley declared at a contentious board meeting. (RELATED: Kentucky students to first lady Michelle Obama: Your food ‘tastes like vomit’)

“Kids can’t learn when they’re hungry!” one parent angrily agreed.

Follow Eric on Twitter and on Facebook, and send education-related story tips to [email protected].