The Democratic National Committee is celebrating the Affordable Care Act's sixth birthday with events in key 2016 swing states, hoping to capitalize on sign-up gains from the last two years. | AP Photo DNC marks Obamacare anniversary in swing states

The Democratic National Committee is using Obamacare’s sixth anniversary to stage events in key battleground states, many of which have seen enrollment numbers balloon despite Republicans’ hostility to the law.

The group is hoping to capitalize on sign-up gains seen nationwide over the past two years to demonstrate that Obamacare has widespread appeal and Republicans are waging a misguided crusade to take health insurance away from millions of people. In an effort that began Wednesday and is continuing Thursday, the DNC is holding news conferences and media calls, as well as deploying surrogates to talk up the law in a dozen states. They include Arizona, Florida, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, Nevada, New Mexico, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Virginia and Wisconsin.

Story Continued Below

The effort comes as new polling says health care is still a top issue for voters in the presidential election. According to a Kaiser Family Foundation tracking poll released Wednesday, health care outranks issues such as immigration and government spending. Democrats and women especially tend to say health care is “extremely important” to their vote for president.

The Obama administration says 20 million people have obtained health insurance as a result of the law, with many purple states seeing the largest gains.

Florida saw the highest enrollment through an Obamacare health insurance exchange of any state in the country, with 1.7 million people signing up for coverage this year. More than 600,000 people enrolled in North Carolina, and more than 400,000 signed up in Pennsylvania and Virginia.

Democrats recently touted the law's coverage gains in Wisconsin, where Gov. Scott Walker, a former Republican presidential candidate, refused to help implement the law. President Barack Obama traveled to Milwaukee earlier this month to highlight the ACA after the city won a nationwide Obamacare enrollment contest.

"This law is improving lives and it’s time for Republicans to work with Democrats to improve our healthcare system instead of sitting on the sidelines and throwing bricks," DNC spokesman Eric Walker said in a statement to POLITICO. “Republicans have unsuccessfully fought this law on the campaign trail, in Congress, and in the courts — all in an effort to take healthcare away from millions of Americans."

Yet, the health care law hasn’t been able to shake its unpopular reputation. The latest Kaiser poll finds that 47 percent of Americans have an unfavorable view of the law, compared to 41 percent who give it a positive rating. Views have largely been consistent over the past six years.

Opponents of the law also marked Obamacare's anniversary — naturally, in different terms. In an op-ed, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell railed against the law's "broken promises."

"It’s past time for Democrats to face up to the pain and failure their law has created," he wrote. "Americans are living with the consequences of this broken law and its broken promises every day. That’s why middle-class families continue to call for a bridge to real health reform and better care."

Obama signed the Affordable Care Act into law on March 23, 2010.