A judge in Baton Rouge will rule early next week whether MoveOn.org must take down a capital area billboard critical of Gov. Bobby Jindal's decision not to accept Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act.

During a hearing in the Middle District Court of Louisiana in Baton Rouge on Wednesday (April 2), U.S. District Court Judge Shelly Dick said she planned to rule on the case early next week. According to MoveOn.org Executive Director Anna Galland, Dick wasn't ready to rule after the nearly two-hour hearing Wednesday.

Louisiana Lt. Gov. Jay Dardenne filed the federal suit in mid-March, requesting the national liberal organization take down the billboard critical because it mimics the state's multi-million tourism ad campaign. MoveOn.org has said it will not take down the billboard, or related Internet and TV ads, because they are protected under free speech law and past parody rulings.

"We made it clear that MoveOn will not back down to Republican bullying," Galland said after Wednesday's hearing. "We are confident of our case on the merits, and look forward to the judge's decision early next week. In the meantime, our billboard stays up and our campaign calling out Republicans who are standing between five million Americans and health care through Medicaid continues."

The billboard, erected near the I-10 coming into Baton Rouge from Port Allen in early March, criticizes Jindal for forgoing the Medicaid expansion option available to states under the Affordable Care Act. Mimicking the look of Louisiana's multi-million dollar tourism campaign, the billboard states, "LOU!SIANA Pick your passion! But hope you don't love your health. Gov. Jindal's denying Medicaid to 242,000 people."

On Wednesday, the lieutenant governor's office declined comment until Dick's ruling comes down next week. But Dardenne has said his office has a right to defend proper use of the state's tourism service mark, and has made clear Baton Rouge-based attorney Dale Baringer will take on the case free of charge.

MoveOn.org's billboard and related TV ads criticizing Jindal's Medicaid policies are part of a nationwide campaign against governors who chose not to accept the expansion available under Obamacare. Similar efforts have been launched in Wisconsin, Virginia, Texas, Nebraska and Florida.

Louisiana is the only one of these states to file legal action against the organization.

. . . . . .