It’s a story any novelist would be eager to claim: Michael, a struggling writer, broods in his rented apartment in an unfashionable part of Brooklyn. Researching a post for his lowly temporary position as blogger for the Washington Post, he downloads a book by the successful Jonah.

Like Malcolm Gladwell, Jonah writes bestselling tales of uplift based upon recent discoveries in the social sciences. Michael reads Jonah’s account of Bob Dylan’s struggles with creative inspiration, complete with quotes from the singer. But to Michael, a Dylan fan, the quotes seem off. Michael e-mails Jonah about Dylan’s words. Jonah replies, rather high-handedly: He’s on vacation and can’t access his files. Would Michael be able to wait 10 days? And by the way, the quotes came from Dylan’s manager.

The Javert-like Michael pores through every interview Dylan has ever given and finally reaches Dylan’s manager: No, Dylan never said that. In the electronic back-and-forth, and as his lies and fabrications become clearer, Jonah’s manner changes from superior to ingratiating to pleading. Michael knows that if he publishes, he will ruin Jonah. He hesitates, until he comes across an article about Jonah’s purchase of a multimillion-dollar house. Enraged, he sends the story.

Jonah is disgraced — writers comb through his works seeking journalistic misdeeds. Attempting to rehabilitate himself, Jonah gives a speech at a foundation. It is a self-serving and evasive mea culpa couched in the language of social sciences. Out of a sense of innovation, or perhaps hidden sadism, the foundation not only live-streams the event but erects screens showing a live Twitter feed with reactions to Jonah’s speech. The tweets are savagely and uniformly negative. In real time, Jonah and the audience witness his final ruin.

Jonah Lehrer’s real-life story of electronic downfall is one of several told in Jon Ronson’s fascinating and trenchant “So You’ve Been Publicly Shamed.” Ronson, a nonfiction writer and documentary filmmaker, explores the resurgence of public shaming and its connection to the rise of social media.

Persuasively, Ronson compares the old-style public shamings: pilloring, whipping, executions, to the new-style: trolling, flaming and other forms of cyber-bullying. At least the old-style shamings had the virtue of directnessI suppose when shamings are delivered like remotely administered drone strikes nobody needs to think about how ferocious our collective power might be.

Take the case of Justine Sacco, who tweets in an airport on a layover to Cape Town: “Going to Africa. Hope I don’t get AIDS. Just kidding. I’m white!” Crude and insensitive words, but hardly a justification for what follows. A journalist picks up her tweet and by the time her plane touches down, she is ruined.

“So You’ve Been Publicly Shamed” charts the emergence of a new social reality that behaves like an older one. Closed-circuit cameras and I-Phones have radically shrunk our privacy and can arbitrarily turn anyone into a universal figure of ridicule and hatred. Social media’s toxic combination of convenience, anonymity and a wide, instantaneous public forum has succeeded in bringing out the worst in human nature.

Ronson looks everywhere for explanations for our group behavior: in the work of 19th-century sociologist Gustave LeBon, in the notorious Stanford Prison Experiment. What he settles on as both explanation and metaphor on is something unexpected: those innocuous yet effective Your Speed digital signs you see everywhere: for Ronson, Your Speed signs, which give the same information available on your speedometer, offer, like social media, a “feedback loop” that instantly confirms what you already know.

As a friend tells Ronson, “Social Media is becoming ‘a giant echo chamber where what we believe is constantly reinforced by people who believe the same thing.’ “

NONFICTION: RUIN

“So You’ve Been Publicly Shamed”

by Jon Ronson (Riverhead Books)