Chris Dawson married his childhood sweetheart Lynette

Lynette went missing, another girl moves in

Disappearance remains a mystery

Lynette's family is still seeking answers

HE WAS a handsome football star and part-time model, but behind closed doors he was a violent control freak with a frightening temper.

At first, Chris Dawson charmed everyone - the childhood sweetheart he married, her family and the schoolgirls he taught and seduced.

But when he moved a 16-year-old student into the family home and then his wife vanished, the truth emerged about how he was a cruel abusive man.

A decade on from when a NSW Coroner recommended charges be laid in the mysterious disappearance of Lynette Joy Dawson, her family is still seeking answers.

The missing woman's sister Pat Jenkins and brother, Greg Simms, appear on Channel Ten's Wanted at 8.30pm on Thursday, September 26.

On the program, I recount some of the chilling moments from the inquest, at which Mr Dawson declined to appear.

The story of Lynette Dawson's disappearance began with disturbing revelations about the unravelling of her marriage.

By 1981, Lynette had two young daughters with Mr Dawson, who with his twin brother Paul had played football for the Newtown Jets club.

Lynette, a nurse, appeared to turn a blind eye to the fact her husband was having an affair with 16-year-old Joanne Curtis - one of several girls he seduced at the school where he was the PE teacher - until Mr Dawson decided to move her into the family home.

Ms Curtis gave evidence she had "nowhere else to go" after problems she encountered with her mother's new partner.

Investigating detective, Damian Loone, told the inquest both the Dawson brothers had sexual intercourse with Ms Curtis.

When Ms Curtis swam topless in the Dawson family pool, Lynette began to suspect an affair.

"Lyn confronted me," she admitted to the court, "[saying] 'you've been taking liberties with my husband'."

In front of his teenager lover, Mr Dawson began to chip away at his wife's confidence.

"He was very cold and used to sing songs to her that had double meanings, that he didn't care about her and that she was physically unattractive," Ms Curtis told the hearing.

"Just digging away at her. Just singing songs that were to wear her down."

One one occasion around that time, Ms Curtis accompanied Mr Dawson to a Sydney hotel.

Wearing her school uniform, she waited in the car for his return.

"When he came back he told me, 'I wanted to get a hit man to kill Lyn, but I couldn't do it because innocent people would be killed,'," she said.

On the evening of Friday, January 8, 1982, Lynette spoke on the phone with her mother, who was surprised to hear her daughter, who hardly consumed alcohol, sounding "a bit sozzled".

As told to Australian Story in 2003, Lynette said on the phone, "my husband has poured me a lovely drink".

That was the last contact Lynette had with her family.

Days later, Ms Curtis moved into the Dawson home and subsequently married her lover.

Her wedding ring was made from the engagement and wedding rings which had last been seen on Lynette's finger.

Detective Sergeant Loone told the inquest that he believed Lynette was murdered and her body disposed of between 9pm on Friday, January 8, and 8am on Saturday, January 9, 1982.

Her family never stopped looking for her and, until her death, Lynette's mother never stopped hoping she was still alive.

Outside the inquest, emotional scenes unfolded at Westmead Coroner's Court, with Ms Curtis weeping as she was embraced by Lynette's uncles, aunts and cousins.

They had heard evidence about Ms Curtis's life with Mr Dawson after Lynette's disappearance - how he told her what to wear, whether she was permitted to go out, who she was allowed to meet and how she was forbidden to make friends with a soul.

"Lynette's life was sacrificed, but he gave Joanne a dog's life," one relative said, "I bear no malice towards her."

"We didn't realise Joanne had nowhere else to go," Lynette's aunt, Lee Fletcher said. "At the beginning we ... couldn't anticipate [Lynette] wasn't coming back.

"For years out minds were in turmoil, but my mother believed Chris. He was part of our family.

"He was just so gorgeous, of course you believed him."

But another relative said "behind closed doors he was a monster, a domineering control freak".

Deputy coroner Carl Milovanovich recommended murder charges be laid against a "known person", however no case was taken forward by the Director of Public Prosecutions.

###