On Monday's New Day on CNN, anchor Chris Cuomo complained about Republicans wanting to defund Planned Parenthood as he questioned the "urgency" of doing so "before you investigate the allegations," leading guest and former House Majority Leader Eric Cantor to decry the "grotesque" revelations about the abortion provider.



During a discussion of House Speaker John Boehner's announced resignation and the impact it could have on whether there is a government shutdown as Republicans try to defund Planned Parenthood, Cuomo fretted:

But this Planned Parenthood stuff that's going on -- by the way, does it make sense to you that there's this urgency to defund before you investigate the allegations?

Cantor responded:

Well, I mean, I think they're pretty apparent. I don't know what you need to invest -- I mean, investigate -- when you see the videos of dismemberment of fetuses and then going off to try and talk about selling some of the parts. I mean, that's just really grotesque and it's-

The CNN anchor then asserted that some of the video is "highly doubtful" as he defended the abortion provider:

I totally get that perception, but you know that the video that shows, you know, that baby that Carly Fiorina talked about is highly, highly doubtful, in terms of its authenticity. You know that these people who are speaking on there, taking everything they say as the truth, you still got to investigate. You still are dealing with a handful of people that are now going to reflect the funding of an entire institution.

After Cantor argued against tax dollars going to a group that funds abortions, Cuomo then tried to suggest that tax dollars do not really have an impact on bolstering Planned Parenthood's ability to perform abortions:

CHRIS CUOMO: Technically, they don't go there. You know this better than anybody. Abortions are not what they take money for.



ERIC CANTOR: Sure, but in the end, de facto, money is fungible. We all understand how that works. So, de facto yes, the money is going to benefit those who are performing those procedures. Again, I think this is a question that is unequivocal. The President disagrees.

Below is a transcript of the relevant portion of the Monday, September 28, New Day on CNN, from 8:54 a.m.: