Somerset County 4-H volunteer Judy Hennessy recipient of the governor's award-horse person of the year

Judy Hennessy receives the Governor's Award for Horse Person of the Year. Left to right: Dr. Carey Williams, RCE Equine Specialist; NJ Secretary of Agriculture Doug Fisher; Judy Hennessey; Carol Ward, Somerset County 4-H Agent (Photo: Photo Courtesy of the Somerset County 4-H) Story Highlights Judy Hennessy was recognized for her volunteer contributions within Somerset County 4-H and the state.

Hennessy has been with the program for nearly 40 years

Hennessy is a very active member on the State Horse Shown subcommittee and the 4-H horse project advisory council

She has help coach the News Jersey State Hippology team for more than 10 years

The New Jersey Equine Advisory Board selected Somerset County resident Judy Hennessy to be the recipient of the Governor’s Award - Horse Person of the Year.

The award was presented at a private event on Jan. 24 in Burlington County. On hand to present the award was New Jersey Secretary of Agriculture Doug Fisher. Hennessy was recognized for her volunteer contributions to equine educational programs within Somerset County 4-H and the state. Hennessy has been with the program for nearly 40 years.

While her occupation is secretary for a local equine veterinary clinic, her passion has always been horses as well as helping children and teens discover their passion for horses.

Hennessy’s involvement in Somerset County 4-H goes back to the 1970s. Her leadership in Somerset County 4-H began when her son, Kevin, joined the 4-H Cloverbud/Prep Club. It was there that she held her first leadership position. For 38 years she has been a club leader with the Chaps ‘n Spurs 4-H Horse club. In addition to her club work, Hennessy works weekly with members of all the Somerset horse clubs to prepare them for state competitions.

Her work with Somerset County youth has impacted thousands with some even coming back to serve as adult volunteers and club leaders themselves. She has also dedicated her time to working with youth with learning disabilities.

“Without her positive influence on their lives, these youth most likely would have lead troubled lives, but instead they are contributing members of our society,” Somerset County 4-H Agent Carol Ward said.

Hennessy’s contributions to the county extend far beyond working with Somerset 4-H clubs. Her knowledge of horses has also led her to help coach the New Jersey State Hippology Team for more than 10 years. She works tirelessly raising funds for the various national competitions in which the team competes, such as the Eastern National Round Up in Louisville, Kentucky. She is also an active member on the State Horse Show subcommittee and the 4-H Horse Project Advisory Council, which advises 4-H Staff about horse events as well as help to coordinate all the various aspects of these events.

The 4-H Youth Development Program is part of Rutgers New Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station -Cooperative Extension, 4-H educational programs are offered to all youth, grades K-13, on an age-appropriate basis For additional information, contact somersetcounty4h@co.somerset.nj.us or nj4h.rutgers.edu.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1Ti4L5k