HHS student takes on independent study

It was a very cold morning last December just as the sun rose that Hudson High School students Alex Lien and Taylor Beckman planted the first seeds for a native prairie on the east side of the high school.

Hudson Middle School sixth-grade students helped plant the HHS prairie that should be growing well by the time they become students at Hudson High School. Pictured are, from left, Sammi Lien, Nick McCarthy and Renee Nelson.

It isn’t often that you hear of a high school student who goes looking for more to study but that’s what Hudson High School junior Taylor Beckman did last fall when she undertook an independent study under the guidance of science teacher Cindy Landers.

Beckman, a junior, said she likes to visit the school forest and came up with the idea for an independent study out of her interest in what goes on there.

Landers was enthusiastic when she was approached by Beckman and together the two devised a semester of study that involved both research and hands-on experience. They also ended up reaching beyond the school to partner with Wisconsin DNR Wildlife Biologist Missy Sparrow-Lien on a project that will be around long after Beckman graduates.

Under Landers’ supervision and with assistance from Sparrow-Lien, Beckman undertook the planning, organizing and some of the planting for a rain garden on the east side of Hudson High School. The project involved evaluation of the soil, research into what native species would be best for the site and planting seed that would not only bring runoff water back into the water table but also provide a place for pollinators like bees and butterflies to gather nectar.

Beckman’s independent study involved five different projects. She began her prairie woodland project by drawing a plan and then researched what seed would work best. Despite the snow, Beckman and Sparrow-Lien along with Sparrow’s son, were on campus just at dawn one cold morning to spread the seed. Beckman said she learned that the snow sucks the seed into the wet soil as it melts. They will do a second seeding this spring. The fruit of their labor will likely not be very visible until several years after Beckman graduates but it will be something of a legacy to leave behind.

In addition to planting the prairie seeds and establishing the rain garden in the area, Beckman also researched trees that have or will be planted on the west side of the campus. She also classified mushrooms that can be found in the school forest.

In addition to her hands-on work, Beckman wrote several papers for her class including one entitled “HHS Woodland” and “HHS Prairie.” She also wrote about the benefits of “Compost Tumblers at HHS.” It seems the school lunchroom creates about 9,000 gallons of water in fruit and vegetables every week and the current composting receptacles are inadequate to handle the job. She makes several suggestions about how to address the “overflow” including the purchase of additional tumblers.

Beckman also created a power point about eco-tourism in Costa Rica which she plans to follow up on a trip to the country this summer to classify birds that migrate there from Wisconsin.

She is not certain about a career yet but she said nature and preserving a healthy environment will always be of interest to her.

Beckman is also an artist and is hoping that she can do an art independent study before she leaves HHS. The experience of her first independent has shown her that she is capable of both designing and managing learning on her own, especially with help from teachers like Landers and experts like Sparrow-Lien.