Our 155,000 combined followers on Twitter ( click here for that ) and on Facebook ( then click here to subscribe to that ) know that on weekday afternoons we regularly share a selection of that evening’s late-night jokes before broadcast. Usually, we publish a collection of these and other jokes early each week.

Letterman: Obama says the ObamaCare website has glitches. If a J. Crew pants order comes in the wrong color, that’s a glitch. ObamaCare is a Carnival Cruise.

Fallon: The U.S. was tapping the cellphone of Germany’s Angela Merkel for 10 years. At this point, the only world leader our government DOESNT listen to is President Obama.

Fallon: A reminder that Daylight Time ended this weekend. Or put another way, your microwave now has the right time on it again.

Fallon: A new brewery in Scotland makes the world’s strongest beer — 67% alcohol. All part of the plan to make Scottish people even harder to understand.

Letterman: Halloween was fun, wasn’t it? I love it. You open the door. There are strangers in masks. Great idea.

Letterman: Kanye West rented a stadium to pop the big question to Kim Kardashian: ‘Why are you famous?’ They haven’t picked a site yet for the divorce.

Fallon: A Texas man survives two lightning strikes on the same weekend. Said he’s grateful and credits his lucky metal hat.

Fallon: Syrian hackers targeted President Obama’s Twitter and Facebook accounts. Weird because Obama then hired them to fix the ObamaCare site.

Fallon: Katy Perry criticizes female singers who wear revealing outfits just to get attention. But Perry’s interviewer missed it, watching fireworks shot from her bra.

Conan: My 20th anniversary on late-night television. My Dad called me this morning and told me something he’s never said before, “Son—We don’t have cable.”

Leno: Good news for Kathleen Sebelius. ObamaCare will cover all of her injuries when Obama throws her under the bus soon.

Leno: ObamaCare. What a mess for President Obama. Remember when his worst embarrassment was Joe Biden?

Conan: The top Halloween costume this year was likely Miley Cyrus. Just a warning — I didn’t give candy to any kid who said, “Trick or Twerk.”

Letterman: The Statue of Liberty turned 127 years old the other day, and she’s still single. A gift from France. Came in crates. Important lesson in that: Never buy a statue from Ikea.

Letterman: When the Statue of Liberty arrived from France, Americans said, ‘Gee, thanks. Now, how about some of those fried potatoes?’

Letterman: Guess who’s out of prison? Dr. Conrad Murray. Sentenced to four years, served two. But they were both in the prison waiting room.

Fallon: A North Dakota woman gave an anti-candy note to trick-or-treaters this year. Kids were handing her a note back: “Toilet paper or eggs?”

Fallon: A Pennsylvania restaurant is selling a hamburger with deep-fried Twinkies for the bun. Asked what they thought after eating it, customers were dead.

Fallon: So the Winter Olympics are right around the corner, and this is cool — the U.S. Olympic team just announced that its new uniforms are all made in America, after the last uniforms were criticized for being made in China. Which got awkward when they realized the “Made in America” tags were actually made in China.

Fallon: A new study says 30% of Americans get most of their news on Facebook. Anchors now are trying to compete. Tonight Brian Williams’ top story was a picture of his cat.

Fallon: A flock of more than 50 ducks waddled into an upstate New York CVS after they triggered the auto-doors. Weirder, when one asked for the pregnancy tests.

Leno: A recent survey finds 11% of people admit to having sex while driving. That’s got to be awkward for the rest of the carpool.

Leno: A lot of people accuse President Obama of being untruthful. He called me and said I could keep my job if I liked it. Trouble is, I believed him.

Leno: President Obama didn’t know we spied on allies. He didn’t know about the ObamaCare problems. Now he says he doesn’t know how ‘Breaking Bad’ ended.

Letterman: You cant sign up for ObamaCare on a computer. But you know the Domino’s website? You can track your pizza’s progress? That’s working fine.

Letterman: New Zealand scientists have discovered a new species of dolphin. It’s very smart too. This dolphin predicted the Jonas Bros break-up.

Fallon: I hope everyone had Halloween fun that night. Stayed safe. And to everyone who gave out raisins, I say, ‘Go to hell!’

Letterman: So the ObamaCare website is still broken. They give you an 800-number now. I called it. Know what I did? I ordered a mattress.

Fallon: The FAA says airline passengers can start using laptops and iPads during takeoff and landing. In related news, everyone already was.

Fallon: The former director of the CIA, Robert Gates, has been nominated as new president of the Boy Scouts. He went from the CIA to the Boy Scouts. So don’t be surprised if you ask your little boy, “What’s your badge for?” And he says, “If I told you, I’d have to kill you.”

Leno: Boston was very excited over the Red Sox World Series win Wednesday night. Just crazy. People in Boston haven’t been that drunk since Tuesday night.

Leno: As every year, hospitals all over the U.S. are X-raying children’s Halloween candy. Unfortunately, thanks to ObamaCare, now there’s a $1,000 co-pay.

Leno: American kids seem to be getting fatter these days. On Halloween I opened the door and one kid was Batman AND Robin.

Fallon: The Obamas gave dried fruit to more than 5,000 kids for Halloween. In a related story, White House workers had to sweep up a lot of dried fruit outside.

Fallon: A new study says Americans are making healthier food choices nowadays. Then came Halloween and Thanksgiving. Then Christmas. And Americans were back to Square One.

Fallon: A new study says fruit has become the second most popular food in the U.S. The FIRST most popular food in the U.S.? NOT fruit.

Leno: A University of Oxford study says women with larger butts are smarter than women with smaller ones. So, guys, you know what to say the next time your woman asks if those pants make her butt look big. “No, they make you look really smart, hon, like a genius.”

RELATED:

The ObamaCare mess: No wonder Obama exempted himself

Preparing a 2016 run, Joe Biden launches his own website that doesn’t work

Expelled from Obama’s office, a Winston Churchill bust gets honored Capitol spot