Topics: Barack Obama, Books, Editor's Picks, John McCain, LGBT issues, Rick Warren, Same-sex marriage, Life News, News

Chicago was electric that night. As returns poured in on November 4, 2008, showing that Barack Obama would become the country’s first black president, not a cab could be found. People from every corner of the city streamed into Grant Park to get a glimpse of the man who had helped them find new hope in America.

“It’s been a long time coming,” President-elect Obama told the rapt crowd, “but tonight, because of what we did on this day, in this election, at this defining moment, change has come to America.”

Not for all. Across the nation a wildly different scene was beginning to unfold in the streets of San Francisco. Gay Californians and their allies who had spilled into the Castro to revel in Obama’s victory were learning that a majority of their fellow citizens had likely voted to strip same-sex couples of their marital rights. It wasn’t a right that had come easily.

San Francisco mayor Gavin Newsom had jump-started the state’s marriage equality movement when he ordered city clerks to start issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples on February 12, 2004. It was the first time in the history of the country that a mass of same-sex couples had an opportunity to get marriage licenses. Within the first three days, city officials had already performed nine hundred marriages. Expectant couples—many of whom had been together decades—pitched tents outside of City Hall in hopes of finally getting their turn to commit their lives to one another. Gift bouquets flooded in from across the country—ordered anonymously and delivered to happy couples that had just wed. Twenty-nine days and some four thousand marriages later, the California Supreme Court shut it down. By August, the high court had invalidated every single marriage that had been performed in what came to be known as the Winter of Love.

The following year, the state legislature became the first in the nation to pass a marriage equality bill after a nearly two-year push by LGBT advocates that ultimately succeeded when Latino and African American leaders threw their strong support behind it. But this achievement was just as short-lived; the bill was swiftly vetoed by Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger, who asserted that the courts should decide the matter. In 2007, the California legislature delivered a repeat performance after another sustained push by LGBT activists and gay lawmakers, but Schwarzenegger stonewalled again. When the issue finally did reach the state’s high court (which held a 6-to-1 majority of Republican appointees), it ruled 4 to 3 on May 15, 2008, that lesbians and gays did indeed have a constitutional right to marry.

But by the time the dust had settled from election night, the voters had reached a different conclusion by a margin of 52 to 48 percent. The number of states that performed legal same-sex marriages was summarily halved, leaving Massachusetts as the sole marriage equality state in the union. (A little over a week later, though, Connecticut would pick up where California left off as the state’s first same-sex couples began to wed following a Connecticut Supreme Court decision in October affirming their right to marry.)

As I tapped out an election-night story in the wee hours of the morning from my Chicago hotel room, news from the West Coast drama peppered my inbox. I wasn’t just any journalist that night; I was a journalist working for the LGBT news magazine The Advocate. This one was personal. And as I tried to reconcile Grant Park’s euphoria with the Castro’s heartbreak, I faced an uncomfortable truth: the culmination of one great movement was joyously settling into the soul of America just as another movement realized that the most fundamental piece of their humanity was still not welcome, even in a progressive stronghold like California.

Barack Obama had been central to both dramas.

*

THREE MONTHS EARLIER, Obama and his Republican rival, Senator John McCain, had agreed to appear at a two-hour forum with Evangelical Pastor Rick Warren at Saddleback Church in Orange County, California, a famously conservative enclave nestled against the southern coastline of a state that is arguably the most liberal in the union. The two presidential hopefuls were there for one reason: to woo the Christian vote. McCain’s rap as a moderate Republican widely distrusted by social conservatives had left a rare opening for Obama. If he could present as a moderate but devout Christian, he might shave a point or two from an influential voting bloc that had risen to prominence in the ’80s with the founding of the socially conservative advocacy groups the Moral Majority and later the Christian Coalition and had largely elude Democrats ever since.

Obama talked the talk: confirming he was a Christian and telling Warren that he was “redeemed” through his faith in Jesus Christ. That set up the question everyone was waiting for. Warren glanced down at his notes, then back up, settled his gaze squarely on the Democratic nominee for president and said simply, “Define marriage.”

Obama did not hesitate. “I believe that marriage is the union between a man and a woman. Now, for me as a Christian . . . ” he paused as the crowd’s eruption drowned his words. “For me as a Christian,” he continued, looking at Warren resolutely, “it’s also a sacred union. Ya know, God’s in the mix.”

Those thirty critical words became his most definitive and high-profile articulation on the matter that election. Warren, the celebrated author of “The Purpose Driven Life,” had served up the perfect platform, televised at a time when voter interest was revving up for the final few months of the ’08 campaign. Obama had to have practiced his response to the marriage question. It was sure to come up in the Evangelical forum and he and his political advisers had clearly concluded that appearing to waver on the issue would make him vulnerable at the polls. The sentiment echoed across the nation, but in California it had a nuclear effect.

Californians that fall faced two historic decisions: The first was whether to elect the nation’s first black president. The second was whether to prohibit same-sex marriages in the Golden State by passing a ballot measure known as Proposition 8.

The effort to pass “Prop 8” was launched in response to the California Supreme Court ruling earlier that year that same-sex couples had a constitutional right to marry. All told, Prop 8 became one of the nation’s most expensive ballot battles in history, with both sides sinking a combined $80 million-plus into its fate. Though twenty-eight other states had passed ballot initiatives restricting same-sex marriages, California’s measure stood apart because it actually took away rights that had already been granted by the state’s high court, immediately calling into question the validity of some eighteen thousand marriages that had taken place in a five-month legal window.

Obama’s answer to Warren’s inquiry ultimately provided the perfect weapon to anti-gay forces eager to overturn same-sex marriage. Golden State voters would overwhelmingly favor Obama over McCain, and Prop 8 supporters needed some of those Obama voters to defect on the question of marriage equality. They repurposed his pronouncement at Saddleback as the centerpiece of a robocall that targeted portions of the state. The narrator framed Obama’s declaration by telling voters it was the candidate’s definition of marriage “in his own words” and ending with, “Proposition 8 defines marriage as a union between a man and a woman. Vote ‘yes’ on 8 if you agree with that definition.”

The campaign by Prop 8 supporters worked; Obama won California by twenty-four points on election night, but marriage equality lost by four. The battle over Prop 8 and Obama’s complicity in its passage, however unwitting, marked the beginning of a complicated relationship between the LGBT community and President Obama. On the one hand, he believed himself to be a leader on issues of fairness and equality. On the other, he had willingly deployed an oft-repeated conservative trope about “traditional marriage” in pursuit of his ascension to the highest office in the land. To put it more bluntly, he had used bigotry as a stepping-stone to the presidency and, in so doing, had carelessly harmed LGBT Americans across the nation.

In 2008, it was one thing for politicians to support civil unions as an alternative to full marriage equality. All of Obama’s serious rivals for the Democratic nomination had taken similar positions. In fact, most LGBT Americans accepted the notion that the country wasn’t ready to elect a candidate who supported same-sex marriage. Obama’s charge was that although he didn’t support the freedom to marry, he did endorse providing the same legal rights and benefits to gay couples through civil unions that flowed to heterosexual couples through marriage. Those benefits—more than eleven hundred in total federally—included things as crucial as being eligible to visit one’s partner in a hospital, to get health coverage through a spouse’s employer, or to receive Social Security survivor benefits after a spouse has passed away. It was often a matter of life or death, financial solvency or hardship, and Obama made perfectly clear that these rights should be afforded to same-sex couples.