Mary Ann DeKing Planandcare.com provides consumers with information so they can start the education process. This allows people to include Long Term Care planning as part of their retirement plan.

A new website has been launched to help American consumers plan for the physical, emotional and financial burdens that Long Term Health Care places on family and loved ones. Mary Ann DeKing, regarded by many in the industry as the nation’s top Long Term Care Specialist, announced that her new website, http://www.planandcare.com, will provide consumers with information to help them start the process of Long Term Care planning.

“It can be very confusing trying to determine what options are available. Most consumers understand that health insurance (including plans under the Affordable Care Act) and Medicare (the government health insurance plan for those 65 and older) do not pay for a majority of Long Term Health Care costs. Medicaid is the medical welfare program and it only pays for care after a person exhausts a majority of their assets. What many Americans are unsure of is exactly what other choices for planning could be open to them,” DeKing said.

Planandcare.com provides consumers with information so they can start the education process. This allows people to include Long Term Care planning as part of their retirement plan. DeKing says that affordable Long Term Care insurance is just one of a number of solutions that could be available. A specialist, like DeKing, can help someone determine if they need a plan, health qualify for protection and then shop for the best coverage at the best value.

“Other products, such as Critical Care plans and life & annuity products with Long Term Care riders are also potential solutions. The first step is to educate yourself to discover what solutions best fit your individual situation,” DeKing said.

DeKing indicates that for most people, Long Term Care insurance will be the most affordable and comprehensive option. Unfortunately, many insurance agents do not understand how these products work or how they get used at the time of claim. In addition, she says every insurance company has different underwriting criteria and most insurance agents have trouble understanding these differences.

“Many insurance agents and financial advisors make errors in policy design and product selection. Very few insurance agents and financial advisors have the level of experience that top Long Term Care Specialists have in this field. It is key to work with a specialist in order to get the proper recommendations in terms of coverage and price,” DeKing said.

The American Association for Long Term Care Insurance recognizes DeKing as one of the nation’s top specialists. DeKing is routinely listed among the nation’s top 5 specialists and is her agencies number one specialist. She helps both individuals and companies find affordable Long Term Care solutions. Her new website, http://www.planandcare.com, has education sections for individuals and businesses plus a section on tax impact and recommended links for additional information.

Consumers can then get a personal education session to learn more and obtain plan design and costs. DeKing enables her client’s to see her computer screen as they, on the telephone, learn about their options and shop all the top companies to find the best coverage at the best value. This makes this very convenient and safe for the consumer.

DeKing says she helps people, primarily ages 40 to 70, who wish to plan for their future retirement so they can protect their assets and never be a burden on their family. She says Long Term Care insurance is affordable if designed correctly.

“The consumer watches my desktop on their own computer screen. I ask them questions in order to help me make the appropriate recommendations. If appropriate, I help design a suitable plan and we can make application electronically. There is no pressure just someone who can answer questions,” DeKing said.

DeKing said since insurance rates in Long Term Care are regulated, every agent uses the same rates for each insurance company.

“The main difference between me and someone else is my level of experience in Long Term Care, the fact I represent the top insurance companies and I can help people using this technology to make it simple, safe and convenient for the consumer,” DeKing added.

Consumers can also reach her by phone, (888) 778-2905 or email at maryanndeking(at)planandcare(dot)com.