They might as well call it magic.

One clinic’s website dubs platelet-rich plasma (PRP) therapy “revolutionary.” Other purveyors call it a “breakthrough” and “a paradigm shift.”

The treatment involves injecting concentrated platelets, taken from the patient’s own blood, into the site of injury to speed recovery, and stories of PRP’s use by high-profile athletes have turned it into a lucrative business.

Tennis star Maria Sharapova turned to it for a shoulder injury, and Hines Ward used it to overcome a knee injury in time to help the Pittsburgh Steelers win the 2009 Super Bowl. The PRP market was valued at $45 million in 2009, and it is expected to grow to $126 million by 2016.

Yet the question remains: Does it work? The evidence remains questionable.

In April, the Cochrane Collaborative, a group of independent medical experts, examined 19 trials of PRP for eight conditions and concluded that the evidence is insufficient to recommend PRP for soft-tissue injuries.

A PRP treatment begins with a blood draw from the patient. Next, the blood is spun to separate platelets from the other blood cells. The process creates a solution of concentrated platelets and growth factors that is injected into the injured area to promote healing.

“We don’t know if it helps people,” says Frederick Azar, president of the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons. “The clinical evidence is controversial.”

Some studies show a benefit, he says; some don’t.

The Cochrane review found that most studies are small and not definitive. The wide variety of methods used to deliver PRP and the absence of a standard methodology may explain why studies have reached such different results, Azar says.

Despite the lack of standardization and definitive evidence, PRP is used to treat a wide range of maladies, including chronic tendon injuries, acute muscle and ligament injuries, osteoarthritis of the knee, and to speed recovery from surgery and fractures.

“We don’t have enough information to show that it works, but we believe it has great potential to work,” Azar says. “There’s little downside or risk that would prohibit us from offering this.”

Some patients might point to the cost — from $500 to $1,200 for a single treatment — as a downside. Most insurance companies won’t pay, since the treatment is experimental.

But that doesn’t stop doctors and clinics from marketing PRP to patients, some of whom are desperate to return to their previous activities.

“This is one of those things that falls between the cracks,” says Karen Maschke, a bioethics scholar at the Hastings Center, because PRP doesn’t fall under the Food and Drug Administration’s jurisdiction. Patients have to rely on their physician to “do no harm,” she says.

“Orthopedic medicine has a long history of pushing procedures and devices that don’t fall under FDA regulation,” Maschke says. “They’re engaging in entrepreneurial medicine.”