Is the KKK in Ferguson at this very moment? Anonymous, the online hacker group, is said to have recently released a mass of highly secret details and information regarding Ku Klux Klan members. According to Anonymous, there is a definite connection between some police officers of Ferguson and members of the KKK, and that Darren Wilson himself might be involved with the organization. Sport Act News shares this tense allegation this Wednesday, November 26, 2014.

Courtesy of Wikimedia Commons

With violent protests still continuing in Missouri this week, the KKK in Ferguson would only make racial strains more heated at this point in time. Now the online Internet hackers of Anonymous are saying they have released data on Ku Klux Klan members that have a distinct “link” to Ferguson police force authorities. The group alleges that they have been able to infiltrate the main Twitter account of the KKK, known as @KuKluxKlanUSA.

Having the Twitter account now rumored to be under the hacker’s control, Anonymous has threatened to reveal a number of hidden details with the US public. The press release notes that this seizure of the social media site is part of a continued “clash” between the pair of groups regarding the death of 18-year-old Michael Brown and Ferguson police officer Darren Wilson’s shooting of the unarmed teen.

It appears that Anonymous says they have discovered a tie between Ferguson police officers and KKK members. This is, at least, what the group is claiming this Wednesday afternoon. An alleged video was leaked last week saying that a set of well-known members of the Ku Klux Klan within the Missouri state branch of the organization were in support of officer Darren Wilson. The sect is called the Traditionalist American Knights of the KKK, and were reported to have been in attendance for a private rally backing the white policeman over the black teen.

According to Web Pro News on the KKK in Ferguson story, the members of the St. Louis suburb who secretly participate in the Klan are allegedly called the “Ghoul Squad.” Now, the Anonymous hackers are questioning whether Wilson himself may be a part of the underground community. The group has also alleged to “list every Klan member” within Ferguson and has reportedly spurred an “OperationKKK” crusade based on the leaked details. They say the Ku Klux Klan has already begun to share intimidating notices of “lethal force” that may be used toward active protestors of the Ferguson shooting.

The case gets more complicated after Anonymous revealed an unidentified insider provided concrete proof of ties regarding police officer Darren Wilson and the KKK. However, details of this breaking news are allegedly being kept hidden by the hackers at this time because to share this information would result in his life being in “immediate danger.”

“I know for a fact that the TAKKKK had a lot to do with what went on in Ferguson.” ex-member of the TAKKKK, Henry Harrell, told Anonymous. Apparently, there was a so-called “mole” within Ferguson’s law enforcement force that has been working with the hackers group to bring the identities of the Ku Klux members into the limelight. An unknown activist, who goes by “Kafir,” said that the NOWsec independent journalism website has inner connections and details on the matter.

“NOWsec’s current goal is exposing connections between TAKKKK and law enforcement involved in policing Ferguson protests,” the activist Kafir shared. “An employee with access to the St. Louis County Police Department (who also happens to be a NOWsec sympathiser) is aware of NOWsec’s operations and believes officers are worried … We will list every Klan member and Ghoul Squad member we can find,” the NOWsec activist concluded.

Darren Wilson, the Ferguson police officer who was not indicted this week by a Missouri grand jury, has said that he has been brought into a wrong and negative perspective over the shooting of Michael Brown. The cop claims he was defending himself from a large 18-year-old who was the one who initiated the attack.