Home : News : Local 11/17/2015 10:02:00 AM

PeaceHealth, Providence to collaborate on services

PeaceHealth PeaceHealth, which runs this hospital in Vancouver, Wash., will collaborate more with Providence Health System.

VANCOUVER, Wash. – In a sign of a healthcare market responding to federally expanded coverage, Oregon’s two Catholic health systems are cooperating in new ways.



PeaceHealth and Providence Health & Services are teaming up on a health and wellness center, featuring rehab, fitness, primary care and other services on Padden Parkway in Vancouver, Wash. The center will increase local access and use innovation to keep people healthy.



“This is an important moment for communities we serve,” said Dave Underriner, Providence Oregon chief executive. “This is not just another doctor’s office. It’s not just another fitness center. This is about creating new approaches that will help people get healthy and stay healthy. This is about improving wellness and restoring wholeness to people we care about.”



The two Catholic health systems may work together more around the Northwest.



“We’re just delighted by this exciting opportunity,” said Liz Dunne, PeaceHealth president and chief executive officer. “This is what our communities have told us they want, and what they need. Together, we’ll help improve people’s lives in ways they never imagined.”



Dunne says the missions of PeaceHealth and Providence “align beautifully.” Both trace their roots to women’s religious communities.

The Affordable Care Act is pushing health care organizations to become more proactive in improving health.



Providence is most active in the Portland area. It has 34 hospitals, 475 clinics and 20,000 caregivers in Portland. PeaceHealth serves Vancouver, Eugene and surroundings. It has 16,000 caregivers and 10 medical centers.











Article Comment Submissions Submit your comments, please. Comments are reviewed before being posted to the site. Comments must use respectful language and address the story. Comments are not posted immediately to the site. The site editor may edit content for appropriateness. There may be a delay of 24-48 hours. Comments may also be considered to appear as letters in our print edition, unless the writer specifices no. Note: All information on this form is required. Your telephone number is for our use only, and will not be attached to your comment. Submit an Article Comment First Name:

Required Last Name:

Required Telephone:

Required Email:

Required Comment:

Required Passcode:

Required Click here to see a new mix of characters. This is an anti-SPAM device. It is not case sensitive.