In a dramatically one-sided story for Friday’s CBS This Morning, correspondent Jan Crawford decried: “You know, these stories are heartbreaking. These veterans have sacrificed almost everything for our country and now they have these life-changing injuries that prevent them from having children naturally....The VA can't help because conservatives in Congress 23 years ago passed a law blocking it from paying the costs of IVF [in vitro fertilization] treatments for veterans.”

The report featured Democratic Senator Patty Murray condemning the GOP: “It's just – it’s appalling....I'm so frustrated because it just seems like this is something that’s so common sense, so right, so what we as a country should be doing.”

Later in the segment, Crawford noted: “There now is bipartisan support for change, but the roadblock today is cost. Opponents question how the government will pay for the treatments, which can run into tens of thousands for each treatment.”

Murray hurled accusations: “They are hiding behind, right now, funding.” Crawford replied: “You see the money issue, that, ‘Oh, we can't afford this,’ is just an excuse?” Murray declared: “When it comes to taking care of our veterans, money should never be an excuse for procedures that allow them to be whole again.”

At no point in the nearly five-minute story did Crawford speak to a Republican member of Congress about the policy.

Following Crawford’s taped report, co-host Charlie Rose proclaimed: “This is one more reminder that budgeting has consequences and affects human lives.” Fellow co-host Gayle King added: “I like Senator Murray, ‘When it comes to taking care of our veterans, money should not be an issue here.’ It really does – she said it seems to defy common sense.”



Co-host Norah O’Donnell chimed in: “I hope someone will step in and help them immediately before Congress can.”

King concluded: “Jan's story’s gonna make a difference, my prediction.”

While CBS was eager to cover the controversy surrounding in vitro fertilization, all three broadcasts networks have ignored developments in the scandal swirling around the Department of Veterans Affairs. In April, an Associated Pres report found that the backlog of medical treatment for veterans had not improved one year after the scandal first erupted.

Here is a full transcript of the June 5 report on This Morning: