Walk-in medical clinics proliferate in Western Pa.

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Western Pennsylvanians had a front-row seat over the past several years to the fast spread of walk-in medical clinics that are so common on city corners and suburban strip malls.

Whether that growth will continue in 2014 might depend on how the Affordable Care Act affects patients' ability to get fast appointments with their doctors, some say. The act requires people to have health insurance, which might make it harder to visit a doctor as more newly insured make appointments.

“It may morph a little bit, depending how it goes, especially if (primary care physician) access gets very tight,” said Dr. Richard Wadas, chief of community emergency medicine for UPMC, which opened nine urgent care clinics since 2009.

Walk-in clinics tapped into a growing demand among people who have minor medical issues ranging from sprains and rashes to respiratory infections, but don't want to wait for a regular doctor's appointment to get prescription medications.

“They're generally catering to dual-income parents with kids for whom convenience is important,” said Thomas Charland, CEO of Merchant Medicine, a Minnesota-based research firm that monitors the industry, “For a doctor to say he can't see you until two days from now, this solves that.”

Analysts divide the industry into retail clinics and urgent care centers. The retail operations exist inside stores such as CVS or WalMart and provide less acute services, sometimes with nurses or physician's assistants. Urgent care centers are free-standing facilities with X-ray machines, procedure rooms and doctors.

The state does not regulate the clinics, so officials could not say how many opened in recent years. But Charland tracks trends.

Pennsylvania has 60 retail clinics, led by the Minute Clinics inside CVS pharmacies, which have 22 such clinics in Western Pennsylvania, he said. The top 14 operators of urgent care clinics have 77 operations in Pennsylvania, a total that does not include the UPMC centers. MedExpress, which insurance giant Highmark partially owns, has 50 facilities in Pennsylvania, Charland said.

MedExpress is the dominant player in the market nationwide and in the state. In the past two years, it more than doubled its number of locations, Charland said.

Officials at the Morgantown, W.Va.,-based company could not be reached. Its chief medical and operating officer told the Tribune-Review in 2013 it expected growth, especially as the Affordable Care Act adds patients to regular doctors' offices.

UPMC doesn't plan to open more centers unless it sees a need in certain areas, Wadas said.

“We're not looking to put one next door to the competition,” he said, noting the hospital system's nonprofit mission. He said if the health care act sends more UPMC patients to urgent care, they will find convenience at the centers because their records are in the computer system.

Pittsburgh was an early test market for Minute Clinics so the market might be saturated with those operations at CVS, which has added 100 to 150 new clinics nationwide each year for three years, Charland said.

David Conti is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at 412-388-5802 or dconti@tribweb.com.