Next week, CDC will launch the new version of the National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention’s (NCHHSTP) Atlas, which will feature county-level HIV and STD data. This online data visualization tool for CDC surveillance will offer users the opportunity to view more localized epidemiologic data for HIV and sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), including chlamydia, gonorrhea, primary and secondary syphilis, and early latent syphilis.

To launch this new version of the NCHHSTP Atlas, CDC will host a webinar on September 17 at 2 pm EDT. The webinar is open to all public health professionals. Participants must register no later than September 16, 2013 at 2:00 pm EDT in order to receive the webcast URL. Please register here . You can also follow the session via Twitter at the hashtag: #NCHHSTPAtlas .

Robust Features Available with Atlas

The Atlas enables users to identify areas of the United States and U.S. territories that are most affected by HIV, AIDS, STDs, viral hepatitis, and tuberculosis (TB). Public health professionals can access the information in more efficient and impactful ways that will help them better tailor resources and interventions to meet the needs of those in the areas hardest hit. Atlas users can also easily toggle between cases and rates; identify disparities by race/ethnicity, sex, and age; access pre-developed queries suggested by CDC’s scientific staff; and access links for more information.

With the NCHHSTP Atlas, users can also:

Create maps, tables, and bar graphs

Explore a variety of data stratifications

Display data trends over time and across the United States

Download and export data and graphics

Query data for ad hoc customizable reports

Receive detailed and complete information on surveillance data footnotes and caveats

CDC’s Atlas team is always working to improve this important tool. A dashboard and additional graphics as well as more data will be added in the future, including census socioeconomic data, and HIV and STD testing data.