The Union County Board of Chosen Freeholders announce two new additions to the fall lineup of the Union County Means Business (UCMB) Networking Breakfast Series: The Affordable Care Act and its Impact on Business, and Maximizing Your Business with the Internet. Both events will take place in the month of October.

“I’m extremely proud of this year’s series,” said Freeholder Chairman Linda Carter. “These are hot topics and addressing them allows us to not only energize the business community, but also keep the momentum of networking and communication going.”

The next event in the installment and will be held on Oct. 1 from 8-10 a.m., at Overlook Medical Center in Summit. Titled The Affordable Care Act and its Impact on Business, it will feature a panel discussion on the Act, and answer FAQ’s about its effects. Panelists include Christine Stearns vice president of Health Affairs of the New Jersey Business and Industry Association, Al Titone, director of the U.S. Small Business Administration’s Newark district office, and Alan Lieber vice president, Atlantic Health System and president, Overlook Medical Center.

Maximizing Your Business with the Internet will follow on Oct. 30, and will be held at Union County Performing Arts Center’s Hamilton Stage in Rahway from 8-10 a.m. Featuring Tara Dowdell, former “Apprentice” contestant and Founder of the Tara Dowdell Group, topics covered will include ecommerce, internet marketing and website development.

The Union County Means Business series is open to all interested parties, specifically people who own or manage a business in Union County, or who are planning to start a business in Union County. It is designed to bring local business owners, prospective owners and managers in contact with government representatives who can help them obtain information about grants, loans, social media, employee recruitment, and other resources pertinent to their endeavors.

All sessions are free but pre-registration is required by visiting the Union County website at ucnj.org/UCMeansBusinessor call 908-527-4200.

Union County Means Business Programs are sponsored by the Board of Chosen Freeholders in partnership with the Union County Alliance, Union County Economic Development Corp., Greater Elizabeth Chamber of Commerce, Suburban Chambers of Commerce, Union Township Chamber of Commerce, Kean University, and Union County College. The Affordable Care Act and its Impact on Business is being cosponsored by Overlook Medical Center.