A banner that reads “We love Vietnam, protect your bowl of rice,” in front of the Mega Step Electronics (Vietnam) Co. factory in Binh Duong province, Vietnam. Bloomberg News

HANOI—In early May, a number of dissident, pro-democracy bloggers in Vietnam received a round of unexpected calls from a former top police official.

The bloggers were planning demonstrations on May 11 to protest China’s placement of an oil rig in waters claimed by Vietnam. Normally, Vietnamese officials quash such protests. This time the government would let the protests proceed, the former police general said, according to Nguyen Van Dai, a protest organizer who spent four years in prison for his pro-democracy views.

WSJ Frontiers Newsletter Enter your email to be notified when we launch the new WSJ Frontiers weekly email newsletter

The events that followed provide a cautionary tale for investors who equated Vietnam’s authoritarian rule with a stable manufacturing environment and low risk.

The initial peaceful demonstrations, organized in four cities by the activists, were rapidly followed by waves of riots in three provinces that targeted the country’s crucial manufacturing centers. Five people were killed and hundreds of factories owned by Chinese and other foreign companies were looted and torched.

The Vietnamese government didn’t respond to repeated requests for comment on whether it communicated to demonstrators via the former police official, or why they allowed the first protests on May 11 to proceed.

Although the initial spark for the protests was China’s oil rig, a month-long Wall Street Journal investigation into the causes of the subsequent violence, involving interviews with more than 40 activists, workers, foreign factory managers and government officials, showed that anti-Chinese sentiment combined with a host of other grievances in a potent and explosive mix.

The riots were a shock in a country manufacturers have viewed as a stable, attractive alternative to China. Wages in Vietnam are less than half those in China and among the cheapest in Southeast Asia. Vietnam’s government has been more aggressive in offering incentives to foreign investors than the Philippines and Indonesia, and the country is considered more politically stable than neighbors like Thailand, which has been beset by coups in recent years, said HSBC economist Trinh Nguyen.

Flareup

China’s placing an oil rig in waters claimed by Vietnam last month triggered deadly riots in the Southeast Asian nation. The violence has died down, but repercussions continue.

Vietnam now attracts more money relative to the size of its economy than any other Southeast Asian country besides Singapore; foreign investment pledges jumped to $22.34 billion last year from $16.3 billion in 2012.

The violence was especially troubling for many foreign factory managers since the attacks seemed to come out of the blue. “The workers have always been peaceful before, even when they held strikes,” said Saigon Daryar Plastics Co. Chief Executive Johnason Chang, who lost $4 million in a factory fire overnight.

In the cities, activist groups used the peaceful protests to champion causes ranging from release of political prisoners to complaints about confiscation of land by officials.

In the provinces, rioters shouted nationalist slogans along with calls to end worker exploitation, according to onlookers and Vietnamese officials. Some in the crowd just seemed interested in looting, witnesses said.

A month later, the Vietnamese government has slammed the lid back on public dissent and has begun to send some offenders to prison. Authorities have rounded up more than 1,600 alleged rioters and held a handful of highly publicized trials. Police have tracked down some of the stolen goods and returned them, and the government is working to reassure rattled foreign investors.

Taiwanese companies, the hardest hit, are watching what compensation the Vietnam government will offer before they decide future investment plans, says Yu-Ping Lien, director general of the Investment Development Department of Taiwan’s Ministry of Economic Affairs. Most foreign firms say they’re staying, due to the high cost of relocation and the government’s assurance there wouldn’t be a repeat.

Yet the sudden, violent blowup—which took both government officials and the initial protest organizers by surprise—suggests deep resentments are still bottled up beneath the apparent calm.

Visit wsj.com to read the full story.