One of Nick Clegg’s closest advisers, credited with pushing mental health as a focal point for the Liberal Democrats during their time in power, is to head up a new thinktank to examine the potentially life-long effect that mental health issues can have on a person’s finances.

In an interview with the Guardian, Polly Mackenzie, a former No 10 special adviser, said the coalition government had generally failed to see beyond immediate, clinical issues such as NHS waiting times.

“For understandable reasons, in government we got totally obsessed with trying to drive changes in the performance of the NHS. We did good work – it’s very much not completed yet, but I’m not in government any more so I can’t fix that,” she said.

“Something I don’t think we did adequately enough in government is looking beyond the clinical and the NHS sphere and looking at the environmental and the social factors.”

Launched this week, the Money and Mental Health Policy Institute is funded and chaired by MoneySavingExpert.com founder Martin Lewis, who has given the venture £2m.

For Mackenzie – the daughter of a clinical psychologist, whom she credits with first sparking her interest in mental health – focusing on a practical, fixable problem is a bonus after five years of firefighting in the coalition. “In government, you wake up every day and you’ve got at least 3,000 problems you ought to be trying to fix,” she said. “It’s nice to be able to say, actually, I can’t fix that. I’m just going to focus on the stuff where I can make a difference.”

She admitted it was easier to look openly at some of the social effects on mental health now she was no longer part of a government imposing welfare cuts. “I think there is something in that, yes,” she said. “I think one thing that was a mistake is this idea that you want to treat people who are benefit claimants as the same as anybody else, to be given more and more responsibility for money management.

Related: Mental health problems aren’t all in the brain | Clare Allan

“The assessment was that to make it easier for people to move into work it had to be harder to live on benefits. But being in financial anxiety … has an impact on your IQ equivalent to losing an entire night’s sleep,” she added, citing the book Scarcity by economist Sendhil Mullainathan and psychologist Eldar Shafir. “So we were asking people in financial anxiety to do more to manage their money, even though their cognitive bandwidth is demonstrably reduced simply by the anxiety.”

Although the institute will cover diagnosed disorders as well as general mental health issues such as stress, short-term chaotic spending is the first target. Mackenzie and Lewis plan to push for a change in regulation, allowing a person to register as suffering from a mental health issue and offering banks a trusted friend to contact if they spot unusual spending patterns in an account.

Lewis said that was an issue raised time and again by people who sought his help as they faced financial disaster. “People have conditions which are temporary and those short episodes … go on to ruin their lives,” he told the Guardian. “Their financial lives are permanently crippled.”

Lewis, who met Mackenzie as she prepared one of former Lib Dem leader Clegg’s speeches in the wake of the 2008 financial crash, said he himself had had moments where he “really, genuinely found it difficult to get out of bed … I thought, ‘Thank heavens I’ve got money. Thank heavens that I can take a few days off.’

“You’re five times more likely to have debt crisis if you have a mental health issue. It really started to hit me: bloody hell, we have to do something. And then I got in the position where I was able to do something.”

Related: Six things students can do to boost their mental health

Creating a register where there is no potential for exploitation of vulnerable people is a difficult task. But Lewis said the financial services companies he spoke to were broadly in favour, though current regulation must change.

There was also no legal basis for a “trusted friend”, Mackenzie admitted, and close friends and spouses could often be enablers of crisis spending. “I wouldn’t be scared to shut off my husband’s credit card but there are lots of wives who would be, especially during a period of manic episode,” she said. “You need someone close enough to know what you are doing, but not who might indulge you.”

“Every time I have written this on social media, I am swamped with people saying, ‘please do this’,” Lewis said. “I think we would get 10,000 [sign-ups] on day one … six figures easily in a few years.”

Longer-term, Mackenzie said she hoped to look at one of the opportunities she felt was missed when the coalition tackled welfare reform – the use of new technology to help people in dire poverty manage their finances more easily.

“Iain [Duncan Smith, the work and pensions secretary] was very keen on doing trials of benefit cards, which we [the Lib Dems] blocked routinely,” she said. “Instead of using policy to improve lives, it was very much [for] stigmatising – like the red door [on homes of asylum seekers], the Azure card [given to refugees in place of money], the worst of those experiments.

“But, actually, I do think there was an opportunity there. Mental health and finance are both being radically shifted by technology, and we may be able to do that better.”

Related: Paul Donnachie’s benefits were suspended. Months later, he killed himself | Frances Ryan

When, like so many others in the Lib Dems, Mackenzie found herself a political outsider after the general election last year, it would have perhaps been natural for her to turn her attention to criticising the Conservatives’ cuts; the Lib Dems always claimed to have a softening influence upon their colleagues in the coalition.

Only last week, ministers again sought to take up to £1,500 a year in benefit payments from people with psychiatric conditions, a measure struck out last year by the House of Lords.

But Mackenzie is not prepared to make enemies at the expense of making real change. “I can’t turn up at the door of No 10 and say ‘treble benefits!’ because you won’t win.

“But if you can demonstrate that during the course of a depressive episode it’s hard to comply, and say ‘wouldn’t it be great if you could create a different sort of compliance regime for people with mental health issues on jobseeker’s allowance’, then there are plenty of sensible people in government who will say, ‘that’s interesting, sure’, as long as it was based on actual evidence.

“I’m not setting up another voice to complain about fiscal policy. I have views on it, but that’s not my job. I’d rather do whatever it is that can directly improve as many people’s lives as possible – without sounding too much like John Stuart Mill.”