Health and Wellness Expert Peter Mangiola R.N. MSN Has Launched a New Jersey Consultancy Focused on Helping Consumers Gain Access to the Resources Necessary to Prevent and Treat Health Issues

Medford, NJ, February 3, 2015: Peter Mangiola R.N. MSN has over 25 years of experience in the medical field, working in a wide variety of key positions. For the past several years, he owned and operated two New Jersey senior care agencies. Peter recently sold his agencies to become a health and wellness advocate. He now focuses on helping consumers take advantage of the resources needed to stay as healthy as possible.

“I have always had a passion for helping people become healthier and maintain a higher quality of life,” Mangiola says. “This is what led me into the health care field more than a quarter century ago. Now as an independent consultant and advocate, I’m excited to put my experience and expertise to work on a wider scale to help bring the right care to the right people at the right time.”

Peter has in-depth expertise in a wide range of cognitive, behavioral, emotional and physical issues, including:

Early to Advance Stage Alzheimer’s Disease

Children and Adult ADHD

Children with Learning Disabilities (dyslexia, autism, Asperger’s, etc.)

Developmentally Disabled Adults

Diabetes

Obesity

Many more…

Starting with a personal wellness assessment (PWA), Peter puts together a holistic plan that addresses the unique needs of each client he serves. The plan provides physical, emotional, mental, spiritual and financial guidance that give clients the whole picture of what is needed gain the right treatments and maintain good health.

“A major part of my focus is pointing people to the right resources to properly address their specific health issues,” Mangiola continues. “As we all know, most people struggle to make ends meet financially, so my goal is to show consumers how their health coverage can work for them and not against them. This starts by educating people on what’s available to them within their existing policy.”

Since the Affordable Care Act was passed and signed into law in 2010, there have been a number of changes to health insurance requirements. Mangiola believes a major challenge with the new law is that so many consumers are not aware of the positive changes that can help them stay healthier.

“There is a lot of confusion around the Affordable Care Act and how it affects the average American. Much has been made about the requirement for all Americans to carry health insurance, but fewer people realize that there are prevention and health maintenance benefits built into every policy. I help clients understand what’s in their policy so they can maximize their benefits and optimize their quality of life.”

For more information about Peter and the services he offers, go to http://www.petermangiola.com/

About Peter Mangiola R.N. MSN

Peter Mangiola received his degree from the University of Pennsylvania (School of Nursing) in 1980. He has since served in Emergency, Recovery, Cardiac Care, and Electrophysiology departments, as well as three years as an Oncology Director and eight years as Charge Nurse for a cardiovascular nursing unit. Peter has been a regular speaker for many groups and organizations over the years covering many topics, and as a consultant, speaker, and educator in such areas as Dementia, Alzheimer’s, cognitive/behavioral issues, disabled children & adults and obesity counseling.

Contact information:

Peter Mangiola

One-To-One LifeCare Inc.

Medford, NJ 08055

Phone: (732) 703-6361

petermangiola@icloud.com

http://www.petermangiola.com