Cover Story Perspective

The 340B Drug Pricing Program makes life-saving treatments available to low-income, uninsured and underinsured patients at extreme discounts.

Proponents contend the program — created as part of the 1992 Public Health Service Act — greatly improved access to comprehensive cancer care.

“When the program first started, the original intentions were pure and meant to help indigent patients in need,” Michael Diaz, MD, director of patient advocacy at Florida Cancer Specialists and Research Institute, told HemOnc Today.

Yet, critics suggest 340B has expanded well beyond its intended scope, increasing the costs of insurance and pharmaceuticals while inadvertently providing financial windfalls to eligible hospitals, which can retain the difference between a drug’s discounted price and its market value when the agent is administered to well-insured patients.

Michael Diaz



As debate rages about whether 340B simply provides participating hospitals with the resources necessary to better serve all patients or has created a loophole through which large medical centers can abuse the system, calls for reform to 340B have intensified.

“To return to how the program was initially intended, the definition of ‘patient’ and eligibility should ensure that patients can be treated in the best setting geographically available to them,” Diaz said. “In my opinion, the benefit should be attached to the patients, and not necessarily the institution.”

HemOnc Today spoke with several health care policy experts about how the 340B program has affected the hematology and oncology communities; the strain it has created between institution-based cancer centers, industry and independent oncology practices; and the ways in which the federal government may try to modify the program.

Good intentions

Under the 340B Drug Pricing Program, pharmaceutical manufacturers must provide certain outpatient drugs to eligible nonprofit hospitals at discounts ranging from 20% to 50%. The goal is to help institutions provide more services and treat more patients — particularly vulnerable populations — during an era of limited government funding.

“As is the case with many administrative approaches, the initial intent of 340B was meritorious and would help offset the cost of hospital-based care of populations of patients who often have great needs and consume considerable resources,” Donald L. Trump, MD, FACP, president and CEO of Roswell Park Cancer Institute and HemOnc Today’s associate editor for medical oncology, said in an interview.

Sandra M. Swain



Without 340B, MedStar Washington Hospital Center would not have its cancer center, Sandra M. Swain, MD, FACP, medical director of Washington Cancer Institute at MedStar Washington Hospital Center and past president of ASCO, told HemOnc Today.

“This is a very meaningful charity care policy that helps us offset our uncompensated care, the costs of which are pretty high here,” Swain said. “We’re able to take care of more patients because of the program.”

The 340B program does not require participating facilities to pass along reduced drug prices to patients.

Safety Net Hospitals for Pharmaceutical Access (SNHPA), a nonprofit organization that advocates for more than 1,000 health systems and hospitals that participate in the 340B program, conducted a survey of its members in February 2011. Sixty percent of SNHPA members responded to the survey.

Results showed 74% of member safety net hospitals used the discounts to reduce drugs prices in their outpatient pharmacies. All of the hospitals surveyed reported that the savings derived from the 340B program were important to their operations, and 83% of respondents indicated the savings helped maintain broader operations, including nonpharmaceutical services. The hospitals surveyed saved an average of $5.2 million in 2010 with 340B.

Hospitals should have to declare how much money they made through the 340B Drug Pricing Program and what they have done to provide services to benefit underinsured and uninsured patients, said Jeffery C. Ward, MD, medical oncologist at Swedish Cancer Institute Edmonds. Source: Photo courtesy of Jeffery C. Ward, MD

However, many physicians question whether the benefits derived by hospitals surpass 340B’s original intentions.

“The program was initially developed, depending on who you talk to, to either help pay for the care of the indigent patient, or to help the hospital that takes care of a lot of indigent patients be able to provide services,” Jeffery C. Ward, MD, medical oncologist at Swedish Cancer Institute Edmonds, said in an interview. “That is a sticking point between hospitals and pharma.”

Others say hospital-based benefits are an integral part of the 340B program.

“It was created by a bipartisan Congress to help hospitals and other safety net providers that serve large numbers of low-income, vulnerable patients stretch their resources to help their vulnerable patient population,” Robert A. Chapman, MD, director of the Josephine Ford Cancer Institute of the Henry Ford Health System in Detroit, told HemOnc Today. “It was never intended solely as a pass-through to the uninsured. To limit the program in this way would effectively kill it.”

Critics, however, suggest the financial benefits are a key contributor to the rapidly rising popularity of 340B. The number of participating hospitals nearly tripled in the past decade, increasing from 591 in 2005 to 1,673 — or one-third of all US hospitals — in 2011, according to ASCO’s policy statement on 340B.

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) also expanded the definition of 340B-eligible entities to include free-standing cancer, community and critical access hospitals on the basis of their disproportionate share hospital (DSH) percentage. The total number of covered entities reached 16,572 in 2011, a twofold increase from 2001.

Due to the ACA’s expanded Medicaid rolls in certain states — a factor in the DSH percentage — many more hospitals might meet eligibility criteria.

“There will be fewer uninsured patients to take care of, and more qualifying hospitals to reap rewards based on their Medicaid DSH percentage,” said Ward, who chaired ASCO’s Payment Reform Workgroup when ASCO developed its 340B statement. “In theory, there will be less need for 340B, and more hospitals that qualify.”

Mergers and acquisitions

The availability of 340B drug discounts has dramatically altered oncology care in the United States.

“Oncologists work in a myriad of settings, including national oncology practices, private practices, hospital-based practices and academia,” Ward said. “Some oncologists are able to work because of 340B, and some of them feel very threatened by 340B. But the real battle brewing is between qualifying hospitals and pharma, and it’s a battle over big money.”

Hospitals that participate in 340B often acquire community-based cancer centers to extend their discounts within these sites.

A report published by Berkley Research Group, a consulting firm for pharmaceutical companies, indicated the number of physician-based oncology practices acquired by 340B hospitals and registered to the Office of Pharmacy Affairs database increased from 79 in 2009 to 166 in 2012.

“Some hospital systems have used 340B for the acquisition of practices in order to make money on the margin from this pricing program,” Samuel M. Silver, MD, PhD, MACP, FASCO, professor of internal medicine at the University of Michigan and HemOnc Today’s Health Policy and Value of Care section editor, said in an interview. “It was a business opportunity, and it is certainly an attractive economic driver for practice acquisitions that continues today.”

According to the Berkley report, 340B chargebacks for oncology-related products increased 250% between 2009 and 2012 due to acquisitions, new covered entity enrollments and increased prices. Further, 89% of acquired sites were located in areas with higher median income than the 340B hospital.

These data have prompted some to question whether acquiring hospitals are looking for profit.

“I don’t think 340B hospitals by and large are poaching practices,” Ward said. “Hospitals are not deliberately seeking out oncology practices in wealthy communities to buy. Those practices had already chosen to be in wealthy areas. You don’t find private oncology practices in low-income and distressed communities. You find them where the practice would do well.”

There may be positives on both sides of the equation, Diaz said.

Physician-based practices face financial strain due to lower reimbursements from the Medicare Modernization Act (MMA), cuts from CMS based on reductions in physician fee schedules, and sequestration.