This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

... oral arguments are under way the Supreme Court in the case that could drastically shape the future of the Affordable Care Act ... thirteen states and the District of Columbia are currently running their own health insurance exchanges while the rest of the company country ... uses the government's HealthCare dot dove site which complicates the matter at this crucial tax credits ... to any is not to discuss is doubly SJ deputy law bureau chief Ashby Jones ... Ashby great to have you here ... so the Wall Street Journal has been live blogging the events this morning what's in the town so far what's a closely divided court it sounds like go there been a lot of parking questions on either side both for the government which is defending the the the long course ... in the challengers who claimed that on the part of it ... doesn't really work to them fly ... aam I think one of the most interesting things has come for Justice Kennedy who is typically ... known as the asthe swing justice ... key and Asin very hard for probing questions of the ... of the border for the challengers aam sort of needy indicating that the that his sympathies lie ... with the government ... aam yet so that sort of reading the tea leaves a little bit Justice Ginsburg asking hard questions about ... whether or not the cleanest actually have standing with that they have the right to bring to the case and also that ... actually could be an issue that people wore shirt that was can the issue ... a lot going on aam it's too too too early to know exactly where others can play out but aam but that's the really take too early of course but is there a sense of whether the court will be divided on the ... other core will absolutely be divided on this income in order to even need ... a degree hear the case ... now at least four justices had to say yes this is an issue that really concerns us so ... we we have a sense that this will be at a cost to buy tickets add on pack is technically this is ... about the legal soundness of the IRS the subsidy ... regulations correct about the wording really do we ... do we have a sense of what the importance ... of not here it is those four words established by the state's right right so ... the so the law allows people who wants to get um we use ... the health care law to get their health care ... on the kids and tax subsidies the law says that the text of the subsidy should be to be granted ... aam to those who use exchanges established by the state's tell the whole issue in this case is that of those forwards established by the state ... to those only refer to the state exchanges more to do is refer ... to the federal exchanges that come in when states decide not to use route to set up the role ... so so so that's really at play here the big question is aam ... Laura He justices to focus really all those four words we still see the federal exchanges they only mention estate or are they can that kind of look ... more broadly in the context of a lot and try to figure out what Congress was enlightened and president of looking at the Spirit are not the letter of lot ... that's exactly right and in the justices are typically do look at more than just four words can look it ... exactly what we mean to you with the thinking of the entire law so ... we'll have to see all the chicks out now is it predicted that in your view that the court might break down the same lines as their previous ruling on the affordable health care act and if so where would you put to chief Justice John Roberts that's that's the sixty you know four thousand dollar question at this point where his Justice Kennedy fall and where does chief Justice Roberts fall ... and Dom those two you are really the ones that everybody is looking at those two will likely be the PT boats nets assets were off the walking after thank you so much for that ...