<p>RICHARD QUINN/SPECIAL TO THE STAR</p><p>Justin Collins, of the Buffalo Soldier Mounted Cavalry Unit, talks about weaponry used by the soldiers during the Westward Expansion, including the saber. Collins and other members of the group spoke at the Oxnard Public Library earlier this month and will set up a re-enactment camp in Oxnard in June.</p>

SHARE RICHARD QUINN/SPECIAL TO THE STAR Jay Collins (from right), of the Buffalo Soldier Mounted Cavalry Unit, speaks to the audience at the Oxnard Public Library as the Women of the West, Deborah Collins, Brenda Inouye and Amanda Dyson, listen. The group spoke at the library earlier this month and will return to Oxnard for a re-enactment in June. RICHARD QUINN/SPECIAL TO THE STAR Historical items and reproductions of items carried by soldiers in the Westward Expansion are displayed during an event at the Oxnard Public Library, during which members of the Buffalo Soldier Mounted Cavalry Unit spoke. RICHARD QUINN/SPECIAL TO THE STAR Joe Lawrence, of the Buffalo Soldier Mounted Cavalry Unit, smiles as he listens to speakers from the group at the Oxnard Public Library earlier this month. RICHARD QUINN/SPECIAL TO THE STAR Jonathan Collins (from left), Justin Collins and Art Dyson, of the Buffalo Soldier Mounted Cavalry Unit, listen to speakers from their group at the Oxnard Public Library earlier this month.

By Mark Storer

Jonathan Collins and his brother Justin are following in their father Jay’s footsteps — but not as veterans after 25 years with the Los Angeles Police Department, which Jay is, nor as a sergeant with the Los Angeles International Airport Police Department, which he also is.

Along with their father, the Collins brothers are historical re-enactors with the Buffalo Soldier Mounted Cavalry Unit, based in Los Angeles. They’ll be at Plaza Park in Oxnard on June 20 with a full camp re-enactment featuring tents, supplies, saddles, tack and food.

“It’s really living history,” Jonathan said as he prepared for a presentation earlier this month before about 50 people at the Oxnard Public Library. “When I was a kid, I don’t think I was interested in anything like this. But now that I’m older and having watched my dad, I really feel an obligation and a sense of why it’s necessary to do it.”

The Buffalo Soldiers were established by Congress in 1866 as the first peacetime all-black regiments in the regular U.S. Army. Tribes of Comanche and Kiowa Indians in the Southwest gave them their name because, they said, their hair was like buffalo hair. It was meant as a compliment, and the name stuck.

The whole Collins family, of Rowland Heights, is involved with the re-enactments. Jay’s wife, Deborah, is part of the Women of the West, a group that travels with the Buffalo Soldiers and whose members dress in period outfits with flowing dresses, parasols, kerchiefs and gloves.

Deborah said she too felt an obligation to share the history.

“It’s important to tell this history so we can inform our youth,” she said. “It’s helped instill in us the importance of our past and we have to do that so that we can be guided toward our future.”

The group’s presentation began with a 45-minute film on the origins of the Buffalo Soldiers. Out of 10 cavalry regiments in the United States, two of them, the 9th and 10th Cavalry, were entirely African-American with white officers. One in five mounted cavalry soldiers was African-American in that time.

“This isn’t just African-American history,” said Amanda Dyson, one of the re-enactors from Women of the West. “This is American history. You can’t know where you’re going if you don’t know your past. This is a way we move forward with a rich history and knowledge of who we were.”

Jay Collins, dressed in his cavalry blue coat, pants and hat, said that he used to see the Buffalo Soldier re-enactors at the Rose Parade each year, and he knew early on he wanted to be one.

“I thought it was the best thing going, and I had a friend who was a member of the unit,” Jay said. “Believe it or not, one of the guys in the unit bought me a horse after I joined, and I had already built a ranch house out in the country to prepare for it.”

Collins owns a six-acre ranch in Three Rivers, just outside Sequoia National Park. His ranch sits a few hundred yards from where the 9th Cavalry had its summer supply camp. One of the many duties the African-American units performed was protection of the National Parks from poachers and criminals.

After the Spanish-American War, where the units fought with distinction, many were stationed in the west.

“At a time when the west in America was virtually wild, these men had something to prove,” said Collins. “They were discriminated against because of the color of their skin. Many of them were ex-slaves, and yet they were in a very dangerous part of the world protecting people who didn’t always accept them.”

Leroy Gibson of Oxnard helped bring the group to the library.

“I’d seen them at the Santa Barbara Fiesta parade where they rode down State Street carrying the American flag. I got a chance to meet them and invited them to come here,” he said. “When I was a kid, I learned that my heroes, Tarzan and Superman, weren’t real. But these are my real heroes. These are people who helped change the world.”

For more information visit the website: http://www.bsmcu.com/