Rand Paul walks on stage to deliver remarks during the 41st Annual Conservative Political Action Conference on Friday. European Pressphoto Agency

Sen. Rand Paul (R., Ky.) on Monday pointed to Ronald Reagan as an example of a president who believed in forceful foreign policy but relied on diplomacy as well, as he criticized GOP lawmakers who he said have taken Russia’s occupation of Ukraine as an occasion to “beat their chest.”

Mr. Paul brought down the house at the Conservative Political Action Conference last week with a speech that offered a stinging indictment of President Barack Obama, and subsequently won the CPAC straw poll. The speech focused on civil liberties but didn’t address Ukraine or other foreign policy issues.

Mr. Paul, known for being wary of overseas military actions, turned to foreign-policy issues in an op-ed published on Breitbart on Monday. Mr. Paul touched on the crisis in Ukraine, recommending the U.S. implement sanctions and “increased economic pressure” on Russia. More broadly, the senator called for the “strategic use of soft power” and compared his approach to that of Mr. Reagan. But he also criticized fellow Republicans who he said have incorrectly characterized Mr. Reagan’s actions to gain political traction.

Here is more from his op-ed:

“Every Republican likes to think he or she is the next Ronald Reagan. Some who say this do so for lack of their own ideas and agenda. Reagan was a great leader and President. But too often people make him into something he wasn’t in order to serve their own political purposes.”

“I don’t claim to be the next Ronald Reagan nor do I attempt to disparage fellow Republicans as not being sufficiently Reaganesque. But I will remind anyone who thinks we will win elections by trashing previous Republican nominees or holding oneself out as some paragon in the mold of Reagan, that splintering the party is not the route to victory.”

On Russia’s occupation of Ukraine: “[S]ome politicians have used this time to beat their chest. What we don’t need right now is politicians who have never seen war talking tough for the sake of their political careers.”

“Today’s Republicans should concentrate on establishing their own identities and agendas, as opposed to simply latching onto Ronald Reagan’s legacy—or worse, misrepresenting it.”

Follow @wsjwashington on Twitter.

Video: Jerry Seib on the U.S. and Russia: It’s Complicated

Video: CPAC Attendees Pick Their Top 2016 candidates