'SPECIALTY DRUGS'

-- AT A GLANCE



Specialty drugs include a large number of medications for everything from cancer, to AIDS to hepatitis.



Very costly

They are generally very expensive and can involve complicated treatment procedures They are generally very expensive and can involve complicated treatment procedures Rare and advanced

Medications in this category also might have special storage requirements and some are biotech medications, meaning they are manufactured using DNA recombinant technology (genetic replication) instead of a more traditional chemical processes. Some examples

For osteoporosis: Actonel; for multiple sclerosis: Aubagio; for severe rheumatoid arthritis: Xeljanz; for hepatitis C: Infergen; for cancer: Xeloda; for post-herpetic neuralgia: Soliris.



STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- A survivor of colon and bladder cancer, Mariners Harbor resident Julia Stack, 63, was diagnosed with leukemia 18 months ago and, since then, has relied on a daily dose of the cancer drug Sprycel (dasatinib) to keep her condition in remission.

So she could not believe what she heard when she telephoned her local CVS pharmacy on Jan. 3 to call in a renewal of her monthly prescription for the 100-milligram pills.

Her co-pay for a 30-day supply just jumped from $50 to $2,672 a month, the pharmacy informed her.

This was based on a new calculation: She was now responsible for paying 25 percent of the cost of a month's supply of the tablets, manufactured by pharmaceutical giant Bristol-Myers Squibb. The current price tag for 30 pills is $10,600, Ms. Stack said CVS told her.

LINK TO 'OBAMACARE'



Her case is yet another example of the ripple effect of the implementation of the Affordable Care Act.

"Like a lot of other parts of Obamacare, uncertainty around drug costs and coverage is becoming another one of the scheme's unpleasant surprises," wrote Dr. Scott Gottlieb in Forbes magazine last month.

"In order to pay for all of its expensive mandates," Obamacare will force health insurers to "skimp on other things -- principally the number of doctors you'll have access to, and also the number of costlier branded drugs that make it onto formularies," added Dr. Gottlieb, a practicing physician who formerly served in various capacities at the federal Food and Drug Administration, including director of medical policy development and deputy commissioner for medical and scientific affairs.

'SPECIALTY DRUG'

The huge jump in the co-pay came as a frightening financial shock to Ms. Stack, who pays $752 a month for her Federal Employees Health Benefit insurance coverage, which is administered by Emblem Health/GHI.

She said that she received no heads-up about the staggering increase in her co-payment for Sprycel, which is classified as a "specialty drug."

Among other uses, Sprycel is prescribed to those, like Ms. Stack, diagnosed with Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph+ ALL) and "who no longer benefit from, or did not tolerate, other treatment," Bristol-Myers Squibb states in the drug's patient-labeling information.

Ms. Stack was prescribed Sprycel after chemotherapy treatments following her leukemia diagnosis "left me in a wheelchair. After my (chemo) induction phase and four infusions, I couldn't walk, talk, or write."

With the daily dose of Sprycel, "I feel stronger than I ever felt, and have virtually no side effects," Ms. Stack told the Advance.

She gave a reporter a computer printout of her co-payments for Sprycel in 2013.

The list showed payments around the 15th of every month, with Ms. Stack responsible for mostly $50 co-payments, and her health-insurance plan covering the balance of $8.911.75 a month. When the co-pay increased to $80 in December 2013, the plan paid $9,150.53 for the monthly supply of her Sprycel medication, the records showed.

'I DIDN'T KNOW WHAT TO DO'

After learning of the huge co-pay hike, "I appealed to Emblem Health on the phone all day," said Ms. Stack. "I told them that, without this pill, I will die. I told them that you're taking away my life-saving drug."

She was disheartened by responses from the customer service representatives: "They explained the 25 percent co-pay, and then asked if there was anything else that they could help me with."

Ms. Stack produced a spiral notebook, filled with pages of notes from telephone conversations with Emblem Health, as she struggled to make sense of the co-pay increase, ever-conscious of the dwindling number of pills in the plastic container on her kitchen table.

"Look at this," she said, flipping through pages and pages of handwritten notes, documenting repeated phone calls to her insurance carrier, pleading for help. "This is just to get my Sprycel - this not normal."



NEWSPAPER GETS ACTION



In desperation, Ms. Stack called the Advance, and the newspaper contacted Emblem Health about Ms. Stack's situation.

In Ms. Stack's case, there was "a significant benefit change," said David Mahder, vice president of marketing and communications at Emblem Health.

He explained that the changes were effective January 1, 2014, and "were described within the employee benefit handbook which was distributed to all members of this plan in October 2013. The enrollment period for employees to select or change their plan was November through December 2013."

He continued: "Within Ms. Stack's plan, there are different levels of benefit coverage for retail and specialty drugs. Specifically, the plan includes a specialty drug benefit of 25% coinsurance, with an annual maximum out of pocket of $3,000.

"Therefore, the member is responsible for paying 25% of the allowed cost up to $3,000. Once the member pays $3,000 out of pocket for specialty drugs, their specialty prescriptions are covered at 100%."

Mahder also said that Emblem Health would contact Bristol-Meyers Squibb, "in an effort to provide financial assistance to Ms. Stack."

'RIGHT DOWN TO THE WIRE'

Over the next few days, a high-level Emblem Health representative worked closely with Ms. Stack to address her situation, overrode her co-payment for the next bottle of Sprycel, and arranged through Bristol- Myers Squibb another month's supply at no cost, through the company's voucher program.

"But it came right down to the wire," said Ms. Stack, who had only two pills left in her bottle on Wednesday.

Friday morning, she received a month's supply, by hand-delivery to her house, and breathed a huge sigh of relief. Emblem Health "has gone above and beyond," she said gratefully.



CO-PAY CONFUSION



Tom Russo, an insurance agent and retirement-planning specialist who lives in the Richmond section of Staten Island and is familiar with Ms. Stack's case, described recent insurance-plan and Medicare-program changes as "very confusing" for consumers.

As co-pays have increased dramatically, "a lot of seniors are taking [prescribed medications] every other day, or are breaking pills in half," Russo told the Advance.

Ms. Stack confessed that she contemplated one of these options, before her situation was resolved.

"It's not just about me," Ms. Stack said, explaining why she decided to go public with her story.

"I want to help everyone this has happened to -- I think it's happening on Staten Island and across the country."