Piers Morgan doesn’t have too much of a brain bouncing around in his head, and what he does have is stuck on the bottom of conservative rocker Ted Nugent’s shoe, he told TheBlaze earlier this week.

Nugent sat down for an interview with TheBlaze’s Dana Loesch, which aired Friday. The famed rocker, who has been known to go head-to-head with outspoken CNN host Piers Morgan, paused while discussing his “haters” to scrape some of Morgan’s brain matter off the bottom of his shoe.

“I have to take a break here Dana, if you mind, I’m scraping a little bit of Piers Morgan’s skull tissue out of my shoe,” Nugent said.

The rocker challenged the CNN host and any others on the Left to a face-to-face debate, but said no one will take his offer because they are too scared he will do the “Ted Nugent-Piers Morgan skull boogie.”

“Debate me,” Nugent told Morgan and his other dissenters. “Bring me on your show. Teach me a lessen. Because I’ll eat your guts.”

Nugent defended his views, which he often faces criticism for, by saying that the things he asserts are not opinion, but fact, including what happened at the U.S. consulate in Benghazi, Libya, on Sept. 11, 2012.

“It’s not my opinion that there are four dead Americans at our embassy, who not only refused to be provided security after multiple requests, but when security was on the way to save them, Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama and the United States of America government punks refused to save their lives,” he said.

Morgan wasted no time in responding to Nugent’s diss, taking to his Twitter account to fire back at the conservative rocker.

I'm still looking for Ted's > RT @theblaze .@TedNugent finds @PiersMorgan's "brain matter" in his shoe - http://t.co/evzuOuGYOU — Piers Morgan (@piersmorgan) January 30, 2014

I've got plenty left, relax > RT @Mediaite Watch Ted Nugent Scrape @PiersMorgan 's 'Brain Matter' Off of His Shoe http://t.co/Fi8TN077Th — Piers Morgan (@piersmorgan) January 30, 2014

Watch Nugent’s interview below, courtesy of TheBlaze.

h/t Mediaite