AUSTIN, TX – Today, Health and Human Services Executive Commissioner Chris Traylor announced he has selected a former Texas Ranger to lead the Department of Family and Protective Services. Retired Texas Ranger Chief Henry "Hank" Whitman will become the next DFPS Commissioner. Whitman has more than 34 years of law enforcement experience.

"I can't think of anyone better than a Texas Ranger to protect our most vulnerable Texans," Commissioner Traylor said. "Chief Whitman is no stranger to critical assignments that keep us safe and I know he will bring the same diligence to DFPS that has always driven the Rangers."

Joining Whitman will be Kristene Blackstone who will serve as Assistant Commissioner for Child Protective Services. Blackstone has significant experience in child protective services work.

CPS currently faces serious challenges managing caseload growth and with employee retention. The new leadership team will provide new direction, clear goals and high accountability to ensure keeping Texas children safe remains the agency’s core mission.

“Nothing is more important than protecting our children and I'm honored to be given this sacred trust," Whitman said. "We've got Texas' future in our hands and everything we do will focus on making sure these kids have their chance to shine."

Whitman and the team he builds will look to overhaul the operations of CPS. They will rebuild structures that are failing and improve the systems that are working. Whitman’s strength as an investigator will help the caseworkers on the frontlines evaluate the critical cases involving Texas children.

Whitman and Blackstone will begin their tenure at DFPS effective May 1.

Biographies:

Henry "Hank" Whitman, DFPS Commissioner – Henry “Hank” Whitman spent 22 years with the Texas Department of Public Safety. A decade of that time was spent serving as a Texas Ranger. In 2011, he was named Chief of the Texas Rangers. During his tenure with the Rangers, Whitman created and supervised the elite Texas Ranger Reconnaissance Team and led border security operations. Whitman is also a military veteran having served in the United States Marine Corps. He currently is President of Whitman Consulting, a professional service company that provides security consulting and private investigations. He earned a Bachelor of Science degree in Law Enforcement from Southwest Texas State University and a Master of Public Administration in Criminal Justice from Texas A&M University, Corpus Christi.

Kristene Blackstone, Assistant Commissioner for Child Protective Services – Kristene Blackstone has almost 25 years of public service experience working with children and families. She has 17 years of experience with Child Protective Services, where she started out serving as a caseworker. Blackstone held positions as a CPS Supervisor, Program Director and as the Regional Program Administrator. Blackstone currently serves as the Deputy Director for Field Operations for the Texas Office of the Attorney General’s Child Support Division. She oversees the daily operations of the Field Operations Division which has more than 2,300 employees across the state. Blackstone received her Bachelor’s Degree in Political Science from the University of North Texas and a Master’s Degree in Social Work from the University of Texas at Austin.