The Long Beach Department of Health and Human Services will hold a health insurance enrollment event on Saturday, Dec. 6, from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. at The Center Long Beach, 2017 E. 4th St. Certified Enrollment Counselors will assist community members with Medi-Cal and Covered California applications during the current enrollment period. Language assistance is available in Spanish and Khmer.

“I am committed to making sure that as many residents as possible have access to health care,” Mayor Robert Garcia said. “Having health insurance is an important tool to ensure that our City is healthy and vibrant.”

Covered California is an easy-to-use marketplace implementing the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act in California.

“This is an important event and if you need guidance on how to select a health plan, learn if you qualify for subsidies, or how to enroll, certified enrollment counselors will be available to help you,” Vice Mayor Suja Lowenthal said. “Remember that open enrollment for Covered California ends on February 15, 2015 and Medi-Cal applications are accepted year-round.”

No appointment is required but interested individuals must bring the following documents in order to complete a health insurance application: 1) birth certificate, U.S. passport or resident alien card (green card); 2) proof of income such as recent paychecks and recent tax forms; 3) proof of Los Angeles County residency such as a driver’s license, utility or phone bills, rental agreement; and 3) Social Security cards for everyone in the family applying for health insurance.

The Long Beach Department of Health and Human Services is participating in various community enrollment forums. Also, walk-ins and appointments are welcomed Monday through Friday from 7:30 a.m. to 6:30 p.m. at the Long Beach Department of Health and Human Service, 2525 Grand Ave. Services are available in English, Spanish, and Khmer. In addition, the Health Department will provide Saturday appointments upon request.

For more information on Covered California enrollment services and/or community enrollment forums, please contact Anthony Ly with the Medi-Cal Outreach Program at 562-570-7979 or visit www.longbeach.gov/health/fss and click on “Medi-Cal and Healthy Families Outreach Program.” You can also obtain Covered California information at www.coveredca.com.

The Long Beach Department of Health and Human Services is one of three local health jurisdictions in the state of California that is comprised of five bureaus: Community Health, Environmental Health, the Housing Authority, Physician Services and Policy, Planning, and Prevention. The mission of the organization is to improve the quality of life by promoting a safe and healthy community in which to live, work, and play. For more information, visit www.longbeach.gov/health.

The LGBTQ Center of Long Beach serves over 21,000 people a year with an array of services including support groups, youth services, legal assistance, employment referrals, rental and roommate referrals, a hate crimes hotline, mental health referral, women’s health programs, cultural and social activities (including a Film Festival), educational forums, and HIV prevention and support programs. For more information, visit www.centerlb.org.

The article above was released by the City of Long Beach.