Topics: 2016 Elections, annise parker, Gay Rights, GOP, LGBT, Marriage equality, Rick Santorum, Social conservatives, Supreme Court, Ted Cruz, Politics News

Rick “Man on Dog” Santorum may be gearing up for a second White House run, but his 2012 base has some bad news for the former Pennsylvania senator. Deep in the heart of Texas, they’ve found a new anti-gay hero.

One Ted Cruz has emerged as the most stridently homophobic of the GOP’s 2016 contenders. Of course, it’s not as if his positions on LGBT issues are all that different from any other likely GOP contender. But the Scott Walkers and Jeb Bushes of the party prefer to keep quiet about their conservative social views, lest they alienate swing voters. (Although it’s worth noting that Ohio Sen. Rob Portman, who came out for marriage equality after learning his son is gay, is reportedly considering a bid. He would lose.) Cruz, by contrast, is out and proud with his anti-gay views, and by repeatedly inserting himself into anti-gay firestorms, he’s showing every sign that bigoted demagoguery will be central to a Cruz 2016 campaign.

The most consequential moment of Cruz’s nascent Senate career is, no doubt, the government shutdown he triggered last year over Obamacare. But he has also introduced among the most odious pieces of anti-gay legislation since the Defense of Marriage Act. Earlier this year, Cruz and Utah Sen. Mike Lee introduced a bill that would preserve the rights of states to ban marriage equality and to refuse recognition of same-sex unions performed in other states. Because the bill would have sanctioned a patchwork of state laws on marriage equality and jeopardized same-sex couples’ rights as they traveled from state to state, LGBT advocates nicknamed the legislation the “’You’re Not Married Anymore’ Bill.”

That bill stood approximately as much chance of becoming law as legislation making Che Guevara’s birthday a national holiday. Beyond introducing hopeless bills, however, Cruz has served up no shortage of bombastic anti-gay rhetoric. Cruz was among the first GOP politicians to rush to the defense of Duck Dynasty star Phil Robertson after he made crude anti-gay remarks in an interview with GQ magazine. Commenting on the controversy, Cruz wrote on his Facebook page, “The reason that so many Americans love Duck Dynasty is because it represents the America usually ignored or mocked by liberal elites: a family that loves and cares for each other, believes in God, and speaks openly about their faith.”

Those liberal elites, at it again – deigning to mock a down-home reality show star for speaking openly about his faith by equating gay people with terrorists and goat fuckers.

More recently, we saw Cruz going ballistic in the wake of the Supreme Court’s decision last week to let stand a series of lower court rulings in favor of marriage equality. Calling the decision “tragic and indefensible” and “judicial activism at its worst,” Cruz vowed to introduce a constitutional amendment “to prevent the federal government or the courts from attacking or striking down state marriage laws.” It’s precisely the kind of debate the GOP, increasingly out of step with public opinion on LGBT equality, wants to avoid. But Cruz is determined to have it.