Latino activists arrested while canvassing in white neighborhood sue CPD

A pair of young Latino political activists who were arrested and charged by Chicago Police while canvassing in a white neighborhood on the Southwest Side last year have filed a federal lawsuit, alleging they were racially profiled.

Students Kevin Tapia, 20, and Felipe Hernandez, 21, say they were handcuffed, held for three hours and charged with “soliciting unlawful business” for going door-to-door in Garfield Ridge and asking residents to sign a petition in favor of a progressive income tax in Illinois.

The municipal charges were dropped two months later after their supporters staged a letter-writing campaign, but both men say they fear the arrest record could hurt them and that they are angry at how police treated them.

“They automatically convicted us on the spot,” said Hernandez, who added that he and Tapia both had identification and had explained that they were doing political work to the four officers who arrested them. All the officers were white. None of the residents whose doors they had knocked on had shown any hostility toward them, he said.

“I was shocked to be arrested,” said Tapia, an Ecuadorian immigrant who is studying at the Illinois Institute of Technology. “Especially for engaging in a lawful activity.”

Tapia — who said he was also telling Garfield Ridge residents about the deadlines to sign up for health insurance under “Obamacare” — said he’s worried the arrest could affect his immigration status and ability to find work when he graduates.

“This arrest was simply unfair, unjust and simply outrageous,” he said.

But Chicago Police spokesman Marty Maloney said that “CPD expressly prohibits racial profiling or any other bias-based policing.

“This matter stemmed from a 911 call made by a city resident, and there is no basis to suggest that this is indicative of anything other than that.”

A police source said that the neighborhood had suffered a series of door-to-door scams in the weeks leading up to the arrests of Tapia and Hernandez, and that the officers were concerned that neither man could provide identification from the organization that they worked for, or the name of their supervisor.

But activists at a news conference Tuesday morning denied that, connecting the arrests to high-profile national disputes about police use of racial profiling.

Amisha Patel, the executive director of the left-wing pressure group that Tapia and Hernandez were canvassing for, Grassroots Collaborative, said, “It is the right and duty of citizens to talk to their neighbors about the issues they feel strongly about.”

Patel said that the arrests of Tapia and Hernandez are a concern for activists who want to participate in the upcoming city elections.

“Are they in danger of getting arrested for door-knocking and talking to their neighbors about the things that they care about?” Patel asked.

“The CPD needs to admit their mistake, they need to apologize and they need to work to make sure something like this does not happen again.

“We all deserve to live in a city where we can talk to anybody in any neighborhood, especially if they are young men of color who are working to make their communities better.”