While 3D printing technology may be saving lives, offering unlimited potential in innovation, and generally saving the world, nothing gets people more excited than talking 3D printed food–namely, confections. While we’re all concerned about the more serious and highly beneficial transformations both digital design and manufacturing have to offer the world, we’ll have to get back to you after snacktime.

And while having a delicious 3D printed sugary delight is one treat, just imagine if it were combined with another indulgence we all secretly love and often are quite prolific in creating on our own en masse–the selfie. If these are a couple of life’s small pleasures that you enjoy, then the services offered by Candy Mechanics should have you jumping up and down on your bed with delight, one arm pumping overhead in epicurean victory and the other holding a 3D printed candy on a stick.

Once your mom yells at you to stop doing that, you may be thrilled to check out the services and flavors Candy Mechanics has to offer–and they promise that no matter what your mug might look like in person, undoubtedly it will be very attractive, 3D printed in candy form on a stick. This isn’t just one of most yummy looking creations we’ve seen–it’s a very creative combination of technologies–and the team really offers a sense of humor; there’s no way offering one of these candied treats as a gift wouldn’t procure a smile from even the stodgiest of recipients.

Founded recently by Londoners Sam Part and Ben Redford, they are on a self-professed and very noble mission to see that candy-eating tech lovers everywhere have the dubious distinction of saying that they ate their own faces. Imbued with a deep passion for “making ridiculously awesome stuff,” the Candy Mechanics team is now just about to launch their first run of numerous delectable flavors. As part of the seven-member Makerversity popup in London at Selfridges, composed of three teams (see video below), the duo completed a six-week ‘trial by fire’ creation of their line of 3D printed candy.

Positioned in one of the busy areas of London, the members were basically on display as they created brands for new businesses. Using off-the-shelf scanners and 3D printing, they were able to use the six weeks to create their product while in the public view, making for an intense–and fulfilling–project scope and experience, as they developed a business with some seriously savvy flavor.

If you are hungry, this next part might get you in some high-caloric trouble. If the stomach’s rumbling and the wallet’s opening, you’ll have to literally ‘head over’ to Candy Mechanics to order a taste of the following in your likeness:

Freeze-dried raspberry and salted pistachio

Lemon and biscuit crumb

Salted corn and chocolate crumb

Peanut and chocolate crumb

Banana and salted peanut

Freeze-dried raspberry and black sesame seed

Once at their office, the team uses a handheld scanner to digitize your countenance. If you live outside of London, contact them to see about how to get a scan of your likeness to their headquarters.

Orders are required to be for at least 100 3D printed candies, and they can be prepared for large events like weddings, parties, office events, and more. Candy Mechanics can also take into account varying dietary requirements as well as some, ahem, more xxx requests.

Are you interested in contacting Candy Mechanics for their 3D printed products, or are you planning to pop in and see them in London? Discuss in the Candy Mechanics 3D Printed Faces forum thread over at 3DPB.com.