Topics: Civil War, confederate battle flag, confederate states of america, Editor's Picks, james loewen, jefferson davis, Martin Luther King, tom watson, News, Politics News

Clickbait headlines and the general hyperbole inflation of the media today has devalued the word somewhat, but on Friday morning, something truly amazing happened: South Carolina, the birthplace of the Civil War and Southern rebellion, finally removed the Confederate battle flag from its capitol grounds. It did so in broad daylight, with the full backing of its conservative governor as well as the clear majority of its legislature, itself also quite conservative.

Of course, this was just the most conspicuous and shocking example of a trend that emerged after a white supremacist allegedly murdered nine African-Americans in a historic South Carolina church. The trend has included bastions of Southern pride like Mississippi, South Carolina and even NASCAR distancing themselves from a symbol that only a few months ago they would defend as representing “heritage not hate.” It appears that the Confederate battle flag, which lingered in the American mainstream for decades, is finally beginning to be widely understood for what it really is.

With an interest in getting some perspective on this cultural shift, as well as some background on why this de-Confederatization is necessary in the first place, Salon reached out to historian James Loewen, the best-selling author of “Lies My Teacher Told Me: Everything Your American History Textbook Got Wrong” and “Lies Across America: What Our Historic Sites Get Wrong,” two books that helped lay the groundwork for this sea change. We touched on the events of recent weeks, Loewen’s work, and his hope for the future. Our conversation can be found below and has been edited for clarity and length.

Are you surprised by how quickly the mainstream has reassessed the Confederate battle flag?

I am delighted by the rapid de-Confederatization of the last couple of weeks, and I hope it continues. I think it shows how fragile the actual support for the neo-Confederate position was. The connections of neo-Confederates to right-wing Republicans have been strong for the last 30 years or so, and that caused many politicians, especially in the South, to worry that they had to take the neo-Confederate position seriously.

I think now the neo-Confederate position is coming down like the house of cards it always was. It was always based on a flat lie, the claim that the South had seceded for states’ rights, and not for slavery. In truth, every single document of secession shows that the South seceded for slavery, and against states’ rights. The states’ rights motif is attractive. Anybody who ever had any problem with the IRS can identify with something smaller, the state, against the Goliath of the federal government. But the Confederate cause had nothing to do with states’ rights.

All that said, how can we explain the new history textbook in Texas, which downplays slavery’s role in causing the Civil War?

The textbooks have paid homage to the neo-Confederate position and the neo-Confederates’ power in textbook adoptions, including [in] Texas and all other Southern states. Almost half of all states adopt statewide, and every Southern state adopts statewide. Publishers no longer publish special Southern, or neo-Confederate, editions of their textbooks. They used to, up through at least the 1960s. But for the last 50 years, they have mystified secession and omitted any bad things about the Confederacy, hoping thereby not to offend the Texas adoption process, and that of South Carolina, Mississippi, etc.

It isn’t just Texas, and it isn’t new. These new standards in Texas put slavery third in the causes of the Civil War. First there’s sectionalism — of course the sectionalism is driven primarily by slavery — and second it’s states’ rights. And that’s just flatly a lie, flatly wrong. Then, finally, third, they admit slavery. Most of our textbooks in use, whether in Vermont, Oregon, or anywhere else, already put it that way. They already conform.

Do you think that the way textbooks are written will change, given the recent public reassessment?

I hope so. I’m doing what I can to force that to happen. Part of the problem is that most of the textbooks for middle schools and high schools were not written by the people whose names are on them. They rent those names. The books are often written by nameless gnomes, in the bowels of the publishers, who may or may not have qualifications in history. Even if the main narrative is by one of the authors listed on the cover, the boxes, the questions, the maps, the photos and captions — which amount to 60 percent, often, of the textbooks — are by other people. Again: perhaps qualified, perhaps not.



Another problem with these textbooks is that they never quote, or almost never quote, original sources. With regard to secession, they typically do not quote the central documents, such as South Carolina’s famous “Declaration of the Immediate Causes which Induce and Justify the Secession from the Federal Union.” That document makes absolutely clear that it’s all about slavery, and that South Carolina is against states’ rights.