Political fliers, cranberries and a Port Edwards fundraiser in this week's editorial roundup.

Man throwing crumpled paper into waste basket, studio shot (Photo: Aidon, Getty Images)

The political ads that clog the airwaves get all the attention, but at least we have the option of turning off the television (or, for those with DVRs, fast-forwarding). Every other October is also attack-mailer season, and anyone with a mailbox can attest that, right on time, the slimy, sketchily sourced fliers have begun appearing daily.

We've seen them in many races across the region and they're not worth dignifying with a rebuttal. After all, they aren't making arguments; they're trying to scare voters through implication, association and selective editing.

They are a gross part of politics, perhaps even worse than broadcast attacks. The proper response is to quickly dispense with them, straight into the recycling bin.

Graphic:Election ads: Who's calling the shots?

Cranberry tours a hit

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Pittsville High School's Splash of Red Cranberry Tours, Wednesday, Oct. 15, 2014. Megan McCormick/News-Herald Media

The cranberry harvest is in full swing, which means trips to local marshes for many elementary school children.

Pittsville High School students have been offering Splash of Red Cranberry Tours since 2001 during the fall harvest. Offered about twice a week, agriculture students lead tours of children, other students and adults for several weeks. Marshfield Madison Elementary School students were among visitors during a tour this week.

Story:Splash of Red Cranberry Tours a hit with students

"A lot of my students had never even seen a cranberry before," said Amy Beil-Larson, a third-grade teacher at Madison Elementary School. "They were really excited to see the harvesting part and see where cranberries came from."

It's also an educational experience for the Pittsville students.

"They're nervous during the first tour, and uptight. They're very scared, and this is about the time they're hitting their stride," said Bill Urban, agriculture and FFA adviser in Pittsville. "That's what I live to see. It's very rewarding."

We're naturally proud of this local commodity that our young people can show off to their peers and others.

If you're interested in taking a Splash of Red Cranberry Tour, call 715-884-6412 or email urbanbil@pittsville.k12.wi.us.

Port Edwards chips in

For a number of years, Port Edwards residents have organized a community event for fun and as a fundraiser.

The Port Edwards Fun Fest raised about $3,000 this year for the South Wood Emergency Pantry Shelf, or SWEPS. It was a little less than last year's total, but committee members plan to try harder in 2015.

The pie and ice cream social after the car cruise raised $500 of the total, thanks to church members who donated pies and a committee member who donated ice cream, making the venture pure profit. More than 400 people were served.

A day of activities followed with fun for families, music, food, games, swimming, craft sale, car show, tractor show and a raffle. Jeremiah's Crossing demonstrated horse therapy for people with challenges.

It's a fun event for those who attend. We commend organizers who put in the time each year to make it possible, to the sponsors who support it and the community members who attend. The fact the proceeds go to help the hungry in our community is a bonus. Thanks to all for your efforts.

If you'd like to support the local food pantries — SWEPS or the Adams County food pantry, you can give to Stock the Shelves. Go online to www.incouragecf.org and click on the "Give" link. Donors can donate to South Wood County, Adams County or both. Send a check, made out to the Incourage Community Foundation, noting it is for Stock the Shelves, to: Stock the Shelves Fund, c/o Incourage Community Foundation, 478 E. Grand Ave., Wisconsin Rapids, WI 54494

Read or Share this story: http://wrtnews.co/1tAk3Xi