Most employers don’t think last week’s Supreme Court ruling to uphold Affordable Care Act subsidies will impact them, but the prevailing feeling among those that do is the decision will have a positive effect.

That’s the finding of an employer survey conducted by consultant Mercer Inc., a unit of Marsh & McLennan Cos. MMC, +0.17% which talked to 564 companies. Firms were asked to describe how the court’s 6-3 ruling that preserves government assistance in the 37 states that don’t have their own Obamacare exchanges would affect their businesses.

Mercer’s survey found 54% of employers saw no impact. Another 29% saw a positive effect while 17% saw negative results. The study also found that 7% of employers saw “strongly positive” outcomes while 4% predicted “strongly negative” impact.

“To me, that was a surprise because we tend to not get that kind of a response about the ACA,” said Beth Umland, director of research for Mercer’s health-care business and the author of the study. She says that most employers have tended to be “less than enthusiastic” about Obamacare.

Mercer’s study found that the larger the business, the more favorable reception the ruling received. Roughly 41% of companies -- ahead of the 29% average -- with 5,000 or more employees predicted a positive impact from the ruling, which could include putting part-time workers or early retirees on public exchanges.

The option to put early retirees on exchanges is a particularly attractive option for many, as roughly 45% of those who responded said they would consider it. At companies with more than 5,000 employees, that percentage was 54%.

Umland said for many large employers, retiree health benefits can be a huge expense. She cited the example of General Motors Co. GM, +1.93% which has faced more than its share of financial troubles in recent years over retiree health benefits.

“If there is a retiree medical plan, people tend to retire early,” she said, which adds to expenses.

The survey also found that 16% of respondents believe Obamacare has hampered their employees’ ability to get coverage. While the percentage seems low, Mercer is watching this figure closely to see if it rises.

But Umland says there has been no increase in the percentage of employers who say they’ll drop coverage due to Obamacare offerings. In fact, that number has dropped from 9% in 2012 to 4% last year for companies with 500 or more workers, she says.

The breakdown of companies in Mercer’s survey was: 47% with 500-4,999 workers, 29% with 5,000 or more employees and 24% with fewer than 500 staffers.

More from MarketWatch