An artist’s conceptual rendering shows a fall scene in the Titletown District’s public plaza, with Lambeau Field in the background. Final designs might differ. (Photo: Courtesy of Rossetti Design Workshop)

Ever since the Green Bay Packers started purchasing property west of Lambeau Field, fans and neighbors have speculated what the land would be used for.

They got their answer on Thursday when the team announced its plans for the 34 acres from South Ridge Road to Marlee Lane in the village of Ashwaubenon.

The ambitious plan has a lot going for it — Wisconsin companies, lots of public space, housing and room for other retail.

It’s defined with its anchors — Lodge Kohler, Hinterland brewery and Bellin Health — but it’s flexible enough that it can accommodate a multitude of events, activities and retailers.

What the Packers hope to create is a year-round destination, for not only fans and tourists but Northeastern Wisconsin residents as well.

This plan accomplishes that, and more. Some of the reasons we like the plan include these:

•It’s an economic shot in the arm. There will be the $125 million to $130 million investment in buying the land, installing the infrastructure and building the plaza and buildings. The Packers’ investment is $65 million, none of that from the county sales tax. It will also create jobs, both for the construction phase and the operational phase.

•It helps secure the Packers financial future. The team owns the property and leases to the anchors and any other future retailers, which are responsible for building their structures. Those businesses and the town homes will provide a revenue stream independent of the football team.

•It relies on Wisconsin-based companies — Bellin, Hinterland and Kohler — to be the anchors for the new development. With its high-end hotel experience, Kohler is a good fit. Some say Green Bay can’t sustain a four-star hotel, but we believe there’s a better chance of that when it’s tied to Kohler, Lambeau and the Packers.

You can’t ignore the middle class in such a development, but, as Ed Policy told the editorial board, it’s good to attract people with disposable income to the Green Bay area.

•It aims to be a part of the community. This might be the most critical aspect of the plan. A 34-acre commercial development that devotes a third of its space to a public area is unheard of. The plaza — 10 acres in the middle of this development — will be a park-like destination that can be used year-round for outdoor events. It will also be a place where people can meet, go for a stroll, hang out and enjoy the ambiance of the district.

You may look at it as a wasted opportunity and that the Packers could have brought in more money by developing those 10 acres commercially. That would be the wrong way to look at it.

Instead, it makes the Titletown District a residential destination as well as a tourist one.

To build a community, to be part of a community, you need these types of public spaces where residents and visitors can congregate, take a walk, throw a football around, kick a soccer ball, relax in the grass.

It will have an exciting place to be on game day, but for those of us who live in the area, it will provide an outdoor activity the rest of the year.

•It takes a long view. It’s easy to get caught up in the team’s record revenue numbers each year and think it will always be that good. But that’s a short-sighted approach. The Packers are looking to the future and securing their spot in this community and in the NFL. If you look at the league’s plan in Los Angeles and London, it’s clear they’re not looking to locate a team in a small market again, therefore, the Packers must secure future viability. Income that doesn’t have to be shared is key.

Plus, the Packers are trying to make the district attractive to millennials and keep young professionals in the Green Bay area instead of seeing them leave the area or the state.

Packers President and CEO Mark Murphy told the editorial board the team’s two goals are to win championships and make sure the Packers stay in Green Bay. The coaches and players will look after the first goal; the Titletown District will go a long way toward accomplishing the latter.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1JchvTY