PR Web

St. Louis, MO (PRWEB) August 25, 2014

Today, the American School of Real Estate Express , one of the largest online real estate license schools, announced they have seen the number of Certified Seniors Specialists and Certified Technology Specialists double in just twelve months.

"With over 2 million real estate professionals in the U.S., standing out can be tough. Getting a real estate designation or certification can help real estate agents and brokers become experts in a given area and become more marketable to their clients," said Tom Davidson , General Manager at Real Estate Express.

RealEstateExpress.com offers four real estate designations: Certified Financing Specialist, Certified Property Management Specialist, Certified Seniors Specialist and Certified Technology Specialist. Financing Specialists and Property Management Specialists have grown steadily over the past year (up 30% and 66%, respectively), while Seniors Specialists and Technology Specialists are seeing rapid growth--more than doubling the amount of real estate professionals getting certificates in these respective areas in the past 12 months. Seniors Specialists have seen a growth rate of 133% and Technology Specialists are growing at a rate of 104%.

In customer follow-up surveys, real estate professionals are interested in Real Estate Seniors Specialties and Real Estate Technology Specialties due to the growing number of senior citizen clients and the growth of technology with real estate.

Certified Seniors Specialists :

"The over-50 crowd represents more than 20% of the U.S. population. For most senior adults, the homes they live in are their largest asset and account for most of their net worth," said Davidson. "A Certified Seniors Specialist designation is a great step in understanding the demographics' real estate goals, concerns and needs."

Certified Senior Specialists can walk their clients through different senior housing options, have knowledge of applications of the Housing for Older Persons Act (HOPA), know the ins and outs of reverse mortgages, the use of pensions, 401k accounts and IRAs and help their clients understand the implications of tax laws, probate and estate planning.

Certified Technology Specialists :

"More and more real estate agents find value in current technology tools that allow them to conduct business quickly and conveniently, whenever they need to," said Davidson. "Getting certified as a Real Estate Technology Specialists gives you the tools and knowledge to help you find the perfect home for a buyer or find qualified buyers."

Becoming an expert in this field means that agents have a deep understanding of current and emerging real estate technologies, know how to leverage the technologies, know the power of social media--and how to leverage it, and can take advantage of rich media strategies.

To help customers have a better understanding for each real estate specialty, Real Estate Express recently launched a Real Estate Expert Toolbox where real estate professionals can find free information and guides on selecting a specialty.

About Real Estate Express

The American School of Real Estate Express, LLC is one of the nation's oldest 100% online real estate license schools and has educated over 500,000 real estate professionals. The school is approved to deliver 100% internet-based training and/or exam prep in almost all the major states that allow it. Our library of courses has expanded to include real estate pre-license, post-license, broker, designation and continuing education courses, as well as exam prep systems, versions in Spanish, and appraisal courses. We have a library of over 150 original, dynamic state-approved courses to choose from--all of which were created and designed by our own real estate experts.

Read the full story at http://www.prweb.com/releases/2014/08/prweb12118995.htm