Republican presidential candidate and Former California Governor Ronald Reagan in 1979. (Photo: AP Photo)

In a Quinnipiac Poll (July 3, 2014, USA Today) President Obama was rated worst president since WWII. Ronald Reagan was rated best. There's an old saying comparing lies and statistics. In that saying statistics is declared to be the better way to deceive people. For a poll to serve any legitimate purpose, other than propaganda, there must be a very wide random sampling of a cross section of the public. I seriously doubt this poll included an equal number of rich and poor, rural and urban, males and female, blacks, Hispanics, and whites, Catholic and other faiths, liberals and conservatives, Democrats and Republicans.

Ronald Reagan started this whole mess of inequality by giving tax breaks to the wealthy and deregulation of big companies. He trashed every antitrust law on the books giving more and more power to big business. It was called "Reaganomics". Wealth was supposed to trickle down to the poor and middle class.

It didn't exactly work that way, did it? George Bush got us into expensive wars on false pretenses. These wars accomplished nothing except the loss of lives and, of course, they put lots of money into the pockets of the gun manufacturers. That money is being used to lobby politicians who refuse to do anything to stop the violence on our streets. During the Bush era our manufacturing jobs went to foreign countries and the wealthy became more and more powerful. It took Obama's administration to catch the perpetrator of 9/11.

Bush and Dick Cheney almost destroyed the world's economy with the busting housing bubble and it's aftermath of foreclosures, and high unemployment.

Obama inherited a terrible mess and he's had the neoconservatives fighting his every plan to clean up the Bush disaster. The Affordable Care Act may not be perfect, but it has already helped many get health care. The economy is still suffering from the previous administration's screw-up, but it has very slowly improved under Obama in spite of the gridlock.

So don't tell your readers that this poll is for any reason other than pushing ahead the agenda of the top 1 percent. Anyone can take a poll and skew the results to promote their views. If I were to poll only Catholics about pro-choice rights the outcome would be starkly different from a poll that included a cross section of the public.

Statistics can be used to convince, persuade, and deceive people. How many of us ran out to buy a product because 9 out of 10 doctors preferred a certain brand?

I hope Enquirer readers who saw this poll have enough critical thinking skills to recognize a bunch of baloney when they see it. I believe they are smart enough to do just that.

Dorothy Weigel, Springdale

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1m9LgL7