Listen up, black folks. Bill O'Reilly has a Martin Luther King Day message for you: now that Barack Obama is president, race is no longer allowed to be a big deal.

In his Talking Points commentary last night, O'Reilly was one of several hosts to "observe" Martin Luther King Day by scrutinizing President Obama's comments about race and his presidency in a recent New Yorker article. You'll be happy to know that Judge O'Reilly ruled Obama "not guilty" of race hustling.

In that interview, Mr. Obama talked about race, quote: "There is no doubt that there is some folks who just really dislike me because they don't like the idea of a black President. Now, the flip side of it, is that there are some black folks and maybe some white folks who really like me and give me the benefit of the doubt precisely because I'm a black President." That assessment 100 percent correct. To his credit, Barack Obama has not used race in his quest for power. As a mixed race individual, the President knows how difficult that circumstance can be. But he has not addressed it in any substantial way. Again, that is to his credit because as president he represents all Americans.

Sadly, America, some African Americans are guilty. And what better day for a white guy to impart judgment than on MLK Day?

In the public arena Mr. Obama has been cautious and responsible on the race issue. That has angered some on the far left and some race hustlers who want Mr. Obama to be more proactive in promoting African-American policies. Cornell West for example has excoriated the President for not being more sensitive to black issues. I believe Dr. West, who teaches at Princeton, is misguided.

How do we know West is "misguided?" Why, because black issues are not an issue any more! The only real issue is their own failure:

The truth is, that the race factor in America is not an overwhelming problem anymore. Mr. Obama won two elections. And although his standing among white Americans is now in decline that's primarily because of the economy and Obamacare. It has little to do with race. Upon his inauguration in 2009, Barack Obama had a nearly 70 percent approval rating very high for any politician. That proves the USA has made dramatic improvements in the race arena. There is no question about it. Finally "Talking Points" believes that minority Americans do -- do have a much tougher time succeeding in the marketplace generally speaking than affluent whites, for example. But it all comes down to something that is accessible in America: education and personal responsibility. Black Americans should understand that if they study and work hard they will likely succeed in this country. And that's the message about race that all good and honest people should be promoting.

Thanks, Bill. I'm sure black American appreciated your whitesplainng lecture just as much as I did. And delivering it on Martin Luther King Day - well, that just made it all the more meaningful.

But that New Yorker article everyone at Fox so fixated on? That same paragraph which included Obama's race comments also stated:

Ironically, the country may be more racially divided than it has been in a generation. Obama lost among white voters in 2012 by a margin greater than any victor in American history. The popular opposition to the Administration comes largely from older whites who feel threatened, underemployed, overlooked, and disdained in a globalized economy and in an increasingly diverse country. Obama’s drop in the polls in 2013 was especially grave among white voters.

I doubt O'Reilly missed that. But instead of trying to heal that divide, he deliberately aggravated it. As part of his "observance" of Martin Luther King Day.