The Republican is a lawyer and county commissioner.

The Democrat is a physician and Navy veteran.

These opponents are swooping into a district, where the incumbent has served since 2002.

Ryan Costello, the Republican, and Manan Trivedi, the Democrat, each hope to replace Republican Jim Gerlach, who will retire from the 6th Congressional District, which begins in eastern Lebanon County and includes parts of Berks, Chester and Montgomery counties.

Costello, 38, is the son of public school teachers. He is chairman of the Chester County commissioners and a former township supervisor and county recorder of deeds.

Trivedi's parents worked at a Red Cheek apple juice factory. Trivedi, 40, went on to become a physician and serve as a military surgeon and medical team commander in Iraq. The Berks County resident presently works as a health care consultant and part-time doctor at Pottstown Memorial Medical Center.

The district leans Republican, with 202,075 registered Republicans and 182,201 registered Democrats. About 79,000 people list themselves as some other affiliation. Trivedi had a head start in that he ran against Gerlach in 2010 and 2012.

National Democrats at first saw the seat as an opportunity, but that hope seems to have faded. According to an Oct. 6 article in Politico, the national Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee canceled plans for television ads in the district, as it shifted money to vulnerable Democrats around the country. Politico took that to mean Democrats now view the seat as "out of reach."

However, Kevin Boughter, chairman of Berks County Democratic Committee, said Democrats weren't banking on the outside money. He said the race will depend on "who can get their people out to vote."

Asked about the most important issues in the race, Boughter said the most singular issue in this race is the same for all U.S. House and U.S. Senate races around the country — gaining or keeping control in Congress.

On health care and Ebola

Costello has cited a top goal of ending partisan gridlock in Washington, D.C., and finding bipartisan solutions.

Regarding Obamacare, he has said he favors fixing it rather than repealing it. Trivedi, meanwhile, points to his medical background and says that makes him highly qualified to help fix the health care system.

In debates, Trivedi has voiced support for raising the minimum wage, arguing that working Americans should not have to worry about feeding their families, and a higher minimum wage would help the economy.

Costello also expresses concern over wage stagnation, but says the solution involves lessening the burden of taxes and regulations on businesses. He also has said part-time work and underemployment are rampant and blamed Obamacare for causing it.

Ebola is among the topics that has arisen in debates. Costello has said the United States needs a more "coherent" approach to dealing with the threat, and he supports a travel ban involving West African flights.

Trivedi has called a travel ban "counterproductive," because the chances of an Ebola outbreak in the United States are low. However, he said cuts to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have hurt preparedness.

Trivedi has accused Costello of raising taxes in Chester County, with Costello countering that the tax increase resulted from improving the county's 911 system.

Costello has a funding advantage, having raised about $1.5 million, with much coming from conservative political action committees, including the National Association of Realtors, which provided $779,000; the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and National Rifle Association. The figures were as of the end of September.

Trivedi had raised about about $779,000.