Horrific: Paul George lies on the court after suffering the badly broken leg. Photo: AP

Indiana Pacers NBA star Paul George is out of basketball indefinitely after suffering a horrific leg injury.

WARNING: Vision below of injury is of graphic nature.

George was playing for Team Blue against Team White in Team USA's intra-squad practice match at the Thomas and Mack Centre in Las Vegas on Saturday afternoon [Australian time] where the team is preparing for the FIBA World Cup in Spain in late August.

Can't look: Team USA teammates Derrick Rose and Kenneth Faried were shocked by the injury. Photo: AP

Broadcaster ESPN only showed limited replays of the incident due to the gruesome vision of the injury.

Advertisement

US media reported late on Saturday George had "successfully" had surgery to repair his leg with surgeons finding no additional problems.

George is predicted to miss anywhere between nine and 18 months depending on how soon doctors let him return to the court.

Stretchered off: Paul George is taken away for further treatment. The scrimmage was cancelled following his accident. Photo: AP

George is considered one of the leading young stars in the NBA and a key part of the Pacers team who were expected to be one of the contending teams in the NBA's Eastern conference this coming season.

In the fourth quarter George leapt high to attempt to block James Harden as he attempted a lay-up but landed with his leg hitting the side of the base of the basket and immediately snapping.

The injury was similar to leg-breaks suffered by soccer players after high tackles and is rarely seen in elite basketball.

Players from both sides quickly noticed the seriousness of the injury with trainers immediately beginning work to stablise the leg.

ESPN commentator Mark Jones called the injury an "immediate leg fracture" but the full extent of the injury will be revealed in the coming days.

ESPN NBA writer Marc Stein said George would begin a five-year, $90 million contract this season which is guaranteed.

He said the contract would be insured so the Pacers would be reimbursed for his payments while injured and the club could also apply to have addition salary cap room to sign a replacement for him.

Team USA coach Mike Krzyzewski called the scrimmage off as soon as George was taken from the court.

"With the serious injury that we have and the fact we have stopped playing for a long period of time and, really, in respect to Paul and his family, the scrimmage is done," Krzyzewski told supporters. "We thank you for your support."

Fans at the Thomas and Mack Centre then started to chant "USA, USA" then for George, whose parents were at the game and able to help comfort him.

Krzyzewski has yet to name his final 12 for the world cup so still has other players in his squad to move into George's position on the team.

&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;nbsp;

With NBA teams still working to put together their rosters for the coming season, the Pacers will now have to seek out a replacement for their leading scorer who averaged 21.7 points this past season, tied for 12th in the NBA.

That will be a much tougher task.