A Ted Cruz coloring book, Hillary wine and 2016 paraphernalia are options. | Courtesy 10 last-minute political gifts

Time’s running out. Still trying to think of holiday gifts for your friends, colleagues and loved ones? Try throwing politics into the mix. Here’s POLITICO’s roundup of the 10 most unique gifts for your favorite politico this holiday season.

1. Ted Cruz coloring book

Story Continued Below

For fans of the U.S. senator from Texas, this coloring book is the perfect way to express your affection. The product description states: “The Cruz to the Future™ book is a non-partisan, fact-driven view of how Texas Sen. Rafael Edward ‘Ted’ Cruz became a U.S. senator and details, through his quotes and public information his ideas for what he believes will help America grow.”

2. Obamacare, the game

Yes, there’s an actual board game based around the Affordable Care Act. Choose your player: Tea Party, Democrat, Republican, Green Party or Occupy Wall Street.

3. Sasha’s sweater

Sasha Obama wore this unicorn sweater at a basketball game in November and sent sales shooting through the roof. Good luck getting one: They’ve been sold out for a while.

( Also on POLITICO: Tech catches shoppers in their tracks)

4. Hillary wine

The former secretary of state hasn’t announced her 2016 candidacy yet, but for those looking to get the party started early, try this seyval blanc, which Clinton Vineyards unveiled “to encourage Hillary Clinton to run for President in 2016.”

5. John Boehner T-shirt

Like the speaker’s personal story? Grab this T-shirt, which features a notable Boehner quote about his upbringing.

6. Paul Ryan quote

Maybe you like Paul Ryan better, so this quote from Ryan — artfully decorated — is the perfect gift for your mother.

7. Pundit portraits

Like Neil Cavuto? Andrea Tantaros? Shannon Bream? Artist Scott Wilke does portraits of pundits and politicians.

8. 2016 paraphernalia

From Chris Christie to Hillary Clinton to Elizabeth Warren to Rand Paul to Paul Ryan, CafePress.com has something for everyone who wants someone to run for the White House in 2016.

9. Obama bust

For the true POTUS fan, get this lifelike sculpture of the president for only $300.

10. Romney remembrance

Miss Mitt? Get his likeness on a T-shirt.

Authors: