Confederate flag

To many, the Confederate flag is a symbol of intolerance and white supremacy but to others, the flag represents the sacrifices thousands in South Carolina made during the Civil War. After last week's mass shooting at the Emanuel AME Church in Charleston, the debate over whether to remove the flag from the statehouse was reignited. CBS News correspondent Adriana Diaz reports Republican state Rep. Doug Brannon plans to introduce a bill to remove the Confederate flag from state property, which he acknowledges will likely cost him re-election.

Escapees' DNA

Police shifted their focus overnight as the manhunt for two escaped killers in New York entered its 16th day. State police set up a command center in Owls Head, New York, some 25 miles from the prison, in a remote hunting area. Sources tell CBS News correspondent Anna Werner DNA from the escapees was found in a cabin that had been broken into near Wolf Pond, in the Saranac Lake region.

Carter accuses Putin

U.S. Defense Secretary Ash Carter accused Vladimir Putin of inappropriate "loose rhetoric" and said there was "no need" for the Russian president to announce plans to add 40 intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) to his country's nuclear arsenal. "Nuclear weapons are not something that should be the subject of loose rhetoric," Carter told CBS News correspondent Margaret Brennan and other reporters traveling with him yesterday in Europe, where he will attend his first NATO summit in his new role.

Highest threat

House Intelligence Committee Chairman Devin Nunes, R-California, said the nation faces "the highest threat level we have ever faced in this country" due to the flow of foreign fighters to and from Iraq and Syria and the radicalization of young people on the Internet. He said on CBS News' "Face the Nation" that investigations often "do no good" in encrypted chat rooms, so Americans should be diligent about reporting suspicious activity to the proper authorities because "we are having a tough time tracking terrorist cells within the United States."

Upcoming rulings

The Supreme Court has 11 rulings left to issue before the end of the month. The two biggest are likely to be among the last decisions - an Obamacare case that threatens the president's signature healthcare law, and the other on the constitutionality of same-sex marriage. The justices will also weigh in on lethal injections, Environmental Protection Agency regulations, housing discrimination, and redistricting. CBS News looks at six of the court's outstanding cases.

California golf courses

Some consider golf courses in California a drain on scarce water supplies as summer begins in a state ravaged by drought. CBS News correspondent Ben Tracy hit the links to show how those who run the fairways are faring.

Medical debt

Thousands of individuals who have been hounded for overdue medical bills are about to get a welcome surprise: a check. The move comes six months after the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau completed an extensive study that revealed one in five U.S. consumers has a credit report marred by medical debt, often because the debt reporting companies failed to provide basic consumer protections.

Dad's home

With gifts and cards and maybe a dinner out, millions of Americans honored their dads yesterday, realizing that today, many dads will head out the door and back to another busy work week that allows for precious little family time. CBS News correspondent Lee Cowan reported for "Sunday Morning" on a growing number of new dads embracing the opportunity to briefly enjoy an alternate lifestyle in which Daddy is home.

Swarovski

This year marks 120 years of business for the crystal company Swarovski. The multi-billion dollar enterprise was founded to give everyday people the look of movie stars with its cut glass. Many of its products were also featured in Hollywood blockbusters. CBS News correspondent Major Garrett visited the family-owned company's headquarters in Austria.

More Top News

World

Taliban attacks Afghan parliament

Detained Al-Jazeera journalist to stay in German custody

China ignores calls to end dog meat festival

Politics

Obama uses "N-word" in discussing racism

GOP cries foul after Senate blocks defense bill

Mike Huckabee: Confederate flag "not an issue" for 2016

U.S.

Jordan Spieth takes U.S. Open in surprise win

MoneyWatch

Apple Swiftly succumbs

Contractor or employee? It's a taxing matter

When money's tight, these bills can be put off

Health

In rare case, Colorado teen dies of plague