After George Benson's concert Saturday at the Benedum Center, keyboardist and musical director David Garfield said Mr. Benson was attempting to give extra effort for the hometown folks.

Judging from the reaction afterward, I'd say he delivered.

The evening was billed as a "Greatest Hits" tour, and the guitarist/vocalist who has always delivered a smorgasbord of music stretched his repertoire from the pop-jazz that put him on the map in the 1970s to his 1980s mega-hits to just a taste of traditional jazz. Oh, and did I tell you that he comes from the Hill District? (The city remembered, as Pittsburgh Mayor Bill Peduto officially proclaimed Saturday "George Benson Day.")

The evening was billed as a "Greatest Hits" tour, and the guitarist/vocalist who has always delivered a smorgasbord of music stretched his repertoire from the pop-jazz that put him on the map in the 1970s to his 1980s mega-hits to just a taste of traditional jazz. Oh, and did I tell you that he comes from the Hill District?

Perhaps not surprisingly, Mr. Benson opened up with the Bobby Womack tune "Breezin'," of course the title track from his breakout album from 1976, but added accents to change things up a little bit. He followed that up with "Johnnie Lee," another instrumental and one that allowed Mr. Garfield to display some of his artistry.

And then he went pop on us -- "Love X Love," "Kisses in the Moonlight," "Turn Your Love Around" (though Stanley Banks' opening bass riff was virtually inaudible), "Nothing's Gonna Change My Love For You," "In Your Eyes," during all of which he put down his guitar. Mr. Benson even took the time to pay homage to another singer and, in this case, songwriter, pulling out James Taylor's "Don't Let Me Be Lonely Tonight."

Two songs he had to do closed the performance: "This Masquerade," during which he went right into the groove; and a stretched-out rendition of his post-disco smash "Give Me the Night."

For an encore, Mr. Benson came up with "Moody's Mood for Love," a takeoff on "I'm in the Mood for Love" that employs the technique known as "vocalese" in which words are written to an improvised solo. In this case it was a version originally performed by the late saxophonist James Moody -- and in a surprise, Mr. Benson was joined by vocalist and percussionist Liliana de los Reyes on a duet. Finally came his now-classic take on "On Broadway," which gave space to drummer Kahari Parker to bash a bit.

One thing I appreciated: The sound wasn't too overpowering where I was sitting, meaning my ears won’t be ringing for hours or days afterward.

Opening the show -- and keeping it local -- was singer Mister Chandler on such standards as "All of Me," "The Shadow of Your Smile" and "My Cherie Amour." He had keyboardist Max Leake and, later, alto saxophonist Tony Campbell backing him up. For an opening act, he, too, got the audience going, but his segment went just a little too long.

Rick Nowlin: rnowlin@post-gazette.com or 412-263-3871.