WASHINGTON — The Republican presidential candidates’ three debates have been sometimes compelling, often contentious and always amusing.

We have learned a lot less about how any of the candidates would govern. They have chiefly relied on clichés, buzzwords and attempts to prove who is the most contemptuous of President Obama or Hillary Rodham Clinton. There is a similar weakness in the smaller Democratic field, which has had only one debate; subsequent forums may provide more meat.

The Republican void was on display in the debate on Wednesday focusing on the party’s favorite issue: taxes. All the candidates would cut extensively, though most would add trillions to the debt. The proposals from the two front-runners, Donald J. Trump and Ben Carson, would create the largest budget shortfalls.

They also tried to camouflage their plans’ heavy tilt in favor of the more affluent. Mr. Trump stresses that he would end the carried interest tax loophole benefiting private-equity and hedge fund executives. He would also eliminate the estate tax, which is paid by only 0.2 percent of all families. Killing carried interest would raise $2 billion a year; killing the estate tax would cost $20 billion.

The much-maligned moderator at last week’s debate was essentially correct that Senator Marco Rubio’s tax cuts would give almost twice as much to the rich as to the middle class, though the candidate denied it. An analysis by the Tax Foundation of Mr. Rubio’s initial proposal — which has been slightly modified — showed that it would give the biggest benefits to the poorest, but that the top 1 percent would get about twice as much, on a percentage basis, as the middle and working class.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

To understand why candidates avoid budget specifics, look at the one realistic proposal, that of John Kasich, the governor of Ohio. He would cut taxes and offer a balanced budget in eight years. Some of the entitlement changes he advocates would be tough; but the real problem is that he would freeze nondefense discretionary spending for eight years, bringing it far below levels in the Eisenhower administration as a percentage of the economy. These cutbacks would affect big-ticket items such as veterans’ health care, the Border Patrol and health research, and would be politically impossible.

The Affordable Care Act, long the bête noire of Republicans, was mentioned only twice in passing at the debate. Demanding repeal is easy; a replacement is much harder to come up with. Former Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida has tried. His initiative would lower some costs and lessen regulation, but it would also provide fewer benefits, weaken a ban on discriminating against people with pre-existing conditions and limit tax-free insurance offered by employers.

The immigration discussion has been dominated by Mr. Trump’s promise of a “beautiful” wall along the southern border that he insists Mexico would pay for. Climate change was barely mentioned, other than condemnations of Mr. Obama’s policies.

Similarly, all the candidates attacked what they consider the president’s weakness on foreign policy and national security. With the exception of Senator Lindsey Graham, who does not register sufficiently in polls to get on the main stage, they offered few specifics on how they would fight terrorists, or counter Russian incursions and China’s assertive territorial claims.

“The only Republican with a defined national security policy is Lindsey Graham,” says John Nagl, formerly a top adviser to Gen. David H. Petraeus and now the headmaster at the Haverford School. “They certainly aren’t willing to give defense the resources it needs, to impose a gasoline tax to fund national security needs, or to do anything serious.”

To be sure, there have been deceptive debates in past campaigns. Mr. Obama presented himself as a protectionist, vowing to renegotiate trade pacts. George W. Bush promised a “humble” foreign policy.

Still, campaigns and debates matter. The candidates and the news media have yet to meet that standard this time.