LANSING, MI -- Welfare spending in Michigan is shrinking at a faster pace than the state's unemployment rate, a trend that suggests some needy adults -- and their children -- may be missing out on social safety nets designed to protect the poor.

The Michigan Department of Human Services is one of the few state agencies poised to see a significant funding reduction in the $53.2 billion 2015 budget that lawmakers sent to Gov. Rick Snyder on Thursday.

Total state spending is expected to grow by 9.3 percent next year, but the DHS budget is down 4.4 percent.

The DHS reductions are a direct result of declining caseload estimates for temporary cash and food assistance programs funded by the state and federal governments. Fewer people are qualifying for the programs due to an improving economy and welfare reforms.

Caseloads for the Family Independence Program, which provides cash to families with children and pregnant women, are already at their lowest point in decades and falling quickly. The state expects to process 33,300 cases in 2015, down from 44,400 in the current year and 79,660 in 2011, saving the state and federal government about $62.8 million combined.

Spending on the Food Assistance Program, fully funded by the federal government, is projected to drop by $445.5 million in 2015. The state expects to handle 890,000 food stamp cases at $224 per month, down from 894,750 at $264 per month in the current fiscal year.

"This is an enormous drop in cases in Michigan," said Pat Sorenson, a senior analyst for the Michigan League For Public Policy. "And when you're talking about reductions in FIP cases, it's important to understand that 70 percent of recipients are children.

"It's really about economic opportunities for families, because children live within the context of families. We're seeing unemployment remain high, child poverty rates are high, but access to basic public assistance is being cut off or choked off. This should be concerning to all of us."

Michigan's economy is showing signs of improvement -- the unemployment rate has dropped from 10.9 percent in 2011 to 7.4 percent in April -- which means some families may be taking a step up after receiving a helping hand. But policy changes have also played a large role in Michigan's reduced welfare caseloads and costs.

A 2011 law signed by Gov. Rick Snyder strengthened Michigan's 48-month lifetime limit on cash assistance, originally enacted under former Gov. Jennifer Granholm. The state retained exemptions for the elderly and those with disabilities but eliminated various extensions and leeway afforded to case workers.

Snyder said the tighter limit, at the time considered the strictest of its kind in the nation, would return "cash assistance to its original intent as a transitional program to help families while they work toward self-sufficiency."

Also in 2011, Michigan changed the way it determined food stamp eligibility, adding an asset test to an existing income cap. Families with $5,000 or more in assets -- including cash, savings and vehicles beyond a $15,000 exemption -- cannot qualify.

Food stamps are administered by the state through the Bridge Card program but paid for by the federal government. The asset test and related laws passed in 2012 were widely seen as a response to a handful of lottery winners who continued to receive food stamps because their winnings were not considered traditional income.

Michigan closed 8,237 cash assistance cases in calendar year 2013 as the result of the state's 48-month time limit and the federal governments 60-month limit, according to DHS. The department did not immediately have data on the impact of the asset test on food stamp cases.

"There's a lot of things we've done that have reduced caseloads," said Sen. Bruce Caswell, R-Hillsdale, chairman of the Department of Human Services appropriations subcommittee.

"We help people when they're down and out, get them back on their feet and get them back out into the workforce. We help them when they need it, but we expect them to help themselves as well."

To be sure, the state and federal government have enacted other programs designed to help the hardest hit, including a major expansion of Medicaid eligibility under the Affordable Care Act. The Healthy Michigan plan, championed by Snyder, has already provided health care coverage to 287,281 beneficiaries.

The state is expected to save $232 million next year as federal Medicaid funding jumps by more than $1 billion. The state's minimum wage rate is also expected to go from $7.40 to $8.15 in September before climbing to $9.25 in 2018 under compromise legislation signed by Snyder late last month.

But critics say welfare policy changes have made it harder for low-wage workers to climb out of poverty and hurt kids who are at the mercy of their parents. As of 2012, 25 percent of children were living in households with an income below the federal poverty level.

"Sadly, research shows that children who are born poor and live in persistently poor families are more likely to have health problems, suffer from learning and other disabilities, drop out of high school, have babies as teens, and ultimately have trouble finding consistent employment as adults," MLPP President and CEO Gilda Jacobs said in subcommittee testimony earlier this year.

"The effects of persistent poverty can be long-lasting, and could derail Michigan's attempts to improve educational achievement and fuel economic growth."

Jonathan Oosting is a Capitol reporter for MLive Media Group. Email him, find him on Facebook or follow him on Twitter.