ORLANDO -- At this week's Florida Council on Aging's annual conference, one dominant theme was a worry that budget cuts in aging services and a political climate that emphasizes "personal responsibility" place unfair pressure on elders not lucky enough to remain healthy and wealthy to the end of their lifetimes.

As keynote speaker and Grantmakers in Aging CEO John Feather put it, messages about the importance of wellness and preventive medicine can cloud the fact that many circumstances determining health -- like income, environment and what kind of parents you happened to have -- are beyond an individual's control.

"If your aging process is not successful, it's your fault," he said, describing the current popular response to the rise of poverty and chronic illness among older adults. "That's part of the individualism model; it's up to you to figure it out. Why should we help you if you screwed up? You had your chance."

After Feather's speech, one woman in the audience observed that in the current social climate, people who succumb to age-related diseases are seen as "failures of wellness," instead of elders who deserve community support.

"As someone who cares for people who didn't make the wellness cut," she said, "I'm concerned about that."

But on the final day of the conference, Florida Department of Elder Affairs Secretary Samuel Verghese did announce a new form of support for elders who don't make that cut because of dementia. He unveiled a plan to promote better care and treatment for an estimated 510,000 Floridians with Alzheimer's disease, as well as those uncounted others who have some form of cognitive decline.

The Dementia Care and Cure Initiative, he said, "will engage communities across the state to be more supportive and improve the quality of life for Floridians affected by dementia." This does not involve any new funding, a department spokeswoman explained, but "will be focused on coordinating and strengthening partnerships." According to a statement from the department, the first pilot "Caring Community" will be selected next month.

As the head of Elder Affairs since December, Verghese takes a lot of kidding from aging specialists for his youthful appearance. But he made it clear that focusing on his new job has taught him to plan ahead.

"We want to help people stay in their homes and their communities. That's where they age best, and that's where they want to be," he said, adding, "I'm just a few years from there myself. I'm already thinking about which of my three kids are going to be my caregivers."

Follow Barbara Peters Smith on Twitter @BarbaraPSmith.