Home health agencies in Michigan and nationally are beginning to feel the effects of a cumulative 14 percent payment cut that began earlier this year and was part of cost containment provisions of the Affordable Care Act.



The Obamacare cuts, which amount to 3.5 percent annually, will save Medicare an estimated $22 billion over the four years through 2017.



But home health agency executives and health care lawyers I’ve spoken with in Southeast Michigan say the cuts are unfair, counterproductive and come at a time when investments in information technology and adding staff to improve quality are straining budgets.



Agency CEOs say the cuts also could disrupt care as weaker agencies struggle to meet patient needs before they close or are acquired by larger and more successful companies.



In Michigan, a report by Avalere Health LLC for the home health industry shows 40 percent of home health agencies will lose money in 2017 – 253 agencies serving 67,854 seniors. Some 14,299 jobs are at stake.



Moreover, cutting prices too much and too fast to home health agencies – instead of increasing resources to weed out unethical and fraudulent providers – could increase hospital readmissions, result in more emergency department visits and lower quality care for hundreds of thousands of patients.



As I’ve written before, the new health care overhaul is more than about increasing taxes to pay for private insurance and Medicaid coverage for more than 16 million people.



Who said there is no cost containment? Among other changes that seek to reduce costs, Obamacare cuts more than $500 billion in payments to hospitals, hospices, skilled nursing services and home health over the next 10 years. That’s not chump change because private insurers traditionally follow Medicare pricing strategies.



The nation's new health insurance system had also required a cut in payments to Medicare Advantage plans before intense insurance industry lobbying turned those cuts into a half percent price increase for 2015.



But some health care payment cuts are really counterproductive because they result in higher costs in other areas. And I believe the home health cuts – which, in effect, reduce services to seniors at home and make it more likely they get sicker and result in an ambulance visit to a hospital – are a case in point.



However, relief for home health may be on the way.





A $1.1 trillion spending deal recently approved by Congress asks theto answer key questions about the effect of the home health cuts. President Barack Obama, who pushed for congressional approval, is expected to sign the bill.First, Congress asked CMS to answer if the certification requirement to prove that a physician has indeed conducted a face-to-face visit with a patient has prevented fraud and abuse, increased access or reduced costs.Second, Congress ordered CMS to present a plan on how face-to-face certification can be simplified.Third, Congress also wants CMS to describe the impact the payment cuts is having on home health agencies.William Deary, CEO of Jackson-based, a for-profit home health and hospice company, said the CMS reports will likely show significant impacts on operations to the home health agencies.“We think this is a clear signal from the Hill to CMS and are very appreciative of it,” Deary said. “Lawmakers have been hearing a lot about its impact, especially in rural areas.”On the face-to-face physician certification requirement, Deary said home health agencies agree there should be proper documentation. But he said physicians already provide sufficient documentation when they order home health services.“There are safeguards in place now. Doctors provide a plan of care and then sign it,” Deary said. “That is enough.”Deary compared the face-to-face requirement with using a consumer credit card at a retail store.“You use yourcard at a store and sign the bill,” he said. “Under face-to-face, you must then write a narrative as to why you bought the product and that you intend to use it.”Medicare’s primary goal is to reduce inappropriate care, but Deary said all Medicare has done is make it more difficult for patients to receive at-home care.“I don’t believe (Medicare is) going to find the overly burdensome (face-to-face) requirement has reduced fraud, impacted access or reduced costs,” he said.Deary told me he understands Medicare must make some cuts in home health payments to protect the solvency of the Medicare Trust Fund. But he said the 14 percent cuts are too deep, especially on top of double-digit cuts that began in 2009.“The cuts have to be intelligent,” he said.Deary wouldn’t say precisely how much of a reimbursement cut he would support. However, he said more funds should be spent investigating and putting out of business fraudulent home health providers that drive up government spending.“What I do know is there are a large number of good providers who may not be in business next year because of these cuts,” Deary said. “There are individuals taking advantage of the system to take money via home health, who never provided the services (but billed Medicare for them).”Deary said Medicare should more aggressively fight fraud and abuse in the home health industry.Here’s a recent story about a home health executive in metro Detroit who pleaded guilty to $22 million in Medicare fraud.My colleague Chad Halcom wrote about Medicare fraud earlier this year that showed Medicare is spending $100 million less on home health billings in metro Detroit than it did in 2009.Since 2010, 84 people have been indicted for a total of $150 million in fraudulent billings in Southeast Michigan, according to the Detroit-area Medicare Task Force.