Buy Photo CEO Rich D'Amaro and William "Kip" Schumacher, founder and executive chairman, pose for photographs at the Schumacher Group in Lafayette, LA, Tuesday, April 8, 2014. Paul Kieu, The Advertiser (Photo: Paul Kieu, The Advertiser)Buy Photo

There's been a changing of the guard within the Schumacher Group.

After 20 years in business, the company's founder, Dr. William "Kip" Schumacher, will remain on the board and Executive Chairman Rich D'Amaro will take the reins as the new CEO.

D'Amaro, 59, is the founder of 13-year-old company Subsidium Healthcare in Atlanta.

Schumacher, the Lafayette-based medical staffing and management company, provides services to 4 million patients throughout the U.S. and, like many health care companies, is undergoing major changes with the onset of the federal Affordable Care Act.

In early March, the company confirmed that it will consolidate its accounts receivable function in Dallas. In October, 42 jobs, including 32 in Louisiana, were eliminated.

The uncertainly over the ACA's impact on Schumacher's hospital clients and the federal sequestration affected the company's margins, Maura Nelson, vice president of marketing and communications, said.

"Payer pressures on our revenue/rate structure required all providers to 'tighten their belts' and do things differently," Nelson said. "That trend continues for all health care providers and particularly (emergency) physicians."

The company's main objective hasn't changed, Schumacher said during an interview last week with The Daily Advertiser.

"You have to be prepared for anything and that is what we've been focusing on. We are preparing our infrastructure and our company to be able to last. So no matter what happens we are going to be able to end up accommodating changes," Schumacher, 60, said. "I think the most important thing is that health care is really about the interface between the patient and the doctor."

Schumacher, an emergency medical practitioner for more than 30 years, started the company in 1994 in Opelousas.

In 2011, the company announced a $19 million expansion that would create 600 direct jobs and 800 indirect jobs.

Part of the expansion included landing a state performance-based grant from the Mega-project Development Fund to offset 50 percent of the company's headquarters expansion. Other incentives included training assistance from the state's FastStart program and access to its Quality Jobs program and assistance from the state Digital Media and Software Tax Credit.

Despite the company's realignment efforts, including staff reduction, Schumacher Group has made good so far with its state contract, Gregg Gothreaux, president and CEO of the Lafayette Economic Development Authority, said.

"As of March 31, Schumacher Group is approximately 20 jobs short of the contractual requirement. However, they are hundreds of thousands of dollars above the payroll requirement," Gothreaux said via email.

So what's next for the company?

"I think every health care organization has to adapt. Whether it's providing more existing services or more new services," D'Amaro, seated next to his predecessor, said. "As Kip described, the ACA is not a trivial event and we aren't even seeing normalized behavior within the country let alone the state. So every organization that works in 26 states is going to look differently state by state and going to morph differently based on timing and what's going on in that particular market."

D'Amaro was president of the health care consulting firm Tatum LLC and served as managing partner and chairman of International Health Care Practice at international company KPMG for 20 years.

Schumacher said he spent the last year getting acquainted with D'Amaro. His lengthy background in the business side of the healthcare industry, particularly with large corporations, made him the prime candidate to run his Acadiana-based company, which has grown into a major conglomerate.

"You don't see entrepreneurs grow businesses like this without bringing in people that have had experience with very large, complicated organizations," Schumacher said. "So Rich has had those experiences, and also, equally as important, has the same philosophical approach to what business we are in. We are in the business of taking care of patients.

"It made me realize that he was the right guy to keep the mission alive and also operate the beast."

D'Amaro said he spent the year researching the company and meeting with Schumacher's clients to get a feel for the business.

"You could see the admiration and respect that they had for the company," he said. "For those of us who grew up on the business side of health care, we've seen the sham organizations that mouth the words 'patient care, quality' but don't really live it and embody it day in and day out. This organization does. I had a chance to take a glimpse in before I kind of came in to the company, which you very seldom get to do. I got to watch a company go through a lot of changes, good and bad. And like every other health care organization, you saw the character of the organization."

Health care companies nationwide are expected to shift as policies within the ACA are likely to morph and be altered by Washington lawmakers. With the swift federal overhaul comes great uncertainly within the industry, D'Amaro and Schumacher said.

"Everyone in health care, not just physicians, are kind of in flux right now. What you see with these types of changes going on are people don't really know what to expect when they walk into work just about every day," Schumacher said. "So what you are seeing is a lot of people demoralized. If you look at the job satisfaction in areas of health care, they are probably the worst that they've been in many, many years. We are trying to convince people that this is still a great industry to be in."

The demand for health care, however, isn't going to slow, D'Amaro said, and Schumacher Group's services will inevitably change in the next few years — but for the good.

"We are going to see an increase in demand. The market for our services really mirrors the market for hospitals. There are about 4,500 hospitals in America. We think about 30 to 40 percent of them are independently managed," D'Amaro said. "So there are about 1,200 or so potential clients across the country that don't have an affiliation with a company like ours. That's a great opportunity."

Schumacher Group was behind the staffing of new in-house surgical specialists for the Lafayette General Health System. Those are just some of the services the company plans to provide as it moves forward, Schumacher said.

"There are challenges, but we are headed in the right direction and do think good things are going to happen," Schumacher said. "I do think that the ACA, despite the fact that there's all kinds of changes, is forcing us down a path to incorporate technology and other innovative technology like predictive analytics and electronic medical records. The use of telemedicine and all kinds of technologies are going to make our lives better and our care better over time."

"We might actually have a chance in providing that care for the population we are entrusted to care for, and we might actually pull it off," the doctor said.

Read or Share this story: http://www.theadvertiser.com/story/money/business/2014/04/12/damaro-takes-reins-at-schumacher-group/7645395/