SAN ANTONIO, March 23, 2016 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- A new analysis by Verify Markets shows the United States Virtual Healthcare Market was valued over $162.1 million in 2015 and expected to reach revenues over $3.5 billion by 2022 (http://www.verifymarkets.com/products/2016-united-states-virtual-healthcare-market) with a CAGR of 49.8 percent during the forecast period. The market is defined by revenue generated from video consultation, audio consultation and kiosks. The adoption of integrated business models by the healthcare industry and increasing penetration of smartphones have significantly fostered the rise of the virtual healthcare market in the United States. The Affordable Care Act is consequently leading to the increasing popularity of virtual healthcare services among hospitals and customers. Furthermore, virtual healthcare offers benefits such as resource optimization in the healthcare industry and reduction in the number of personal visits in non-emergency medical conditions, which are the key driving factors in the U.S. virtual healthcare market. However, factors such as varying medical practices laws across different states and security and privacy for patients are posing as major restraints to the growth of the U.S. virtual healthcare market.



Digital transformation allows the healthcare industry to deliver on-demand non-emergency medical treatments to patients. U.S. certified doctors and physicians are listed on various virtual healthcare service platforms eliminating the occurrence of any fraud medical practice. In addition, insurance companies have been keen on increasing coverage for such virtual healthcare services. Companies like Cigna Healthcare and Life Insurance Company (CHLIC) and UnitedHealth partnered with virtual healthcare service providers MDLIVE, Inc. and American Well Corporation, respectively, to offer maximum access to healthcare services for its members.

The U.S. virtual healthcare market has been analyzed based on various modes of consultation including video consultation, audio consultation, and kiosks. Currently, the market has witnessed an increasing adoption of the video consultation services in the United States.

The report provides a detailed analysis of the United States virtual healthcare market along with comprehensive study of key market trends and the competitive landscape. Prominent companies included in this report are Teladoc, Inc., MDLIVE, Inc., Doctor on Demand, Inc., American Well Corporation and HealthTap, Inc., among others. A copy of the United States Virtual Healthcare Market research report can be obtained at www.verifymarkets.com. Follow us for more updates on Twitter@verify_markets and LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/company/verify-markets.

Haley Rico Phone: 210-595-9687 Email: haley@verifymarkets.com