U.S. Rep. Jim Renacci, R-Wadsworth, visited Walgreens on North Court Street in Medina on Monday to learn about pharmacies’ role as a health care provider.

“We want to talk about the role of the community pharmacy in providing access to care,” said Jaime Whited, health care supervisor at Walgreens’ district offices in Warrensville Heights.

Whited was joined by Joe Prignano, director of pharmacy retail operations at the district office, and North Court Street store manager Abby Cuevas for a tour of the building.

The store at 805 N. Court St. administered 2,247 flu shots last year, and Cuevas said they’re gearing up for another busy flu season in 2015. Many families opt to get their shots at the local pharmacy because the hours are convenient and walk-ins are welcome.

Renacci met with pharmacy manager Brain Colbert, who said his staff plays an important role in educating people about illnesses and chronic conditions and helping to explain how medications work.

Colbert said his work is what he was hoping to do when he went to pharmacy school 10 years ago.

Whited said pharmacists receive between six and eight years of training to get their degree, and their expertise allows them to play an important role in educating patients on a drug’s possible side effects and interactions with other medications.

Renacci met with Sue Sitzenstock, a nurse practitioner who works at the store’s health clinic. Clinic staff can diagnose and provide medication for acute illnesses and also vaccinations and sports physicals for schools or camps.

Sitzenstock said the goal is not to replace the family doctor, but to provide an alternative to the emergency room, and to offer vaccinations and other services on a convenient basis through scheduled appointments and walk-in examinations.

Renacci asked Whited to outline the biggest issues facing pharmacies, and access to care was his response.

Whited urged Renacci to support House Resolution 592 — bipartisan legislation introduced in January — which would designate pharmacists as health care providers and allow them to bill for services under Medicare Part B.

Pharmacists provide immunizations and health screenings and tests. The bill would allow pharmacists in underserved rural and urban areas to provide those services to patients with Medicare Part B coverage and bill Medicare. The change would reduce the drive and wait for patients who have Medicare Part B coverage and need screenings, including blood pressure, blood glucose and bone density.

Renacci said he would review the legislation before making a decision to support it. After the stop at Walgreens, Renacci planned to visit with Medina County commissioners.

Renacci, who represents the 16th District, is serving his third term in the U.S. House. He has voted more than 30 times to repeal the Affordable Care Act, an overhaul of health insurance system approved in 2012. He serves on the Ways and Means Committee and has introduced legislation aimed at lowering taxes for businesses and curbing government spending.