LINCOLN, N.H. (AP) - The National Forest Service’s proposal to take down a damaged bridge over the North Fork of the Pemigewasset River has caused concern among hikers and policymakers alike.

The 60-foot-long Thoreau Falls Bridge was damaged during Tropical Storm Irene in 2011 and since then, the National Forest Service has posted signs warning hikers to go over it one at a time. The bridge, built in 1962, is part of the 5.1-mile Thoreau Falls Trail in the Pemigewasset Wilderness area in the White Mountain National Forest.

“The bridge itself is not sound,” said Dan Abbe of the Forest Service.

Abbe said engineers have determined the log span can’t be repaired, leaving as the only options removal, replacement or leaving it there and hoping nobody gets hurt if it collapses. Federal rules make it hard to put man-made structures in wilderness areas so officials would have to justify building a new bridge, Abbe said.

U.S. Sen. Kelly Ayotte said she’s heard from hikers who are urging the service to repair or replace the bridge.

“Removal of the Thoreau Falls Bridge could result in a higher rate of safety challenges and rescue operations,” Ayotte wrote in a Sept. 8 letter to the U.S. Department of Agriculture. “Recreationists often utilize the same guide books and maps for many years and will not have updated information if a trail or bridge on their planned journey has been altered. As a result, should the bridge be removed, a hiker may attempt a dangerous and potentially fatal water crossing.”

State Sen. Jeb Bradley, a Wolfeboro Republican and avid hiker, said in a letter asking Ayotte to intervene that removing the bridge would hurt tourism by cutting access to the wilderness from the popular Lincoln Woods lot on the Kancamagus Highway. Bradley said removing another bridge over the Pemigewasset in 2009 cost more than it would have to repair it and he wants the Forest Service to do a cost analysis of both options.

Abbe said the service received 60 to 70 comments - from both sides of the issue - during the five-week public comment period that ended on Sept. 9.

“We have a legal mandate, because it’s wilderness, to try to manage that in a particular way,” Abbe said. “The concerns about safety are totally valid and if we can honestly say that bridge is needed for safety reasons and we have specific things that point to that, there’s going to be a higher possibility that it would be replaced.”

A decision could come in November.