Buy Photo Pat Medlin, who is disabled, unpacks basketballs at her job at New Horizons. (Photo: File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

The intellectually and developmentally disabled community of Tennessee faces a crisis in the quality of their care and in their ability and desire to contribute to society.

A 46 percent turnover rate among those who directly care for them has created inconsistency and instability that jeopardize clients’ health and prospects.

The system is heavily reliant on private services because they can offer care at half the cost of the state. However, with rising health care and technology costs, in addition to mandatory minimum wage increases, employers cannot compete with other business, such as fast-food restaurants, for direct support employees.

What that means is that the fully professional, stable workforce that once cared for the state’s most vulnerable — and voiceless — citizens no longer exists.

As a consequence, clients are constantly having to build relationships and trust with new caregivers, taking a toll on their emotional well-being.

In addition, because rules require staff to be present when clients are working — whether it is sorting clothes at a retail shop or moving boxes at a warehouse — the unstable workforce has resulted in leaving 80 percent of intellectually and developmentally disabled clients unemployed.

That further isolates them and makes them more vulnerable.

State lawmakers and Gov. Bill Haslam can help reverse the poor retention rate.

They could amend the state budget to allow the Department of Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities to provide the Bureau of TennCare $21 million in recurring funds, thus enabling providers to pay direct-service employees a $1-an-hour raise.

That money would be matched at a rate of 2-to-1 by the federal government, bringing that investment to $60 million.

Surely, with the state’s healthy financial outlook and its half-billion surplus, attending to the 9,000 intellectually and developmentally disabled citizens should be a priority.

Haslam's spokeswoman Jennifer Donnals said: "We're beginning the budget amendment process now, and this is one of many requests that have been made. The governor will continue, as he has done during his time in office, to take a thoughtful and deliberate approach to the state's budget and how taxpayer dollars are spent."

Of course, Haslam and lawmakers should be commended for approving $24 million in the 2016 budget to ensure services for intellectually and developmentally disabled people who were on the state’s waiting list.

However, that money did not go for those who were already receiving services and the people who directly work with them.

That workforce numbers 20,000 employees, and the average hourly salary is $8.61, about $340 a week or $18,000 a year.

That is below a living wage, and the state’s formula keeps that wage stagnant.

The minimum wage is $7.25 an hour.

“The problem is, they could be making more at McDonald’s,” said Luke Queen, vice president for operations for Evergreen Life Services, a private provider of care.

Queen recently visited with The Tennessean Editorial Board along with Evergreen house manager Molly Sullivan; Robin Atwood, executive director of Tennessee Community Organizations; and three of the clients who live in Sullivan’s home — Patricia Medlin, 71, and twins Charity and Chelsea James, both 31.

Medlin’s sister Eleanor Thompson also attended.

Medlin still works, but the James sisters are unemployed and want to go back to work in retail.

These women want to offer their skills and talent and should not be denied that opportunity because of instability in the workforce that is supposed to care for them, protect them and encourage them to live up to their potential.

The state can make a difference for Patricia, Charity, Chelsea and thousands more. It has the means to do so and should act.

Send the governor and lawmakers this message if you agree.

Opinion Engagement Editor David Plazas wrote this editorial on behalf of The Tennessean Editorial Board. Call him at 615-259-8063, email him at dplazas@tennessean.com or tweet to him at @davidplazas.

Buy Photo Pat Medlin talks with her program coordinator Monica Sullivan at New Horizons, where Medlin, who is disabled, works. (Photo: File / The Tennessean)

CONTACT THEM

Governor Bill Haslam

(615) 741-2001

Bill.haslam@tn.gov

Lt. Gov. Ron L. Ramsey

Senate Speaker

R-Blountville

(615) 741-4524

Lt.gov.ron.ramsey@capitol.tn.gov

House Speaker

(615) 741-0709

Speaker.beth.harwell@capitol.tn.gov

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1Rco3Uk