Dylann Roof appeared June 19 at his bond hearing in North Charleston. Roof remains at the Charleston County jail, where he’s expected to stay until he’s tried on nine murder charges and possibly federal hate crimes in the June 17 massacre at Emanuel AME Church.

On the night he joined a dozen black churchgoers for a Bible study, people close to Dylann Roof think the hatred quietly brewing inside him reached a cataclysm.

Old friends who renewed ties with Roof in the weeks before that evening had noticed signs of odd behavior and possibly violent tendencies. He was still the shy, soft-spoken, distant guy they remembered from his middle school days, but something about him was different.

Much of the change in Roof’s life had unfolded after he flunked out of ninth grade in Lexington County and moved, parting with his childhood friends. He split his time between a dad accused of abusing his stepmother and a mom who left his father before he was born.

Since then, an apparent racist hatred roiled in him, but he constantly exposed himself to black culture — what he viewed as the source of his feelings. Interviews with his acquaintances and with authorities, along with details gleaned from court documents and online postings, portray his aloof, insular existence leading up to that deadly night at Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in downtown Charleston. Officials confirmed last week that they had started a criminal probe into exactly how much some of his acquaintances knew about his hatching scheme.

Only now do the peculiarities of Roof’s behavior stand out to his friends, they said. They sometimes found him sitting alone, watching reruns of Oprah Winfrey’s talk show. They knew he traveled to Charleston and took pictures of important sites from Confederate history and the slavery era. They also saw him hang out with black people, treating them the same as his white friends.

Still other experiences that might have fueled his thoughts unfolded beyond their view: He took cues from “American History X,” a film that delves into beliefs of white supremacy, and he stored photographs of himself waving the Confederate battle flag and burning the U.S. banner.

The trouble percolating in his mind became most apparent during a bout of drinking with friends in early June, when he spoke of carrying out mass violence that would bring attention to his beloved South Carolina. They didn’t take his scheme seriously.

A little more than a week later, he immersed himself in an experience that he could have used to again study the targets of his hatred. He is white, but the 12 other people in the room at Emanuel AME Church were black.

According to the thoughts he apparently expressed in an online manifesto, what he did that night was his destiny. He felt obliged to act out a belief that black people were to blame for the nation’s ills — from its struggles with crime to its shortcomings in education. Police said he listened to Bible verses and pastors’ teachings, then stood and killed all but three of the people in the room before he walked out the door and disappeared into the night.

The next day, Kim Konzny saw surveillance images of Roof in the shirt and boots he often wore at her Lexington County home, where he had been staying lately.

Not Dylann, she thought; not the little boy who pushed a skateboard around her old neighborhood and struck up a friendship with her son.

But it was Dylann. It was the young man Konzny once knew as a good boy, albeit a loner. She wept.

“It breaks my heart that a sweet kid could do something like this,” she said. “It must have been hidden in himself.”

‘Just lost touch’

Roof’s father, Franklin, and his mother, Amy, married in 1988. He was a carpenter and an attorney’s son. She was a bartender.

His sister, Amber, was born four months later.

Trouble stirred in the marriage years before Roof was born. His parents separated in 1990. Citing “marital difficulties” in court paperwork, they divorced the next year.

Roof was born in April 1994 during a brief period of reconciliation between the couple, the Associated Press has reported.

But the pair remained divorced, and they shared custody of their two children.

Franklin Roof — most know him as Ben — got married again in 1998. His new bride, Paige, loved his children “unconditionally as her own,” her mother, Patricia Hastings of Chapin, wrote in court documents.

Roof’s stepmother often picked him up at school and shuttled him between his father’s house in Columbia and his mother’s place. She also had a biological daughter of her own: Morgan.

“She always put (the children’s) needs before her own and was most supportive of school, extracurricular and church activities,” a friend of hers, Carol Elliott of Columbia, wrote in the court papers.

Money got tight. Roof’s stepmother landed a part-time job at Sears. She worked for four years until 2005, but her husband wanted her to stay home to care for the children, cook and clean.

Her husband started making enough money from his business, Bennett Construction Co., to support the family alone. He eventually hauled in a six-figure income.

But their relationship crumbled. He belittled his wife and faulted her cleaning skills, she wrote. Her mother called it a “pattern of control and mental manipulation.” After she reluctantly moved with Roof’s father to Key West, Fla., she accused him of pushing her down during an argument. She hit her head and was left with bruises.

“My whole life fell apart,” Roof’s stepmother said in an affidavit. “I was so scared of him that I knew I had to get out.”

She filed for divorce in 2008, and it lingered in court for three years.

During much of that time, Roof stayed with his mother on Smokey Joe Court near the Red Bank community. Ridgewood, their well-kept subdivision of middle-class families, is just south of Lexington.

Joey Meek, another middle-schooler around Roof’s age, lived on an adjacent street. They struck up a friendship. They went skateboarding and hung out with other neighborhood children, many of whom were black.

Roof was quiet, but polite. He would thank Meek’s mother, Konzny, when he stayed for dinner.

“I remember his mom thanking me for giving him a friend, or else he’d be stuck in the house all the time,” Konzny, 41, said. “He didn’t have many friends. ... I never saw him with anybody else.”

He and Meek seldom made mischief. They once got caught with marijuana, but police didn’t get involved, Konzny said.

At White Knoll High School, Roof started failing classes. The ninth-grader told Konzny that his advanced coursework bored him.

When he flunked out in 2010, Roof moved to Rosewood, a community 25 miles away in Columbia. He stayed in touch with Meek through Facebook messages, but the contact waned. Soon, it faded out entirely.

“They just lost touch,” Konzny said.

A ‘drastic action’

Within the next few years, Roof would move with his mother to an area outside Eastover, where her family had a wooden cabin on the main street, Garners Ferry Road.

The rural town is surrounded by cornfields and abandoned farms with rusty silos ensnared in vines. Many residents are black.

From his nearby house, 70-year-old widower James Dunlap sometimes saw members of Roof’s family outside, working on potted plants in the yard or near a backyard barn. He never talked to them. A chain stretched across the driveway, halting most visitors.

Dunlap had seen Roof at Mr. Bunky’s Meat Market and Restaurant, a town gathering place across the street that offers quail dinners for $10. He never heard him speak.

“It’s quiet out here,” Dunlap said. “That’s why we like it.”

Around the same time as Roof’s move, 17-year-old Trayvon Martin was killed in Sanford, Fla. The February 2012 shooting of Martin, who was black, by a Hispanic man, George Zimmerman, raised Roof’s interest. Whether Martin’s race prompted Zimmerman, a neighborhood watch volunteer, to confront him was a key question.

The manifesto that Roof is thought to have penned portrayed how the case sparked his racism.

Roof took to his computer. He typed “black on white crime” into Google, and “I have never been the same since that day,” the manifesto stated.

As his research deepened, the more impassioned he became. He saw segregation as a necessary defensive measure to keep society orderly, and he wished more people were proud descendants of slave owners. He thought about how he would take his fight against minorities to “the real world.”

“It is far from being too late for America or Europe,” the manifesto stated. “We could take it back completely. But by no means should we wait any longer to take drastic action.”

In February, the website LastRhodesian.net was created. It would house the diatribe and photographs of Roof’s travels to the Lowcountry. He had started amassing the photos as early as last summer, when he was pictured with slave mannequins at Boone Hall Plantation in Mount Pleasant.

Hints of a sinister plan taking shape showed up that same month. He was wearing all black clothes on Feb. 28 at Columbiana Centre mall when he asked questions of workers at The Shoe Department and Bath & Body Works: How many people work here? What time do you close?

Concerned, mall security guards called Columbia police. He slowly and nervously answered investigators’ questions. After prescription drugs were found in his pocket, he was arrested and banned from the mall for a year.

The next month, on March 13, a Columbia officer confronted Roof at Earlewood Park, where he had been lingering in his car. The site is within walking distance of his father’s house.

The officer searched his black 2000 Hyundai Elantra and found the forearm to an AR-15 — the military-style rifle used in the 2012 slayings of schoolchildren in Newtown, Conn. — and six magazines that could hold 40 .223-caliber rounds each — 240 in all. Roof told the officer that he didn’t have enough money for the entire rifle that he wanted to use for target practice.

He had committed no crime that day and was allowed to drive off.

His travels resumed. Photography on the website documented them.

On March 25, he visited a section for Confederate soldiers in Columbia’s Elmwood Cemetery. Four days after his 21st birthday on April 3, he clutched a .45-caliber Glock 41, a $600 pistol that news media said he bought with cash he got as a gift.

A week after that, he went back to Boone Hall Plantation and walked under the Avenue of Oaks. He strolled past slave cabins at James Island’s McLeod Plantation on April 23. He stood at Charleston’s Waterfront Park and looked across the harbor at Fort Sumter, where the Civil War started in 1861.

His friends said they knew of his trips to Charleston, where he had relatives. His uncle, Paul Roof, works as a College of Charleston sociology professor and is best known for his beard, which appeared on a beer can.

At some point, according to federal authorities who spoke with The New York Times, he also contacted hate groups online. But how much those sects knew of his burgeoning plot wasn’t known.

He returned to the Columbia mall on April 26, only to be caught again in the parking lot by a police officer. He was arrested for trespassing, and the ban against him was extended to three years.

The next day, he started posing for pictures with his Glock and a Confederate battle flag. On May 11, he burned a small American flag. In his tan boots, he crouched on another U.S. flag and spat on it.

‘Thought it was gibberish’

Two months ago, amid his old friend’s visits to historic sites, Meek checked Facebook and found a familiar name in his inbox.

Dylann Roof. He wanted to hang out and catch up.

Meek gave him a new address in a mobile home park not far from where they had spent part of their childhoods.

Konzny returned from work one day and found Roof there with her three sons. He wasn’t as thin as she remembered him. He still had a wiry 5-foot-9 frame and the same blond hair fashioned into a bowl cut, though it was shorter than she recalled.

He was still quiet, but Meek, 20, noticed that something was troubling him. Meek’s two younger brothers, 15-year-old Jacob and 17-year-old Justin, also caught on.

He once asked Justin Meek to take a picture of him burning the American flag. He had a Zippo lighter and some fuel.

“I said, ‘Hell no,’ ” Justin Meek said. “I couldn’t do that, and I asked why. He said he had his reasons.”

Konzny’s sons often found him watching “Titanic” and “Stand By Me,” a coming-of-age tale based on a Stephen King novel about boys setting out to find a missing child’s body. The manifesto, though, alluded to his favorite film: “Himizu,” a Japanese crime drama in which the protagonist embarks on a murder spree to kill evil people.

He played video games like “Call of Duty: Advanced Warfare” on the family’s Xbox 360. He surfed the Internet on his phone. He often ignored questions people asked, speaking only when he needed to. But he once mentioned to Jacob Meek that he wanted to bring more attention to the Palmetto State.

“He wanted South Carolina to be worldwide,” Jacob Meek said. “He said South Carolina is usually never on the news. ... Something really big had to happen to make it worldwide.”

He also talked about starting a race war. As he drank one night in early June — he liked Taaka vodka — Roof talked about doing something crazy, like “shooting up the College of Charleston,” the Meek brothers said. A black neighbor, 22-year-old Christon Scriven, was drinking with the group.

More concerned with what he would do that night, Joey Meek fetched the Glock from Roof’s trunk and stashed it under an air vent in his home. When Roof sobered up in the morning, Meek returned the gun.

“They didn’t take him seriously,” Konzny said. “They didn’t think anything of it. They thought it was gibberish.”

For the three or four times a week that Roof stayed overnight, he slept on top of some couch cushions arranged on the floor. But when the family woke June 17, he wasn’t there. He had arrived late the night before and slept in his car outside because he didn’t want to bother anyone.

The Meek brothers hitched a ride with him for a day at Lake Murray. Roof chose not to stay, instead telling them that he would catch a matinee of “Jurassic World” for $5.03 at the local AMC Theatre.

“He said he would be back that night or the next morning, but he never showed,” Jacob Meek said. “There was no word from him whatsoever after that.”

Konzny and her sons saw him the next morning in surveillance images taken outside Emanuel AME Church. He was wearing an outfit they often saw him in: dark pants rolled up above his Timberland boots and a gray shirt with stains on a sleeve that Roof said were caused by spilled battery acid.

They had heard about the attack the night before: Someone walked into a Bible study and fatally shot nine people, prompting a massive hunt for the gunman. They hoped it wasn’t Roof, but when they saw the surveillance, Joey Meek called the police.

Four unmarked vehicles soon showed up at the family’s mobile home, and FBI agents got out. They took everything he had left there: some empty vodka bottles, the lighter fluid he used to burn the American flag and two T-shirts, one featuring “The Incredible Hulk” and another emblazoned with “Myrtle Beach.”

Roof, meanwhile, drove northward in his Hyundai as authorities distributed his photo nationwide. A motorist in Shelby, N.C., recognized him and dialed 911. Police officers stopped his car about three miles from the home of his sister’s fiance, Michael Tyo. Amber Roof and Tyo, a soldier, were set to be married in Columbia three days later.

Roof didn’t put up a fight. The officers searched his car and found his Glock under a pillow in the backseat.

‘Wanted to kill’

The shooting brought the media attention to South Carolina that the Meek brothers said Roof sought.

Journalists descended on the towns where he had lived, trying to answer the question so many people were asking: Why? Some were willing to spend money for the answer.

The Meeks said a network television crew took them to dinner at Ruth’s Chris Steak House before they portrayed their side of Roof. One of Roof’s black friends asked reporters for cash to tell his story. “If y’all not paying no money, then no,” he said.

Roof’s relatives shooed away the reporters who showed up at their homes, where they had tacked up “no trespassing” signs. His father, a heavily tattooed motorcycle rider, came to the door with a Rottweiler by his side. “We’re not talking,” the man said.

Roof sits at the Charleston County jail, where he’s expected to stay until he’s tried on nine murder charges and possibly federal hate crimes. His family, in a statement through his attorney, has expressed disbelief of the events that put him there.

More of the experiences that led Roof down a path that ended in the church on Calhoun Street could be revealed when he’s prosecuted. But the FBI’s Brian Womble, supervisory resident agent for the area, said Charleston was fortunate to have an incredible collaboration of law agencies on hand to make sure that trail stretched no farther.

“He’s just a really bad person,” Womble said, “who wanted to kill a lot of people.”

Reach Andrew Knapp at 937-5414 or twitter.com/offlede.