Contributed by admin on Mar 08, 2015 - 03:38 PM





Harper Government celebrates the potential of young women and girls on International Women's Day

Minister Leitch announces "Strong Girls, Strong World" project and highlights the Government's new Girls Advisory Council

TORONTO, March 8, 2015 /CNW/ - The Honourable Dr. K. Kellie Leitch, Minister of Labour and Minister of Status of Women, today celebrated International Women's Day by announcing funding for a new national project that will support leadership opportunities for young women and girls in ten communities across Canada. The Minister also announced the creation of a new Girls Advisory Council to engage girls across Canada on their priorities and perspectives. The funding announcement took place at YMCA GTA.

Plan Canada, YWCA Canada, and YMCA Canada are receiving $750,000 in Government of Canada funding to work in partnership on a 24-month project entitled Strong Girls, Strong World. As part of the project, Plan Canada and its partners will support ten young women/girl led community projects across Canada. These grassroots projects will focus on the creation of Girls Committees, where young women/girls will gain skills in decision-making and leadership. This will be done by leading special events, community outreach, advocacy, and media initiatives. Priority issues around leadership will be identified in consultation with young men/boys and other stakeholders such as schools, and local community organizations.

Minister Leitch also took the opportunity to announce a new Girls Advisory Council that will engage girls 15-24 years of age on their priorities and areas of interest. The goal of the Council is to inform the ongoing work of the Government of Canada in areas such as: how to empower girls to be leaders; mentoring and championing for girls; preventing violence against young women and girls, including the harmful effects of social media (e.g. cyberviolence); and, how to use social media tools in positive ways (e.g. to promote role models and gender equality).

Council Membership

The Minister is pleased to announce the initial members of the Girls Advisory Council. They are:

Helen Zhou attends Central Technical School, is President of Student Council, an active member of the Mock Trial Club, and has worked on the school yearbook and magazine for four years.

attends Central Technical School, is President of Student Council, an active member of the Mock Trial Club, and has worked on the school yearbook and magazine for four years. Rory Flynn attends Sacred Heart School of Halifax , and is a member of her school's debate team as well as the national debate team.

attends Sacred Heart School of , and is a member of her school's debate team as well as the national debate team. Anjali Katta is a high school student and founder of GirlsCo and Bombay pads, which are organizations that seek to better the lives of girls in India and Canada .

is a high school student and founder of GirlsCo and pads, which are organizations that seek to better the lives of girls in and . Madilyne Kevany has for the past ten years personified the YMCA-YWCA of Winnipeg's core programming values of Respect, Responsibility, Honesty and Caring.

Strong Girls, Strong World Video Contest

Additional Advisory Council members will be selected by the Minister with the help of the current Council members announced today. New members will be selected from among girls making submissions to the Strong Girls, Strong World video contest, details of which were also announced today. Minister Leitch is inviting girls and young women to submit videos of their own thoughts about why it's important to celebrate the International Day of the Girl, and why they would like to join the Girls Advisory Council. Guidelines for the Strong Girls, Strong World video contest can be found at www.dayofthegirl.gc.ca.

Quick Facts

Strong Girls, Strong World video contest: videos need to be submitted by April 15, 2015 .

. The Government of Canada is committed to giving girls a strong foundation for success by empowering girls to be leaders and reach their full potential, including through mentoring and championing, and by working to prevent violence against young women and girls.

is committed to giving girls a strong foundation for success by empowering girls to be leaders and reach their full potential, including through mentoring and championing, and by working to prevent violence against young women and girls. Since 2007, the Government of Canada has provided more than $153 million through the Women's Program at Status of Women Canada for community-based projects. Of this amount $18 million for projects that address the needs of young women and girls.

has provided more than through the Women's Program at Status of Women Canada for community-based projects. Of this amount for projects that address the needs of young women and girls. The 2015 International Women's Day theme is Strong Women, Strong World: Improving Economic Opportunities for All. This theme points to the vital contributions that women make to both the domestic and global economies. It also highlights the need to ensure that every woman has the opportunity to help create prosperity, whether as an employee, a professional, a business leader or an entrepreneur.

Quotes

"On International Women's Day, I am proud to launch a new Government of Canada project that will support leadership opportunities for young women and girls in ten communities across Canada, along with a new Girls Advisory Council to engage girls on their priorities and perspectives. Both of these initiatives highlight what we know is true - when girls have a strong start in life they can achieve their full potential."

The Honourable Dr. K. Kellie Leitch, P.C., O.Ont., M.P.

Minister of Labour and Minister of Status of Women

"Plan Canada welcomes the support of the Government of Canada for this collaborative project that will see us partner with YWCA Canada and YMCA Canada to create new leadership opportunities for young women and girls across Canada. Plan's work across 70 countries has shown that when you invest in girls, the whole community, and ultimately the whole world, benefits. By sharing the best practices and lessons learned from these projects in communities across Canada, we will all benefit from girl-powered leadership and expertise."

Rosemary McCarney, President and CEO

Plan Canada

Additional Links

Strong Girls, Strong World video contest details at www.dayofthegirl.gc.ca

Information about International Women's Day

BACKGROUNDER

Girls Advisory Council

Girls Advisory Council (GAC)

On March 8, 2015, the Honourable Dr. K. Kellie Leitch, Minister of Labour and Minister of Status of Women, marked International Women's Day by announcing the creation of a new Girls Advisory Council to engage girls across Canada on their priorities and perspectives.

Council Mandate

The goal of the Council is to inform the ongoing work of the Government of Canada in areas such as: how to empower girls to be leaders; mentoring and championing for girls; preventing violence against young women and girls, including the harmful effects of social media (e.g. cyberviolence); and, how to use social media tools in positive ways (e.g. to promote role models and gender equality).

The Council will also inform the Minister of Status of Women on issues that could include recommendations on events such as the International Day of the Girl, and participation in international events (e.g. the United Nations Commission on the Status of Women).

Council Membership

In addition to the four initial members, additional Advisory Council members will be selected from among girls making submissions to the Strong Girls, Strong World video contest. New members will be selected by the Minister of Status of Women with the help of the four current members. A total of approximately 30 girls are expected to become members (5 or 6 per region). The current members of the Council are:

Helen Zhou attends Central Technical School, is President of Student Council, an active member of the Mock Trial Club, and has worked on the school yearbook and magazine for four years.

attends Central Technical School, is President of Student Council, an active member of the Mock Trial Club, and has worked on the school yearbook and magazine for four years. Rory Flynn attends Sacred Heart School of Halifax , and is a member of her school's debate team as well as the national debate team.

attends Sacred Heart School of , and is a member of her school's debate team as well as the national debate team. Anjali Katta is a high school student and founder of GirlsCo and Bombay pads, which are organizations that seek to better the lives of girls in India and Canada .

is a high school student and founder of GirlsCo and pads, which are organizations that seek to better the lives of girls in and . Madilyne Kevany has for the past ten years personified the YMCA-YWCA of Winnipeg's core programming values of Respect, Responsibility, Honesty and Caring.



Video Concept:

To be eligible for consideration to be selected as a member of the GAC, girls and young women are invited to submit a short video clip (maximum length of 2 minutes) answering: Why is the International Day of the Girl important to you and why would you like to be part of the Council? This can be done either electronically or by mail.

Deadline:

The video contest is open from March 8, 2015 until April 15, 2015.



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF CANADA ON INTERNATIONAL WOMEN’S DAY

Prime Minister Stephen Harper today issued the following statement on the occasion of International Women’s Day:

“Today, I join Canadians and people around the world in celebrating women – mothers, sisters, daughters, grandmothers, friends or simply those that we admire and respect. We applaud their courage, leadership, strength and compassion, as well as their endless contributions to our families, our economy, our country and our world.

“Canada’s theme for International Women’s Day 2015, Strong Women, Strong World, highlights the vital contributions that women make to the domestic and global economy. It also underscores Canada’s commitment to ensuring that every woman has the opportunity to participate fully in society, generating economic and social benefits for themselves and their families.

“Our Government has taken a number of actions to ensure safer communities for Canadian women and their families. For instance, we launched the Action Plan to Address Family Violence and Violent Crimes Against Aboriginal Women and Girls, and have strengthened our justice system by passing the Protecting Victims from Sex Offenders Act, to protect all Canadians, including women, from repeat, violent or sexual offenders; by passing the Protection of Communities and Exploited Persons Act, to protect children from sexual exploitation; and by introducing the Victims Bill of Rights Act, to give victims of crime a more effective voice. We also introduced the Zero Tolerance for Barbaric Cultural Practices Act, which aims to protect girls and young women from early and forced marriage.

“Internationally, Canada continues to be a global leader on improving maternal, newborn and child health in developing countries. The world has seen significant progress since 2010 when Canada brought this critical issue to the forefront of the world’s attention by launching the Muskoka Initiative on Maternal, Newborn and Child Health (MNCH). Canada further galvanized global action toward saving the lives of mothers and children in some of the world’s poorest countries by hosting the Saving Every Woman, Every Child: Within Arm’s Reach Summit in 2014. This Summit brought together Canadian and international partners to ensure that MNCH remains a central global development priority beyond 2015.

“Canada will continue to promote the human rights of women and girls both at home and on the international stage.

“On this special occasion, I encourage all Canadians to take the time to thank the remarkable women who have influenced their lives and show them the appreciation they so richly deserve.”

Message from His Excellency the Right Honourable David Johnston, Governor General of Canada, on the Occasion of International Women's Day

OTTAWA, ONTARIO--(Marketwired - March 8, 2015) - International Women's Day is an opportunity for us to celebrate how far we have come in achieving gender equality. Although great strides and progress have been made over the years, there remain challenges and obstacles to overcome in order for women to be fully recognized in every sphere of society.

Building a better world for all, one that is fairer and more just, is a responsibility we all share. To that end, we must continue to work together to pave the way for true equality of opportunity and to ensure that women's rights are respected and that women are actively involved at all levels.

The many initiatives in this regard and the extraordinary achievements of women around the world suggest that we are on the right track. Today, let us consider all that remains to be done to change mindsets so that women, in all their diversity, are heard and equality is established as a universal truth.

I wish you all a wonderful International Women's Day.

David Johnston

Minister Alexander issues statement on International Women's Day

Ottawa, March 8, 2015 – Canada’s Citizenship and Immigration Minister Chris Alexander issued the following statement on International Women’s Day: