The family of a Dallas mother who has been missing for almost a month searched for her Sunday at a Pleasant Grove park with help from Texas EquuSearch, KXAS-TV (NBC5) reported.

“This is a nightmare,” said Veronica Walls, the aunt of Marisol Espinosa. “This is turmoil to us emotionally and physically as well. It is unimaginable,” she told KXAS-TV.

Walls believes they will find the 34-year-old hairdresser and mother of three.

“We started looking for her on [December] 29, the day of her disappearance,” Walls told KXAS-TV. “We have not given up.”

The family is grateful for the support from Texas EquuSearch, a group of trained volunteers that travel nationally to help find missing people, KXAS-TV reported.

“Police resources are limited, and detectives are very busy on the investigative end,” said Tim Miller, the group’s founder. “So we’ll go ahead and help out.”

As of Sunday afternoon, the group had not found anything at Lawnview Park. Miller said he met with Dallas police detectives who provided additional locations they’d like his team to search, KXAS-TV reported.

Police were still classifying Espinosa’s disappearance as a missing persons case as of Thursday and have not named a person of interest.

Espinosa’s house caught fire in mid-December, and at the time of her disappearance, she was living with her mother and three children at her ex-boyfriend’s home in the 7700 block of Aurora Avenue.

Her family now suspects her ex-boyfriend, Faustino Valdez, may have caused the fire.

A judge granted Espinosa’s mother, Rosemary Espinosa, temporary custody of her three grandchildren last week and prohibited their father from contacting them. Valdez, who is the father of Espinosa’s two younger children, did not attend the hearing and has not been seen since Jan. 3.

Rosemary Espinosa fears that Valdez may have killed her daughter and that he could target the rest of the family. She said she had once seen Valdez try to choke Espinosa during an argument.

Anyone with information about Espinosa’s disappearance may call Dallas police at 214-671-4268.