Topics: Black Sabbath, Christianity, Jesus Christ, Ozzy Osbourne, The Weekling, Entertainment News

This article originally appeared on The Weeklings

“Pure e-vil!” the little preacher hissed, lifting the LP cover high and slamming it against the pulpit to make his point. He’d come to warn us against the dangers of rock by revealing secret messages hidden backwards in the music, scaring our parents by exposing symbols of the Illuminati tucked away in band photos and barcodes, and showing slides of Nikki Sixx and Tommy Lee surrounded by scantily clad women with long tan legs and raven eyes.

“But these guys,” he fumed, “are the worst.”

With a flick of his wrist the slide advanced. Four poor-looking sad sacks stood solemnly outside the gates of a cathedral. Their hair was long and straggly. Three of them had giant mustaches. To me, they looked just like the dudes who played Jesus’s crew in the Easter play.

“God,” the preacher spat, shaking his head with disgust, “help us all….”

Later, I found the Sabbath records in my uncle’s stash. The one the preacher banged against the pulpit was there so I listened to it while staring at the cover. The music sounded like the cover looked – purple and wavy and black. I flipped the cover over and found lyrics urging the listener to consider Christ and the state of one’s soul and how the love of God is the only thing that can save us from sin and hate.

What?

How could the little preacher be so wrong?

By the time I reached junior high, Sabbath had captivated me musically, philosophically and theologically as well. I was already a drummer with a fair grip on jazz but I swapped a set of golf clubs for a beat-up SG bass and set out learning Sabbath standards such as “Supernaut” and “Children of the Sea” while studying Bible passages from Job, Psalms and Revelation. Somehow, it all seemed to fit: Tony, Ozzy, Geezer and Bill were like horsemen of the apocalypse, modern day apostles, voices crying out in the wilderness, prophets and madmen bringing an honest message about good and evil, choice and consequence, faith versus despair, free will versus destiny and the seemingly endless war between Heaven and Hell.

Did the band stray too far into substance abuse at times? Well, yeah. Did their image get convoluted and misconstrued by record labels? Sure. Do prophets and apostles have a long history of being misunderstood? Nearly always, in their time.

So I had to wonder. Could Black Sabbath secretly be . . . a Christian band?

“‘Ello, Jamie?” a familiar voice says.

“Yes sir?”

“This is Geezah Butler calling. How are you t’day, mate?”

I’ve got Terrence “Geezer” Butler on the line, bass player for Black Sabbath, Classic Rock Living Legend, member of both the U.K. Music and Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, and one of the most influential musicians and lyricists of all time.

I’m interviewing him for Bass Guitar Magazine and, as an erstwhile kid bassist who cut his teeth on classic Sabbath, it’s an honor to talk guitars, amps and gear with one of heavy metal’s true founding fathers. But with a bit of time remaining, I’ve gotta ask Geezer about Sabbath and God.

(Thanks to BGM editor Joel McIver for allowing this excerpt.)

When I was a boy I heard a preacher claim that Black Sabbath’s music was evil. I got my uncle’s copy of Master of Reality and saw the lyrics were actually — quite Christian. Did you get any backlash over Sabbath singing a message of repentance and God being the only way to love?