Healthcare.gov & Medicare open enrollment deadlines loom (AP Photo/Don Ryan, File)

(SAVANNAH) When it comes to making changes to Medicare for 2016, Monday, December 7, 2015 is the last day to do so for those changes to take effect in the New Year. Healthcare, it’s something everyone needs at some point in their lives, and most of our older citizens rely on it. Dr. Patrick Conway is the Deputy Administrator & Chief Medical Officer for the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. He says people satisfied with their coverage don’t have to take any action to continue what their current coverage. The open enrollment period for medicare allows beneficiaries to make changes to their coverage to better suit their needs. ” They can choose traditional medicare, or they can choose Medicare Advantage Health Plan uh, so-called Part C Plan, that covers their health benefits and lastly, they need to make a choice about whether they want prescription drug coverage, prescription drug plan, so-called Part D plan for drugs that will cover those prescriptions that so many medicare beneficiaries needs.” said Conway.

There are three coverage categories for Medicare: Part A is coverage for hospital services. Part B is primary care coverage, doctor visits and preventative services, and Part C is medicare advantage which is health plans you may choose to pay for services. Part D is for prescription drugs. Dr. Conway says no matter the choice, there’s one thing that should be the foundation for all selections. “We also want you to think about the quality of the healthcare. We have star ratings online that show the quality of various health plans., so beneficiaries can go to medicare.gov/planfinder, and look at their various options for prescription drug coverage, medicare advantage coverage and traditional medicare.”

While the clock winds down on medicare enrollment, the healthcare.gov enrollment period will close a week and a day after medicare enrollment. Those consumers need to sign up by December 15th for coverage to start in 2016. But Dr. Conway says whether it’s Medicare or Obamacare, the time to act is now and for those with internet access, signing up is point and click easy, and that’s why it needs to go at the top of their list of things to do. ” You know, what’s more important than your healthcare? So it’s critically important for medicare beneficiaries and the their families and loves ones to evaluate their medicare options and make an active choice in terms of their medicare coverage.” Conway said. There is help available to answer enrollment questions and help consumers with the process. Phone numbers and links to those resources are listed below.

For face-to-face Medicare enrollment assistance :

Georgia Cares 1-912-236-0916

105 East 34th St.

Savannah, GA

Medicare enrollment assistance by phone: 1-866-552-4464

Medicare enrollment assistance online: https://www.medicare.gov/find-a-plan/questions/home.aspx

Healthcare.gov Enrollment Deadline: December 15, 2015

Healthcare.gov enrollment assistance by phone: 1-800-318-2596

Healthcare.gov enrollment assistance online: https://localhelp.healthcare.gov