Health Advocates identifies all options for 3rd party coverage for unfunded patients. Rash Curtis & Associates specializes in customer-focused collections from patients for remaining out-of-pocket liability. The result is a coordinated solution to minimize a provider’s unpaid, underpaid and disputed insurance claims, bad debts and charity care and to relieve as much of the financial burden as possible from patients and their providers.

An unfavorable by-product of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) is the “churning” of patients between Insurance Coverage, Federal, State & Local Benefit Programs and Self-Pay status for various reasons, including constantly evolving changes in income and patient non-payment of insurance premiums. When a self-pay patient is treated and/or the Qualified Health Plan Insurance (QHP) denies payment for non-coverage, the coordination between Eligibility/Enrollment, Insurance Denial Appeals and Self-Pay Collection Services is more important than ever to confirm whether the optimum solution for an unfunded account is through Coverage, Appeal or Self-Pay Collections.

Terry & Natasha Paff, Owners of Rash Curtis & Associates and Al Leibovic, Founder and President of Health Advocates are excited to partner with each other to deliver a broad array of Revenue Cycle services. According to Mr. Leibovic, “We are convinced that by working together, we are better able to guide our respective provider clients through the challenges presented by the roll-out of ACA Health Reform and the increasing complexities of the Revenue Cycle reimbursement spectrum."

Mr. Paff states, “The two companies will now be able to offer and provide a broad array of services that include pre- and post-discharge patient eligibility screening and receivable management services, including, but not limited to, insurance claim appeals, zero-balance account review and recovery, early out and self-pay collections.”

Both agree that, “By joining forces, we enhance our tools, resources and overall services to our existing clients and patients by offering more services.”

About Health Advocates

Founded in 1990, Health Advocates is one of California’s largest privately funded Eligibility and Revenue Cycle company with nearly 400 FTEs. Health Advocates has provided “Safety Net” eligibility and revenue integrity services to over 225 Healthcare clients. Their services include Eligibility for Federal, State and Local Benefit programs (Medi-Cal, Medicare, LIHP, VOC, CCS, VA and DSH Eligibility), Insurance Appeals, Complex COBRA benefit reinstatement, Non-Contracted Medi-Cal Managed Care Underpayment Appeals, Third Party Liability, Workers’ Compensation, etc.

Health Advocates’ client base includes Hospitals and public health systems, treatment centers, trauma centers and clinics. Health Advocates continues to be California’s leading full service “Safety Net” vendor dedicated to maximizing reimbursement from third party sources and minimizing uncompensated care, bad debts and charity care. Health Advocates has a long history of initiating innovative programs to increase reimbursement for its clients. Since 1990, Health Advocates has generated an estimated $3 billion dollars in new revenue for its clients.

Al Leibovic has served as a member of HFMA for over 35 years. As a leading authority on uncompensated care, Medicaid eligibility and claim processing, he has lectured extensively throughout the United States and conducted numerous workshops for hospitals and hospital systems and various professional associations, including, HFMA, AGPAM, AAHAM, CAHAM, etc., on issues affecting the fiscal stability of hospitals.

About Rash Curtis & Associates

Founded in 1977, Rash Curtis has a strong presence in the Healthcare Recovery Industry with over 35 years in healthcare for Hospitals and public health systems, treatment centers, trauma centers, clinics, teaching and tertiary care facilities. It has served the Healthcare Community with dignity, passion and persistence, maintaining exemplary client services and patient relations. With close to 100 employees, they offer timely solutions for accounts receivable management with a patient friendly yet firm focus on recovering uncollected revenue.

Their experience is unparalleled in managing all aspects related to Patient Access and Patient Financial Services and Collections. They offer a wide variety of services: Early Out solutions; Charity Care Screening; Payment Plans; Insurance Billing and Follow-up; Self-Pay; and Legal Collections. Their skilled bilingual Account Representatives are chosen for their ability to maintain a professional, courteous and compassionate approach while asserting a consistent effort to reach a positive financial conclusion with the patient/guarantor.

Rash Curtis and Associates is highly recognized and appreciated by their clients for their commitment to superior client services, outstanding patient/guarantor relations and extraordinary recovery performance.

Terry Paff served as a member of ACA, CAC and HFMA for over 25 years and was the President of HFMA Northern California chapter in 2013-2014. Natasha Paff has served as a member of CHA, CAHAM and NAHAM and HFMA for over 22 years.

Media Contact:

Al Leibovic

President

Health Advocates

14721 Califa Street

Sherman Oaks, CA 91411

800.435.3457

al(at)healthadvocates(dot)com

Terry Paff

President & CEO

Rash Curtis & Associates

P.O. Box 5790

Vacaville, CA 95696

800.929.3935

terry(dot)paff(at)rashcurtis(dot)com