Church members dedicated last Sunday to service and mission projects in the community

Some of the church members helped to clean debris from the Raritan River. (Photo: ~Courtesy of Bound Brook Presbyterian Church) Story Highlights Members of Bound Brook Presbyterian Church engage in community service all year.

On Sunday, they closed the church, left the building and worshiped God by serving others.

Members did differnt things, sewing backpacks for the homeless, cleaning a stretch of river and many other things.

Instead of worshiping God in the sanctuary of the Bound Brook Presbyterian Church this past Sunday, members worshiped God through serving the community in a variety of ways.

"The motto is, 'Don’t go to church. Be the church,' ” said the church's pastor, the Rev. Nancy Birdsong. "Bound Brook Presbyterian Church has a congregation with a heart for mission/service, and there are ways we reach out to the community and beyond all year. However, 'The Church has left the building' is a way for the whole congregation to be involved in a day where the focus is on worshiping God by serving others and doing what Jesus taught us to do."

And efforts just weren't centered on this past weekend.

Birdsong said that in 2014, the members sewed and sent 46 dresses to little girls who live in poverty in Africa, made 77 hygiene kits for Presbyterian Disaster Assistance, wrote letters to inform congressional representatives about hunger issues, painted the inside of the Middle Earth Drop-In Center for Youth, made repairs to and painted parts of the Brook Theater, provided yard work and painting at The Learning Gatenonprofit child care center and raked the church's own front yard. Sunday School children made special cards for members who could use some cheer.

This year, the members helped the “New Jersey Stream Team” to clean up a mile stretch of the Raritan River and its banks, made and filled backpacks for the homeless and distributed them, repaired and cleaned up Oak Springs Girl Scout Camp in the Somerset section of Franklin and repaired a house for a family that has two physically challenged grown sons who need a lot of care. The members even helped to create downstairs bedroom and a big bathroom for one of the sons, who is wheelchair-bound. Children created cards to go with the Christmas presents that the church will send to foster families later this year. Youth visited residents of the Holly Center (for assisted living) to bring some cheer, and folks who usually go to the Saturday night service made bibs for folks who need them at the Holly Center.

When "the church left the building" at Bound Brook Presbyterian Church on Sunday, some of its children made Christmas cards to go with the presents the church will give out later this year. (Photo: ~Courtesy of Bound Brook Presbyterian Church.)

" I thought that 'The church has left the building' was a wonderful way to engage the whole congregation in a day of service," Birdsong said. "It is a concept that started in a Presbyterian Church in Pennsylvania. Now, other congregations (from different denominations) around the country take the opportunity to include all ages in countless community projects."

On "The church has left the building" Day, several members of Bound Brook Presbyterian Church made backpacks and stuffed them with items for homeless people. (Photo: ~Courtesy of Bound Brook Presbyterian Church)

Staff Writer Pamela MacKenzie: 908-243-6616; pmackenz@gannettnj.com

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1LJ1hnS