MANCHESTER — Big Brothers Big Sisters of New Hampshire has appointed an area resident to be its new interim chief executive.

After serving as a member of the organization’s board of directors, Gregg Burdett of Westmoreland has been named interim CEO. For years, he served on the board of directors for Big Brothers Big Sisters of Western New Hampshire, one of the four regional offices that merged at the beginning of this year to form the statewide organization.

Prior to his appointment, he was president of Alliant Healthcare, a health care consulting firm. During the 10 years before that, he was vice president of administration and physician services at Valley Regional Hospital in Claremont. Prior to this, he was the director of human resources at Smiths Medical in Keene.

Burdett played an “integral role” on a committee comprised of board members from the different regional offices that worked to complete the merger into Big Brothers Big Sisters of New Hampshire, according to the news release.

He said the merger establishes the organization as a large agency, allowing it to be more competitive in applying for regional and national grants, which were out of reach before as four regional offices.

Big Brothers Big Sisters matches adult volunteers (“Bigs”) with “Littles” ages 6 through 18 for mentoring, support and friendship.

Burdett himself was a “little brother” in the organization for about seven years.

“Who knows where I may have ended up had I not had that mentoring,” he said. “I lived in a single-parent household and ultimately my mother died when I was 14.”

His “big brother” was a major part of his life while growing up in Roxbury, Mass., according to Burdett.

Burdett said he hopes to get more children involved in the program and recruit enough people to be older siblings that the agency will have more “Bigs” than “Littles.”

“There will be no more passionate advocate for the mission of Big Brothers Big Sisters than me,” he said.

The initial term of his leadership is six months, although that’s renewable with the consent of both parties, Alyssa Salmon, director of communications, wrote in an email.

Big Brothers Big Sisters of New Hampshire “is grateful to its first post-merger CEO, Kevin Fusco, whose service in the critical post-merger months helped bring together the legacy agencies and to streamline the new statewide model for serving the children of New Hampshire,” the organization said in a news release. Fusco resigned earlier this month, according to Salmon.