Speaking to reporters in Cave Creek, Arizona, on May 25, Republican U.S. Senator John McCain of Arizona discussed the 2010 U.S. Supreme Court ruling in the Citizens United vs. Federal Election Commission case.

“I would still argue that the worst decision the Supreme Court made was Citizens United, which has unleashed this flood of billions of dollars of unaccounted-for money that will sooner or later, that will lead to enough corruption that we will have a reform,” the Arizona Senator told 12 News.

In January 2010, the Court sided with Citizens United, in ruling that businesses and unions were allowed to contribute unlimited funds into political campaigns via advertisements to promote a lawmaker’s candidacy. The ruling also spurred the creation of the Super PAC, which has been frequently utilized by Democrats and Republicans to raise millions of dollars for their campaigns. Super PACs have become known for their negative political advertisements during election season, as well.

McCain has made it clear in the past that he has never supported the Court’s ruling on the matter. Appearing on NBC’s “Meet the Press” in June 2012, McCain called the decision “arrogant, uninformed, naïve,” according to the New York Times.

“I think there will be scandals associated with the worst decision of the United States Supreme Court in the 21st century,” the Senator said to then-host David Gregory. Discussing the Justices themselves, McCain quipped, “I just wish one of them had run for county sheriff.”

The Citizens United decision also removed financial protections that McCain had worked tirelessly to create with Democrat Russ Feingold, a former U.S. Senator from Wisconsin. The 2002 financial reform limited the amount of monetary influence corporations could have on campaigns and elections and was considered a landmark piece of legislation due to the bipartisanship and effectiveness of the bill.

Oddly enough, McCain, a self-described “maverick” in his own party, did not list the Supreme Court’s ruling in 2012 on the Affordable Care Act, or ObamaCare, which kept in place the majority of the President’s definitive domestic achievement. Since that ruling, Republicans, particularly in the U.S. House of Representatives, have voted to repeal the legislation several times.

Sources: The New York Times, 12 News – Arizona

Photo Credit: nationofchange.org, 12 News