By Adam O'Neal - May 14, 2014

CHARLESTON, W.Va -- It's official: West Virginia's next U.S. senator will be the first woman to represent the Mountain State in the upper chamber. The only question now is which party will lay claim to that achievement.

Democrat Natalie Tennant and Republican Shelley Moore Capito both easily captured their party’s nominations Tuesday night -- setting up a general election contest that will pit Capito’s significant fundraising and polling leads against a 2-to-1 voter registration advantage that favors Tennant and her fellow Democrats.

Capito won 87 percent of the GOP primary vote. Tennant received 78 percent on the Democratic side. So lopsided were the results that the Associated Press called each race -- first Capito’s, then Tennant’s -- just minutes after returns began trickling in.

As a thunderstorm raged outside of Tennant’s victory party -- where a few dozen party activists and supporters gathered to watch the anti-climactic results -- the candidate challenged her Republican opponent to participate in five televised debates.

“The people of West Virginia certainly deserve to have candidates who will stand up and debate issues openly and publicly,” she said. Capito later told RCP that the two campaigns would need to discuss exact arrangements, but “of course we’re going to debate. I’ve always debated in competitive races.” (A Capito spokesperson later labeled the challenge as proof that “Natalie Tennant’s campaign continues to be scripted by President Obama's Washington liberals.”)

While Democrats have dominated West Virginia politics for decades, Obama’s unpopularity in the state -- as well as the seat being open for the first time since the 1980s -- puts the GOP in a strong position. And national Republicans, hoping to take control of the Senate, consider the contest a must-win.

The general election race begins with Capito, who has represented West Virginia’s 2nd Congressional District since 2001, heavily favored over the secretary of state. Like most other electoral analyses, RealClearPolitics’ categorizes the race as “likely GOP.”

The Capito campaign has focused on highlighting Tennant’s ties with Obama, whose approval rating in West Virginia has hovered below 40 percent for years. After first lady Michelle Obama said it was “critical” for Democrats to elect Tennant, the Capito campaign has been regularly referencing the implicit endorsement. (Tennant’s campaign said it wasn’t an endorsement.)

The Capito team has also asserted that Tennant was recruited to run by “Washington liberals” and that she supports “President Obama’s war on coal” -- touching upon a major industry and job provider in the state.

“I think [Obama is] a big factor in the race,” argued Capito. “And she has spoken positively about his policies. And those policies are a direct hit on our state in a negative way. So she has to defend that.”

Asked about her ties to Obama, Tennant responded, “This race is about West Virginia.”

However, Obama’s signature legislative achievement, the Affordable Care Act, is a significant issue in the state. Asked if she would have voted for Obamacare when it passed in 2010, Tennant told RCP, “The fact is, I didn’t vote for it.” She then reiterated her position that “there are changes that need to be made” and lamented that she wasn’t able to discuss and debate the legislation at the time of passage. She also delivered a passionate defense of the law’s pre-existing coverage provision.

“It’s not going to get fully repealed. We know that,” Capito conceded. “I think that now the position has got to be, 'We’ve got to reform it and make it work for children, families, and businesses.'”

She added, “I don’t know what [Tennant’s] position is. … Not until she’s found out that it’s become very unpopular has she decided that maybe she’s not so sure.”

Tennant hardly mentioned the president on the campaign trail Monday, and it’s unlikely that she’ll trumpet her support for him during election season. Obama lost every West Virginia county in 2012, something no other presidential candidate has ever done.

Maj. General Allen Tackett, the retired leader of the West Virginia National Guard, serves as Tennant’s campaign chairman. Although he predicted that the polls will narrow (and Tennant will win), he acknowledged that sharing a party affiliation with Obama “hurts every Democrat in the state of West Virginia because [Republicans] have demonized” the president.

But Tackett asserted that Capito’s decade-plus in Washington will hurt her: “Ninety-five to 98 percent of the people in the state of West Virginia can relate to Natalie Tennant. About 3 to 5 percent relate to Shelley Moore Capito.”

The seven-term congresswoman dismissed the criticism as “grasping at straws.”

“I don’t think I have to defend being a West Virginian. I was born and raised here. My children have gone to public schools here, and I have a long and storied history in this state with my family.”

The Capito campaign has challenged Tennant’s competency as a manager. A Capito spokesperson said that the candidate has ignored her basic duties as secretary of state, botching the rollout of a campaign finance reporting website and not complying with a federal law that sets standards for the state’s voter registration rolls. (Tennant blamed a vendor for the website’s complications. The voter registration issue led to local officials and Tennant sparring over culpability.)

West Virginia is a small state, with less than 2 million residents. Its political circles are even smaller. Capito recalled crossing paths with Tennant recently, and the candidates’ relationship goes back years. Tennant’s husband, Erik Wells, mounted an unsuccessful challenge to the congresswoman in 2004, losing by double digits. He was later elected to the state Senate.

Capito holds a significant fundraising lead. Her campaign has $4.3 million cash on hand, compared to $1.2 million for her opponent, according to Open Secrets. Capito has already taken advantage of her enviable financial position, outspending Tennant by more than $1 million.

The Democrat hopes to overcome the current polling and fundraising deficits through retail politics. She points out that Capito has never run a statewide race -- something the secretary of state has done several times. Tennant has also launched a 55-county tour of West Virginia and has already visited 38 of them. (Capito, who announced her candidacy in November 2012, estimated that she’s been to each county at least twice.) Tackett predicted that because Tennant “represents Main Street,” the polls will begin to narrow as she spends more time on the trail speaking to voters.

Tennant has said that the tour has made one thing clear to her: The top issue in the campaign is jobs. “That’s the focus. When you boil down to it, what do we want? We want opportunities.” On this, Capito agrees: “It’s really, really been difficult for us.”

Democratic Sen. Joe Manchin won re-election with more than 60 percent of the vote in 2012, despite appearing on the ballot with Obama. Manchin, a popular former governor, has earned a reputation as one of the Senate’s most conservative Democrats by frequently criticizing the administration and expressing a willingness to work across the aisle.

Manchin has endorsed Tennant and said Tuesday night in a statement that she “is a proven statewide leader whose passion and dedication to public service will resonate well in Washington.”

Tennant is hoping to establish a similar image as a Democrat willing to take her party to task over its positions that are unpopular in the state. However, that may prove difficult for her, as she was previously a more vocal supporter of the president than Manchin. (For example, while she attended the 2012 Democratic National Convention as a delegate; Manchin skipped the event.)

While control of the upper chamber could hinge on the race, it also has local implications. The election may provide a preview of how well the West Virginia Democratic Party can fare in federal elections when Obama isn’t on the ballot.

State party Chairman Larry Puccio sees things more simply, however: “I play to the fact that the candidate that earns the respect and the trust from more citizens of West Virginia will be elected.”

For her part, Capito echoes this. “It used to be you only voted the party,” she said. “Now people are really wanting a message and a messenger that understands the way they feel.”

The challenge for the next generation of West Virginia Democratic leaders who want to earn trust from their constituents -- who don’t have the same name recognition in-state as Manchin -- may be to differentiate themselves from national members of their party before Republicans can lump them together. This contest, and other federal elections in the future, could very well be decided by that factor.