SAN BRUNO, Calif., April 7 (UPI) -- YouTube's kid-friendly app is exposing children to too much advertising, a Federal Trade Commission complaint filed by a group of children's advocacy organizations said.

The app, launched in February, features numerous educational videos and original episodes of child-oriented programs. But it also exposes children to a barrage of commercials for corporate entities like McDonald's, Mattel and Hasbro.

A coalition of eight advocacy groups say those commercials violate federal laws against unfair or deceptive marketing.

The complaint filed Tuesday alleges Google, the parent company of YouTube Kids, violates the law by mixing advertising and programming in a way that young children can't distinguish, featuring "branded channels" for major corporations and failing to disclose business relationships for user-generated content.

"YouTube Kids is the most hyper-commercialized media environment for children I have ever seen," Dale Kunkel, professor of communication, University of Arizona said in a news release from Campaign for a Commercial-Free Childhood. "Many of these advertising tactics are considered illegal on television, and it's sad to see Google trying to get away with using them in digital media."

A YouTube spokeswoman, whose name wasn't reported, told the Los Angeles Times Google worked with child advocacy groups when developing the app.

"While we are always open to feedback on ways to improve the app, we were not contacted directly by the signers of this letter and strongly disagree with their contentions, including the suggestion that no free, ad-supported experience for kids will ever be acceptable. We disagree and think that great content shouldn't be reserved for only those families who can afford it," she said.

Organizations signing the complaint include the Center for Digital Democracy, Campaign for a Commercial-Free Childhood, American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Center for Science in the Public Interest, Children Now, Consumer Federation of America, Consumer Watchdog, and Public Citizen.