Topics: charles c. johnson, Editor's Picks, gun safety reform, Gun Violence, Guns, Newtown, NRA, Sandy Hook, school shootings, The Right, Politics News

Throughout our existence, human beings have asked some of the great questions to which we may never truly find answers. Why are we here? Is there life after death? What technically constitutes a “school shooting”?

Wait, what?

That’s right. “What is a school shooting” is the question right-wing gun-rights activists are posing after a study by gun violence prevention group Everytown for Gun Safety showed there’s been a total of 74 school shootings in the United States, since 26 people, including 20 children, were killed in December 2012 at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Connecticut.

For what it’s worth, a school shooting is defined by Wikipedia as “an occurrence in which an individual discharges a gun and that incident takes place at an education institution.” This seems pretty straightforward. There is a shooting at a school; it is a school shooting. But the problem lies in the fact that if this definition is true, then Everytown’s list of school shootings, which are based on true, actual events, is accurate. And if that stands, gun-rights advocates will have a harder time defending their position of not even closing the tiniest of loopholes to make it even a tad more difficult for wannabe school shooters to gain access to guns.

So, what better way to combat this alarming list of school shootings than to redefine the term “school shooting” itself? By doing this, according to gun-rights activists, you knock off, say, 59 of the 74 school shootings, leaving you with only 15 real, true, legitimate school shootings. ONLY 15! That’s nothing. We can live with that, right? Apparently, gun-rights activists can. They sleep at night knowing the country’s lax gun control laws took the lives of numerous students and teachers at only 15 school shootings. The sad thing is, media outlets are now using this new “revised” number.

Charles C. Johnson is the brilliant conservative philosopher who shined a light upon this question for the ages over on his Twitter account as he went through each school shooting, excuse me, “school shooting” on Everytown’s list.

Let’s look through some of these “not school shootings” or, as he calls them, “fake school shootings.”

Can’t you just picture Mr. Johnson walking into this classroom full of grieving students, pointing at the deceased and declaring, “Yeah, this is not a school shooting”?