The left is becoming progressively dumber. I grew up reading a lot of liberal publications and it was still possible to bypass the bias and find interesting content in them.

Then there came a turning point. The New Yorker, Time, the New York Times Magazine became unreadable. Bush's election was a trigger, but it became much worse when Obama jumped into the race. Bush had unleashed bitter rants and conspiracy theories. With Obama, the left settled into a bland smugness that perfectly echoed their leader.

It became a means of putting out bland mindless propaganda. These days it's dressed up in viral headlines and pop culture references to attract millennials (who mostly aren't reading it anyway) but the landscape of liberal journalism has been reduced to angry attacks on the right and mindless pieces promoting their own heroes and apologia for failed policies.

You can sum up 90 percent of the content with

1. Obama is great

2. ObamaCare is great

3. Republicans are evil

Meanwhile a former New Republicer suggests that it was the magazine's commitment to being more open-minded that killed it off.

The New Republic was hurt by something more specific: the polarization of a media environment that leaves little room for a strain of liberal thought that not only attacks the right and the far left but also prods and questions liberalism itself. ... Some old-time subscribers and confirmed partisans disliked the magazine for its willingness to publish conservative voices—Fred Barnes was its ace White House correspondent for years while staff writer Charles Krauthammer migrated during his time at the magazine from Walter Mondale speechwriter to neoconservative paragon. Critics assailed its perceived hawkishness and its unapologetic Zionism, which had long been anathema to the hard left and was now becoming distasteful to certain high-minded progressives as well. ... But to other readers, the sense of freewheeling debate—as opposed to bien-pensant wisdom or party-line doctrine—gave the magazine its exciting appeal. As a college student in the late 1980s, I found its pages more stimulating than those of rival publications, which tended to toe what was already being called the “politically correct” line. I never agreed with all of the magazine’s positions—its support of the Nicaraguan contras, its opposition to affirmative action—but its pieces made me think in ways that few newspaper columnists or television pundits did. Beyond affording the pleasures of contrarianism, this breed of journalism honored the journalistic imperative to comfort the afflicted and afflict the comfortable. Who, after all, was more comfortable than one’s own loyal readers?

Modern liberals like the idea of being intellectuals without the work of debating ideas. With policy ideas, as with science, they want it to be a brand that they can put on, without any challenges or uncertainty.

They want to be intellectuals because they're just that special and superior. So the outcome was inevitable. The New Republic has gone down the same old tired route.

Salon used to publish David Horowitz. It now specializes in Jon Stewart worship and hysterical claims about a Christian/Koch Brothers plot to take over America. And it's just the leading edge of a left that makes up for its bland conformity with hysteria.

Typical headline: "Now they’re trying to steal 2016: The demented GOP schemes to rewire the Electoral College and elect a Tea Party president".

But it's not as if the New Republic is much better these days. There was a time when the New Republic was a serious magazine, but that was over even long before the latest resignations.

Typical headline: "Republicans Are Responsible for Heightened Fiscal Uncertainty"

Not quite Salon, but getting there.

Questioning the assumed superiority of the left is an attack. The superiority becomes a matter of faith. It has to be. Because the alternative is that a lot of people were made very miserable based on flawed policies whose flaws were covered up by fanatics.

The left rises by generating intellectual ferment which then has to be suppressed once it has risen.