MOUNT HOLLY — Before a standing-room-only crowd of Burlington County business leaders, U.S. Rep. Tom MacArthur, the rookie Republican in the New Jersey delegation, returned to the state's Third Congressional District to meet with the people who sent him to Washington.

That was after he answered phone calls for an hour during a tele-town hall that attracted 6,400 listeners. And a week after MacArthur was one of three U.S. representatives from the Garden State to greet hundreds of anti-abortion protesters from New Jersey who came in from the cold for drinks and snacks after the annual March for Life in the nation's capital.

"My view of being a member of Congress is if you don't stay focused on home, you're not serving the people who sent you there," MacArthur said in an interview. "I intend to be visible and give people a chance to talk about issues they're interested in."

Veteran Washington hands say keeping up with the folks back home is a key lesson any first-year member of Congress needs to learn. Lose touch, they say, and you may lose the seat — no matter how high you may rise in Washington. The most recent example: Former House Majority Leader Eric Cantor (R-Va.), who was sent packing in the GOP primary last year.

"They don't think of people in Washington as their neighbors," said former Rep. James Walsh (R-N.Y.), who each weekend returned to Syracuse, where he saw his constituents at church, at the dry cleaners, and at the supermarket. "If you're there, and you can empathize and you can communicate, it humanizes you, which is of critical importance. You don't want to be seen as a remote government functionary. You want to be seen as a neighbor. You have to know what the people you represent think."

One way do that is to ask them what's on their minds. At his first his first tele-town hall meeting, MacArthur fielded questions while sitting at his desk in his congressional office, press secretary Chloe Rockow to his right.

When one caller asked about immigration, MacArthur said he would not support funding President Obama's actions that temporarily removed the threat of deportation from millions of unauthorized immigrants, including those brought to the U.S. as children.

"We need comprehensive immigration reform but it has to be done in the proper way," MacArthur said. "It's not in the president's power to just give amnesty to five million people."

In response to several calls concerning veterans, 65,000 of whom live in the district, MacArthur said he would push the Department of Veterans Affairs to speed up processing of claims and to improve health care.

Many of those veterans served at Joint Base McGuire-Dix-Lakehurst, which could be threatened under a new round of base closings. President Obama, citing the need to cut spending, called for reducing military facilities in his fiscal 2016 budget proposal.

MacArthur said he was developing relationships with Pentagon officials that would be an advantage later on as he tried to protect the base. Asked if a new base closing round could provide an opportunity for expansion rather than retrenchment, as what happened in 1993, MacArthur said he didn't want to take that chance.

"My concern is an opportunity that's under someone else's control can very quickly turn into a threat," he told the caller.

MacArthur met constituents face-to-face on Jan. 22 when he joined fellow New Jersey Reps. Chris Smith (R-4th Dist.) and Scott Garrett (R-5th Dist.) to provide drinks and snacks to New Jerseyans participating in the annual anti-abortion March for Life. Bags of M&Ms sat on one side of the congressional meeting room where the crowd gathered, and coffee, water and soft drinks lined the other as the three lawmakers gave short speeches, chatted briefly and shook hands with the attendees.

The lawmaker said he largely stayed away from social issues during his campaign, focusing instead on the economy. But the issue of abortion for him is very personal; he and his wife decided not to terminate the pregnancy of their daughter, Grace, who was born with special needs and died at age 11. They later adopted two children.

"My views on life influenced bringing our daughter into this world and my daughter influenced my views of life," MacArthur said in the interview. "We made the decision to bring our daughter into this world. That was the only decision we could make. Gracie dramatically changed our life."

At the Burlington County Chamber of Commerce session, MacArthur ticked off legislation passed by the House in its first month, including allowing construction of the Keystone XL pipeline, raising to 40 hours from 30 hours the amount an employee must work before companies must provide health insurance, and exempting veterans who already receive health care from counting toward the 50-worker threshold before businesses must provide coverage. MacArthur said all of these bills will help create jobs.

In response to questions, he said he would vote to repeal the Affordable Care Act even though it would be futile since Obama would veto the legislation.

What will the Republicans do instead? "We're not ready to get that alternative, but we better lay out a sense of what it is," MacArthur said.

Before leaving the chamber breakfast, MacArthur told the audience that he would introduce legislation that would prevent the Federal Emergency Management Agency, except in cases of fraud, from telling disaster victims that they received too much money and had to repay the government. When he was in the insurance business and the company overpaid, MacArthur said, "we didn't have a right to go back and say, "Give us the money back."

The issue is especially near and dear to New Jersey victims of Hurricane Sandy, some of whom are getting demands from the government insisting to pay back some of the money they received. MacArthur also sits on the House Resources subcommittee on water, power and oceans, which handles issues concerning the Jersey Shore, still recovering from the hurricane.

A few weeks later, MacArthur drafted the Disaster Assistance Fairness and Accountability Act with the help of the House legislative counsel's office. He then signed the finished bill, as well as a separate statement attesting that it was constitutional before walking from his office to the House floor. There, he handed the legislation to bill clerk Peggy Fields in front of a chamber temporarily devoid of lawmakers. She gave him a piece of paper with Bill No. 638 on it, an indication that his measure had been formally introduced.

"The people of Ocean County are still struggling with the effects of Sandy," MacArthur said on the walk back to his office after filing his bill. "This is not going to fix everything but it's going to fix a small part of it."

Jonathan D. Salant may be reached at jsalant@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JDSalant. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.