The Affordable Care Act has become a "political football" and is not sustainable as a national health plan, Dr. Ben Carson tells Newsmax TV. The retired pediatric neurosurgeon — in second place behind Donald Trump in the race for the 2016 GOP presidential nomination — says President Barack Obama's signature health law is too reliant on the "middleman."Watch Newsmax TV onandGet Newsmax TV on your cable system — Click Here Now "It really isn't [sustainable] and there are much better ways to do it," Carson told Newsmax TV's Steve Malzberg in an interview aired Friday."When we take something as important as your healthcare and make it into a political football, this is what we get. Why don't we solve the problem? What do you need for good healthcare? A patient and a healthcare provider."Along comes the middle man who facilitates relationships. Now it's become the dominant factor with the patient and the healthcare provider at its beck and call."Carson said the key to a successful health care plan is putting patients and healthcare providers "back at the center" and limiting the influence of "outsiders.""It would make all the difference in the world, it will cost less money, and will be much more efficient," Carson said.He said he is also concerned about the Affordable Care Act's employer mandate, which will become law after the 2016 election and effect 80 million people.The mandate requires that all businesses with 50 or more full-time employees provide health insurance to at least 95 percent of them and their dependents up to age 26, or pay a fee."It's incredible. It used to be when you started a business, you called your mom and you were so proud. 'Mom, I got a new business! Ten employees!' Then 20, then 30, then 40. Oops, better stop. Don't want to hit that 50," Carson said."That's the very backbone of America, small business, and we have policies in place that are destroying that. What are we trying to do?"Last month, Trump took a jab at Carson's ability to perform as the nation's commander in chief."Ben's a doctor. He's not a deal maker … I don't think that's his natural ability at all," the billionaire developer said on CBS' "Face the Nation." Carson doesn't buy that argument."I would say I've done a lot more things than he thinks I've done. [I've figured] out how to do things in medicine that have never been done before," he said."[I've] started a national nonprofit, nine of 10 of which fail. Ours is not only thriving in all 50 states, but has won major national awards that are only given to one philanthropic organization out of tens of thousands. Done that twice."[I] have served on corporate boards, Kellogg's for 18 years, Costco for 16 years, [the biotechnology company] Vaccinogen as a chairman of the board. I've been involved in multitudinous things."Carson said the nation needs a problem solver."If [Trump] or anybody wants to sit down with me and talk about who has solved a lot of very complex problems that perhaps have never been solved before in their field — let's talk about that."Carson, father of three, is author of the new book, "A More Perfect Union: What We the People Can Do to Reclaim Our Constitutional Liberties," written with his wife, Candy Carson, and published by Sentinel, a division of Penguin.In it, he explores the functions of the Constitution and the Executive Branch and the many controversial issues facing the United States today and how to solve them."Doctors, scientists, engineers really have been trained to make decisions based on evidence as opposed to ideology," Carson told Malzberg."If there's anything we need right now it’s some evidence-based decision-making."