By of the

Madison — More than 70,000 low-income adults would keep their state BadgerCare Plus health coverage for three more months and a larger and poorer group would wait the same 90 days to enter the program for the first time, under a plan advanced by the state Senate Thursday.

The legislation passed 18-12, with all Republicans voting in favor and all Democrats opposing it, and now goes to Republican Gov. Scott Walker, who first proposed the measure to deal with the troubled rollout of the federal law often referred to as Obamacare. Sen. Dale Schultz (R-Richland Center) voted for the final bill but joined all Democrats in voting for several failed amendments that would have provided BadgerCare coverage to more Wisconsinites in January.

Walker said he would sign the bill Friday.

"In 2014, everyone living in poverty will be covered — for the first time — under Medicaid in Wisconsin. No more waiting lists, and no more enrollment caps. Wisconsin's unique solution to health care will ensure everyone in our state has access to health care," Walker said in a statement.

In response, Democrats said the legislation offered a "false choice" between two low-income groups. That's because it would prevent 83,000 of the state's poorest residents — those below the federal poverty limit of $11,490 per year for single adults — from securing BadgerCare Medicaid benefits for another three months.

Two Democratic senators missed the floor session for health reasons — Kathleen Vinehout of Alma is recovering from an automobile crash that shattered her right arm, and Tim Cullen of Janesville is recuperating after open heart surgery. Sen. Fred Risser (D-Madison) was absent.

On Dec. 4, the Assembly voted 64-32 to respond to the enrollment problems surrounding the federal Affordable Care Act by waiting to drop patients from BadgerCare until April 1 instead of the Jan. 1 deadline in current law. The bill being sent to Walker also delays by three months the end of separate state high-risk coverage known as the Health Insurance Risk-Sharing Plan. HIRSP had been scheduled to end on Dec. 31.

At a news conference Thursday with Senate Democrats, cancer survivor Kathy Federman of Washington County said that passing the bill would mean a three-month delay for her in receiving coverage. Federman, who lost one eye to cancer and has limited eyesight in the other, is unemployed, can't afford private insurance and doesn't qualify for new federal subsidies because her income is just under the federal poverty limit.

Once the measure is signed into law, "they will not accept me until April 1. I cannot wait that long," said Federman, 63, who also has large medical bills from her deceased husband's failed fight against cancer. "I'm stuck. I don't know where to go."

Under Obamacare, the very poorest people were to go under Medicaid coverage while those with slightly higher incomes would qualify for subsidized coverage under the federal plan. Wisconsin had intended to expand BadgerCare to take those very poor people as of Jan. 1, but that plan has been delayed, leaving uninsured people like Federman without coverage until spring.

Republicans argue that President Barack Obama's administration is to blame for failing to have a subsidized private insurance program ready in time to allow BadgerCare changes to move forward in Wisconsin on Jan. 1. They vented their own frustration with having to react to problems at the federal level.

"The fault with our plan is that we banked on the Affordable Care Act being ready (on time). That was the only flaw in the plan. ... To say we made a mistake is just not true," Sen. Rick Gudex (R-Fond du Lac) said.

Democrats point out that some GOP governors have extended Medicaid coverage more broadly in their states by taking extra federal money available for that health program under the Affordable Care Act. Expanding coverage in that way would save the state up to $119 million through June 2015, according to the nonpartisan Legislative Fiscal Bureau.

But Walker and other Republicans say that's not a good long-term strategy for saving state or federal taxpayers money. The federal government can't be trusted for the long term to pay for an expanded Medicaid program, especially given the other problems with Obamacare, they said. The federal money still comes from taxpayers, they said.

Democrats respond that the federal government can be reasonably expected to hold up that commitment for the next three months. Senate Minority Leader Chris Larson (D-Milwaukee) and Sen. Dave Hansen (D-Green Bay) said the Republicans were catering to tea party members who want to oppose Obamacare over protecting vulnerable state citizens.

"The Grinch has absolutely nothing on you," Hansen told Republican senators.

Democrats do support another provision of the plan that would delay until April 1 the dropping of a separate group of 72,000 people off BadgerCare. For that reason, some Democrats in the Assembly voted for the proposal despite their criticism of it.

Walker's three-month delay will also save state taxpayers money. Insuring the new group of people coming onto BadgerCare is more expensive than insuring the group that will be losing coverage, so the delays will result in a net savings of up to $23 million for taxpayers.

"What we're doing here today, I think it makes sense. I think it's the responsible thing to do," Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald (R-Juneau) said.

Some Republican leaders in other states have chosen to take the federal money to expand Medicaid, at times by negotiating changes to the original Obamacare law with federal officials.

In Iowa, the federal government is paying the full cost for the first three years of expanding its Medicaid program to cover all adults up to 133% of the federal poverty level. The federal share will eventually decline to 90% of the cost.

In contrast, Wisconsin is paying roughly 40%, and the federal government paying the other 60%.

The Iowa plan would provide traditional Medicaid to adults below the federal poverty level and to low-income adults above that level would provide similar coverage through private insurers. After a year, the consumers could have to pick up a chunk of the cost through premiums.