By Marc Perrusquia

She called 911 and waited skittishly at a brightly lit gas station for the police. She was 19, running from a domestic altercation, and breathed a little easier when three blue-and-white Memphis police cruisers pulled up.

She was safe — or so she thought.

“He was going to take me to a safe place,’’ she later told investigators, contending that one of the officers took her to a secluded apartment complex clubhouse and raped her.

“He had the gun in his hand … He said this was between two consenting adults and he didn’t want to hear nothing else about it.’’

What happened that warm July night in 2001 raises questions not only about Memphis’ huge backlog of untested rape kits but about the actions and supervision of then-patrolman Bridges Randle, who was charged last week in a separate cold-case rape allegedly committed in June 2000.

In announcing the arrest of Randle, now 40, officials told how they nabbed him when a DNA profile from connected to the 2000 case was finally uploaded last August into CODIS, the national FBI database. Randle is accused of raping a 23-year-old woman who had called police on June 24, 2000 after her car was vandalized.

Randle maintains his innocence.

What authorities didn’t reveal is that Randle was investigated for a second on-the-job rape allegedly committed 13 months later, on July 18, 2001. In fact, following a 14-month investigation in that case, he was indicted in September 2002 on charges of rape and official oppression after his DNA was matched to the crime scene, an investigation by The Commercial Appeal found.

But in a plea bargain with then-District Attorney Bill Gibbons’ office, he received a year of probation. Contacted by a reporter last week, Marie Finney, spokeswoman for the Shelby County Criminal Court Clerk’s Office, said the case file has been expunged, but later called back and said simply, “It doesn’t exist.’’ However, surviving records on the court’s online electronic docketing system show Randle pleaded guilty on June 21, 2004 to a single count of official oppression and received a one-year suspended sentence. One docket entry, “Set Diver,’’ indicates he may have received diversion, a legal process in which a defendant’s charge is dismissed and his record is wiped clean.

Police records show MPD’s internal affairs bureau opened an investigation on July 23, 2001, five days after the alleged assault, when a woman called the East Precinct. “The female refused to identify herself, stating she feared for her safety,’’ a report said. However, she later began cooperating. Soon, investigators uncovered a disturbing series of events:

Randle and two other patrol officers had responded on July 18, 2001 to a domestic disturbance call placed by a 19-year-old woman from a phone at a Mapco Express service station in Hickory Hill.

Records show Randle later offered to drive the woman to a safe house, but instead took her to an apartment complex, then known as the Gleneagles Apartments, abutting The Links at Fox Meadows golf course. There, in the clubhouse, around 3 a.m., Randle allegedly assaulted the woman.

“He sat on the couch near me and he got up and sat closer to me to where his legs were touching me,’’ the woman told internal affairs investigators. It is the policy of The Commercial Appeal to not identify alleged victims of sexual assault.

“He turned my face with (his) hand and I was face to face with him and he was going on and on about how soft my skin and my legs were,’’ the woman said.

“I said stop. This is not what I want.’’

The woman picked Randle out of a photo lineup and police recovered two cushion covers from the sofa containing semen stains. A Nov. 27, 2001 Tennessee Bureau of Investigation crime lab report says the DNA profile taken from the cushion covers matches blood drawn from Randle.

By then, Randle had resigned.

“I regretfully submit this letter of resignation due to the fact that I will be teaching school this fall,’’ he wrote in a resignation letter, asking that he be shifted from active duty to reserve officer status. Records indicate Randle might have served as a reserve officer until December 2001.

Randle was interviewed by internal affairs on Sept. 25, 2001. Investigators read him his Miranda rights, and the interview ended quickly.

“No, I do not wish to give a statement,’’ Randle told investigators.

Last week, District Attorney Amy Weirich’s office announced Randle’s indictment for aggravated rape involving a 2000 incident in which he allegedly forced a female crime victim at gunpoint into a bedroom in her apartment at Knight Arnold and Mendenhall and raped her. Police arrested Randle, who was living in Atlanta under the name Ajamu Abiola Banjoko, after DNA work was finally completed in the now 14-year-old case. Authorities have not spelled out the details so it could not be determined if police waited more than a decade to test a rape kit collected in the 2000 case, making it one of some 12,000 kits stretching back to the 1980s that went untested in Memphis.

A spokesman for Weirich said Saturday details on the prosecution of the 2001 case were unavailable, but prosecutors expect to have answers Monday when they can access files. MPD spokesman Karen Rudolph, too, said police would have to wait until Monday to provide additional information.

Randle posted a $250,000 bond last week and was released from the Shelby County Jail. He faces an Oct. 9 hearing.

A man identifying himself as Earl Randle, Bridges’ uncle, said in a brief phone interview Saturday that his nephew maintains his innocence. “He has a lot to tell you,’’ the man said, telling a reporter he would have his nephew call back. The uncle later called back and in a voice-mail message said, “He has been instructed not to talk about it at all.’’

Bridges Randle’s attorney, Leslie Ballin, said any DNA matches to his client do not prove he committed any crimes. “To conclude without knowing anything else that it was rape I don’t think is fair.’’ Ballin didn’t represent Randle in the 2001 case and said he had no details on how it was resolved.

A spokeswoman for former DA Gibbons, now Tennessee commissioner of Safety and Homeland Security, said he was on vacation and could provide no information.