Candidates in the June 7 primary election for the 17th Congressional District -- Peter Kuo, from left, Ron Cohen, Pierluigi Oliverio, Mike Honda and Ro Khanna -- sit on the dais at a May 6 forum hosted by the League of Women Voters of Fremont, Newark and Union City in the Fremont City Council chamber. (James Sakane)

Sparks briefly flew at a candidates forum last week when Rep. Mike Honda accused his top challenger in the 17th congressional district race of trying to sound like a Republican.

The setting was a televised forum hosted by the League of Women Voters of Fremont, Newark and Union City featuring five of the six congressional candidates. It took place inside the Fremont City Council Chambers.

Honda told the audience Khanna, a fellow Democrat who narrowly lost in his bid to unseat the congressman two years ago in a contentious campaign, is "willing to say or do anything to get elected."

Ro Khanna speaks while gesturing with his hands during a May 6 League of Women Voters of Fremont, Newark and Union City forum for 17th Congressional District candidates in the Fremont City Council chamber. (James Sakane)

Honda said his foe criticized progressives in that 2014 campaign while trying to sound like a Republican to get Republican support and donations from "right wing corporate executives" who have been hostile toward living wage ordinances, labor groups and public pension plans.

In light of that, Honda asked Khanna how can middle-class Silicon Valley residents trust him to act in their best interests and not sound like a Republican again.

Khanna, who was sitting to the left of Honda, said he respects the incumbent for his service and knows he did not write that question.

"One of your political consultants wrote that," he said.

"I wrote it," Honda replied.

Advertisement

Khanna, a Fremont resident, urged voters to go to his website to get the facts on his positions on issues such as Social Security benefits and his ideas to bring manufacturing jobs back to America.

"I was born in Philadelphia despite this implication of some of your ads that I'm going to ship jobs overseas," he told Honda.

Khanna said he has not misrepresented Honda's positions.

Honda countered that his record of missed votes has been pushed out to the public.

"They were when my wife passed away, my mom passed away, my daughter had three children, and I think those times are good excuses for missing votes," he said. "Besides, overall I have a 93 percent voting record."

The nearly 80-minute event -- the first and only gathering of the candidates -- was closed to the public and broadcast live on Comcast public access television channels in Fremont and San Jose.

The other candidates who participated were Republican Ron Cohen, Republican Peter Kuo and Democrat Pierluigi Oliverio. The only woman in the field, Libertarian and retired quality engineer Kennita Watson, was absent.

The top two finishers in the June 7 primary election will face off in the November general election.

Rep. Mike Honda speaks during a May 6 League of Women Voters of Fremont, Newark and Union City forum for 17th Congressional District candidates in the Fremont City Council chamber. (James Sakane)

A similar forum in 2014 involving Honda, Khanna and Republican Joel Vanlandingham drew a boisterous, overflow crowd to the council chambers. That November, Honda defeated Khanna by less than 4 percent, or 4,714 votes.

As a crowd control measure, city officials decided to allow only members of each candidate's campaign and reporters at Friday's forum.

The district covers parts of Alameda and Santa Clara counties, including the cities of Cupertino, Fremont, Newark, North San Jose, Milpitas, Santa Clara and Sunnyvale. Of the district's registered voters, 49 percent are Democrats, 19 percent are Republicans and a one-third have no party preference. The district is nearly 50 percent Asian.

During most of the forum, candidates focused their comments on why they should be elected.

Oliverio, a San Jose city councilman, said he is "battle tested" after a decade on the council and has never missed a meeting while working to balance a $3 billion budget. If elected to Congress, he pledged to not miss any votes, explain his votes to constituents and to not serve more than 10 years. Oliverio said he is funding his own campaign and promised to video-record meetings with lobbyists.

Kuo, a small business owner from Santa Clara, said he came to the United States from Taiwan with his family when he was 14 in the early 1980s. "This American dream that I have achieved is truly remarkable," Kuo said, adding that he wants to give back to the community and offer an "extra choice" to voters.

Cohen, a Fremont-based certified public accountant, said Washington, D.C. politicians from both parties are "methodically destroying the middle class to enrich their pals." He described Social Security, Medicare and Obamacare as "Ponzi schemes" that will not work in the long term. "I'm a CPA, we know a little bit about the financial world," he said. "There is not enough money in all the world through the end of time to pay the future obligations that we are all entitled to."

Honda, who has served in Congress since 2001, said he has a "lifetime of experience" including in the Peace Corps and a background in education, which sets him apart from the other candidates. The San Jose resident described himself as one of the most progressive members of Congress.

Khanna, a former member of President Barack Obama's administration in the U.S. Department of Commerce, said congressional incumbents are re-elected at a rate of 98 percent while approval ratings for Congress hovers at 11 percent. "Something is wrong in our democracy," he said. "We need to have a renewal of the democratic process." New times and new challenges call for new leadership to move forward, he said.

On immigration reform, all candidates except Cohen said they would support it including a path for citizenship for undocumented immigrants. Cohen said he believes Congress "isn't the right place" to solve the illegal immigration problem. He suggested a court system in which case workers and judges determine who stays and who goes depending on "what is best for the United States."

Honda said he supported proposed comprehensive reform legislation as it was presented although he "wouldn't have written it that way." He said he would make the path to citizenship shorter -- five years -- for young undocumented immigrants in high school and college. Honda noted he supported Obama's executive actions on Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals and Deferred Action for Parents of Americans and Lawful Permanent Residents because "Congress did not do its job."

As for Obamacare, Cohen called for its complete repeal. "The Obamacare plan is falling apart under its own weight," he said.

Oliverio said he would support the current legislation until a viable alternative comes forward. "I have not seen those alternatives," he said.

Kuo, who sells health insurance, said Obamacare is not a "one-size-fits-all solution." He suggested scrapping the legislation and starting the process over again through "reverse engineering."

"That's the only way to fix this broken health system," he said.

To watch video of the forum, visit lwvfnuc.org.

Contact Julian J. Ramos at jramos@bayareanewsgroup.com or (510) 661-9920 or follow him on twitter.com/julianjramosmp