It is unfair in the extreme to claim that William (Wrong) Kristol has been, you know, wrong about every issue in his entire sorry-assed public life. Back in the early 1990s, he was right about something and we've been paying as big a price for his having been right as we have for his having been wrong about practically everything else. When Bill Clinton proposed to bring to the United States the same kind of universal health-care enjoyed by citizens throughout the rest of the industrialized world, Kristol wrote a memo that has become famous, partly because it is documentary proof that Bill Kristol once was right about something. In it, he proposed that the Republican party -- and the conservative "movement," the prion disease that was just beginning to eat away at the party's brain -- should resist this attempt by any means, fair or foul.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

(That means Betsy McCaughey's piece, Andrew. Sorry.)

The long term political effects of a successful Clinton health care bill will be even worse - much worse. It will relegitimize middle-class dependency for "security" on government spending and regulation. It will revive the reputation of the party that spends and regulates, the Democrats, as the generous protector of middle-class interests. And it will at the same time strike a punishing blow against Republican claims to defend the middle class by restraining government...

Most Popular

You can stare at those words until you go blind, and you will not see a single thing in there about the common good. And, so, OK, it's cynical enough to make Machiavelli look like a Trappist, but it's not wrong. If the Clintons had succeeded, the issue would have helped the Democratic party. Of course, the sensible thing would have been for the Republican party to go along, claim a partial victory, and hope to play for a draw on that particular issue down the line. (You would think that would be easier for them this time, since so much of Obamacare is drawn from Republican ideas.) But that would have been to misapprehend the effects of the prion disease and what was then only mildly erratic behavior. Now, with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act hard upon us, you can see Republicans large and small -- and Marco Rubio (R-Shrinkwrap), who is neither -- gearing up in fullblown dementia against it. There's going to be a lot of calculations in Beltway wiseguy algebra about all the maneuvering that's going to go on but, if you want to see the fundamental basis for the assault on health-care reform -- if you want to trace the basic etiology of the prion disease -- then you should look to a strange little story out of Portland, Oregon.

The note reads: "Dear Reader of This Note, There are twenty seven people in this neighborhood who vote and receive food stamps. The names of these people are being posted where they can be seen by taxpayers and the neighborhood can decide who is truly in need of food. (signed) Artemis of the wildland."

(And, on the subject of Artemis Of The Wildland, can I suggest that investigators begin by casing every comic-book store in town, and by recalling the words of Mr. Spade of San Francisco: "The cheaper the crook, the gaudier the patter.")

It all began with Darling Ronnie and his welfare queens and his big black bucks and their T-bone steaks. The prion disease took hold, and the Republican party abandoned the concept of the public good in favor of enlisting to its advantages the forces of contempt. It did this first by demonizing the people who depend on the government -- which, whether it does the job or not, is the fundamental expression we have of the public good -- and then the government itself. The concept of the public good was exchanged for the concept of public shaming. The idea of a political commonwealth was abandoned and in its place was unleashed the country's political Id. These were the waterfall symptoms of the prion disease, the cascade of dementia from which the Republican party never has been able to restrain or resist, even if it wanted to, which it does not. It's too far gone for that. They are all Artemis Of The Wildland now.

You are going to see it frantically engaged over the next few weeks. Rubio, who truly has become a stumbling fop on the big stage, is now outraged that the federal government would spend money to explain one of its own laws to the public. Grover Norquist is trying to pick a fight with the Baltimore Ravens. But the most vivid example of Kristolian resistance and the forces of contempt that are arrayed against the public good can be seen in how the Republicans are trying to sabotage the bill among the people who need it the most.

"The timing of these letters is particularly suspect," Waxman wrote in a letter to Upton protesting the investigation. "You are insisting on voluminous document productions by September 13, just when these groups need to be focused on their mission of helping uninsured Americans enroll for coverage. Indeed, it appears that these requests may have been sent solely to divert the resources of small, local community groups, just as they are needed to help with the new health care law." Timing is suspect. But so is location. Republicans seem unconcerned with the privacy of uninsured people in states like Wyoming and New Hampshire. Unless protecting uninsured people from slipshod navigators is only worth doing in states with large uninsured populations, it looks like Republicans were mainly interested in creating obstacles for as many uninsured people as possible, and this targeting scheme was meant to maximize bang for their buck.

What Kristol feared back in the early 1990s was not just that health-care reform would be in and of itself a political boon to the Democrats, but also that its success would undermine the fundamental political structure of modern conservatism by reining in the national Id and by blunting the impact of the forces of contempt. If the idea of a political commonwealth reasserted itself, where would Kristol's politics, and the politics of the movement in which he was formed, find the unfocused wrath that movement has needed to survive? Now, with the prion disease advanced and the dementia full-blown, we are seeing a party in a kind of existential madness, thrashing itself with its own entrails and threatening the public good into the bargain. The mad fire dance of Artemis Of The Wildland threatens us all.