Q: What causes vertigo, and why won’t mine go away?

A: Most of us take our sense of balance for granted. But “70 percent of people in the U.S. experience a problem with their vestibular system at some time in their lives,” says P. Ashley Wackym, a neuro-otologist in Portland, Ore.

Vertigo — dizziness or difficulty maintaining your balance — is a common reason for people to seek medical help. Often the symptom is caused by a short-term problem, such as an ear infection. Other times the problem endures. That’s when the condition causing the vertigo can be most difficult to diagnose.

Researchers described a new disorder of the vestibular system as recently as 1998. In that condition, called superior semicircular canal dehiscence, an opening in one of the canals of the inner ear causes vertigo and/or auditory disturbances.

To the afflicted, vertigo — along with related symptoms such as ringing in the ears or hearing one’s own eyes blinking — is vexing, and the sensations are difficult to describe.

“Patients can feel isolated and alone,” says Cynthia Ryan, the executive director of the Vestibular Disorders Association, based in Portland.

Misdiagnosis or delayed diagnosis is a common story for people with chronic vertigo. Wackym says his patients typically report seeing four to 10 doctors before coming to him.

Our sense of balance depends on visual information from our eyes, mechanical input from our joints, and movement and positional information from our inner ears. All this gets integrated in the brain to tell us where we are in space.

More common causes of vertigo are fluid buildup in the inner ear — called Meniere’s disease — and benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, or BPPV, in which calcium carbonate crystals become dislodged from their place in the inner ear and migrate into the canals. Vertigo also can be triggered by certain medications and illnesses.

In Meniere’s, treatment is focused on reducing inner ear fluid. In BPPV, patients undergo the Epley maneuver, in which their heads are moved slowly through several different positions to clear the crystals.

“It’s like tilting a pinball machine to get the silver ball to go where you want,” says David Zee, a professor of neurology and otolaryngology at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.

Vertigo is associated with migraines in some people. Sudden episodes of extreme dizziness can occur with or without a headache. Like visual auras associated with migraine, Zee calls this a vestibular aura. Sometimes these episodes are triggered by looking at things in motion, “such as disco lights or an action movie,” Zee says.

Vertigo can be a symptom of stroke. While 2.6 million Americans go to the emergency room with vertigo every year, only about 4 percent of them have had a stroke.

Zee says an eye-movement exam can sometimes be better than an MRI scan for figuring out inner-ear problems. And a new device, which looks like a pair of goggles, is being tested by Johns Hopkins doctors to gauge inner-ear problems quickly at the bedside.

“It’s like an EKG of the eyes,” Zee says.

—Jill U. Adams, The Washington Post