The Southern Colorado Community Band will perform at 7 p.m. Sunday at the Lou Del Pizzo Performing Arts Center at the Cañon City High School, 1313 College Ave. Mike Nolan has directed the band since 2001. ( Courtesy Photo )

Reach Out To receive information about upcoming SCCB concerts send your email address to: SCCBandconcertinfo@gmail.com

Interesting facts about SCCB musicians: • 23 percent have music degrees • 30 percent are teachers or retired teachers • 23 percent teach or have taught music • 43 percent have Bachelor's degrees • 30 percent have either a Master's Degree or PhD

SCCB Founders Conrad (Con) Miller Con Miller, a clarinet player, graduated from the University of Northern Colorado, Greeley, with a Bachelor's degree in music and a Master's degree in elementary administration. Miller served in the Air Force for twenty-eight years and retired as a Lieutenant Colonel. He directed the Canon City High School Band from 1960 to 1965, and worked in elementary administration for 24 years. He served as principal at McKinley, Washington and Skyline elementary schools. William (Bill) Finch Originally from Pueblo, Bill Finch graduated from music school at UNC, Greeley. He taught music for thirty one years, including nineteen years in Fremont County. Bill taught in Westcliffe from 1962 to 1967, Florence from 1967 to 1974, and Canon City from 1974 to 1993. Bill plays the Trombone, and has been the director of The Dwight Shaw Band for the past six years. Advertisement Dr. Eric Carlson Dr. Carlson, a tuba player, grew up in Mississippi. He has a music degree from U.T. Austin, and a medical degree from The University of Mississippi. In addition to being a musician, Dr. Carlson is an orthopaedic surgeon, hand surgeon and an avid rafter. His wife Linda Carlson is a member of the band. All three of their sons have played in the band over the years.

The Southern Colorado Community Band will perform at 7 p.m. Sunday at the Lou Del Pizzo Performing Arts Center at the Cañon City High School, 1313 College Ave. The SCCB Winter Concert is sponsored by Cañon National Bank. Admission is free; donations to the Ron Cross Memorial Scholarship Fund will be accepted.

The idea for creating a community band first started in 1996 when Ron Cross, who had recently opened Cross Music, 623 Main St., asked a few musicians to play on a float in the annual Music and Blossom Festival Parade. Original members of the group included: Bill Finch, Conrad and Norma Miller, Lee Allison, Pat and Jean Callahan, Jeri Fry, Dennis Carroll and Dr. Eric Carlson.

"We sat on tandem trailers with woodwinds in front, drums in the middle and brass in the back, playing The Saint Louis Blues March," Dr. Carlson said.

Jan Cross, Linda Carlson and the three little Carlson boys decorated the float. The banner on the back of the float read "Old Timers' Band."

"A couple of years later ,(Finch, Carlson, Carroll and I) started talking about finding a director to form a year-round band, and that's how the whole thing started," Con Miller said.

The Southern Colorado Community Band performed its first concert in 1997 under the direction of Todd Woods, who also taught at Cañon City Middle School. Other past directors include Myron Derbaum and Les Hickerson.

Mike Nolan has directed the band since 2001. Nolan is originally from Golden. He graduated from UNC, Greeley, and taught music for 31 years, including 29 years in Florence, where he directed the middle school band, the high school band and high school choir, as well as the high school theater.

Nolan retired from teaching in 2011, but continues to direct the Community Band. He is popular with musicians, both for his conducting skills and for his playful approach. When asked what he likes most about directing the band, he said, "Fun, Fun, and Fun." Nolan's wife, Stephanie, the director of bands at Cañon City High School helps support SCCB.

Today, the band has 55 members who live within a 50 mile radius of Cañon City, including musicians from Westcliffe, Pueblo and Pueblo West, as well as Canon City. The band plays about six concerts per year, including three outdoor concerts in Cañon City, Florence and Westcliffe during the month of June.

To receive e-mail notification of upcoming concerts, send an email address to SCCBandconcertinfo@gmail.com.