After discovering a lump on her breast at age 49, supermodel Elle Macpherson feared the worst. Had her age and lifestyle finally caught up with her?

Although she believed it was cancer, she did not see a doctor right away. On Sunday, as reported by the Daily Mail, Macpherson admitted she was scared to receive the results of the diagnosis.

“I thought I had cancer. I was away shooting Britain and Ireland’s Next Top Model so I couldn’t see my doctor and I was really panicking. It was four weeks before I got the biopsy results, so it was a long-drawn-out and stressful period of not knowing.”

It turns out the Aussie beauty was lucky, as the tumor was a benign growth of tissue and non-life threatening. However, Macpherson took it as a warning and at the time approaching 50-years-old, she decided that day to take a deep look at her diet and lifestyle.

“I did some soul searching and realized that maybe I was taking the wrong vitamins and minerals, not eating properly and was too stressed.”

Afterwards, Macpherson went to see a nutritionist, Dr. Simone Laubscher, who explained how her high acid diet may be the culprit. She also advised Macpherson to stop taking synthetic supplements and eliminate stress from her life.

After the meeting, Macpherson recalls the details of the conversation with Dr. Laubscher.

“Disease thrives in an acidic body and I didn’t realize that stress, worry, jet lag, not getting enough sleep, and eating too much red meat, dairy or not enough greens, can make your body acidic.”

Since then, Macpherson has made significant changes. She has been sleeping more, eating more fruits and vegetables, drinking more water, and eating less red meat. Additionally, she is drinking a personalized super green drink formulated by Dr. Laubscher.

In a previous report from the Inquisitr, Macpherson acknowledges her super slim bikini body is a direct result of her diet change, fitness regime, and personalized green juice.

Not only did the cancer scare change Elle’s life personally, she has made it a passion to reach out and help others change, as well. She partnered with fellow Australian Andrea Bux to create a natural nutritional supplement company called WelleCo.

Teaming up with some Australian doctors and using the formula designed by Dr. Laubscher, Macpherson’s company created their own supplement, called The Super Elixir. This product was eventually followed by a new supplement, named The Super Elixir Nourishing Protein powder.

To study the effectiveness of The Super Elixir, clinical trials were run on 50 patients over eight weeks to measure different biomarkers, including blood, iron levels, cholesterol levels, as well as liver function. According to Elle, the results of the tests were “incredible.”

Since its inception, the company has been successful and recently stopped advertising, relying only on word-of-mouth and the positive customer testimonials coming in over the past couple years.

Macpherson, who in the 1980s gained the nickname The Body, is no stranger to entrepreneurship. In 1989, at the age of 25, she created Elle Macpherson Inc. Later, in 1990, she launched her Elle Macpherson Intimates lingerie collection and The Body skin care products.

Aside from her revitalized health and company success, The Body has another reason to be happy. In a recent article from Hello! Fashion, Macpherson has been spending a lot of time with her hotel billionaire husband, Jeffrey Soffer. She recently expressed how being with him has enriched her life and may be contributing to her improved health.

“My husband likes to water ski, paddleboard, snow ski, hike and spin, so we do a lot of that together. Laughter is very important to us too.”

Elle Macpherson’s cancer scare is now behind her, and now spends her time equally between homes in Miami and London. The Aussie beauty is on a new high-alkaline diet as well as a special super green juice and now claims to feel much better.

[Disclaimer: The Inquisitr strongly recommends you consult your physician before beginning any diet or exercise program. The Inquisitr does not endorse any of the diets or diet techniques mentioned in this article.]

[Photos courtesy Stuart C. Wilson / John Parra / Mireya Acierto via Getty Images]