Coming up this evening at 9, Piers Morgan welcomes the sole female member of the legendary Osmond clan, and one half of a famous brother/sister Las Vegas performing duo, as Marie Osmond joins him in studio for a primetime, face to face interview.

Staring across the desk at a business woman, former child star, and performer with a career spanning half a century, Morgan asks his guest about the latest crop of young female entertainers, leading off with the most probing of all questions.

“Do you twerk?” he asks Osmond.

“I work,” she deadpans, likely using the two words to send a much broader message.

As a woman who entered the business at an early age, toting a strong brand of ethical, family-oriented fare, Osmond offers her assessment of the 20-year-old pop star who dropped jaws with an intensely controversial performance at the Video Music Awards:

“I don’t think she’s stupid,” says Osmond of Miley Cyrus. “I think she knew exactly what she was doing.”

Asked if her career had ever tempted her to do something “naughty,” Osmond answers clearly and proudly.

“No, I never wanted to. And I believe it’s because I had incredible parents. And mostly I had a great mother who taught me to respect myself.”

While not wanting to impose her own values on others, Osmond explains how the choices one makes ultimately define the direction of a career, citing other successful women who have opted for alternate routes than her own, such as Cher and Madonna.

Ultimately, she tells the "Piers Morgan Live" host, it’s all about individuality.

“I just know that some people love it and some people don’t find it appealing for their children," she says of Cyrus' brand. "And she gets to make those choices.”

Watch the above clip for more of her analysis of the modern entertainment industry, and for complete coverage of Piers Morgan's interview with Marie Osmond, watch "Piers Morgan Live" on CNN at 9.

-–

» Follow "Piers Morgan Live" on Twitter and join the conversation using #pml

» Follow "Piers Morgan Live" on Instagram