VAIL — The long-standing distinction between the river-surfing mountain waterman and the island-hopping, wave-riding waterman is blurring.

“I grew up surfing and riding big waves in Hawaii and other wind sports. I never thought I’d find myself at this altitude doing this, riding a river,” said Kai Lenny, the 21-year-old world champion race and big wave stand-up paddler.

Lenny arrived in Vail this week for his first-ever foray into whitewater. His participation in Saturday’s GoPro Mountain Games downriver sprint showed the nascent sport of whitewater stand-up paddling gaining legitimacy in the major-league realm of coastal paddling, where athletes for generations have raced across raging seas and ridden huge waves.

“Just to change it up and have this different scenery is rad. That’s why I like doing all these other sports too,” he said.

The Red Bull-sponsored big wave paddle surfer, kite surfer and last year’s overall world champion in both race and surf disciplines spent the week learning the intricacies of high altitude river-running. He struggled with the lack of oxygen as well as the swirling nature of narrow, shallow swiftwater.

He’s a quick learner. He took second place out of 33 racers Saturday, behind stand-up pioneer Dan Gavere. Whitewater veteran Mike Tavares finished third a mere three-tenths of a second behind the Hawaiian superstar.

The race serves as a precursor for the Payette River Games in Cascade, Idaho in two weeks. With a $50,000 stand-up prize purse — the largest in the history of whitewater stand-up paddling — the event is expected to draw more coastal stand-up racers, including Lenny.

“We are seeing new heights for the whitewater world for sure. People are looking at whitewater stand-up and seeing that it’s actually viable and legitimate and super fun,” Tavares said.

While Lenny’s presence in the GoPro Mountain Games race — along with several Japanese and California coastal stand-up athletes — certainly raises whitewater’s profile in the historically salty stand-up scene, Gavere said he was more impressed the race drew so many different paddlers. There were moms, dads, kids and first-timers competing in the downriver race alongside seasoned athletes. Surfers and kayakers are joining the swelling ranks of whitewater stand-up too. Sunday’s stand-up cross races on Gore Creek are expected to draw many of the kayakers who competed in the GoPro Mountain Games freestyle and creek contests.

“I think we are looking at chronic growth over the next few years,” Gavere said. “I think freshwater and whitewater growth is going to outpace saltwater growth big time.”

Ken Hoeve, a stand-up who has pushed the sport’s growth in recent years, was tasked by GoPro Mountain Games sponsors to show Lenny the ropes of the river. He took the surfer down to Glenwood Springs’ huge wave on the Colorado River, where Lenny surfed lengthy rides, spinning tricks and revealing his true prowess even though he’d never surfed a river wave.

“I ended up learning from him,” Hoeve said.

Like Gavere, Hoeve was celebrating diversity more than big names on Gore Creek on Saturday.

“We have so many walks of life and so many styles of paddler here and everyone is having an equal amount of fun. Everyone is on a level playing field with the creek,” Hoeve said.