Texas to the state’s poor: Drop dead

Photo: Eric Gay /Associated Press Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick charged the Senate State Affairs Committee with the task of studying and recommending how the state of Texas should work to affirm the constitutionally guaranteed religious liberty protections of all Texans. The first hearing is set for Feb. 17. less Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick charged the Senate State Affairs Committee with the task of studying and recommending how the state of Texas should work to affirm the constitutionally guaranteed religious liberty ... more Photo: Eric Gay /Associated Press Texas to the state’s poor: Drop dead 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

The federal government evidenced its concern for the uninsured in Texas by setting up an Affordable Care Act exchange for them to gain coverage when the state refused to establish one on its own.

If the federal government were to withhold all or a portion of funding in a so-called Medicaid waiver program, it would demonstrate not nearly enough concern for this same pool of people.

The five-year program set to end in Texas on Sept. 30, 2016, was intended to help states expand Medicaid coverage. Just as Texas refused to set up an ACA exchange, it refused to expand Medicaid as part of the ACA.

But the truth is that even if Texas formally expanded ACA Medicaid, these waiver funds are needed to care for those who would still not be covered.

Hospitals in Texas that serve Medicaid clients and the uninsured have used these funds to expand care even as the state refused.

This amounts to about $17.5 billion for the state’s hospitals between 2011 and 2016. Another part of the waiver funding — $11.4 billion in the same period — has been used as incentives for providers to improve heath care quality and costs.

Texas has until Sept. 30 to apply for renewal of the program. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services then has six months for its initial reply. The federal government has signaled that it will take the state’s refusal to expand Medicaid into consideration.

The federal government’s irritation is understandable. Texas leads the nation in the number of uninsured residents. The state has ostensibly offered alternatives to Medicaid expansion — block grants, for instance — but these simply don’t address the need, the experts say. The state, we are certain, knows such proposals are non-starters. The message to Texas’ poor is essentially — and quite literally in the absence of meaningful coverage — drop dead.

So, a question logically follows: If the state doesn’t care enough about its uninsured, why should the federal government? Well, precisely because the state doesn’t act to address the issue, and the hospitals that have been receiving these funds have used the waiver program to pick up some of the slack and to improve health care quality and costs. We are asking the federal government to be the adult in the room here.

People who might not otherwise have gotten care received it. Rural hospitals might close without the funds derived from the federal waiver.

Texas should have embraced the Affordable Care Act, set up a state exchange and expanded Medicaid. But foolishly, state lawmakers have failed to take action that would help the state’s poor.

The Legislature can remedy this, but it recently finished up with its session for the biennium without doing so. The Legislature should remedy its failings on ACA as soon as it can.

In the interim, the federal government should save Texans from Texas.