China, the biggest foreign bond buyer of U.S. debt, bought record amount of bonds issued by U.S. government agencies including Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and securities backed by residential mortgage loans in July while selling Treasury notes and bonds for the first time since April, according to the latest capital flows data from the Treasury Department.

Bloomberg News

China’s purchases are the latest sign the country isn’t stepping away from funding the U.S. even as prices on Treasurys and mortgage debt fell sharply this summer, sending yields higher and diluting the value of investors’ fixed-income holdings, said analysts. China was a net buyer of Treasury notes and bonds in May and June when many other investors cut back their holdings during the Spring swoon.

“There is no evidence that Chinese investors are losing confidence in the US market,” said Ian Lyngen, a senior government bond strategist at CRT Capital Group LLC. “In fact the notion that they are buying dips [in bond prices] is longer-term constructive” for the U.S.

In July, China increased its holdings of high-grade securities sold by government-sponsored enterprises such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and securities backed by home mortgages guaranteed by the U.S. agencies, by $20.2 billion, according to the Treasury Department data. The purchases broke the previous record of $16.9 billion purchases in April, according to Mr. Lyngen.

Mr. Lyngen said the July amount was the biggest on a monthly basis since 1977, the earliest year the data provided by the Treasury.

While buying the U.S. agency debt, China reduced its holdings of Treasury notes and bonds by $6.48 billion in July, after a $34.7 billion net increase in the previous two months. Many investors perceive agency bonds and agency MBS as an attractive alternative to Treasury bonds because they are highly rated bonds and offer higher yields than Treasury debt.

Analysts continue to play down any concerns that China might dump its U.S. bond holdings, potentially exposing the U.S. government to an interest-rate shock and dealing a blow to the U.S. economy.

Despite the selling in Treasury notes and bonds in July, China’s overall holdings of Treasury debt actually rose by about $1.5 billion to near a record high of $1.277 trillion thanks to its purchases of shorter-term U.S. Treasury debt called bills, which mature in a year or less.

China’s portfolio reshuffling came at a time when overseas investors were warming up to US bonds again, particularly in July as the market stabilized after a spring swoon. Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke had soothed investors’ worries about rising yields that month by suggesting that there is no “preset course” for the central bank to wind down its bond buying program.

The benchmark 10-year Treasury note’s yield hit 23-month peak of 2.756% on July 8 and fell to 2.58% at the end of July. Bond prices rise when their yields fall.

Overall in July, foreign investors increased their holdings of long-term US assets by $31.1 billion following a decline of $67 billion in June, according to data Tuesday from the Treasury. Japan, the second-largest foreign owner of Treasury debt after China, boosted its overall holdings by a record $52 billion in July to $1.135 trillion.

“It appears some yield-sensitive foreign investors took on the opportunity to lock in higher yields,” said interest rates strategists at Nomura Securities International in a research note.

Broadly, overseas private investors and central banks took diverging paths of investing in July. Private foreign investors bought a net $50.1 billion in Treasury bonds and notes in July. In contrast, foreign central banks shed $15.9 billion in Treasury notes and bonds holdings and boosted holdings of agency and agency MBS by $20 billion.

As overseas investors came back into the market in July, US investors continued to pull money out. A total $14.8 billion cash was yanked from U.S.-listed bond mutual funds and exchange-traded funds in July following a record outflow of $69.1 billion, according to TrimTabs Investment Research. In August, there was $42.9 billion net redemption again for the sector.

Some analysts cautioned whether appetites from foreign investors may have waned again in August. Bond yields shot up again that month to multi-year highs amid renewed fears over a shift in the Fed’s easy-monetary stimulus.

The Treasury’s capital flows report for August will be released in October.