Buy Photo Congressman Steve King meets with the Des Moines Register editorial board on Oct. 6, 2014. (Photo: Kelsey Kremer/The Register)Buy Photo

U.S. Rep. Steve King says he's a better member of Congress than when he was first elected 12 years ago, he likes what he's doing, and he thinks Iowa values can help fix the federal government's troubles.

"My sense of dedication and urgency wrapped up together is as intense as it ever was, although I am tempered a little bit; I am seasoned a little more, and I think I pick my targets better than I did when I first went into Congress," the Kiron Republican told The Des Moines Register's editors and reporters Monday. He added he has developed important relationships that have been strengthened over the last few years.

King, 65, who is seeking re-election to a seventh term, is opposed in Iowa's 4th Congressional District by Democrat Jim Mowrer, 28, an Iraq War veteran from Boone. The district covers 39 counties in northwest and north-central Iowa, including the cities of Ames, Fort Dodge, Sioux City and Mason City.

King calls President Barack Obama "the most liberal president we've ever had" and contends that Senate Democratic Leader Harry Reid has acted as a shield to prevent some contentious bills from reaching the president's desk. But he also says some bipartisan cooperation is occurring, such as this year's passage of a five-year farm bill, which he supported.

"It is a good bill for our grain producers," he says.

Congress does have a role in the dysfunction occurring in Washington, D.C., King concedes. But he singles out Obama's Affordable Care Act for criticism, saying there were promises made that have not been fulfilled, and he also cites alleged targeting of conservative groups by the Internal Revenue Service.

"It looks like government is being used as a tool" to do something other than serve Americans, he adds. "That growing sense of dysfunctionality I think has now penetrated into our culture and our society. That is going to be a hard thing to put back together. We must have a federal government that functions, and I believe that it needs do to less than it is doing," he said. "We need to shrink it down, but we need to increase the quality of the product that comes out and increase the credibility."

King says he has been asked what does he agree with the president on, and his response is, "What does he agree with me on? We have a solid base here in the state of Iowa. So it would be causing more problems to go along to get along than it is to stand on the principles that need to prevail in the end."

For example, King says he would like to win approval of a long-term federal highway funding bill, and he believes it would only take a little compromise from Obama to accomplish it. But he doesn't think that most people know that two-thirds of every dollar paid in federal gas taxes doesn't go for roads and bridges, a situation he strongly disagrees with.

He says 3 percent of the gas tax money is spent on trails, 17 percent for mass transit, 28 percent for environmental and archaeological work, and about 20 percent for wages that must be paid under the Davis-Bacon Act, which requires that local prevailing wages be paid on federal public works projects. He suggests public transit riders "could pay a little more for their cheap metro ticket and we can put that into roads and bridges, especially in places like Iowa."

He adds that he isn't against recreational trails, but remarks, "I just think the people that use them should be the ones that have the first opportunity to pay for them."

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Rep Steve King on a trip to Texas with Michele Bachmann

=====

OTHER ISSUES: STEVE KING

EBOLA VIRUS: King says there's more to be learned about the disease, but he adds, "Constitutional rights don't require us to commit societal suicide." At this point he says he isn't calling for a shutdown of all air travel to the United States, but he thinks it is something that should immediately be considered. King also says he is uneasy about sending 3,000 American troops to Africa, although he sees a need to contain the disease. One of his concerns is that health care workers are still becoming ill from Ebola. "If they don't know how to avoid it, how do we in the streets of America expect that we can? I am not at all satisfied with what this administration has provided for us as information to deal with."

SOCIAL SECURITY/MEDICARE: "I don't want to take anything off the table. I would like to see Social Security solvent," he says, although he won't prescribe solutions until he thinks a political solution can be achieved. But increased employment in an economic resurgence would help Social Security become nearly solvent on its own, he adds. Medicare is more difficult, he says, suggesting that Congress start by repealing the Obama's Affordable Care Act and "then take a look" at fixing Medicare in the aftermath.

AFFORDABLE CARE ACT: "We can't fix it. So we must repeal it." As an alternative, he would let states run high-risk health insurance pools and federal incentives could be provided if necessary. He also notes that Iowa law already lets young people stay on their parents' health insurance. In addition, he would permit health insurance to be bought and sold across state lines to encourage price competition, and he noted he has introduced a bill to make health insurance premiums fully deductible on income taxes. He says about 20.5 million Americans have paid for health insurance with after-tax dollars.

ABORTION/SAME-SEX MARRIAGE: "Life begins at the moment of conception and human life is sacred from that moment until natural death," he says. He believes the courts should not decide the issue of same-sex marriage. But if state legislatures want to write acceptance of same-sex marriage into law, he accepts that as the will of the people. "It doesn't mean that I will agree with it, or five or 10 years down the road I won't be supportive of an effort to reestablish marriage between a man and a woman."

BAKKEN PIPELINE: King supports the concept of a proposed 1,100-mile pipeline that would carry crude oil from North Dakota's Bakken oil fields through 17 counties in Iowa to an Illinois transfer area. However, he says he wants to protect the property rights of Iowa landowners, and he wants to reach a consensus by requiring that the pipeline company have a "substantial number of leases signed." He adds, "I don't want to go through Iowa with eminent domain and wipe out peoples' property rights. They have to have an idea that is good enough and strong enough and economically feasible enough that they can get a significant percentage of these leases negotiated before you get to eminent domain."

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1xjx1Xp