NEW YORK

Parts of N.Y., Conn. gun laws upheld

A federal appeals court on Monday upheld parts of New York and Connecticut gun-

control laws banning semiautomatic assault rifles and large­capacity magazines, ruling that the measures passed after a 2012 school massacre did not violate the Constitution.

The U.S. Court of Appeals for the 2nd Circuit in New York upheld the bans on semiautomatic weapons and large-capacity magazines but struck down a New York provision barring gun owners from loading more than seven bullets in a clip and a Connecticut prohibition on the non-semiautomatic Remington 7615.

The appeals court, in upholding the provisions, ruled against coalitions that included firearms dealers, sports shooters and gun owners who claimed that the mandates infringed on their constitutional right to possess firearms.

New York and Connecticut’s gun-control measures, among the strictest in the nation, were signed into law after a gunman killed 26 children and staff at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Conn., in December 2012.

The Newtown shooting revived a national debate on gun control. At the time, President Obama launched an aggressive gun-control push, but his efforts largely failed in Congress.

— Reuters

OHIO

Executions delayed by lack of drugs

Ohio has delayed executions until 2017 because of problems finding supplies of lethal injection drugs.

The announcement on Monday means Ohio will go at least two years without putting anyone to death and marks another setback in efforts to carry out capital punishment in the state.

The Department of Rehabilitation and Correction says the execution dates of 12 inmates have been pushed into the future through warrants of reprieve by Gov. John Kasich (R).

The developments mean Ohio will not execute anyone until January 2017. More than two dozen executions have been put off nearly four years, to August 2019.

Ohio has run out of supplies of its previous drugs and has unsuccessfully sought new quantities, including failed attempts to import chemicals from overseas.

—Associated Press

HEALTH

Colo. plan ﬁles suit in bid to stay open

One of the Affordable Care Act health insurance plans told to fold by state regulators filed a lawsuit Monday to block that action.

The Colorado HealthOP, a consumer-focused co-op ordered to go out of business by the end of the year, is asking a district court in Denver for a temporary restraining order against the state Division of Insurance and a preliminary injunction to allow the plan to continue providing coverage to residents in 2016.

Eight of the nation’s 23 health insurance co-ops will be closed by December because of financial issues, although several blame a sudden shortfall in federal funding for their situation. The Colorado plan contends that independent projections indicated it would be profitable next year, making the state action “irresponsible and premature,” chief executive Julia Hutchins said.

— Susan Levine and Amy Goldstein

GEORGIA

State scrutinizes fantasy sports sites

Daily fantasy sports sites have come under scrutiny in another state, with Georgia regulators questioning two major industry players as officials in Nevada and elsewhere have done.

In Georgia, officials are questioning whether FanDuel and DraftKings can operate at all under the state’s tight restrictions on gambling. Georgia’s constitution generally bans gambling except for state lottery-run games, according to a Sept. 23 letter written by the lottery’s general counsel, Joseph Kim, and sent to the companies’ chief executives.

Kim said Monday that neither company responded by the Oct. 16 deadline given in his letter. He said lottery officials are considering their next step.

Nevada ordered both companies out of the state unless they get a gambling license. The standoff is being closely watched by regulators in Delaware, where parlay bets on NFL games are allowed.

The companies argue that fantasy sports are not gambling but a game of skill, which exempts them from an online gambling prohibition by a 2006 federal law.

— Associated Press

PENNSYLVANIA

Contractor convicted in deadly collapse

A demolition contractor charged in the deaths of six people buried in debris from a building collapse in Philadelphia was found guilty Monday of involuntary manslaughter.

A jury convicted Griffin Campbell of six counts of involuntary manslaughter, rejecting the third-degree murder charges sought by prosecutors.

Campbell had described himself as a scapegoat for the architect overseeing the block-long demolition project. Prosecutors say he caused a towering brick wall to collapse on an adjacent Salvation Army thrift store as he cut corners on the job in June 2013. One woman found alive after hours in the rubble lost her legs.

— Associated Press

Actor shot during Tombstone reenactment: An actor staging a historical gunfight in the Old West town of Tombstone, Ariz., was shot with a live round during a show that was supposed to use blanks, leading officials to put the popular reenactments on hold. The shooting happened Sunday as performers from the Tombstone Vigilantes group reenacted a gunfight in the 19th-century mining town made famous by Wyatt Earp, Doc Holliday and the O.K. Corral.

Teen sentenced in plot to attack school: A teenager who told authorities he was planning to shoot his family and carry out a massacre at a Minnesota school was sentenced Monday to up to 10 years of probation, which will begin with treatment at a secure facility. John LaDue, 18, of Waseca, was sentenced in Waseca County District Court on one count of possessing an explosive device. LaDue earlier pleaded guilty to the charge, and five other similar counts were dropped.

— From news services