Big night in the city? There’s nothing like missing a can’t-miss event because you can’t find a parking spot. But not to worry. Denver wasn’t left off the list. Various parking-app developers have added locations in the city this year to help us all find a spot for an affordable price.

Just don’t forget your smartphone! Here are a few I’ve heard from:

Parking Panda

Reserve and pay for a parking spot based on event or local venues. For example, if you were planning to go to Tuesday’s Denver Nuggets game at Pepsi Center, select the date on Parking Panda’s Pepsi Center page. It shows you available options and the prices for at least 15 area parking lots and garages within walking distance. Parking Panda has also teamed up with History Colorado, Denver Center of Performing Arts and the Clyfford Still Museum, which posted a discount code for Parking Panda users. The company currently works with at least 20 locations in the city. Parking Panda also has gone the Airbnb route and lets individuals rent out their own parking spots to make some extra cash. +parkingpanda.com

CurbStand

If you frequent valet-parking lots, CurbStand adds the convenience of communicating with the valet and paying on with an iPhone app (Android coming soon). After you drop your car off at the valet, check in at the location on your mobile. When you’re ready to pick up your car from the valet, you can request your car and pay and tip all in the app. In the Denver area, CurbStand has 14 locations, mostly at restaurants including Root Down and Linger. The company said that it is expanding in Denver and plans to soon add 150 businesses and offer 100 locations. In Colorado, CurbStand’s app also works at Breckenridge Slopeside and the Larkspur restaurant in Vail. +curbstand.com

Parkmobile

Launched in Boulder this year, Parkmobile lets drivers pay parking meters with a smartphone. You must first register at parkmobile.com (or on the app). Then after you park, scan the QR code on the parking meter or sign, verify your space and license plate, set the time limit (if there is one) and go to your event. The app will send alerts when your time is almost up. No need to carry quarters either. Your account gets charged. The service is now available in Denver at a few garages and lots. Check its site for locations. +parkmobile.com

More to check out with Denver parking spots: