The entire South is the grave of Calhoun.

-- Attributed to a Union soldier by Historian Margaret Coit, 1970.



Governor Nikki Haley of South Carolina, not very long ago at all, watched quietly as her state legislature flirted with the idea of nullification in connection with the Affordable Care Act. So, I am willing to give her one cheer for what she said today about the banner of treason that waves over the state capitol.

"Today, we are here in a moment of unity in our state, without ill will, to say it is time to move the flag from the Capitol grounds," Haley said during a news conference attended by Republican senators Lindsey Graham, Tim Scott and other state leaders.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Just so we're all on the same page, in this case, "today" is June 22, 2015, or more than 150 years after General Sherman's Army of the Tennessee made roughly the same point, but with considerably more emphasis. And all it took to shake these people out of their historical coma was the fact that nine African Americans were shot to death in Bible study by a pathetic secessionist wannabe.

(Which reminds me, there has been no more useless presence on my electric teevee throughout these events than the inexplicably employed Harold Ford, Jr. of MSNBC, who has spent the past few days loudly proclaiming the Day of Jubilee, unconscionably hijacking the private grace of the people whose family members were murdered and making sure nobody raises their voices. He also was bummed by what the president said to Marc Maron. Please to be sodding off now.)

Most Popular

First of all, I make it no better than 50-50 that the South Carolina legislature goes along with this. Haley has to get two-thirds of both houses of the legislature to agree to do it. She may have to force them back into session even to get a vote, and she's never been confused with Huey Long on her best day.

Second, even if she gets the vote she wants, and even if she somehow wins it, all that happens is the flag goes to some museum. I'll be convinced when Haley and the rest of her party abandon the principles that the flag represents. Let's have no more talk about blocking federal officials who enforce national gun laws or the Affordable Care Act. Let's not ever again rally armed people to the defense of some freeloading crank in Nevada. Let's leave the Bureau of Land Management guys alone. Let's stop listening to -- and appearing on -- radio shows that encourage this behavior. Let's abandon extremist views of the Tenth Amendment that should have died with Calhoun and the Confederacy. Let's not have sessions on nullification at CPAC. Let's all greet with happy smiles the 21st century. Until then, alas, and as much as it may give the sad face to Harold Ford, I fear that, once again, I will have to associate myself with the remarks of the gentleman from Brooklyn, Mr. Rock.