Congressman Bradley Byrne (R-Alabama District 1), held a town hall meeting in Poarch as a guest of the Poarch Creek Indians (PCI) Monday, August 17.

“I didn’t come to make a speech,” Byrne said. “I wanted to come and hear your concerns and comments.”

About 100 people gathered in the PCI auditorium to speak with the Congressman and have their questions answered. Byrne will visit 16 sites in District 1 over the next two weeks, talking with his constituents and getting their feedback to take back to Washington D.C.

The Congressman was introduced by PCI Tribal Chair Stephanie Bryan.

“Congressman Byrne truly serves the people,” Bryan said. “He is a champion for creating jobs and a great friend to Poarch.”

Byrne was very complimentary of PCI and the work they do in the community.

“It is great stuff that you do for the area,” Byrne said. “You have truly become a force for good.”

In explaining his approach to his job, Byrne said he takes the lead from his grandson.

“I am not doing right by my grandson if I go to Washington and just complain,” Byrne said. “I need to be about the business of fixing problems. People want to sit around up there and complain. We need to get up and do something to fix it.”

One problem he mentioned is mandatory spending and how it has grown unchecked.

“The spending that congress gets no say in, such as entitlement programs and Obamacare, now take up most of the budget,” Byrne said. “We must get this under control to remain the great nation we have been in the past. We have cut discretionary spending so much that many in the armed forces wonder if we have the troops needed to defend against our greatest threat, Russia. When you spend 50 percent more on welfare than national defense, you have a very real problem.”

In response to a question on the Iran nuclear deal, Byrne said that he had to travel to Israel to get the American side of the issue.

“It is a problem when you have the president of the United States and the Secretary of State only giving you Iran’s side of the issue,” Byrne said. “This may be the most important vote I will cast and I will oppose the deal. The question is will we have the votes to overturn a sure veto from the President. These people do not think like we do. We use our missiles to protect our children. They hide their missiles in schools and hospitals. They use their children to protect their missiles.”

He spoke on a wide variety of topics, including freedom of religion, ISIS, the burdens placed on small town banks, and transportation.

In response to a question about mandatory spending from PCI Vice-Chairman Robert McGhee, Byrne said he would protect Social Security and Medicare, but block grant other social programs to the individual states.

“Let the states determine who needs these funds and how much they need,” Byrne said.

Byrne closed by telling of a visit to an aircraft carrier and the professionalism he saw in the sailors and airmen there.

“These are just kids and yet they do their job flawlessly,” Byrne said. “We need to support them and not go back to the way it was before WWII. We are doing a disservice to our troops with the cuts we have made under this administration.”