Two early-morning radio show hosts in upstate New York have been fired for mocking people seeking gender reassignment surgery.

The controversy began Wednesday, when Kimberly Ray and Barry Beck, hosts of “The Breakfast Buzz” on WBZA, were discussing a decision by the city of Rochester to cover city employees’ gender reassignment surgery in its health care plan, according to The Daily Mail.

The duo was critical of the decision, and while mocking the transgender community, they played the Aerosmith song, “Dude Looks Like a Lady.”

Outraged GOP senator slams Dem chairman

for calling Obamacare opponents racists

“The services that will be paid for under the new coverage: gender reassignment surgery, psychological counseling, because you’re probably a nut job to begin with,” Ray said on air. “The new coverage, if you are a city of Rochester employee, will pay for services related to your gender reassignment surgery. So, the dude can look like a lady, and the city is going to pay for it. Your tax dollars at work.”

According to the local ABC affiliate, WHAM, the two also ridiculed a caller and a local high school transgender who plays on the school’s softball team.

The gay rights community, referred to in some quarters as the “gay mafia,” quickly sprang to life, and the station announced Wednesday via Twitter that Ray and Beck were suspended for making “hateful” comments about the transgender community, WHAM reported.

The station released a statement Thursday morning announcing the pair’s termination, saying:

“This morning Entercom fired Kimberly and Beck effective immediately. Their hateful comments against the transgender community do not represent our station or our company. We deeply apologize to the transgender community, the community of Rochester, and anyone else who was offended by their hateful comments. We are proud of our past work on behalf of the local LGBT community and we remain committed to that partnership.” — Sue Munn Vice-President/General Manager Entercom Rochester

Consider it swift justice in the Obama era that some will argue sends a clear message: Dissent will not be tolerated.