Donald Dates photographed his jeep on one of the Devils Slide trestles. (Silvia Pettem / Courtesy photo)

Years ago, I was fortunate to have purchased a dozen black-and-white photographs that chronicle a Jeep driver's 1954 ascent to the summit of Rollins Pass. Of importance to historians is that the images document the section of this former railroad grade (between Rollinsville and Winter Park) that lies in Boulder County.

The driver, Donald Dates, obviously sent his photos to someone else, as he photographed his Jeep in various locations and wrote lengthy captions and comments on the backs. The railroad tracks, in use from 1903 to 1927, had been removed in 1935, and the road-bed, at the time of the photos, was rough but drivable by four-wheel-drives vehicles.

Genealogical research shows that Dates was a 37-year-old salesman of photographic supplies from St. Louis. Most likely he had saved his black-and-white film for the highlight of his journey. His first photo, marked with a "1," was taken about one mile below Yankee Doodle Lake.

"This is the ridge up which the old Moffat 'high line' was built," he wrote, "in order that the Denver & Salt Lake Railway might reach Rollins Pass from the Atlantic side of the Continental Divide."

Dates then had to detour around the remains of a wooden snow shed that had once sheltered the tracks in an open cut between Yankee Doodle and Jenny lakes.

After circumventing a natural amphitheater surrounding Jenny Lake, Dates entered what he called "a short rock tunnel," more commonly known today as the Needle's Eye Tunnel. He stopped to photograph his Jeep at both the east and west portals.

Perhaps the most dramatic part of Dates' journey was crossing the Devil's Slide Trestles. One view shows the Jeep on the shorter of the two trestles, with its wooden planks obviously decaying.

On the back of another trestle photo, Dates noted that he was 1,000 feet above the South Fork of Middle Boulder Creek, adding, "And it certainly looks it!"

As Dates approached the 11,600-foot summit near the former railroad station of Corona, he found his route blocked by fallen timber and boards from another collapsed show shed. Luckily for him, another driver had come up from Denver and two other men had driven "from the Pacific side." Together, the men moved enough of the debris so they could all get through.

If Dates had returned two years later, he would have seen many road improvements. In 1956, Boulder, Gilpin and Grand counties joined together to install culverts, surface the road with gravel and add new wooden planks to the trestles.

For more than two decades, the road became a popular drive for two-wheel-drive vehicles, even family station wagons. Then, in 1979, the Needle's Eye Tunnel was closed because of rockfall. It was reopened in September 1987, then closed again in July 1990.

Dates' last photo was of the Moffat Tunnel, which undercuts the route that early day tourists called "the top of the world." Dates wrote the following about the tunnel, which was completed in 1927 and is used by the railroad today:

"The Moffat Tunnel may be far easier to maintain than the old high-line, but man is no mole. And, what can one see of the majestic Rockies while rolling through an underground tube?"

Silvia Pettem and Carol Taylor write about history for the Daily Camera. Email Silvia at pettem@earthlink.net, Carol at boulderhistorylibrarian@gmail.com or write to the Daily Camera, 5450 Western Ave., Boulder 80301.