Stuart Pollack

April 27, 2015

Last year was tough for the transformation of health care from volume to value. Two major medical home studies (Friedberg and Rosenthal) and two major readmission prevention studies (Goldman and Dhalla) had negative to underwhelming results. Thirteen of the original 32 Pioneer Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs) have dropped out of the program.

Of the original 220 Medicare Shared Savings Program ACOs, only 53 held spending enough below their targets to receive performance payments. Given the significant investments these ACOs made in the infrastructure needed to manage risk, and that the top 12 ACOs were responsible for half of the savings, the vast majority of participating systems have clearly lost money in the program.

Does this mean that health care transformation is impossible and that we are stuck with the status quo until the next big idea comes along? Are previous studies showing that medical homes work, that readmissions are preventable, and that integrated care management can improve quality while lowering costs just publication bias, never to be reproduced?

The problem is not that lower cost, higher quality care is impossible. As someone who spent most of his career in the world of integrated health care systems before moving to an academic medical system, I know there are many organizations that have been producing Triple-Aim results for decades (such as Intermountain, Group Health, HealthPartners, and Geisinger) — systems where there is good evidence that they can deliver high-quality care at a significantly lower cost than the rest of the country and that consisted of medical homes embedded in Accountable Care Organizations well before anyone had invented those terms.

The problem is that most existing disorganized, fee-for-service systems are struggling to reproduce the results of those successful systems. I believe this is because we have failed to truly understand why the best systems achieve Triple-Aim results. As a result, we are busy scaling their processes when we should be scaling their cultures and principles instead.

Looking Beyond Processes

In 2007, while I was busy trying to practice and lead a department of general internal medicine, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP), American College of Physicians (ACP), and American Osteopathic Association (AOA) published the Joint Principles of the Patient-Centered Medical Home. I thought, these are wonderful—like mom and apple pie—how can anyone disagree with them, and what in the world am I supposed to do with this?

So I was excited when in 2008 the National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) published their Medical Home guidelines. They were so concrete: an actionable and discrete list of processes around access, population management, care management, and care coordination that we could implement and measure. And medical home, followed by the medical neighborhood, and then the Accountable Care Organization, morphed from being about philosophy to being about process improvement.

The first hint that we were on the wrong track came from AAFP’s National Demonstration Project. In retrospect, it was obvious that giving a family practice just a part-time coach, but no new personnel or sources of revenue, was not going to change outcomes. Yet amazingly, while the average results were negative, there were practices that successfully transformed from volume to value care.

What made these practices different from the rest was their Adaptive Reserve: a consistent vision of practice, a learning culture, healthy relationships within the practice, rich communication, trust, regular time for reflection, and shared and facilitative leadership. Not differences in functional processes, but differences in cultures.

Similar to the practices that succeeded in the National Demonstration Project, systems such as Intermountain, Group Health, HealthPartners, and Geisinger, have always had “different” cultures. Cultures going back to the founding of these organizations decades to a century ago.

Of course, we don’t have decades to centuries to wait for ACOs to develop Triple-Aim producing cultures. What makes me optimistic is my experience leading and practicing in a start-up learning-lab medical home where we successfully designed, engineered, and executed a culture. And there are examples from other start-ups, both in (Iora) and out (Zappos) of health care, where culture was planned.

I found my answer in a National Health Service (NHS) publication about leading large scale change: “Build leadership systems that are managerially loose but culturally tight.” Or in a more actionable form, build your front-line day-to-day processes loosely, but the processes that determine your culture incredibly tight.

It’s important to build your front-line processes loosely because no matter how detailed your protocols, we are dealing with individual human beings, each with different DNA, different environments, and different hopes and dreams. They have combinations of diseases that are unusual enough that it doesn’t make sense to spend time and money building a specific protocol, and where following guidelines for each individual disease results in multiple interactions and direct conflicts. This is not to say that standard processes shouldn’t exist. But as we deal with more complex, and hence more expensive patients, processes start failing. What we do when the protocol falls apart likely separates the organizations that achieve Triple-Aim results from those that don’t.

My colleague, a Registered Nurse (RN) care manager, was doing a phone follow-up with a high risk patient. She started by asking the standard set of questions, the same question asked hundreds of times a day by RN care managers all over the country, but then continued to chat with him. Only then did she learn that he was recently homeless, living in his pick-up truck in a Walmart parking lot 30 miles from his dialysis center, and that he had no money to buy the gas to get to his dialysis appointment that afternoon. We didn’t have a process that obtained that history, nor did we have a process to deal with what we had just learned.

And we still don’t. But because our processes around culture are tight, the RN care manager understood our mission to keep patients healthy. By focusing on health, we can keep them out of the emergency room and hospital, and inevitably cut down on costs. She made sure that he was at his dialysis appointment later that afternoon.

I am convinced that it is these type of processes around culture and mission, processes that had no reason to exist in the disorganized world of fee-for-service, that actually differentiate the Intermountains, Group Healths, HealthPartners, Geisingers, and a small number of successful Medicare ACOs from the groups who are struggling in their transformation from volume to value.

Determining Culture

So what are the “meta” processes that determine our culture and result in every team member understanding who we are as a team and why we do what we do? Generalizing and expanding upon the concept of Adaptive Reserve, I would include processes that touch on:

Mission and vision — creating, communicating, and living

Hiring

Individual and team development

Communication within the team, between teams, and between leadership and teams

Meetings, especially huddles

Any aspect of leadership

This is not to say we don’t have the front-line processes that meet current NCQA standards around access, population management, care management, care coordination, and care transitions. Once you hire the right people, train them well, develop them into teams, and help them internalize the mission and vision of the organization, they will be raring to go, and they need these front-line processes to succeed.

Intent around the creation of these new processes matters. It is well known in the medical home community that there is a big difference between those who view NCQA standards as a list to be checked off and those who use it as a structure to help them fulfill their mission.

What’s Next?

What I failed to understand in 2008 when I blew off the Joint Principles of the Patient-Centered Medical Home, is that moving from volume to value is not about basic change, but about wholesale transformation. We are not moving from the 2014 Camry to the 2015, but from the 2014 Camry to self-driving electric cars. It was and is absurd to think that that degree of transformation could be about anything other than principles.

So if 2014 was a tough year for the transformation of health care from volume to value, how is 2015 looking? It depends. Badly if we use those failures as excuses to hold onto to a broken status quo. But there is an alternative. I never use the phrase continuous improvement because improvement is never continuous. But learning should be.

It is not enough to just transplant processes that work in value-driven cultures to volume-driven cultures. I’m a big believer in the endocrine theory of health care transformation: new processes, new roles, and new information technology (IT) are like hormones. They only work if there is a receptor to bind to. How receptor-rich a practice is depends on its culture.

Culture can be designed, engineered, and executed. Organizational leadership can invest in building incredibly tight processes around hiring; individual, team, and leadership development; communication, huddles, and meetings; and most importantly a strategy for communicating and living a shared set of principles.

That is what I believe has separated, and will continue to separate, the winners from the losers, the Triple-Aim achievers from the increasingly unsustainable status quo, and the systems that produce value for their communities versus volume for themselves.