World Human Hands Holding Word Give (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

EDITOR: It seems everywhere you turn, there is stress. Someone is carrying a heavier cross than you. We see the tears of others, the dark rings under their eyes; the stories on the city bus; their canes; grandparents raising grandchildren.

And yet, there are also so many places I see and hear simple generosity offered by strangers. For some, it is a small, random act of kindness. There are young middle schoolers who always open the door. And what may appear to some as an unruly child, may be the same little girl who flashes you a smile as you reach to pick out your yogurt for purchase. There are high school student volunteering, spending time with our elderly, pushing a wheelchair down a long hall, standing up in the restaurant and refilling the coffee cups.

Why? Does it fulfill something inside of us? Perhaps. Perhaps, life is changing one selfless act at a time.

This past weekend, a woman hurried to have her oil changed before picking her husband up after a hospital stay, and someone had already paid for her oil change. She left the establishment with tear-filled eyes, and an internal feeling of value. One of my friends travels, and she’s received 6 free cups of coffee from strangers who stood in line before her. Still other people are leaving the last few cents on their gift card for the next person in line.

I often think the way to affect others may be to donate what I do not need, share the wealth, as I like to call it. There are some of my acquaintances who were downsizing, and just drove everything over to Good Will or St. Vinney’s. And, yes, “getting rid of it” might have been the idea. But their relief was someone else’s fond discovery.

The action to affect others in a positive manner has exploded exponentially. The concept has also evolved, from “helping the homeless” or “the poor”, to simply being generous of spirit. Whether we are on the giving or receiving end of a random act of kindness, the results continue to bring the same outcome; a smile, tears, appreciation and relieving a small burden of stress, just for a moment, from someone else’s life. Thank you, friend!

Tina Smart,

Stevens Point

Read or Share this story: http://spjour.nl/1HP0uBh