ORANGE, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Choice Builder, the nation’s private ancillary exchange, announced today the availability of dental, vision, chiropractic, and life insurance coverage to businesses with two to 199 employees. The expansion from the current group size limit of 99 employees to 199 employees is available for coverage effective October 1, 2014, or later, so now even more groups can manage all of their ancillary benefits in one program with one monthly bill and one service center for customer care.

Launched in 2009, Choice Builder offers a diverse portfolio of coverage to small and mid-sized companies, including dental insurance from Delta Dental, Ameritas Group, and Madison National Life; vision benefits from VSP and EyeMed; chiropractic and acupuncture benefits from Landmark Healthcare; and life insurance protection from Assurity Life. Coverage is available to employers on a voluntary basis (with employees paying all of the cost) or as employer-sponsored benefits (with the employer and employees sharing the cost).

“The Affordable Care Act (ACA) has focused a lot of attention on group health benefits and the requirement for many employers to offer coverage or face a fine,” said Ron Goldstein, President and CEO of CHOICE Administrators, which operates Choice Builder. “As employers look to make changes in their group health coverage, they’re also considering more ancillary benefits for employees. In fact, Employee Benefit Adviser said last year that ancillary benefits may be the ‘silver lining’ of health care reform because the market is expected to grow significantly. Ancillary benefits present a great opportunity for brokers, employers, and employees. They give employees more benefit options. And they offer brokers another reason to talk with employers about how Choice Builder makes it easy to expand benefits without increasing the employer’s costs.

“Choice Builder was the first private ancillary exchange to launch in California five years ago, and the employer reception has been very positive,” added Goldstein. “Businesses appreciate the range of ancillary products we offer and the choice of employer-sponsored or voluntary benefits, so it can fit within any company’s budget. And, of course, the convenience of one program offering a range of coverage with just one enrollment form and one number to call for assistance is attractive to brokers, employers, and employees. The expansion of Choice Builder from 99 to 199 employee groups for coverage effective in October means we can serve an even larger portion of the marketplace, helping employers and employees in California and across the nation.”

Choice Builder is a division of CHOICE Administrators, the nation’s leading developer and administrator of consumer-choice insurance exchange models. For further information, visit www.choicebuilder.com or www.choiceadmin.com.

CHOICE Administrators is one of The Word & Brown Companies, which also include: Word & Brown® General Agency, the largest general agent in California and Nevada focusing on group and individual and family insurance; Word & Brown Medicare Brokerage, offering Medicare coverage nationwide as well as individual and family plan coverage outside the service area of the Word & Brown General Agency; Quotit® Corporation, the foremost national provider of Internet sales and marketing solutions for the health insurance and employee benefits industry; and HealthCompare®, which helps individuals, families, and seniors easily research, compare, buy, and enroll in the right health insurance or Medicare Advantage, Medigap, or prescription drug plan at the right price. Trusted for nearly 30 years, The Word & Brown Companies have built strong relationships with partners across the country – including more than 50,000 brokers and hundreds of health plans through which they provide benefits and service to approximately 60,000 employers with nearly 6.5 million eligible employees and hundreds of thousands of consumers nationwide. For more information, visit www.wordandbrowncompanies.com.