Palmer Land Trust received $300,000 from GOCO to preserve the remaining 1,135 acres of Wilson Creek Ranch, permanently protecting the entire 2,212-acre ranch. ( Special to the Daily Record )

Click photo to enlarge «

1

»

GOCO awards $348,000 to Fremont County wildfire recovery and land conservation

The Great Outdoors Colorado Board awarded two grants totaling $348,450 to Fremont County communities. Palmer Land Trust received $300,000 from GOCO to preserve the remaining 1,135 acres of Wilson Creek Ranch, permanently protecting the entire 2,212-acre ranch. The City of Cañon City was awarded $48,450 for eight weeks of Youth Corps work at Royal Gorge Bridge and Park.

Nearly half of Wilson Creek Ranch is visible along the Gold Belt Tour National Scenic Byway. The conservation easement will allow Wilson Creek to continue ranching cattle while also protecting wildlife habitat, four stream corridors, and providing public access for hunting and fishing.

In Cañon City, crews of 16- to 25-year-olds from Mile High Youth Corps - Southern Front Range will help Royal Gorge Bridge and Park continue its road to recovery since the 2013 wildfire. Crews will construct two to three miles of new trails and plant 2,500 seedlings in the burn area.

The grant will be administered through the Colorado Youth Corps Association (CYCA). Youth Corps work in Colorado employs and trains 1,600 youth between the ages of 14 and 25 each year for land, water, and conservation work. Corps members earn a living stipend for their full-time service and an AmeriCorps education award to use toward college or trade school.

Advertisement

To date, GOCO has invested $3.5 million in Fremont County, supporting projects including Coal Creek Community Park, the Arkansas Riverwalk Trail, Hogbacks Open Space, and Pathfinder Park.

Great Outdoors Colorado invests a portion of Colorado Lottery proceeds to help preserve and enhance the state's parks, trails, wildlife, rivers and open spaces. GOCO's independent board awards competitive grants to local governments and land trusts, and makes investments through Colorado Parks and Wildlife. Created when voters approved a Constitutional Amendment in 1992, GOCO has since funded more than 4,500 projects in urban and rural areas in all 64 counties without any tax dollar support.

For more information, visit goco.org.

Cañon City School Board meets this evening

The Cañon City School Board meets for its final meeting of the year at 5:30 p.m. today at the Central administration Office, 101 N. 14th St.

Superintendent George Welsh will share information on the District Accountability Committee Data Analysis of Elementary Schools, and the board will consider adoption of File 715 - Grading/Assessment Systems. The board also will consider a resolution certifying the ad valorem tax levies for the calendar year 2016 for the General Fund and the 2003/2004/2006/2011/2014 General Obligation Bond and Interest Fund.

Also during the meeting, Cañon City Middle School representatives and the board will recognize Jordan Epperson and Sebastian Swann as the CCMS Falcons of the Month. The meeting is open to the public.

Florence-Penrose School Board meets this evening

The Florence-Penrose School Board meets for its final meeting of the year at 7 p.m. today at the district's T&I Building, located at 451 Church St. in Florence.

The board will hear reports from standing committees. The meeting is open to the public.

Host home needed for student

ASSE International Student Exchange Program is reaching out to families in the Cañon City area who may be interested in hosting a 16-year-old male Mongolian student in need of a host family for the duration of this school year. Due to an unfortunate situation, he will need to find a new loving home as soon as possible. He speaks English well and is a delight to be around.

ASSE students have their own spending money and insurance and are able to share a room with another male child within four years of his age. He has come to America because it has been his lifelong dream. Organizers hope that someone in the Cañon City area would open their hearts and home to this child. This will be an amazing experience for the host family and will provide a lifetime of memories for both the host family and the student.

Those interested in hosting the exchange student for the remainder of the school year may contact Shelley Bruccoliere at (719) 659-2150 or shellbrucco@q.com.

Daily Record Staff