Mobile ad network Millennial Media revenue growth didn’t live up to its expectations in the second quarter as the company faced increased competition from rivals such as Google and Facebook.

Millennial’s revenue rose 18% to $67.3 million, below its May forecast of $70 million to $75 million. Sales for the current quarter are expected to range from $65 million to $70 million, lower than Wall Street consensus estimates.

Bottom-line results weren’t particularly encouraging either: the company’s loss widened to $15.1 million from a year-earlier loss of $3.1 million, as operating expenses jumped 50%.

“Listen, I’m not happy with where we are,” Chief Executive Michael Barrett said in an earnings call with analysts. “We believe in time you’ll see a substantial re-acceleration of revenue growth,” he added.

Millennial Media’s shares tanked 12% to $2.95 in recent after hours trading, a far cry from its $13 a share IPO price in 2012.

The latest period marks Millennial’s first full quarter under Mr. Barrett, an advertising veteran who took over the reins of Millennial in January from co-founder Paul Palmieri. Mr. Barrett previously served as Yahoo’s chief revenue officer and CEO of programmatic ad company AdMeld, which was acquired by Google in 2011.

Revenue in Millennial’s business that focuses on “performance” advertisers, marketers that seek to get viewers to perform an action when they view an ad such as downloading an app or registering their email address, took a big hit in the latest period.

Millennial attributed the “very significant drop-off” in the performance business due to a small number of large app download advertisers spending “far less” with Millennial than they were a year ago. Meanwhile, growth in the business that focuses on “brand” advertisers, or marketers that seek to promote the awareness of their brand and persuade consumers to make a purchase over time, didn’t grow as much as the company had expected.

“Clearly a few big players entering the mobile space are taking significant chunks of the app download business,” Mr. Barrett said. “We need improvement here.”

Facebook, for example, has seen huge growth in its mobile advertising business, particularly from app advertisers.

Millennial has been building up its programmatic platforms, a move that the company sees as key to its future growth as more advertisers move their ad dollars to automated ad buying systems.

Mobile advertising is an increasingly competitive and fast-growing sector, with ad spending expected to explode 83% this year, according to research firm eMarketer. Still, Millennial Media has incurred losses since its inception and operating expenses have continued to climb. In the second quarter, its gross margin narrowed to 40.2% from 42.4%. Millennial expects gross margins in the near-term of about 40%, though margins may fall below that level as it expands its exchange business.

Millennial disclosed in a securities filing on Monday said Mr. Barrett would add principal financial officer to his title. Chief financial officer Michael Avon in May said he would step down from the role at the end of the second quarter. Millennial also disclosed that its head of sales and operations Molly Spillman is leaving the company at the end of the week.