In Mitch McConnell’s world, it doesn’t matter who works in his Hill office, who left for K Street or who runs his campaign, almost everyone calls the Kentucky Republican “Boss.”

Indeed, interviews with a number of those closest to the incoming Senate majority leader say there’s little difference between the McConnell confidants who used to be on his payroll and those who still are: a couple dozen key players, from political operatives to senior leadership staff to outside policy wonks, work nearly seamlessly to advance his agenda, whether it’s getting him reelected or pushing bills through. A number of those closest to McConnell are alumni turned lobbyists, and they too have retained their access to his office and staff in a mutually beneficial way, advancing his interests at the same time they gather intel for clients who pay their firms millions of dollars.

Story Continued Below

As McConnell prepares to take control over the Senate, then, it’s impossible to understand how he’ll run the place unless you know who’s in his network and how it works.

( Also on POLITICO: Obama turns to McConnell to secure his legacy)

“One thing that you consistently hear from former McConnell staffers is how proud they are to have worked for him and the personal affection they have for him,” said Steven Law, a former McConnell chief of staff.

The tight bond comes in part from the long hours Hill staffers clock during big fights, like over health care reform or the government shutdown, but McConnell world is unusually tight even for a powerful Senate office. Loyalty, years of service and a near-devotion to McConnell make it one of the strongest and most influential in Washington.

The gatekeepers on his staff controlling who has access to McConnell, to the wonks who help write and vet Republican bills, to former chiefs of staff who now lobby his office, to even his wife, Elaine Chao.

Chao is a political operative in her own right, and she’s committed to keeping her husband on top. She served as secretary of labor under President George W. Bush and is now an important surrogate for McConnell at events in Washington and Kentucky. This campaign season, she went so far as to meet with Republican lobbyists and others and urge them not to wait, but to give the maximum donation to her husband early — a bold ask for a congressional spouse. She also made individual phone calls to donors asking for money. And with Democratic opponent Alison Lundergan Grimes trying to paint McConnell as anti-woman, Chao appeared in an ad to counterattack.

( Also on POLITICO: The GOP's numbers problem)

Never was the network more on display than in his recent reelection, when current congressional staff became political aides, old friends took leaves of absence from their jobs to go on the campaign trail, and the entire crew not only contributed but encouraged their networks and clients to cut checks for his reelection bid.

Formal roles shift and change - but the goal has remained the same: help McConnell.

For example, Josh Holmes, chief of staff in McConnell’s personal office left Capitol Hill for Kentucky to lead his political team. Holmes is credited with the strategy that helped McConnell handily beat Lundergan Grimes by 15 points. The Kentucky Republican was so thankful, on election night, he said Holmes “pitched a perfect game.” Holmes has not said publicly what he’ll do next.

Even long-ago aides like Law, who hasn’t worked for McConnell in more than 20years, has remained part of the extended political team. He helped set up and served on a pro-McConnell super PAC that was key to hitting McConnell’s primary tea party challenger and trying to define Grimes. “Even when they aren’t talking, they are thinking the same way,” one lobbyist said of the relationship between McConnell and Law. Law ran McConnell’s first reelection campaign in 1990 and later served for six years as his chief of staff. He’s now the CEO of American Crossroads, a super PAC backed by Karl Rove.

Three former chiefs of staff who now lobby — Kyle Simmons of the Simmons Russell Group, Billy Piper, whose clients include theAmerican Television Alliance and Metlife Group, and Hunter Bates, a lobbyist who splits time between Washington and Kentucky — were on a weekly call helping with campaign strategy.

Piper, who worked for McConnell for nearly 20 years, went so far as to take a three-week leave of absence from his K Street job at boutique GOP lobbying firm Fierce, Isakowitz & Blalock to help out on the campaign.

( Also on POLITICO: The angst is rising on Capitol Hill)

The extended network isn’t just on call when McConnell is in trouble on the campaign trail.

After helping with the reelection effort, the lobbyists have all gone back to their jobs, where clients will expect them to use their ties with the office to get access and information on critical bills and to help shape them. For example, a set of business-tax deductions and subsidies, called extenders, that are worth billions to companies must be renewed by the end of the year. It’s a top priority for K Street, especially this year, when some downtowners are nervous that the package could spark a fight between establishment Republicans and movement conservatives. Top lobbyists will game out a way to get the measures through. McConnell has said he wants the package done during the lame duck session of Congress.

The Kentucky Republican and his staff also often rely on former aides who have gone to K Street for their expertise and experience on the Hill.

David Schiappa, now at lobbying firm the Duberstein Group, is a prime example. A former secretary of the minority, Schiappa is an expert on procedure — a skill that is critically important in the Senate, where complex rules can dictate whether a bill succeeds or fails. Republicans right now are not just debating whether to derail President Barack Obama on immigration reform and Obamacare, but how technically to do it. Schiappa continues to help advise GOP leadership on Senate rules and guide them on the process of moving into the majority. When he left Capitol Hill, Schiappa got a waiver from the Senate Ethics Committee to continue to respond and help staff when they reached out with questions on procedure. He did not lobby or talk about clients before his lobbying ban was up.

While government reform groups balk at arrangements like the one between McConnell and his former staffers who now lobby, the situation is common. Senators of both parties maintain ties with former staffers even after they head to K Street.

For McConnell’s part, he’s defended his ties. On the eve of the election in Kentucky, POLITICO asked McConnell about the optics of lobbyists descending on the Bluegrass State. He had no qualms about it. “I’m just grateful for the help,” he said.

Illustration by POLITICO

***

THE WIFE

ELAINE CHAO

Elaine Chao is a political operative in her own right. | AP Photo

Elaine Chao, McConnell’s wife since 1993, is a political force in her own right. The former secretary of labor plays several important roles in McConnell’s professional life: She’s a chief confidante. A regular on the campaign trail, she frequently stands in for her husband at events. She brings out the “softer side of Mitch,” according to several sources. She also isn’t afraid to shake down donors and helped McConnell raise money in Washington and beyond. She sits on several corporate and nonprofit boards, including News Corp., Protective Life Corp. and Wells Fargo. The companies have plenty of business before Congress and are players in Washington.

***

POLITICAL OPERATIVES

JOSH HOLMES, former chief of staff and campaign manager

Josh Holmes left Capitol Hill to lead McConnell's political team. | AP Photo

McConnell put his toughest political reelection bid in Holmes’ hands. After serving as his personal office chief of staff for nearly three years, Holmes moved to McConnell’s political operation full time in August 2013 and moved down to Louisville, Kentucky. On election night, McConnell said, “He pitched a perfect game.” He’s weighing his next move.

STEVEN LAW, political adviser and former chief of staff

Law is seen as McConnell’s No. 1 political consultant. This cycle, he served on the board of the pro-McConnell super PAC Kentuckians for Strong Leadership, meaning he technically could not coordinate with the campaign. Still, one McConnell ally described the relationship between Law and McConnell as, “Even when they aren’t talking they are thinking the same way.” Law ran McConnell’s first reelection campaign in 1990 and later served for six years as his chief of staff. He’s a U.S. Chamber of Commerce alum and is a major fundraiser and strategist for the Karl Rove-backed American Crossroads.

LAURA SEQUEIRA, national finance director

The former office manager in the Senate Republican leader’s office, Sequeira is the brains behind Team Mitch’s fundraising operation. Based out of Kentucky, this cycle she worked solely raising for McConnell, a rarity in the fundraising world. Besides being able to bring in the money, Sequeira knows the world of McConnell’s major donors.

LARRY McCARTHY, media consultant

McCarthy has been with McConnell since the senator’s first campaign. The veteran media consultant of McCarthy Hennings Whalen worked on the original “Bloodhound” ad with Roger Ailes and was responsible for the reprise in this past campaign.

***

THE GATEKEEPERS

SHARON SODERSTROM, chief of staff

Soderstrom is the resident institutionalist. | Getty

Soderstrom is the resident institutionalist, known for her encyclopedic knowledge of how the Senate works. McConnell’s leadership chief of staff is a veteran aide who worked for the two previous GOP leaders. McConnell is very comfortable with her, and they have personal camaraderie and trust that allows her to make sure the entire Republican Conference is on board with plans.

DON STEWART & JOHN ASHBROOK, communications

McConnell trusts Stewart to be his first line of defense with the news media. The former aide to Sen. John Cornyn of Texas and the late Sen. Paul Coverdell of Georgia has a reputation for being tireless. “The guy never sleeps and he never stops working,” said one McConnell confidant.

Ashbrook serves as staff director of the Senate Republican Communications Center. He is integral to McConnell’s message operation. He moved to Kentucky for the last three months of the campaign and is credited with helping sharpen McConnell’s press operation.

BRIAN McGUIRE, chief speechwriter

McGuire has been “the voice” for McConnell for nearly eight years, serving as his chief speechwriter. He also has a hand in communications and political strategy for the office.

SCOTT RAAB, health care

The former legislative director to McConnell has been his key adviser personally and to the Republican Conference on Obamacare. As Republicans look to find opportunities to repeal portions of the law, Raab will be key to any strategy and serve as the key point of contact for K Street.

TERRY CARMACK, senior adviser

The veteran McConnell aide has served in many roles starting with his 1984 campaign and is a trusted adviser. The former National Republican Congressional Committee aide was a constant presence on the campaign trail this cycle, often serving as the photographer at events when attendees wanted to get a shot with the boss.

***

FORMER CHIEFS

KYLE SIMMONS, Simmons & Russell Group

McConnell choked up on the Senate floor when chief of staff Simmons left in 2010 after 14 years working for the Kentucky Republican. Simmons is known for his close relationship with McConnell. He managed McConnell’s 1996 race and then served as chief of staff, opening up the Kentucky Republican’s office, first when he was whip, and later when he became minority leader. He recently hung a shingle with Bob Russell, former chief of staff to outgoing Sen. Mark Pryor (D-Ark.), and now reps companies including American Airlines, ExxonMobil, Google and Toyota.

BILLY PIPER, Fierce Isakowitz & Blalock

Piper began his career with McConnell as his driver, spending hours shuttling the senator to and from events. The Kentucky native worked nearly 20 years for McConnell, serving as a his principal political adviser and liaison to the National Republican Senatorial Committee. He now works at the all-GOP boutique lobbying firm Fierce Isakowitz & Blalock for clients like the American Television Alliance, Almost Family, Apple and BP America.

HUNTER BATES, Republic Consulting

The former chief legal counsel and chief of staff to McConnell, Bates also advised McConnell on ethics and campaign finance, and served as his speechwriter. He was McConnell’s campaign manager for his 2002 reelection campaign. He now splits his time between Washington, D.C., and Louisville after co-founding Republic Consulting. He represents Altria Client Services, Amgen and Brown-Forman Corp., among others.

***

FORMER POLICY EXPERTS

ROHIT KUMAR, PriceWaterhouseCoopers LLC

Kumar served as domestic policy director and chief of staff to McConnell, but his real claim to fame is working on the big tax deals. Over the years, McConnell and Kumar spent many late nights during negotiations, and the two developed a close rapport and sports rivalry. (Kumar went to Duke, and McConnell is a die-hard University of Louisville fan). One of Kumar’s biggest clients is the Alliance for Competitive Taxation.

MEGAN HAUCK, Nathanson+Hauck

Former McConnell health policy adviser Hauck was the chief architect of Senate Republicans’ strategy on Obamacare. She also focused on Medicare, Medicaid and FDA reauthorization. She now lobbies at a two-person shop for health care clients like Hospira, Express Scripts, DaVita and Pharmaceutical Care Management Association.

DAVE SCHIAPPA, Duberstein Group

Schiappa is considered the GOP’s guru on Senate rules. The former secretary for the minority actually started working in the office before McConnell got into leadership. The Kentucky Republican would often ask Schiappa how things used to get done or as a “validator” of his memory. Schiappa, who left in 2013, got clearance from the Senate Ethics Committee to continue to give institutional counsel before his lobbying ban expired.

***

LAWMAKER ALLIES

SEN. RAND PAUL

AP Photo

The Kentucky junior senator and McConnell have struck up an unlikely alliance after getting off to a rough start when McConnell endorsed Paul’s opponent in his first bid for Senate. McConnell even used Paul family ally and high-ranking staffer Jesse Benton as a campaign manager for a bit during his 2014 reelection. Since then, McConnell said he would endorse a 2016 Paul presidential bid, and the two have an unspoken alliance that they won’t surprise each other if they disagree on Capitol Hill.

SEN. LAMAR ALEXANDER

Alexander has been a trusted McConnell ally for years, especially when the Tennessee Republican served as Senate Republican Conference chairman. The two have known each other for more than 40 years, and Alexander has often filled the role of McConnell’s pragmatic right hand.

SEN. JOHN CORNYN

The Texas Republican and McConnell have grown close since Cornyn began serving as the minority leader’s chief deputy. With Republicans in the majority, Cornyn will be in charge of making sure the Senate Republican Conference stays unified behind McConnell.