The close of Congress’s 113th session marks the retirement of John Dingell (D., Mich.), the longest serving member of the House of Representatives. The Michigan Congressman served for 59 years and was part of landmark legislation, such as Medicare, the 1990 Clean Air Act, the Affordable Care Act. In June, he said voting for the 1964 Voting Rights Act was the “single most important vote I cast.”

Mr. Dingell had a lighter side, and in recent months, he became Congress’s break out star on Twitter. In honor of his retirement, here’s a look at his top 10 best tweets, as analyzed by Twitter. It shows that Americans don’t mind a little humor mixed with policy talk.

1. Not Keeping Up With the Kardashians

First, a story. In July, the @EPAWater account had a mis-tweet advertising the popular Kim Karsashian: Hollywood game. The tweet was inadvertently sent by an EPA fellow and later deleted. But not before John Dingell tweeted them, admitting he didn’t know what a Kardashian was.

The tweet that followed became his most popular tweet yet, and in the days following the Kardashian-related tweets, his twitter account grew by 8,000 followers.

Staff has now informed me of what a Kardashian is. I'm only left with more questions. — (@john_dingell) July 22, 2014

2. Hollywood Icon

Last month, Mr. Dingell was awarded the Medal of Freedom, the country’s highest civilian honor. He received it alongside actress Meryl Streep, and drew a comparison.

Today is also likely the only day that Meryl Streep and I will be wearing the same thing. So, who wore it best? pic.twitter.com/Kql9JPkhLN — (@john_dingell) November 24, 2014

3. Shark Attack

In July, Mr. Dingell said what many were thinking when Sharknado 2 aired on TV.

So it's a tornado full of sharks? That's what the entire film is about? — (@john_dingell) July 30, 2014

4. Water Trouble

The tweet that started it all. Mr. Dingell’s first tweet wondering about the Kardashian game takes this spot.

I'm the last original author of the Clean Water Act, but I have no idea who/what a Kardashian is and I rarely play games. You OK, @EPAwater? — (@john_dingell) July 22, 2014

5. Liking the Suit

In August, President Barack Obama took some heat for wearing a tan suit while taking questions from reporters. Mr. Dingell showed his support.

I see no problem with the suit. pic.twitter.com/ZFFt75FedU — (@john_dingell) August 28, 2014

6. Defending NIH

While lawmakers were dousing themselves with ice water for the ALS Ice Bucket challenge, Mr. Dingell pointed out that funding for the National Institutes of Health, which would research the debilitating illness, had been cut by $1.55 billion.

Since 2011, House Republicans have cut NIH funding by billions. And you thought dumping ice water on your head was cold. — (@john_dingell) August 20, 2014

7. Life Is Funny Sometimes

Sometimes his tweets pointed out life’s oddities.

Monday, I got word I'd receive the Medal of Freedom. Today, staff wants me to watch Too Many Cooks. Life is a series of strikes & gutters. — (@john_dingell) November 14, 2014

8. A Dingell Dynasty

Or he used Twitter to direct users to his history in Congress.

Fun fact: There has been a “Dingell” voting in Congress since 1933. John Dingell replaced his father in Congress in 1955, in a special election after his father died. His wife, Debbie Dingell was elected to replace him in November, so there will still be someone casting votes under the name for years to come.

50 yrs ago today, LBJ signed Wilderness Act. As lone remaining member to vote for it, I'm proud of all it did & does. pic.twitter.com/nRY5PXZ0iD — (@john_dingell) September 3, 2014

9. Motor City Celebration

He also celebrated Detroit’s 313 birthday, marked as special because Detroit uses the area code 313.

313 years ago today, Cadillac landed on the banks of the Detroit River. No, I wasn't there at the time. Happy 313th Birthday, Detroit! #313 — (@john_dingell) July 24, 2014

10. No Slowing Down

Even being in the hospital didn’t slow Mr. Dingell down from legislating. He tweeted from the hospital while watching the House debate the Clean Water Act – a law he helped pass.

Yelling at hospital TV as House debates YET ANOTHER bill to gut the Clean Water Act. Nice of the nurses to check in on me though. I'm fine. — (@john_dingell) September 9, 2014

Unfortunately, Mr. Dingell went back into the hospital this weekend. His wife, Debbie Dingell, posted on Facebook that he has a hairline hip fracture from a fall. He used social media to offer an update on Monday that he’s “feeling well and on the mend.”

Mr. Dingell’s retirement does not mean the end of his tweets. After casting his final vote on Thursday, he tweeted “And no, you’re not done with me just yet, Twitter.”