A key Obamacare official said he was confident that more insurance co-ops won't fail this year, but several senators in the latest hearing on the startup failures are less enthused.

More than half of the 23 consumer-oriented and operated plans, or co-ops, created under the Affordable Care Act have shut down, with a lack of federal funds a primary reason. The shutdowns have caused more than 700,000 people to find new plans and raised pointed questions from Congress about how to get back the $1.2 billion in taxpayer funding.

Eleven co-ops remain after 12 shut down. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, which oversees the co-ops and Obamacare, refused to estimate how many co-ops could shut down.

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

"Each of the co-ops in business today has every opportunity to be successful this year," acting CMS Administrator Andy Slavitt said during a Thursday hearing of the Senate Finance Committee.

Slavitt said CMS works with the states the co-ops are in and conducts financial audits to ensure they remain stable.

But several Republican senators were more critical of the co-op program.

"We could have protected taxpayers better and we could have protected patients better," said Sen. Rob Portman, R-Ohio.

Portman added that the co-ops are "failed enterprises" as more than $1.2 billion in taxpayer funding is likely lost.

Slavitt said that the agency is working with the Department of Justice to recoup as the funding from the failed co-ops.

Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, noted that funds to the federal government get a low priority when a company goes into receivership. Normally funds are doled out to other sources such as investors and then the federal government gets whatever remains.

Slavitt said the co-ops are essentially startups and that it is a challenge to build a new business that has large competitors. The co-ops were created to spur more competition in the Obamacare marketplaces.

"It doesn't surprise me in the first couple of year that co-ops are going to lose money," he said.