The Iowa Democratic Party announced details of its first-ever "tele-caucus" in 2016 that would open up access to Iowa Democrats living or serving abroad on the night of the first-in-the-nation caucus. Iowans serving in the military both in the United States and abroad will have the opportunity to participate in the Iowa caucuses via telephone, state Democratic Party Chairman Andy McGuire said Tuesday during a press call. This also includes military family members as well as students studying abroad and those participating in the Peace Corps and diplomatic corps. The state party had previously said that it will also hold satellite caucus locations for caucusgoers unable to attend their precinct caucuses as a result of mobility, distance or time constraints. ADVERTISEMENT “Last year, the Iowa Democratic Party announced its proposals to expand participation in Iowa Democratic precinct caucuses, really with the goal of making the Iowa caucuses more inclusiveness and really an even better process than the already great process we have now,” McGuire said.

The tele-caucus will run “nearly identically” to the precinct caucuses, beginning at 7 p.m. on Feb. 1. The registration deadline to participate in the tele-caucus is Jan. 6 and the party will work to verify that they are both registered voters in Iowa as well as Democrats. “We take Iowa’s status as first-in-the-nation very seriously, and we’re always looking for ways to improve upon the already great process,” McGuire said. “But what won’t change, is that the caucuses will remain a gathering of Iowans to come together to decide where we want the direction of the country to go.” With New Hampshire being the earliest state to hold a primary, Iowa leaders have to be careful not to restructure the caucuses into what could appear to be a primary, With New Hampshire being the earliest state to hold a primary, Iowa leaders have to be careful not to restructure the caucuses into what could appear to be a primary, The Des Moines Register reported in August, when the tele-caucus was first announced.

In her 2008 concession speech following the Iowa Democratic caucuses, Hillary Clinton said that "there were a lot of people who couldn’t caucus tonight, despite the very large turnout," and implied that among those were members of the military.