Florida Blue exec prepares for launch of insurance exchange Talking With

Talking With

As the single biggest change to hit America's health insurance system approaches, Craig Thomas is ready and braced for some unknowns. Florida Blue's senior vice president and chief strategy and marketing officer, Thomas, age 52, is in charge of rolling out the insurance products that will be sold on the federal health insurance exchange starting Oct. 1. Thomas recently spoke with Sentinel reporter Marni Jameson.

CFB: With only 21 days until the exchange launches, what's left to do?

Our big push is to get the word out and we're making a big investment in that. To help people become educated about their options, and about how subsidies and the exchange work, we'll conduct thousands of seminars for consumers across the state. Times and locations will be on our website. We are also adding staff at our walk-in retail centers, adding seven more centers and extending our hours.

CFB: What are the biggest challenges facing insurance providers as they reach out to the new market?

If you look at the Affordable Care Act, you see that it mostly impacts lower-income folks who have not purchased health insurance in the past, and aren't familiar with how to do so. While this creates a new market for health plans, it's a more diverse market. One goal we have is to make sure we have enough bilingual staff.

CFB: Can Florida Blue sell insurance plans sold on the exchange directly to consumers?

That gets tricky. First off, to get a subsidy, consumers must purchase their plan through the federal exchange.

If a consumer shops online, compares plans, decides he wants a Florida Blue policy, but needs help enrolling, he can come into a Florida Blue retail center, where we can help him enroll through the exchange into the Florida Blue plan.

If someone walks into a retail center and asks for help shopping for a plan on the exchange, but doesn't know what insurance carrier he wants, Florida Blue representatives would have to direct the customer to a navigator, someone trained to explain the features of all the exchange plans available.

CFB: Will individuals who buy private insurance directly — not through the exchange — realize any benefits as a result of the new law?

All the rules ushered in through health reform that level the playing field — including no denials or premium increases based on pre-existing conditions — apply whether consumers buy plans on or off the exchange.

CFB: How will the law affect premiums for those who have insurance?

That's complicated and will vary person to person. But in general studies indicate that for current customers not eligible for subsidies rates will likely go up.

CFB: Florida Blue is among 10 or so insurance providers offering coverage to Floridians through the exchange, and the only one with plans in every county. Is that right?

Yes, we will not only offer plans on the exchange to residents in all 67 counties, but also we will offer all tiers of plans (bronze, silver, gold and platinum) in all counties.