Avik Roy and Stephen Parente

November 6, 2014

In a recent Health Affairs Blog post, Washington and Lee University law professor Timothy Jost described a new health-reform plan designed by one of us (Roy) and fiscally modeled by the other (Parente) as a “serious proposal [that] deserves to be taken seriously.” Jost praises parts of the plan. Most notably, he writes that its suggested reform of Medicaid “makes a lot of sense and is similar to proposals made earlier by progressive commentators,” and describes its aim of enacting a uniform annual deductible for Medicare as a “common sense proposal.”

But much of Jost’s review is filled with ideological pique—there are various harrumphs about “nostrums” and “talking points” and “hobby horses.” His article contains some factual and analytical inaccuracies, but also a few good points worth discussing.

Singapore And Switzerland

Jost, like many observers of health policy, likes to make comparisons between the United States and other countries. But for some reason, he believes that comparisons to Switzerland and Singapore are illegitimate. “The bottom line,” he writes, “is that we are not Switzerland and we are certainly not Singapore, and we cannot have their health systems.”

This is a rather facile argument, and one that Roy addresses on the third page of his executive summary. “Of course,” Roy writes, “the U.S. is neither Switzerland nor Singapore. Each country has its own political system, its own culture, and its own demography. Those differences, however, are not large enough to erase the gains that would accrue here by adapting the most relevant features of the Swiss and Singaporean health care systems to that of the United States.”

Regina Herzlinger, in 2004, compared Switzerland to demographically similar U.S. states on health-care cost and quality, and she found Swiss expenditures “considerably lower” and health outcomes “roughly equal or better.”

Switzerland was, in fact, the model used by the designers of both the original health insurance exchange in Massachusetts, and the one incorporated into the Affordable Care Act (ACA). Switzerland’s health insurance system is, quite simply, the ACA exchanges applied to the entire population. If the ACA’s exchanges are good enough for 64-year-olds, it’s certainly conceivable that they’re good enough for 65-year-olds. And if the ACA’s exchanges are good enough for those at the poverty line, it’s also plausible that they’ll be good enough for those below it.

Jost writes that “Switzerland and Singapore are hardly libertarian health care utopias,” as if Roy is not aware of that fact. But Roy acknowledges this in nearly every article he has written on the topic. Roy has used that very phrase, “libertarian utopias,” on countless other occasions. For example, in a March 2012 article for the Atlantic, Roy wrote, “Neither Switzerland nor Singapore could be described as libertarian utopias.” (He has no intention of charging Jost a royalty.)

Indeed, the fact that Singapore regulates provider prices—as most European countries do—makes its model even more compelling, because Singapore spends approximately 4 percent of GDP on health care, compared to around 10 percent for the typical European nation. Clearly, something other than price controls is at work in Singapore, and the distinguishing characteristic of the Singaporean system is its reliance on consumer-driven health plans: health savings accounts and catastrophic coverage.

Most health policy researchers rely on OECD databases to make international health-policy comparisons, and Singapore is not a member of the OECD; this is perhaps why the Singaporean health care system is often overlooked. It is long past time for this oversight to end.

Reforming The ACA Exchanges

The Universal Exchange Plan contemplated by Roy makes some effort to liberalize the ACA exchanges, so as to offer consumers a broader range of affordable coverage options. For example, at the behest of the pharmaceutical industry, ACA plans must contain one branded drug for each therapeutic category or class included in the law’s essential health benefits, regardless of cost-effectiveness. Under Roy’s proposed reforms, insurers would have broader latitude to deploy evidence-based medicine when paying for branded medications.

In addition, the Plan would make greater use of health savings accounts and catastrophic coverage. It would broaden the ACA’s age-rating bands from 3:1 to 6:1. Jost claims that such a change “would certainly result in serious rate shock for older Americans.” This is misleading, on several counts.

First, subsidy-eligible individuals on the ACA exchanges would not pay more for their health coverage under a widened age band, because the subsidy scheme fixes the percentage of income that subsidy-eligible individuals would pay for premiums out-of-pocket. Second, Jost entirely ignores the fact that widening the age band would substantially reduce premiums for younger individuals. This is especially important given the fact that, in 2010, 55 percent of the uninsured were under the age of 35. In contrast, only 34 percent of those enrolled in exchange-based plans were younger than 35.

Jost highlights the fact that the benchmark plan under Roy’s proposal would have a deductible of $7,000 for a person of average age. But he neglected to mention that such coverage would also include an annual HSA subsidy of $1,800. Older individuals would see lower deductibles and higher HSA subsidies. The plan would convert the ACA’s cost-sharing subsidies for low-income individuals into additional HSA subsidies. Furthermore, Medicaid-eligible individuals with high medical costs would have the option of remaining in the legacy Medicaid program until 2027.

It is fair to say that widening the ACA’s age bands would reduce cross-subsidies for a small subset of the near-elderly. Those nearing retirement who purchase coverage on the non-group market—who also have incomes above the exchange subsidy threshold—would see their artificially-lowered premiums increase. In order to address this issue, Roy has revised the Plan to include a transitional fund that will offer extra premium subsidies to this population.

Jost worries that allowing seniors to opt out of the Medicare program—as they could do before 1993—would result in “increasing Part B premiums for those left behind.” But as he notes earlier in his article, the Universal Exchange Plan would merge the Part A and Part B benefits into a unified premium and deductible. As part of this process, the Plan would adjust Medicare premiums such that adverse selection would not affect the remaining Medicare beneficiaries.

While we calculate that these reforms would reduce the average cost of commercial premiums—by 17 percent on average for individuals and 4 percent for families by 2023—Jost is correct in noting that these lower premiums are not the primary driver of the proposal’s fiscal savings.

The plurality of the plan’s reductions in future federal health spending is driven by the fact that it would gradually migrate future retirees onto the reformed ACA exchanges. Because the ACA exchanges do not subsidize coverage for upper-income individuals, the net effect of the Plan is to redistribute federal spending from wealthy retirees and upper-income workers to the low-income population.

Improving Health Outcomes

Jost claims that “how Parente and Roy modeled an improvement in health outcomes, something the CBO never attempts, is a complete mystery,” and complains that he can find “no description of the methodology, or for that matter of the inputs, applied in this analysis.”

The health-outcome inputs turn out to be rather unmysterious. They are described on pages 20 and 21 of “Transcending Obamacare”:

In order to gauge the impact of the Plan on [the Medicaid-eligible population], we employed two indices developed by Stephen Parente and colleagues at the University of Minnesota. The first index is the Patient to Provider Access Index (PAI). The PAI, based on a survey of patient-provider access published by the Parente group, indicates the degree of provider choice available in a given health plan, relative to Medicaid’s provider network. A higher score indicates broader access to health care providers. The second index is the Medical Productivity Index (MPI). The MPI was developed by analyzing the Medicare National Claims History File (NCH) and the Resource-Based Relative Value Scale (RBRVS) in order to correlate a patient-level measure of health to the specific health care services that a patient receives.13 As with the PAI, the MPI is benchmarked to health outcomes under Medicaid.

Footnote 13, included in that passage, cites Parente’s fuller description of the Medical Productivity Index, the proxy for improved health outcomes.

It should hardly be surprising that a proposal to offer Medicaid enrollees exchange-based commercial insurance would result in improved health outcomes. The evidence is overwhelming that commercial insurance offers superior health outcomes to Medicaid, even after adjusting for health status and socioeconomic factors.

Furthermore, while the Oregon Medicaid Experiment showed no meaningful improvement in health outcomes for Medicaid enrollees relative to being uninsured, coverage expansion with commercial plans has performed better. Sommers and colleagues persuasively observed an improvement in mortality after the 2006 coverage expansion in Massachusetts, under which approximately 88 percent of the coverage expansion was achieved through private insurers: employer-sponsored insurance, exchange-based coverage, and other non-group commercial insurance.

We appreciate why calling attention to Medicaid’s poor health outcomes elicits a reaction from the ACA’s strongest supporters; after all, the new law leans heavily on Medicaid to expand coverage to the uninsured. But Medicaid’s problems with access to care are real, and they must not be ignored.

Reducing Health Policy Complexity

Jost concludes by contending that the Universal Exchange Plan would increase the complexity of the U.S. health-care system. On the contrary: the proposal would substantially reduce the complexity of American health care.

The reformed exchanges would be less complex than their ACA forebears, because they would be less prescriptive. They would require fewer regulations. After reform, it would be substantially easier for insurers to offer affordable, exchange-compliant plans.

Gradually, the Plan’s reforms would bring four large federal programs—Medicaid, Medicare, the ACA exchanges, and the Veterans Health Administration—under one system, the reformed exchanges. Not only would this reduce the complexity of the U.S. health care system, but it would substantially improve its equity and efficiency. It would focus our taxpayer resources on the poor and the sick, and it would reduce the amount of disruption that covered enrollees face under the ACA, as their eligibility for various programs changes over time.

Jost claims that single-payer health care is simpler than a market-based system. This comes as news to anyone who bills Medicare for health care services, let alone those who are tasked with managing and governing the program. It’s telling that in September, Swiss voters overwhelmingly rejected a referendum, 62 to 38 percent, that would have replaced their health care system with a single payer.

Complexity is a necessary part of any health care system in a country as large and diverse as our own. But the nimbleness and flexibility needed to handle health care’s complexity resides in the private sector.

Refining The Plan

As noted above, we will continue to revise the Plan as constructive feedback comes in—from both the left and the right. Roy is compiling an index of these revisions online. In that spirit, we welcome Jost’s contribution to the debate about the future of health reform, and we will continue to strive to be worthy of it.