He never wrote for Redlands High School’s paper, or laid out pages for the yearbook, or contributed to the literary magazine, but two and a half years after graduation Tyler Fields is editor in chief and publisher—and founder—of The Boston Political Review, an online and print magazine at Boston University.

“I didn’t have any journalism experience, so in starting the Review I worked really hard to build a team that brought those skills with them,” said Fields, a junior majoring in business administration and political science. “Web design, publishing, editing, production, everything—it took a lot of advertising and recruiting to get us going.”

The magazine—online at bostonpoliticalreview.org—offers a wide range of commentary on national events, and also looks at Boston-area issues. The online version is updated monthly, and the twice-yearly print edition compiles the staff’s best work.

Fields saw a need for a publication like this one last spring, he said: “I was reading an article from Stanford’s political review, and I realized that we (Boston University) didn’t have anything like that,” he said.

So, he said, he came up with a business plan and obtained funding for the project through the university’s Allocations Board and student government. He and the rest of the staff volunteer their time, he said.

Recent articles explore more Supreme Court scrutiny for the Affordable Care Act, the current state of voting rights, and Fields’ own take on the 2016 elections, “The Presidential Horse Race.”

Fields said he is learning to be a manager as he goes, which seems to be his style: His years on the Mock Trial team at Redlands High gave him a good look at how groups work together toward a goal, he said, and he built on that experience last summer as an assistant manager for the primary campaign of Assemblyman Marc Steinorth, R-Rancho Cucamonga.

“Tyler was a valued member of Team Steinorth,” said staffer Heather Rouhana, who supervised Fields’ work during the campaign. “We were very lucky to have a team of energetic, hard working young people who were instrumental in securing Assemblyman Steinorth’s victory.”

Having worked on the political campaign, Fields said, is helpful to him now—the experience enhanced his people-management skills.

About four months into creation of a forum for a variety of issues, voices and political outlooks, Fields said he and his staff are working very hard—but it’s satisfying and useful work in light of his career goals, which include public service, specifically in politics.

Advertisement

“We publish work by anarchists, regular conservatives, liberals, socialists and more,” Fields said. “Pitting these different political pieces against each other has opened dialogue— it’s a lively debate, and that’s what we like.”

Fields, the son of Jerry and Staci Fields, is at home in Redlands on winter break. He said he enjoys keeping up with his Redlands High teachers, and has been known to drop in on the Mock Trial team.

The passage of time is on his mind, he said. The Boston Political Review is still a new publication, but he is not getting any younger. He’ll be graduating in 2016, and wants to leave the Review in good hands.

“The sustainability of the publication is important,” he said. “I’m always thinking about who we have on the staff, and how we can maintain our momentum as we go through changes every year.”