A new “wearable sexual activity tracker” device uses advanced technology to improve couples’ sex lives in a similar way that the Fitbit has for physical health. It's called the Lovely, and it's here to enter your bedroom in the most informative way.

The device is meant to be worn at the base of the penis and tracks sexual activity for the couple, including calories lost, the intensity of intercourse, and the average thrust speed. The data is stored in an app on your smartphone, providing you with tips and even sex positions to make intercourse better the next time.

The device will measure your performance. Indiegogo

“Lovely can provide each partner with a personalized set of information and suggestions on how to improve their sex life,” Jakub Konik, the founder and CEO of Lovely Inc., told Mic. “Long story short: Lovely knows what the couple likes and chooses the right tips and tricks to have more pleasure during sex.”

A major point of the Lovely is also to get couples talking about sex more often. Communication is proven to enhance sexual satisfaction. It still remains to be seen whether it is something that can work among couples. Receiving sexual feedback from a machine seems like something that could bring anxiety in your sex life. But the product has received a lot of attention, and hopes to provide couples ways to make their sex lives more invigorating.

The device is geared for better performance through tips and suggestions. Indiegogo

This isn’t something exclusively for heteronormative couples either; it is something that can also be used in a host of other types of relationships as well. Reid Mahalko, a sex and relationship expert, who is connected to the project, said of the Lovely in a promotional video, “you can put this wearable on a dildo, you can put it on your fingers, you can use it on a toy on yourself. It’s really only going to be limited by the ideas that you come up with.”

The product is still raising funds through its Indiegogo page, with a total goal of raising $95,000. In six days, the Lovely has raised $18,755, with a month left to donate. Contributors can expect their Lovely device by June 2016 if the campaign is ultimately successful.