SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Former Congressman Jeff Landry says he’s running for Attorney General in Louisiana because he thinks that state Attorneys General “are our last defense” against government overreach from Washington, D.C.

Landry joined Breitbart News Daily on SiriusXM with host Stephen K. Bannon and used immigration as an example of an issue where an Attorney General office must protect its state.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

“It’s a huge issue,” Landry said of immigration. Landry said he believes people around the country are recognizing one of the last stands Americans have in the country to fight back against government overreach and the abuse in this country is the Attorney General’s office.

“They are our last defense,” Landry stressed. “I believe that those elected officials that swear to [uphold] the Constitution, that then it’s a contradiction” to engage in sanctuary city regulations around the country.

“They are the defender of the state. They are the defenders of the Tenth Amendment,” he said, saying it’s the Attorneys General that have been fighting religious issues and states rights.

“We sit in the Fifth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals,” Landry said, adding it’s one of the most conservative courts in the country, which is an advantage for Louisiana.

“We’re going to go on the offensive,” Landry said, adding, “playing defense isn’t getting us places. It’s time we go on offense” and take it to those people who want to restrict religious liberties.

Landry said, “Our country when it was founded, the foundation of it is Judeo Christian principles” and when the people adhere to those principles, “our communities are safer” and the country is more peaceful.

He explained that when the establishment in Washington pushed him out of Congress, he left as the most conservative member of the 112th class, and was a member that was vocal about the problems former House Speaker Rep. John Boehner (R-OH) was causing.

Landry said that his lost congressional seat was an opportunity to take out a liberal Attorney General in Louisiana.

“My opponent went to the steps of the U.S. Supreme Court [during the fight against Obamacare]…and then commented on a blog [that] he didn’t think Obamacare went far enough,” suggesting he believes the government should have more control, according to Landry. “The way he is running the current Attorney General office is fiscally unsound.”

“Whether it be Obamacare, or whether it would be other regulatory matters that are affecting us in the state of Louisiana – he hasn’t led, he’s just followed,” Landry said of his opponent, but vowed that if he was elected as the Attorney General, he will lead.

He said, “For conservatives out there, here’s what they have to rememeber, the establishment did a great job of kicking me out of D.C.” but the people have an opportunity in Lousiana to help put him in the Attorney General’s seat.

Landry stressed that when people put God into their lives, life gets much much better.

“There really is only one conservative in this race,” Landry challenged, saying he is running for Attorney General because he wants to take out “a 40 year Democrat who switched to the Republican Party just three years ago” to fool Republicans in the state of Louisiana.

Election day between Landry is less than ten days away, on November 21.