2015-10-04 17:33:38 -0400

Bob’s post is a little odd, assuming that he actually means what he’s saying and isn’t trying for satire. The reality is that conservative right wingers tend to be quite angry and belligerent by nature. This is easily demonstrable by looking at the behavior of various Fox News and right wing radio hosts, like Rush Limbaugh, Sean Hannity and Bill O’Reilly. O’Reilly in particular is openly stating in his friendly discussions with GOP candidates that he’s “really angry!” So this isn’t something that should be a surprise to anyone seriously discussing the issue.



The fact is that Fox News viewers tend to be angry right wing people who are comforted by the Fox News (and right wing radio) spin that somehow all the voters who disagree with them are all “low information” people who don’t know anything. The almost casual bigotry that goes with this spin seems to go unnoticed as well, for those people inside the bubble. Granted, there are also a lot of more liberal viewers who tend to be drawn to the rants of people like Hannity for sheer entertainment value – along the lines of “Can you believe that so-and-so said that?” The overall ratings numbers for Fox News have usually been higher than the other networks (although they faltered in early 2013 for obvious reasons), but this disregards the important information we can glean from the key demographics. Namely, that Fox News viewers have been shown to primarily be older, whiter and male. It’s a demographic of an aging population that does not understand how someone like Barack Obama was elected president (and likely was not helped to understand by the kind of coverage that Fox News has provided).



Fox News has never internally believed itself to be “fair and balanced”. That’s an advertising slogan, based on the anger of the right wing that they felt they weren’t hearing “their” side of the story. So now angry right wingers have an outlet that repeats the same biased worldview they’ve been hearing from Rush Limbaugh for nearly 30 years now. And as a result, the GOP has been pushed steadily farther to the right, to the point that it can no longer appeal to mainstream Americans and thus cannot win national elections in anything other than gerrymandered districts. And as a side result of that, we now have not only right wing radio, but Extreme right wing radio, fomented by angry and hateful people like Glenn Beck.



Bob apparently does not understand that Fox News has a history of misstatements, misrepresentations and biased coverage that has been exhaustively documented in public by outlets like this website. And there are research papers that have consistently shown over the past 20 years that Fox News viewers are the least informed of news consumers – regularly indicating that they believe the most extreme and inaccurate propaganda to be purveyed on Fox News and right wing radio. (There’s an argument to be made that it’s actually the Fox News viewers who may be the “low information voters” – as we saw in the 2012 election results.)



The issue that really should concern Fox News proponents is what they’ll do in a few years when the older population that was watching the channel begins to sharply recede. It’s the same problem that the GOP faces – what will they do when their base of older white male voters (mostly from the Baby Boom) begins to decline? Fox News has worked very hard to encourage the most extreme views, particularly of angry “Tea Party” groups, but there’s simply not enough of those people to make for a dependable audience base. Further, the really extreme groups no longer think that Fox News is extreme enough for them now – they’re off listening to exploiters like Alex Jones or Glenn Beck, and referring to even hard right GOP congresspeople as RINOs. This is a problem of the right wing’s own making, and it is one that they’ll have to face sooner or later.



Posters like Bob would do better to spend a little more time looking at those real problems and not trying to debate undisputed facts that have been documented on sites like these. And they might want to look a bit more inward to see who’s really posting out of anger.