Advertisement - story continues below

As the American economy staggers along after a “lousy” third quarter, with personal income barely rising and consumer confidence thin, Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton is indulging in a round of happy talk on the subject.

In a recent Boston Globe interview, Clinton said she would give President Obama an “A,” citing his economic achievements.

“I’d give him an ‘A.’ I don’t think he gets the credit he deserves for saving our economy from falling into a great depression, for saving the auto industry which represents millions of jobs up and down the supply chain, for beginning the crackdown on Wall Street abuses with Dodd-Frank, for getting the Affordable Care Act passed, for really being as responsive as he could possibly be given the obstructionism that he faced with the Republicans in Congress,” Clinton said.

Advertisement – story continues below

Others had a different grading system.

On Varney & Co., Tammy Bruce said she would give Obama an “F” and Clinton a “D” for “deluded.”

“The left will continue to say their fantasy,” Bruce said. “And business people have to make sure, and this network has to make sure, that people know the truth of what’s been happening.”

Advertisement – story continues below

Others find it hard to share Clinton’s enthusiasm for the state of the economy.

“What’s happening is not very pretty. The US economy is broken and, if we continue down this road, the US will experience subpar growth until, well, forever,” wrote analyst John Crudele, who labeled the economy’s third quarter “lousy.”

“Congress is useless. And the president is hopeless,” he said.

One writer compared what Obama promised and what he delivered.

Advertisement – story continues below

“The president probably earned a D for his economic performance,” Michael Busler wrote on Communities Digital News. “Had he taken absolutely no economic and regulatory policy actions, the economy would probably be better today than it is.”

“Maybe, then, the grade of D is a bit too generous,” he concluded.

As for Clinton, her economic plan has something for everyone.

“Taken as a whole, Mrs. Clinton’s plan is an eclectic grab-bag. It is as if her advisors brainstormed every possible policy to boost wages, and then kept them all…Perhaps when Mr. Sanders exits the stage, some of the duds will be dropped,” wrote The Economist.

h/t: Fox News