16 photos: The week in politics President Barack Obama greets former Rep. Gabrielle Giffords during a commercial break at a town hall meeting in Fairfax, Virginia, on Thursday, January 7. During the event, moderated by CNN's Anderson Cooper, Obama rejected the "imaginary fiction" that he wanted to take away the guns of law-abiding Americans. He said his opponents had twisted his plans on gun-safety measures. Giffords was shot in a 2011 mass shooting in Tucson, Arizona. Hide Caption 1 of 16

16 photos: The week in politics House Benghazi Committee Chairman Trey Gowdy enters a secure area of Capitol Hill on Wednesday, January 6, as his panel holds a closed-door interview with former CIA Director David Petraeus. The committee has been investigating the 2012 assaults on the U.S. Consulate in Benghazi, Libya, where attackers killed four Americans, including U.S. Ambassador Christopher Stevens. Hide Caption 2 of 16

16 photos: The week in politics Former President Bill Clinton waves as he arrives during a campaign stop for his wife, Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton, in Nashua, New Hampshire, on Monday, January 4. Hide Caption 3 of 16

16 photos: The week in politics Journalists and congressional staff members photograph legislation to repeal the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, and cut off federal funding of Planned Parenthood. The bill had just been signed by House Speaker Paul Ryan on Thursday, January 7. President Obama vetoed the bill the next day. Hide Caption 4 of 16

16 photos: The week in politics Rose Hamid, a 56-year-old Muslim woman wearing a hijab, was escorted out of Donald Trump's campaign event in Rock Hill, South Carolina, on Friday, January 9, by police after she stood up in silent protest during Trump's speech. Hide Caption 5 of 16

16 photos: The week in politics With tears running down his cheeks, President Obama talks about the victims of the Sandy Hook school shooting during a White House event on Tuesday, January 5. "Every time I think about those kids, it gets me mad," Obama said, referring to the 2012 massacre that killed 26 people in Connecticut. Obama, calling for a national "sense of urgency," unveiled a series of executive actions on guns , including expanded background checks. Hide Caption 6 of 16

16 photos: The week in politics Democratic presidential candidates Hillary Clinton, Martin O'Malley and Bernie Sanders stand on stage with Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid (second from right) during the Battle Born-Battleground First in the West Dinner in Las Vegas on Wednesday, January 6. Hide Caption 7 of 16

16 photos: The week in politics Campaign staffer Kyle Radon, left, and volunteer Jack Davidson look over information as they call Iowa residents from the state headquarters in West Des Moines for Republican presidential candidate Jeb Bush on Wednesday, January 6. Hide Caption 8 of 16

16 photos: The week in politics A supporter screams as Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump signs her poster during a campaign rally in Lowell, Massachusetts, on Monday, January 4. Hide Caption 9 of 16

16 photos: The week in politics Ted Cruz campaigns for the Republican presidential nomination at Penny's Diner in Missouri Valley, Iowa, on Monday, January 4. Hide Caption 10 of 16

16 photos: The week in politics Republican presidential candidate Mike Huckabee is seen through wall slats as he speaks in Urbandale, Iowa, on Sunday, January 3. Caucuses in Iowa are set for February 1. Hide Caption 11 of 16

16 photos: The week in politics A young boy sits this one out while Republican presidential candidate Marco Rubio speaks at a rally in Dallas on Wednesday, January 6. Hide Caption 12 of 16

16 photos: The week in politics Republican presidential candidate Ben Carson shakes hands with supporters at a town hall in Panora, Iowa, on Wednesday, January 6. Hide Caption 13 of 16

16 photos: The week in politics Campaign brochures for Republican presidential candidate Carly Fiorina sit on a table next to an attendee eating after Fiorina spoke in Manchester, New Hampshire, on Tuesday, January 5. Hide Caption 14 of 16

16 photos: The week in politics Brig. Gen. Diana Holland, left, stands with Command Sgt. Maj. Dawn Rippelmeyer, center, and West Point Superintendent Lt . Gen. Robert Caslen as they arrive for a ceremony where Holland assumed the role as the first female commandant of cadets at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, New York, on January 5. Hide Caption 15 of 16