Father Isaac Kariuki (Courtesy Photo / St. Michael Church)

Father Isaac Kariuki knew as a young boy that he one day wanted to serve as a Catholic priest. After working in the ministry and attending school to become ordained, he left his native country of Kenya about seven years ago to study for the priesthood in the United States.

Fast forward to today, and he is settling in at his first official assignment as associate pastor with the Diocese of Pueblo to Immaculate Heart of Mary Catholic Church in Grand Junction. Packing up and leaving Cañon City on Friday was like leaving home.

Kariuki, 43, completed his training at the Saint Meinrad Seminary and School of Theology in Indiana, but he spent school breaks at St. Michael Church in Cañon City. He said it has been his "home away from home." Father Kevin Novack who formerly was assigned to St. Michael Church, was his mentor.

Kariuki was ordained June 19 and celebrated his first mass at St. Michael Church on June 21. His parents, Charles Kariuki Mungai and Margaret Wanjiru Kariuki, traveled from Africa to attend both events.

Other than a cousin in Kenya who serves as a nun, he is the only one in his family serving in the ministry, but his family fully supports his mission. He was born in Kenya, grew up in Mombasa and was confirmed the same year he qualified to be an altar boy, upon entering elementary school. Throughout his school years, he was involved in drama, concert and wildlife clubs, football, music and other Catholic youth renewal programs. He was involved in all these activities on the school, parish, deanery, archdiocese and national levels. Becoming a priest was the natural next step.

Advertisement

"I was born into a Catholic family, I was raised as a Catholic Christian — I attended mass and I was an altar boy," he said.

After high school, instead of attending a public college, he spent two years in catechetical ministry and then worked for 10 years in parishes in Mombasa Archdiocese in Kenya as the faith formation coordinator for children and adults. That's when he took the next step in his journey and completed five years of seminary in Kenya and Uganda before moving to the U.S. to join his cousin, Nancy Karanja, in Texas. Colorado now is his home, but he plans to return to Africa once a year to visit his family.

Kariuki said he looks forward to getting to know the people in Grand Junction, letting them get to know him, and sharing Christian faith.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com