— When Republican Sen. Ted Cruz made some pointed remarks at a unity event for Middle Eastern Christians here this week, the hecklers booing him off stage weren't the only ones who viewed his words as "incendiary."

Lehigh Valley Congressman Charlie Dent was at Wednesday evening's dinner for In Defense of Christians, a group seeking to raise awareness of the persecution of Christians in the Middle East. Dent's 15th District stretches through much of the Lehigh Valley and has one of the highest concentrations of Syrian-Americans — many of them Christians — of any congressional district.

Cruz, a Texas senator and potential 2016 presidential candidate, was the dinner's keynote speaker. After some initial applause, the mood shifted as he told attendees — some from countries with complicated relations with Israel — that "Christians have no greater ally than the Jewish state."

"Let me say this: Those who hate Israel hate America. And those who hate Jews hate Christians," Cruz said, as some applauded and others in the audience began to shout. Cruz continued, responding briefly to comments from the audience before leaving the stage.

It wasn't the content of Cruz's comments that struck the wrong note with Dent, who describes himself as a strong supporter of Israel, as much as the way they were said.

Dent said in an interview that discussing delicate religious and political topics called for "tact and understanding, not defiance and a lecturing tone."

"Sen. Cruz has a bad habit of telling people who disagree with him on policy or tactics that they are insufficiently committed to the cause, whatever it may be," Dent said. "I experienced that firsthand during the government shutdown."

While Dent emerged during last fall's federal government shutdown as a voice of Republicans seeking to end the standoff, Cruz was critical of fellow GOP lawmakers like Dent who refused to hold out for a spending bill that would defund the Affordable Care Act.

Wednesday's dinner concluded a day of remarks from religious leaders and politicians, including a video address from Republican House Speaker John Boehner that played during the dinner. Other speakers focused on ways Christians and other religious minorities can come together and reach out to other groups.

"[Cruz] either didn't understand the audience, or he was trying to speak to an audience outside that room, or it was a willful confrontation that was self-serving," Dent said.

In a statement on his Facebook page after the event, Cruz defended his comments, writing that those who shouted at him were part of "a shameful display of bigotry and hatred."

The group's president, Toufic Baaklini, said in a statement afterward that "a few politically motivated opportunists" sought to divide the room and that the incident shows the organization's unity efforts are "desperately needed."