Highland Park resident Barbara Altman has thrown herself into volunteer work since retiring in early 2013 from her post as Deputy Chief Counsel with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services in Chicago. She jumped at the chance to put her experience and skills to work helping individuals navigate the Obamacare enrollment process through Moraine Township's partnership with Enroll Lake County and Get Covered Illinois.

Q. What excites you about helping people sign up for health insurance?

A. For me, it was the perfect fit. I had spent my whole career in this field. Of course, the Affordable Care Act is administered out of the Department of Health and Human Services. As a recent retiree, it was a way to use my intellectual and legal muscle. It also aligned with my values. I strongly believe that everyone has the right to affordable health care.

Q. Do any particular clients stand out in your mind?

A. I can still remember one woman the first year. She was working three jobs, earning maybe $33,000, and none of her jobs provided benefits. She'd not had a mammogram for five years. As soon as she was enrolled in January of 2014, her mammogram was free. She was skating on very thin ice and all of a sudden the pond was frozen. There are more people in need of insurance than you realize, particularly since the crash of 2008. There are people in their late 50s and early 60s who lost their jobs and are underemployed. The job they landed in after the crash does not have benefits.

Q. What are some of your other causes?

A. I spend a lot of time volunteering for the 10th Congressional District Democrats. I work with an anti-recidivism program in Waukegan that teaches ex-offenders how to handle a job interview. I also volunteer for a "college application boot camp" for Waukegan High School students. One of the things we do is help kids with their personal essays. I've also been volunteering time to the Highland Park-Highwood Legal Aid Clinic, which provides free legal services to low-income residents of Highland Park and Highwood in matters involving domestic violence, landlord-tenant disputes and certain immigration issues.

Q. What else do you do in your spare time?

A. I like taking adult lecture classes through a Northwestern University alumni organization. There's no credit, no tests. One course that just ended was called Nationalism and the Arts. The courses are fascinating. As someone who studied World War I in high school and college, I can tell you that what you understand from a 100-year perspective is a lot different that what you understood from a 50-year perspective. The instructors are really incredible.

Karen Berkowitz