With its computer problems solved, the Affordable Care Act moves into its second year, and employers face the complications that government mandates generate.

Application and instructions paper work for the Health Insurance Marketplace. (Photo: AP ) Story Highlights Employers speak about their concerns about the ACA

Most employers offer health insurance to full-time workers

A marketplace for businesses with few than 50 workers offers insurance plans

What worries Cincinnati business owners about the Affordable Care Act isn’t a new government penalty if they don’t provide health insurance to employees. It’s all the other tidal changes rippling out as the act rolls into its second full year:

Unexpected cost increases. More government reports. Plan changes in mid-year that distress and confuse workers.

“I just got our insurance bill, and I’ll tell you, it makes my chest hurt,” said Don Wright, chief operating officer for the Mason biotech company Assurex Health. “Our monthly bill is more than we spent on all company operations four years ago.”

Last year, the Affordable Care Act opened with a colossal computer problem that took months to resolve. Ultimately, more than 8 million Americans bought insurance through the government-mediated marketplaces. The next annual “open enrollment” will be Nov. 15 through Dec. 15 for plans to start Jan. 1. It’s the chance to shop for a 2015 plan if consumers want to change coverage.

The open enrollment this year is of particular interest to employers because in January, businesses with more than 50 employees must offer health insurance to all full-time workers.

Companies with 100 or more employees who don’t offer insurance will face a new government penalty in 2015. The penalty becomes effective in 2016 for employers of between 50 and 99 workers who do not offer coverage.

The penalty is $2,000 for each employee, after the first 30.

Not many companies in Ohio or Kentucky, however, face the prospect of paying the penalty. The Kaiser Family Foundation estimates that health insurance is part of the employment package in nearly 97 percent of Ohio companies of more than 50 employees and nearly 40 percent of companies with fewer than 50 workers.

Nearly 99 percent of Kentucky’s employers of more than 50 people offer health insurance; 36 percent of businesses with fewer than 50 provide health insurance.

Most employers in the United States employ fewer than 50 full-timers and will never have to face that mandate. Understanding that reality can calm business owners’ worries about the government law, said Michaela Hawn Burriss, the Ohio representative of the Small Business Majority, a nonprofit founded and supported by the nation’s small businesses.

“The ACA can be complex, and it’s important to know what your responsibilities are, but what’s more important is to make sure you’re not fearing an obligation under the law,” Hawn Burriss said.

Business owners with fewer than 50 workers now have access to another insurance marketplace called the Small Business Health Options Program that offers coverage at four levels. Hawn Burriss said the Small Business Majority offers counselors to help employers navigate the marketplace.

Employers with fewer than 25 workers and marketplace insurance plans also qualify for a tax credit worth up to 50 percent of premium costs.

Last year, President Barack Obama delayed implementing the business mandate to give employers more time to figure out how to proceed. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce predicted the requirement would kill jobs or force employers to cut hours or workers. Mary Miller, chief executive officer of Cincinnati’s JANCOA Janitorial Services, went on CNN to say, “I’m going to be out of business, and that’s not OK with me.”

This week, though, Miller’s words are not as dire, although she said she’s still concerned about the ACA’s effect on her business.

“Fear captured us, too,” Miller said with a laugh. “We have a healthy dose still, and that is because of not knowing what’s going to happen going forward.”

JANCOA employs 380 full-time workers and has offered health insurance since the 1990s – a rarity in the commercial-cleaning industry, Miller said. The trendline on costs, though, troubles her.

“That’s still the concern because nobody knows, including our broker, where the cost is going to go,” she said. “That’s the biggest fear, that unknown.”

At Robbins Inc., which manufactures hardwood floors for sports venues, particularly NBA arenas, health insurance has long been part of the employment package for the 220 workers. But Human Resources Manager Kimberly Jackson said ACA-driven changes in insurance are often beyond the employer’s control. One plan switched from a calendar to a fiscal year operation, and in October, a new deductible went into effect.

“For individuals who thought they’d made their $500 deductible for the year, they’re trying to figure out what to do next, now that they’ve got another $500 deductible to meet,” Jackson said.

“These are employees working in a manufacturing facility, where week-to-week dollars matter, and it’s very challenging. We were very discouraged. We sought every alternative, but we are really hemmed in.”

Despite the tightening in his chest from his insurance bill, Don Wright of Assurex Health said insurance coverage is a part of doing business.

“I’ve heard people saying things like, ‘The penalty is actually cheaper to me than providing the coverage.’ Lots of people mouth off about stuff like this,” he said. “I’m doubtful that’s true. You cannot possibly say as a business owner that it’s better to pay a penalty to the government than to cover your employees.”

New for employers in 2015

Come Jan. 1, the Affordable Care Act will require an employer to:

•Provide insurance coverage equal in quality to plans offered through the insurance marketplace. This is required of any employer of more than 50 workers.

•Pay a penalty to the government if the employer of more than 100 workers chooses not to offer health insurance. The penalty is called the Employer Shared Responsibility Payment. That penalty kicks in for businesses with 50 to 99 workers in 2016.

•Provide notice of coverage options to each employee, no matter if the worker is part-time or full-time.

For more information, go to healthcare.gov.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1wFboAU