While holding about 20 percent of the seats in Congress or local legislatures is by no means parity, it’s impossible to deny that female lawmakers are no longer considered unusual. For some reason, however, male politicians are finding it as difficult as ever to wrap their heads around the idea that women are equal players in society – including in the state houses.

Last week, a South Carolina state senator called a female lawmaker a “lesser cut of meat” after she objected to sexist comments the senator was making at her expense.

“[State Sen. Thomas] Corbin made a pair of comments directed at the 60-year-old [state senator Katrina] Shealy, who was elected to the South Carolina state senate in 2012, starting with the bizarre remark, ‘I see it only took me two years to get you wearing shoes,’” reports the Inquistr. When Shealy told him that his remarks, which apparently were meant to be a riff off the idea that women should be barefoot and pregnant, were unprofessional, he said he was just trying to make a joke, since women are inferior to men. “Well, you know God created man first,” Corbin responded. “Then he took the rib out of man to make woman. And you know, a rib is a lesser cut of meat.”

Corbin eventually apologized once the media learned about his remarks.“Senator Corbin has telephoned me and we have talked privately,” Shealy wrote on her Facebook page according to FITSnews, which broke the original story. “We had a frank conversation. He apologized for what he said last week. I believe he was sincere in offering that apology. Although I do not believe that these type (of) comments are ever acceptable, I accept his apology so we can move forward. He has agreed to make a public apology next week.”

His public apology has yet to arrive, but even once it does will it really make up for what by all accounts has been months of public harassment of the state’s only female senator? The fact that after so many comments about “baking cookies” and other gender tropes, no one in the body stood up for Shealy, a fellow Republican, or suggested that Corbin stop his “jokes” shows exactly how embedded the sexism has become.

Sadly, while South Carolina may be an extreme example, casual sexism is a default in other legislatures, too. In Missouri, state Rep. Mike Moon is demanding that lawmakers take a stand of “manly firmness” against Obamacare, even writing the language into a resolution requesting that the federal Missouri congressional delegation announce opposition to the Affordable Care Act.

And yes, that applies to the 30 percent of the 10 person delegation that is female.

“It is just like going to war,”he said to the Columbia Tribune, “You want a soldier to fight like a man. If a woman is in the trenches, you want them to fight like a man, too..It was not meant to downplay their womanhood at all. We just want them to know, every man and lady who is representing us, that we are demanding, as citizens of Missouri, that Obamacare be repealed and make it clear we don’t want a replacement.”

Moon claims there was no sexism meant. In fact, the phrase was supposed to be a Tea Party reference. The St. Louis Post-Dispatch reports that Moon “borrows the ‘manly firmness’ phrase from the Declaration of Independence, which credits colonial Americans for ‘opposing with manly firmness’ King George III’s aggression.”

However, a lot has changed since the 1800s, including the gender makeup of government bodies. Besides the obvious issue that Moon appears to be comparing affordable health insurance to tyranny and calling for a revolution to rid the country of this supposed scourge, he is also purposefully using the soft sexism of hearkening back to a day when only men were allowed to make policy as if that time were the ideal.

Is it any reason that women still feel like they are on the outskirts of the boy’s club even when they do manage to get elected to office? It’s impossible to feel like a welcome, appreciated member of a body that defaults straight to “manly firmness” and other implications that women should be home baking cookies. Whether these kinds of statements truly are unintentional or not, there’s no doubt that female legislators are, on some level, still being told they are lucky to be included at all.

Photo credit: Thinkstock