Buy Photo Steve Odom (Photo: HELEN COMER/DNJ)Buy Photo

There is a great deal of hot air floating about regarding religious freedom these days.

Some Americans are worried about it, and in a primary season, politicians respond to that worry by fanning the flames. One candidate accuses the IRS of auditing him because he’s a strong Christian but he also promises to regulate immigration based on the religion of the immigrant.

There seems something contradictory about those two positions.

But, what is “religious freedom?”

There are two things to know from the start. One is the that the 13 original colonies did not invent or create religious freedom with the ratification of the Constitution and its First Amendment. That Amendment, which covers several freedoms, says in part, “Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof.”

It goes on to list the freedoms of speech, the press, assembly and petition for redress (of grievances). The Founding Fathers, after the Constitution was ratified in 1789, went on to prepare several Amendments, the first 10 of which came to be known as the Bill of Rights. This was then ratified by the states and adopted in 1791.

But, it is significant that the First Amendment made to our founding charter was all about the freedoms of citizens and restrictions on government power, and the first freedom described in the First Amendment is the freedom of religion.

The Amendment restricted Congress per se, because it was beyond the imagination of those Founding Fathers that the president or Supreme Court could so far fail in their constitutional roles as to attempt to “make law,” since Congress and only Congress has that assignment in the Constitution.

The Constitution further restricts the Federal government with the Ninth and Tenth Amendments, which state, respectively, “The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.” And, “The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the states, are reserved to the states respectively, or to the people.”

Almost all of the Constitution is about designating (“enumerated powers”) certain obligations and duties of the three branches and restricting their power everywhere else. The Amendments were to clarify the nature of limited government, “Congress shall make no law...”

The notion of freedom of religion is part of the essence of humanity, what Jefferson referred to as “inalienable rights” in the Declaration of Independence.

An inalienable right is a right from which a person cannot be separated while still being treated as a person. It inheres in his identity as a person. This is a truth that should be “self-evident.”

Search Mr. Google for “inalienable” and the first thing to pop up is this: “freedom of religion, the most inalienable of all human rights.”

It’s sort of an archaic use of alienate or alien, for what inalienable meant back then was inseparable.

Take away a person’s life, liberty or pursuit of happiness and you have declared that you don’t regard him or her as a true “person” under law. Thus, the just and proper complaint of slaves at that time and all the way to 1863. And thus the just and proper complaint, I think, of the unborn, who cannot speak for themselves, and who, without being consulted, may have their right to life taken from them under our current Roe v. Wade regime.

Government is not a perfect vehicle by any estimation. The “government of men” is always and ever in conflict with the “government of laws” in old John Adams’ formulation.

So, because freedom of religion is an inalienable right, the Constitution of the U.S. would more properly be said to have “acknowledged” or “recognized” that prior inalienable right, rather than to have “invented” or “enacted” or “assigned” it to citizens.

The concept of freedom of religion does have a beginning though, first being talked about in a way that we would recognize in the 4th-century church under Emperor Constantine who was influenced by a theologian by the name of Lactantius.

Often today we understand freedom of religion as a species of “toleration.” You might hear it said that one should tolerate all religions because who can know for sure which is right?

In addition, toleration has taken on some of the cast of religion itself for those who are religion-less, coming to be used as a sort of unofficial litmus test, to the end that those who do not practice and exhibit toleration should not be tolerated.

The incoherent nature of this confusion — what must be tolerated and how that must be enforced — brings us back to the original idea of religious freedom. Those early Christians like Lactantius saw clearly that a religion that wasn’t free, wasn’t voluntary, let’s say, was a mere simulacrum that didn’t really fulfill the idea of a religion. Tolerance is not the originating value, freedom is.

For Lactantius, religion has to do with love of God and purity of mind. This cannot be forced. Lactantius considered that religion cannot be imposed on someone, it can only be by persuasion that it might make its way in the world and with the hearts of individuals.

“Nothing,” says Lactantius, “requires freedom of the will as [much as] religion.”

As Robert L. Wilken says in the journal First Things, “Lactantius claims that coercion is inimical to the nature of religion. This is the first theological rationale for religious freedom, because it is the first rationale to be rooted in the nature of God and of devotion to God.”

The second thing to say about the freedom of religion is a correction of the way the current administration has taken to referring to this first of freedoms, and that is by proclaiming the importance of the “freedom of worship.”

This is a distortion of the First Amendment and of the whole idea of freedom as understood in 1789.

Congress shall not “prohibit the free exercise” of religion, and the exercise of religion goes far beyond worship. It’s obvious if Congress has the prior right to define what religion actually is, then it can define its free exercise out of existence. Too many administration spokesmen have made this slip of the tongue lately, assuming that’s all that it is.

Part of the context of the 18th century was the jailing, fining or even flogging of Baptist preachers and teachers for evangelizing or proselytizing in predominantly Anglican colonies like Virginia. There was a great deal of conflict like this in those colonies that had an “established” church, such as Virginia, Massachusetts and Connecticut.

But, the First Amendment was not written just so Baptists could stay inside their houses and chapels and worship in private to their heart’s content, but not be allowed to follow the dictates, the mandates of Jesus’ words, “Go into all the world and preach the gospel.”

Free exercise covers much more than worship inside a sanctuary. Free exercise means the right to practice one’s faith. It means the freedom to proselytize, to wear a cross, or a Jewish yarmulke, or a Muslim headscarf or a Sikh turban, to feed or shelter the homeless in places where neighbors are offended, to be exempt from participating in organized violence (Quakers), to be exempt from pledging allegiance to the flag (Jehovah’s Witness), to be allowed to homeschool one’s children (the Amish).

Freedom of religion can be understood positively and negatively, so that sometimes it is freedom from coercion into activities that would violate one’s religious conscience. For a Catholic organization, of nuns, for example, it might mean the freedom not to be required to provide contraception for its employees, contra the Affordable Care Act’s requirements.

Religion is not just thoughts and beliefs and prayers in a secluded space but the practice of (for Christians) following the example of Christ, or the law of Moses for Jews. Religion at its root means to bind together, like the words ligament or ligature.

Therefore, to restrict and proscribe outward the behaviors of like-minded people that bind them together with their brothers and sisters and to God, is essentially to vaunt oneself higher than God and assert that only the state may dictate how one may and how one may not “exercise” one’s religion.

Any government that willingly and knowingly undermines this first and most important of freedoms has abrogated its reason for existence and abandoned its own legitimacy. Governments are instituted by God for the purposes of justice and liberty and order and peace.

Steve Odom is pastor of Central Christian Church on East Main St. in Murfreesboro. You can follow him on Twitter @borodisciples and he can be reached at steven.odom@gmail.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.dnj.com/1pgin4j