Dr. Brad Allen announces candidacy for Congress

Pediatric heart surgeon, Dr. Brad Allen announced his candidacy this week for California’s 24th Congressional District. Allen, a Republican, joins a crowded primary ballot with a total of nine candidates, including incumbent Democrat Lois Capps, vying to make the top two in the June 3 primary election.

Others challenging Capps include Orcutt Democrat Paul Coyne, candidate Steve Isakson with no party affiliation, and Republicans Santa Barbara City Councilman Dale Francisco, cattle rancher Justin Fareed, former actor Chris Mitchum, Nipomo businesswoman Alexis Stuart, and publisher Sandra Marshall.

Allen cited the need for real healthcare reform as one of the issues motivating him to run, in a statement from his campaign. In particular, Allen has been critical of Obamacare — articulating some of the law’s lesser known, but still disastrous effects on patients and health care in a recent Wall Street Journal editorial. “The law wasn’t written by a blue-ribbon panel of experts, it was done by politicians and special interests in backrooms, and Lois Capps was one of them,” said Allen.

Allen continued that we need new leadership to fix Washington. “Congress needs more people who can bring professional experience to bear on complex issues, rather than career politicians who are out of touch with what people need,” concluded Dr. Allen.

Allen is a former Surgical Director at the Children’s Heart Institute in Houston. He practiced medicine for 29 years and specialized in pediatric cardiac surgery, thoracic surgery, and cardiothoracic vascular surgery. Recognized as a prominent medical researcher, Allen has published over 80 scientific papers. He is a member of Alpha Omega Alpha Medical Honor Society, won research awards at UCLA and the University of Illinois, and the Board of Trustee’s Academic award from the Chicago Medical School. He received the Golden Scalpel Teaching Award and most recently was a visiting professor of surgery at the UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine.

In addition to his professional career in health care, Allen and his wife, actress Jaclyn Smith, have founded their own business. Their venture has given him an understanding of the problems often faced by small businesses, he said in the campaign statement. Allen and Jaclyn have two grown children and are active in several non-profit and charitable organizations.

Share this post!