Mayor Ford’s legacy

Former Toronto mayor Rob Ford was quoted as courageously saying: "I am an alcoholic and I will die an alcoholic."

Ford’s authentic words provided a great service to the public; the illness of addiction clearly exempts no one. Overcoming denial through the recognition addiction is a real, multifaceted, treatable and biologically based brain disease is the first step to an understanding that enables enlightened caring for one other. It is also the beginning of an inclusive society.

May Rob Ford rest in peace. His tribulations have not have been in vain.

Shirley Kowalchuk

Winnipeg

Milking the Euro data?

One sense of the word "milk" (Milking the sacred cow, 22 March) is to fool people, which could be an unintentional consequence of the misleading reference in this editorial to Europe’s public-private coverage of health care.

Specifically, Eurostat data show on average in 2011, European governments funded 73.1 per cent of health-care costs, higher than Canada’s 69.9 per cent. The highest was the Netherlands at 85.7 per cent. Private funding in Europe covered 26.9 per cent of costs, lower than Canada’s 30.1 per cent.

One country that stands out in the statistics, is the United States. In 2011 government funded only 48.5 per cent of costs, leaving 51.5 per cent to be covered by the private sector. Much of the private cost was through insurance companies that resisted, along with American conservatives, Obama’s very modest Affordable Care Act that threatened profits made from human illness and privatized health care.

So it is simply not the case health-care coverage in Canada differs from Europe in ways that warrant more private coverage. Rather it is America that we differ from, and it should stay that way. Indeed, Canada should ideally move towards the Netherlands, which, along with Sweden, Norway, Denmark, and other enlightened countries, funds more than 80 per cent of health-care costs through government revenue, often spending a higher percentage of GDP towards that end.

Jim Clark

Winnipeg

The poor working poor

David Magrel states in his letter everyone from dishwashers to executives should plan responsibly for their retirement, that working to age 67 is reasonable (A bad retirement plan, March 21). What Magrel assumes, however, is the dishwasher has had full-time work, stable health and literacy skills to access investments. I know a dishwasher in her 60s, she is illiterate, has many aches, pains and repetitive injuries from years of standing, lifting, carrying, wiping and scraping. She will barely make it to retirement at age 65. She wants to go to work because it gives her independence. But she never gets full-time hours, even though she’s worked for the same employer for at least eight years. Her work assignments are scheduled so she never gets statutory holidays or time and a half. She has no equity, but has saved nearly $20,000, and that only because someone more literate took her under his wing. She has no family and no children. She represents the people with few skills, who are easily blown off and scrape by all their lives. She is the one most hurt by cuts to Old Age Security.

And if she were not able to work any longer, her savings render her ineligible for social assistance. If OAS were not available until age 67 and her savings are depleted before that age, she would be eligible. The expense would be borne by a provincial government. Nothing is gained. What advantage would OAS at age 67 confer?

Behind the so called programs we "cannot afford" are the working poor who must hang on as long as their body will last.

Randy Willoughby

Winnipeg

Show your courage

I’m so glad to see Sig Laser also abhors the current practice that the Free Press uses regarding unattributed comments/tweets etc. (Of canaries and comments, March 22,).

Please, enough with the plethora of anonymous comments to the editor being printed. In today’s world we all expect transparency, who said what, etc. Please turn the letters-to-the-editor page back to those who have enough conviction in their comments to sign their real name that the Free Press and its readers can all verify.

Robert J. Sales

Winnipeg

Famous last words

On last week’s campaign trail, Premier Greg Selinger stopped just short of declaring his dire prediction of "If you boot me out, doomsday immediately follows." To the decided voter, this sounds like famous last words. And for the NDP, the French saying "Après moi, le déluge", is best translated as "Oh, how we wish the PST, Bipole III and 2011 flood had never happened."

Don Warkentin

Winnipeg

The opposite of health care

In the midst of all these emotional overtures about "right to die," can we please keep in mind if we do this carelessly then a very complicated and expensive legal/medical/psychological bureaucracy is about to be created. Every penny of that expense will extend wait times for hip surgery, decrease the number of available hospital beds, reduce available money to hire specialists, increase taxes, etc.

I believe people do have the right to die with dignity, but nobody has the right to expect someone else to pick up the tab for it, or force them to give up real health-care services. Real ones. The kind that involve extending lives, not shortening them.

In other words, every bill for medical, legal and psychological consultation or evaluation should be paid in full by the applicant before the services are rendered. Perhaps there could be charitable organizations picking up the tab for poorer applicants. But, in no case, should this come out of taxes devoted to keeping people healthy, alive and safe.

It is the antithesis of health care.

Ted Terra

Winnipeg

Re: Protecting, caring for the mentally ill, March 23.

Dr. Harvey Max Chochinov again provides a sensitive and informed opinion with respect to the issue of physician-assisted death, in this case, as related to mental illness. He is correct there must be broad recognition physical and mental suffering can be equally devastating, and that the rights of persons with mental illness must be equal to those of others. With parity of rights, however, must come parity of services and supports. Funding for services for mental health issues is a small fraction of that for physical conditions. As Chochinov highlights, mental and physical conditions cannot be approached in the same manner. There is a fundamental difference between an excruciating and terminal physical condition, and a mental disorder: Most mental illnesses are treatable.

Effective pharmacological and psychotherapeutic treatments can minimize or eliminate the hopelessness, self-deprecation, and self-destructiveness that often are symptoms of mental disorders. Government must support funding for adequate psychological services, and physicians, who now may hold more people’s lives in their hands, need to be informed about how to access these services. The literature indicates that most people with mental disorders who attempt suicide, but live and receive adequate treatment, express gratitude for having survived. We do damage if we do not provide this opportunity for recovery and, instead, support assisted suicide for those who, when treated successfully, would most fervently wish to continue living.

Dr. Teresa Sztaba

Manitoba Psychological Society

Show compassion

When we witness an accident or injury, one of the small courtesies we can extend to the victim is to offer some comfort in the time of distress and vulnerability. A compassionate gesture might be simply to cover the harmed person to restore some dignity. The Free Press has gone to the other extreme, publishing a photo of one of the Brussels bombing victims exposed and dazed.

Christina Sikorsky

Winnipeg