Rush Limbaugh: If you want to beat the left in 2016, follow Scott Walker’s blueprint

posted at 11:21 am on January 27, 2015 by Allahpundit

Via the Daily Caller, is this not effectively an endorsement? He doesn’t formally endorse in primaries (well, usually), but if Scott Walker has masterminded a way to beat the left and Scott Walker is, per Rush, a Reaganite conservative who’s achieved wonderful things in a blue state and Scott Walker is running for president, then naturally the guy we should be nominating is Scott Walker. Rush won’t go that far, I assume, especially this early in the process with tea-party heroes like Ted Cruz in the mix, but I don’t see the logic by which we follow Walker’s blueprint and not Walker himself. Which is a big deal: One of Walker’s selling points is his potential to attract support from both wings of the party. That potential will be tested when he ends up taking flak, chiefly from Cruz, for his apparent squishiness on amnesty. Having Rush Limbaugh talk him up now to grassroots righties as a proven winner will help deflect those attacks. Unless, of course, Rush decides that Cruz is right, that Walker’s unacceptably RINO-ish on immigration, and therefore we should follow the Scott Walker blueprint to the White House so long as it’s, er, Ted Cruz who’s implementing it.

Speaking of getting the attention of grassroots righties, Bobby Jindal seems to have settled on a strategy.

From worship to prayer, thousands joined together on the campus of Louisiana State University for a weekend faith gathering called, The Response: Louisiana. The event, led by Gov. Bobby Jindal, was designed as a way for Christians to come together and seek spiritual revival for America… Jindal asked all of his fellow U.S. governors to join him in Baton Rouge. “Our God is an awesome God, amen!” Jindal declared before the crowd. “We’re going to plea for Him to send his spirit, His healing spirit, a spirit of revival in this place, all across this state, all across this blessed land.”

Jindal’s always been religious and socially conservative but he was first introduced to conservatives not for his bona fides on “values” issues but for his wonkery, particularly on health care. His main problem next year will be standing out somehow in a ridiculously crowded field; believe it or not, even though he’s now in his eighth year as governor of Louisiana, his name recognition among Republican voters is a bit less than … Ben Carson’s. Is wonking out over ObamaCare during the debates going to change that? Probably not. But if he builds a strong brand as an unapologetic social conservative, the sort of guy willing to decry Islamic “no-go zones” in Europe while the media’s insisting that they don’t exist, committed social cons may decide that they’re better off throwing their support to him than to Huckabee. Jindal has a southern pedigree just like Huck does, he has lots of executive experience just like Huck does, but he’s younger, would bring racial diversity to the ticket, and is more trusted by fiscal conservatives than Huck. It’s hard to imagine him breaking out and winning the nomination but it’s easy to imagine him producing some buzz, finishing surprisingly strong in the early states, and ending up as VP to someone like Jeb Bush. Or, of course, Scott Walker.

Related Posts: