Finally, the questions became too much. Too much doubt. Too much skepticism.

“I took it personally,” linebacker Shaun Phillips said. “Everyone was like ‘What are we going to do about the pass rush?’ I’ve got like 70-something sacks in my career. What am I, some bum or something like that?”

With former Bronco Elvis Dumervil now on the Ravens and Von Miller suspended, coming into Thursday night’s contest there was concern — with good reason — as to whether the Broncos would be able to generate enough of a pass rush to get things done.

But the Broncos defense checked that box to the affirmative.

Four sacks of Baltimore quarterback Joe Flacco said the Broncos did what they needed to do to get to him. Phillips, the most decorated of those candidates looking to fill the void, had two and a half sacks. Wesley Woodyard shared a sack with Phillips and Robert Ayers corralled Flacco on a play in which the quarterback scrambled out of the pocket and right into his arms for his first of the year.

But it was the constant pressure that meant just as much. The Broncos defense flushed Flacco out of the pocket with regularity in the second half, causing errant and rushed passes all over the place.

“We have a great scheme and we have good players,” defensive end Derek Wolfe said. “We did a really good job of replacing the guys that we lost. Shaun Phillips, and Robert Ayers he was getting in there doing a great job. It was a great team effort.”

Moreno gets first crack. In a move that wasn’t surprising in the least given his success against the Ravens last season, the Broncos gave veteran running back Knowshon Moreno the first carry of the game. He had three of the Broncos four carries in the first quarter, gaining 14 yards.

Moreno finished with 28 yards on nine carries.

“He’s a guy that has a little bit more experience,” Broncos coach John Fox said. “We have some youth at that position. It does not mean anything as far as where they are on the depth chart or any of that. In our mind we have three starting running backs. But Knowshon is a little bit more seasoned. But the other guys played well.”

Third-largest at SAF. The announced attendance on Thursday night was 76,977, the third-largest crowd for a home game in Broncos history. The two ahead of it both came in 2007, games against Green Bay and Pittsburgh.

Thursday’s attendance was 245 more fans than attended the AFC Divisional Playoff game between the two teams back in January.

Harris’s mastery of Flacco. Baltimore quarterback Joe Flacco had gone 210 passes without a pick until Chris Harris’s interception in the second quarter, leading to a Broncos touchdown on the ensuing first offensive play. Harris, incidentally, was also the last player to intercept a Flacco pass, on Dec. 16, 2012.

“Every time I play the Ravens I always have pretty good games versus them,” Harris said. “Flacco knows me pretty well now. He tries me, so I just try to take advantage of it.”

Harris said while he was aware that Flacco had not thrown an interception in a while, he did not know he was the last player to pick him off.

“It’s kind of crazy that I was his last one,” Harris said. “And now I’m his first one in the regular season. That’s kind of funny.

Injury report. Linebacker Wesley Woodyard (ankle), PR/KR Trindon Holliday (left lower leg), S Omar Bolden (left shoulder) and WR Eric Decker (right shoulder) were the players listed on the Broncos injury report following the game.

Footnotes. The Joe Flacco half of the decorative banners on Sports Authority Field had a short shelf life. They were taken down before the game even ended. Broncos inactives are quarterback Zac Dysert, running back C.J. Anderson, cornerback Quentin Jammer, cornerback Champ Bailey, guard John Moffitt, guard Chris Kuper and tight end Joel Dreessen. … The Broncos had three first downs in the first quarter.

Christopher Dempsey: , cdempsey@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dempseypost