Reprinted from INSIDE HEALTH INSURANCE EXCHANGES , a hard-hitting newsletter with news and strategic insights on the development and operation of public and private exchanges.

Carriers that priced their products too high for the 2014 plan year are proposing lower — in some cases substantially lower — rate hikes than competitors. And that premium right-sizing actually could translate to higher premiums as well as smaller federal premium subsidies for members unless they switch plans, according to an analysis from consulting firm Avalere Health. For carriers, the change in pricing could negatively impact renewals.

The Affordable Care Act pegs subsidy amounts to the “benchmark plan,” which is the second-lowest-priced silver plan in a given region. Based on an analysis of proposed rates in nine states, the second-lowest-priced plan in six states will lose benchmark status in 2015. Moreover, in seven of the nine states, the lowest cost silver plan will also change in 2015 (see chart, this page).

Carriers that had the lowest-priced option a year ago could wind up losing members to competitors if people base their 2015 decisions on price, Elizabeth Carpenter, director at Avalere Health, tells HEX.

Enrollees Can Be Automatically Re-enrolled

However, enrollees who don’t pay attention to cost increases, or who want to ensure continuity of care, might opt to stick with their existing coverage. On June 26, HHS said that people who enrolled in exchange-based coverage for 2014 could automatically be re-enrolled in their current plan for 2015. The idea is to reduce the need to repeat the application process. According to HHS, 95% of people who purchased coverage through the federal exchange could be automatically re-enrolled unless they opt to switch plans.

To see the full study, visit www.avalerehealth.com.

New Benchmark Plans May Cause Consumers to Switch Carriers

Monthly Premium and Subsidies, 2014 vs. 2015

Consider the following example: An individual in Maryland with an annual income of $17,500 (150% of the federal poverty level) enrolled in the benchmark silver plan for 2014. Monthly premiums were $214, but the federal subsidy dropped the member’s monthly out-of-pocket costs to $58. However, the federal subsidy amount will be reduced if the plan isn’t a benchmark plan for 2015. In this example, the enrollee would wind up paying $432 a year more in 2015 than in 2014.

SOURCE AND METHODOLGY: Avalere Health, June 2014. Analysis includes 2014 premiums and 2015 proposed premiums in Connecticut, Indiana, Maine, Maryland, Oregon, Rhode Island, Vermont, Virginia and Washingon. All premiums are for a 40-year-old non-smoker in the CMS rating region corresponding to the largest ZIP code in the largest city in each state.

© 2014 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The AIS E-Savings Club offers regular opportunities to buy AIS products and services at substantial savings. Click here to see the current specials — including an offer to get a free report and save $75 when you subscribe to Inside Health Insurance Exchanges.