U.S. Labor Board and McDonald’s trial over labor laws after franchisees’ alleged backlash against employees who protested fast-food working conditions.

The question at hand is whether McDonald’s USA, an Illinois-based unit of McDonald’s Corp, is considered a “joint employer” of workers at franchises that are independently owned. If so, the National Labor Relations Board says the company would be liable for labor law violations for franchisees, which include 90 percent of McDonald’s U.S. locations.

The trial has garnered national attention as the outcome will determine how the National Labor Relations Board’s new standards for joint employment defines franchisor-franchisee relationships. Although the ruling will only apply to McDonald’s, critics believe the new standard may pose a threat to the very existence of the franchise model.

NLRB lawyer Jamie Rucker illustrated McDonald’s overarching control over franchisee standards– from cleaning requirements to the number of seconds for order-taking, even standardized interview question for perspective hires, McDonald’s oversight is omnipresent.

In 2012 workers began filing complaints at the Washington based NLRB, reporting that McDonald’s and other franchisees surveilled, disciplined, threatened and fired employees for requesting union rights and higher wages.

“If McDonald’s is involved in determining working conditions at its franchised operations, it is responsible for what happens to workers subject to those conditions,” said Rucker.

A case was eventually consolidated in 2014 after accumulating complaints were received by the NLRB, bringing franchisees in six cities to trial.

Willis Goldsmith, lawyer for McDonald’s, contends that the company “is not now and never has been” a joint employer and that its franchises are independent.

Goldsmith added that McDonald’s does not control workers’ wages, who the franchisees hire nor the scheduling or benefits.

Attorney for New York City franchisees, Robert Brody, defends McDonald’s, saying that while the company provides the “cookbook,” the franchisees are independent in their decisions on employment issues.

In August, the NLRB expanded standards for joint employment in a landmark decision that involved Browning-Ferris Industries Inc. The new standard allows companies to consider indirect and unexercised control while still being a joint employer, whereas the old standard required the company to have direct control over employment conditions.

If the trial rules for joint employment it could make negotiating wages and conditions easier for workers as they would be communicating with parent companies directly.

Source: McDonald’s Squares Off Against U.S. Labor Board in Trial

Photo credit: www.snopes.com

Join the Discussion