Presidential hopeful Donald Trump has rocketed to second place in a recent national poll and in the early nominating states of Iowa and New Hampshire. That has Democrats cheering.

With Trump, a Republican, enmeshed in controversy over his inflammatory comments about Mexican immigrants, Hillary Clinton and other Democrats are eager to make Trump the face of the GOP. As the Washington Post writes, the Republican field has no clear front-runner, and for Democrats, Trump is a kind of divine intervention.

“I am a person of faith — and the Donald’s entry into this race can only be attributed to the fact that the good Lord is a Democrat with a sense of humor,” said Paul Begala, a veteran Democratic strategist and adviser to Priorities USA Action, a super PAC boosting Clinton’s candidacy.

Clinton herself has been calling out Trump’s comments about Mexicans on the campaign trail.

Obamacare sales job: President Barack Obama is intent on finally winning over Americans on his signature health-care law, after the Supreme Court upheld it. As National Journal writes, Obamacare is still underwater with the general public, and Obama and his top officials seem acutely aware of that. It is a problem they are turning their attention to now that the law isn’t threatened by a Supreme Court case. “My hope is that on a bipartisan basis, we can now focus on what we have learned, what’s working, what’s not working,” Obama said Wednesday in Nashville. “There’s still a lot of people who aren’t insured,” he said, in apparent reference to Medicaid expansion.

Trading with Cuba: The Obama administration’s move to normalize relations with Cuba has fueled excitement in the business world at the prospect of a new market. U.S. firms, writes Politico, already export hundreds of millions of dollars’ worth of goods annually to Cuba, and are looking for opportunities to expand. For years, American farmers have been selling wheat, meat, corn and other agricultural commodities to Cuba under a special series of humanitarian exemptions. A delegation of farm leaders toured Cuba last week, Politico said.

Iran backlash: Fox News writes the Obama administration’s decision to send the Iran nuclear talks into overtime is triggering a backlash on Capitol Hill. Congressional Republicans are warning Tehran is exploiting the situation and moving the goal posts. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, a Kentucky Republican, called on the administration to “press pause” on the discussions after negotiators said they would miss the June 30 deadline and extend talks another week. As Fox writes, McConnell and other GOP lawmakers worry the administration’s negotiating position is weakening and giving more ground to the Iranians.

Where Obama, Bush agree: Here’s one issue President Obama and Jeb Bush agree on: don’t mix peas into guacamole. As Time writes, both Obama and Republican White House hopeful Bush weighed in on a controversy that arose out of a New York Times article encouraging readers to add peas to their guacamole. Staunch guacamole fans bristled at the thought of adding peas to their dip. Here’s what Obama and Bush had to say:

respect the nyt, but not buying peas in guac. onions, garlic, hot peppers. classic. https://t.co/MEEI8QHH1V — President Obama (@POTUS) July 1, 2015

You don't put peas in guacamole https://t.co/kG3ewrVv6f — Jeb Bush (@JebBush) July 1, 2015

More from MarketWatch