Reprinted from SPECIALTY PHARMACY NEWS , a monthly newsletter designed to help health plans, PBMs, providers and employers contain costs and improve outcomes related to high-cost specialty products.

Although the FDA has yet to approve a product through the 351(k) biosimilar pathway, multiple follow-on drugs are working their way through the pipeline, noted Kate Keeping, senior director of biosimilars research for BioTrends Research Group at a June 30 webinar sponsored by the company.

“The United States is the only developed market to have no biosimilars, but development is ramping up,” Keeping said. As of June, 23 biosimilar products were in U.S. clinical trials, and as of April, 42 biosimilars were in development-phase meetings.

According to Keeping, “Several Phase III biosimilar trials started this quarter,” including two for Herceptin (trastuzumab) biosimilars for early breast cancer, two for Humira (adalimumab) biosimilars for rheumatoid arthritis and one for Enbrel (etanercept) for RA and psoriasis.

BioTrends closely tracks the development of these drugs, and Keeping explained that what the company expected last year in terms of biosimilars launching in the U.S. was fairly different from what actually happened. Sandoz’s filgrastim — which BioTrends expects will be the first biosimilar on the U.S. market — was expected in late 2013. However, the company said July 24 that the FDA had just accepted its application (see story, p. 1), and the drug now is expected to launch in 2015. The patents for the reference product, Neupogen, have expired.

Other expectations include the following:

Celltrion Inc.’s infliximab, a Remicade biosimilar, was expected in February 2014, but the company just said Aug. 11 that it had filed its application with the FDA (see story, p. 7). The last of Remicade’s patents expire in September 2018, but Celltrion said it has filed a lawsuit against Remicade manufacturer Janssen Biotech, Inc. seeking declaratory judgment that those patents are invalid and unenforceable.

Hospira, Inc.’s epoetin alfa, a biosimilar version of Epogen and Procrit, was expected in June 2014, but the filing is expected in the fourth quarter of this year or early next year. The reference drugs’ patents have expired.

Sandoz’s pegfilgrastim was expected this August, and the company is preparing to file. The patents for reference drug Neulasta expire in October 2015.

The FDA has released seven guidance documents — the most recent one earlier this month on reference product exclusivity and before that in May with a document on clinical pharmacology data (SPN 6/14, p. 1) — since the Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act (BPCIA) establishing the 351(k) approval pathway for biosimilars became law as part of the Affordable Care Act. Keeping says additional guidance still expected in 2014 will address the following topics:

Demonstrating interchangeability,

Labeling for biosimilars, and

Additional questions and answers on BPCIA implementation.

The first two topics are “the most important,” Keeping tells SPN, adding that she assumes the labeling guidance would include information on naming biosimilars, which has been a contentious issue (SPN 7/14, p. 11; SPN 9/12, p. 11).

“There is a lot of pressure on the FDA to do something on naming,” says an industry source who asks not to be identified. However, BPCIA does not use the word “name” anywhere, and when you come down to it, a biosimilar is first and foremost a biologic, points out the source. As such, the system that has been used for all other biologics, including those currently on the U.S. market with shared international non-proprietary names, would seem appropriate. In fact, explains the source, this is the position articulated in the FDA policy paper on biosimilar naming and archived on the FDA website.

View the FDA policy paper at http://tinyurl.com/l8l9dnb.

© 2014 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The AIS E-Savings Club offers regular opportunities to buy AIS products and services at substantial savings. Click here to see the current specials — including a special offer on Specialty Pharmacy Trends and Strategies: 2014, a new resource from the editors of Specialty Pharmacy News.