The Sun Valley City Council will be reinstating payments to reimburse some council members for out-of-pocket health care expenses or to pay for their own health plans.

The council got into trouble with its health insurance carrier, Regence BlueShield of Idaho, last fall, over a similar form of reimbursements. Regence threatened to stop insuring the city because council members Keith Saks, Michelle Griffith and Jane Conard were accepting payments to buy their own health insurance plans, outside of the city’s group coverage.

That ran afoul of regulations in the Affordable Care Act that stipulated that employees be covered under the group plans. The city promptly stopped the payments, which settled the issue.

This new kind of reimbursement has Regence’s blessing, and aligns with IRS regulations, Griffith said at a City Council meeting Tuesday.

The council voted 4-0 to start up the system, which is called a voluntary employees’ beneficiary association plan.

The city will have two such plans, one that covers out-of-pocket expenses and another that pays for health plans outside the group coverage for retirees. Saks and Conard are retired and thus eligible.

Saks said he views this as a trial run, and if it works out, it could be expanded to more city employees.

The reimbursement payments must be for the same amount that the city would otherwise spend insuring the council members through the group plan.

Sun Valley resident Jim Bronson criticized the move, and asked Mayor Peter Hendricks not to sign the resolution passed by the council.

Bronson said Sun Valley was the only city in Blaine County to permit that kind of system.

“The only reason this is being done is to line your own pockets at taxpayer expense,” he said.

Saks and Griffith disagreed with that assertion. Griffith said Idaho law permitted those kinds of plans, and numerous municipalities around the Pacific Northwest use them. Saks said the city pursued it at Regence’s suggestion.

“This is not anything we cooked up under the desk to get around anything,” Griffith said.

Watering restrictions

The City Council voted to pass the first reading of an ordinance that will restrict daytime residential lawn watering in the summer months.

However, the city may rescind the ordinance depending on how the Sun Valley Water and Sewer District’s board of directors votes on a similar resolution on May 16. Saks said he was satisfied that the district’s resolution would accomplish the same goals.