Police escort Uber taxi driver and accused rapist Shiv Kumar Yadav following his court appearance in New Delhi on Monday. Chandan Khanna/AFP/Getty Images

Officials in the Delhi region of India on Monday banned Uber – a car service that allows people to connect with a driver through an app on their phones – after a woman accused her driver of rape.

The passenger had fallen asleep and woke up in a secluded area where the driver had taken her, The New York Times reported.

Police arrested 32-year-old driver Shiv Kumar Yadav, who confessed to the rape and appeared in court on Monday.

The U.S.-based company’s CEO, Travis Kalanick, said in a blog statement Sunday that Uber will work with India’s government to create better background checks “currently absent in their commercial transportation licensing programs.” He also said his company will partner with organizations working to promote women’s safety in India.



[READ: How Much Does Your Uber Driver Make?]

“We will do everything, I repeat, everything to help bring this perpetrator to justice and to support the victim and her family in her recovery,” he said.

But on Monday, the Delhi Transport Department said in a statement it had canceled the perpetrator’s permit and “banned all activities relating to providing any transport service by [Uber] with immediate effect."

The department went on to claim that Uber misled the victim of the “nature of the taxi service offered by the 'Uber App.'”

Uber reportedly hired the driver despite the existence of previous sexual assault allegations against him, for which he reportedly was acquitted.

But Yadav confessed during questioning in the latest incident to raping a 22-year-old woman after he picked her up from her night shift at a bar in 2011 while working for a different taxi service, the Times reported.



[ALSO: Is Uber's Surge Pricing Worth It?]

Uber executive Neeraj Singhal, who works on international launches of the company, said the company counts on governments to do their own background checks on drivers and does not perform them in India, The Wall Street Journal said. It accepts partner drivers if they have valid insurance documents, a driver’s license and a commercial permit to drive a taxi, the Times reported.

The Delhi Transport Department said it had given Yadav an All India Tourist Permit in May “after due verification of character and antecedents of the permit holder."

A police investigator added that Uber had registered Yadav's cab at an inaccurate address and had never added the required global positioning system to his car, the Times reported. He also said Uber did not require Yadav to show a badge that would be evidence he had undergone a criminal background check.