White House to honor CentroMed’s Cortez for Affordable Care Act work

Photo: Courtesy Photo /CentroMed Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Ana Maria Garza Cortez, CentroMed’s vice president of development and marketing, will be among 10 people honored Friday at the White House as “Champions of Change” for the Affordable Care Act. Cortez, 49, the only Texan among the recipients, will be recognized for her efforts to raise public awareness of health insurance coverage opportunities under the Affordable Care Act. less Ana Maria Garza Cortez, CentroMed’s vice president of development and marketing, will be among 10 people honored Friday at the White House as “Champions of Change” for the Affordable Care Act. Cortez, 49, ... more Photo: Courtesy Photo /CentroMed White House to honor CentroMed’s Cortez for Affordable Care Act work 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

The White House will honor this week one of San Antonio’s nonprofit health care leaders for her work helping the area’s children and underserved residents get insurance coverage.

Ana Maria Garza Cortez, CentroMed’s vice president of development and marketing, will be among 10 people recognized Friday as “Champions of Change” for the Affordable Care Act. She is the only person from Texas selected for the honor.

Cortez, 49, is being recognized for advocating for children’s and families’ health care needs. She has long promoted public awareness of Medicaid and the state’s Children’s Health Insurance Program. She also planned and promoted large-scale health insurance enrollment events in San Antonio for the past three open enrollment seasons since the Affordable Care Act took full effect in 2012.

She will attend the White House event with her husband and two children, who are 11 and 8 years old. This will be her first trip to Washington, D.C.

Cortez thought someone was playing a joke when she was first alerted of the honor.

“Really, I’m in awe,” she said Monday. “I’m really surprised and very honored. But it’s bittersweet for me ... It’s very hard to accept this recognition because I don’t do this work alone.”

Cortez has served as one of the key leaders in the EnrollSA coalition, a group of local hospital systems, health clinics, nonprofit agencies, school districts and elected officials working to boost health insurance enrollment under the Affordable Care Act.

She has worked for more than 17 years for CentroMed, one of San Antonio’s “safety net” health care centers that provides low-cost services to uninsured residents. The nonprofit runs 23 clinics in San Antonio, Somerset and New Braunfels and serves all patients, regardless of their ability to pay. CentroMed focuses on comprehensive primary care services and charges “sliding scale” fees based on patients’ income levels.

Cortez was nominated for the honor by two of her colleagues in EnrollSA — Joe Ibarra, Enroll America’s deputy state director for Texas, and Andrea Guajardo, Christus Santa Rosa Health System’s director of community health.

Ibarra said Cortez has previously worked with other community coalitions focused on access to health coverage, citing her past work in raising families’ awareness of Medicaid and CHIP.

“She’s very much a service leader,” Ibarra said. “She doesn’t ask folks to do anything that she wouldn’t do.”

CentroMed CEO Ernesto Gómez said he’s not surprised Cortez’s work is drawing national recognition. Cortez and her staff frequently worked until 11 p.m. or midnight during open enrollment periods to get people signed up for health coverage, he recalled.

“Often federal officials have made contact with her to get a read of how enrollment activities are going here in San Antonio,” Gómez said. “She and her staff have just really done a stellar job.”

Cortez supervises 14 CentroMed employees year round, Gómez said. During open enrollment periods, when some temporary employees join the nonprofit to assist with the crush of signups, she leads up to 30 workers at times, he added.

An estimated 297,742 Bexar County residents don’t have health insurance, according to data the U.S. Census Bureau released in September from its 2014 American Community Survey One-Year Estimates. Statewide, the number was estimated to reach more than 5 million people — roughly 19 percent of the population, according to that census data.

Enroll SA is now in the process of updating Bexar County’s uninsured rate, but that number was not available Monday, Ibarra said.

pohare@express-news.net

Your browser does not support the iframe HTML tag. Try viewing this in a modern browser like Chrome, Safari, Firefox or Internet Explorer 9 or later.