A little-known state health-care option for small business owners has gained ground over the past two months since it was first introduced, and it not only offers tax credits but an escape door for what has become known as the “dependent trap.”

Through My Arkansas Insurance’s SHOP, an acronym for “small business health insurance options program,” small businesses with 50 or fewer employees can offer their workers an insurance plan with options that include the ability to choose different deductibles than other employees.

Another option is not to have the employees’ dependents on their plan, fixing a loophole from the federal system that had required dependents to be on the employees’ plan at high premiums.

Although small businesses with 50 or fewer employees are not required to provide health coverage to their employees under the Affordable Care Act, those who want to provide coverage run into premiums for dependents that were more than $1,000 a month in many cases.

With coverage under SHOP’s “Employee Only” enrollment option, an employee’s dependents are free to go through the Health Insurance Marketplace and in turn seek subsidies for more affordable health care, according to Bruce Donaldson, broker/navigator outreach manager for the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace.

So far, only 25 small businesses in the state have signed up for health care through SHOP, accounting for about 217 people. Many agents reached for this article said the number is low because the program is simply not widely known yet.

According to figures released Wednesday, more than 125 businesses have started the enrollment process through the website MyARInsurance.com.

Arkansas SHOP, offered under the My Arkansas Insurance brand, opened for business on Nov. 1, and coverage for enrolled small businesses became effective on Jan. 1.

There is no deadline to sign up for future coverage on SHOP, Donaldson added.

Donaldson said the roll out on SHOP has been a “good start” for a new program and has at least seen a better start than the federal SHOP program, which signed up 28 businesses over the past two years.

Byron Ware of Ware Insurance & Financial Services in Fort Smith is one of 104 agents in the state qualified by the Arkansas Insurance Department to sign up businesses onto SHOP. He says that while the rates are not different through SHOP, a big advantage to the program is a sliding scale to offer tax credits to small businesses.

“We just signed up a small business this week and their accountant said the business owner was going to save $6,000 in tax credits on his taxes for 2016,” Ware said. “This guy was paying 100 percent of his seven employees’ premiums though.”

Three variables are taken into consideration on those tax credits, Ware explained: How much the employee is paying, how many employees there are and what their income is. There is a sliding for what kind of tax credits employers can expect.

The one drawback so far to SHOP is that there is only one carrier on the system, Blue Cross Blue Shield. Ware said when the program gets more developed other carriers might jump on board to provide more competition and options.

Stephanie Freeman, an independent insurance agent who is also approved to sign up small businesses on SHOP, said her agency has dealt with companies that qualify for SHOP but are not willing to give up their “grandfathered plans.” However, it’s worth looking into, she says.

“In my opinion, the primary reason a business would seek coverage through the SHOP is for the tax benefits if applicable,” Freeman wrote in an email. “The tax credit is worth up to 50 percent of the employer contribution toward the employees’ premiums for low to moderate wage workers (up to 35 percent for tax-exempt employers). The tax credit is highest for companies with fewer than 10 employees whose average annual salary is $25,000 or less.”

While insurance carriers outside the SHOP marketplace require businesses to pay 50 percent of the “employee only” rate, SHOP employers can pay as little as nothing. However, in order to receive tax credits, business owner must pay at least 50 percent of the “Employee Only” premium, Donaldson explained.

To qualify for the tax credit, all of the following must apply: Employer has fewer than 25 full-time equivalent (FTE) employees; average employee salary is about $50,000 per year or less; employer pays at least 50 percent of the full-time employees’ premium costs; and employer offers coverage to the full-time employees through the SHOP Marketplace.

Another issue Freeman says they have discovered is that employers don’t like the added complication of having to consider whether it will raise their insurance costs if they are able to give their employees a raise during the year, or if employees work more overtime than expected increasing their annual pay.

Small businesses can find a list of the 104 qualified SHOP agents and brokers at www.MyARInsurance.com and clicking on the “Find An Agent/Broker” icon at the top of the page. There are other tools at the website to help out those researching the program.