Will Butcher and his under-20 American all-star team practiced Thursday at the Bell Centre in Montreal and were scheduled to go to the movies and watch a Christmas showing of “Unbroken.”

Team USA will play its 2015 World Junior Championship opener Friday against Finland, the defending tournament champion, at 1 p.m. MST at the Montreal Canadiens’ arena. All U.S. games at the Bell Centre or Toronto’s Air Canada Centre will be televised by the NHL Network.

Butcher, an Avalanche-drafted sophomore defenseman for the University of Denver, is among six U.S. veterans from the 2014 WJC team. He is serving as an alternate captain, along with forward John Hayden, under captain Jack Eichel. Hayden (a sophomore at Yale) and Eichel (a freshman forward at Boston University) are among 16 NCAA players on the 24-man roster. The other eight play under the Canadian Hockey League’s major-junior umbrella or will begin playing NCAA or major-junior hockey next season.

“This team is a close-knit group that I believe can jell and become a gold medal contender,” Butcher, 19, said via text Thursday. “I am very proud to represent my country. It’s always a huge honor. The WJC is a big stage that I’m fortunate to be a part of.”

Butcher, from Sun Prairie, Wis., is partnered with 18-year-old Brandon Carlo of Colorado Springs at even strength. The 6-foot-5 Carlo played his midget hockey for the Colorado Thunderbirds and is in his second season with the Tri-City Americans of the Western Hockey League (major junior).

Butcher was selected by the Avalanche in the fifth round (123rd overall) of the 2013 NHL draft. Carlo will be eligible for the draft next summer.

Butcher is the Avs’ only WJC participant this year, another example of how they haven’t drafted well outside the first round recently. Nathan MacKinnon, the Avs’ first pick in the 2013 draft (first overall), is eligible to play for Canada but, for the second consecutive year, the 19-year-old’s NHL contract will prevent his WJC participation.

The 5-10, 200-pound Butcher probably will sign with the Avalanche within the next 2½ years, possibly before his senior year. He has eight points (two goals) in 15 games as one of DU’s youngest players.

“It’s pretty special to play in a city like Denver,” Butcher said. “Being able to enjoy the city and its attractions have been an awesome experience. Having the team that drafted me right down the road is also something that helps motivate me to reaching my goal of playing professional hockey.”

Team USA’s final Group A preliminary game is Wednesday against Canada in Montreal, and the Pioneers aren’t expecting Butcher to rejoin them when they resume play from the holiday break Jan. 2 at Dartmouth. The WJC quarterfinals also begin Jan. 2, and the Americans are expected to be there.

At the 2014 tournament in Malmo, Sweden, Team USA went 3-1 before losing to Russia 5-3 in the quarterfinals and failing to medal. Finland defeated Sweden 3-2 in overtime for the gold medal and Russia upset Canada 2-1 for the bronze.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers