Duck Dynasty's Phil Robertson is not the worst news for gays.

It’s amazing how much this Christmas season has been dominated by the words of a big man with a fulsome head of hair and a huge, flowing beard. Santa Claus? No, Phil Robertson.

The “reality TV” star landed in a cauldron of duck soup thanks to his comments on homosexuality. How odd that so many fret so much about his views and so little about others who target gay people.

Robertson told GQ, “Neither the adulterers, the idolaters, the male prostitutes, the homosexual offenders, the greedy, the drunkards, the slanderers, the swindlers — they won’t inherit the kingdom of God.” The leading man of A&E’s Duck Dynasty added: “It seems like, to me, a vagina — as a man — would be more desirable than a man’s anus. That’s just me. I’m just thinking: There’s more there! She’s got more to offer. I mean, come on, dudes! You know what I’m saying? But hey, sin: It’s not logical, my man. It’s just not logical.”

Fair enough. Like karaoke, the male posterior is not for everyone. But Robertson would have suffered less grief had he focused on religion and not drifted into sexual mechanics. Still, this story should not have exceeded 90 seconds on Entertainment Tonight.

Amid transcontinental flights, Christmas carols, and family gatherings, America became obsessed with the pronouncements of a man who resembles Mullah Omar. (Why is someone so epically ungroomed in GQ anyway?) Is Phil Robertson the governor of Louisiana? Is he a U.S. senator? Does he run Apple?

Nope. Robertson makes duck calls.

Whether he finds male anuses erotic, repugnant, or neutral — as Hillary Clinton might ask — “What difference, at this point, does it make?”

Indeed, America has bigger ducks to shoot.

Obamacare promoters are desperate to recruit gay men among the “young invincibles” without whose premium payments Obama’s entire contraption will collapse. So Out2Enroll’s new Internet ad shows bare-chested men in skintight red and green briefs. They dance, decorate a Christmas tree, and generally look hot for each other. They seemingly marched in from a Gay Pride parade. This “Full Frontal Freedom Production” features precisely zero gay men in suits at work, in jeans doing home repairs, or in boots climbing mountains. Perhaps such images were insufficiently fabulous for Obamacare’s overlords.

Scene from Obamacare ad aimed at gay Americans.

“As a self-proclaimed ‘fierce advocate’ of gay equality, President Obama would do well to distance himself from this nonsense and denounce it immediately,” said Log Cabin Republicans executive director Gregory T. Angelo. “This ad is also an example of the Left promoting harmful stereotypes that gay men are nothing more than sex-crazed lechers. If anyone on the Right made such a comparison, liberals would be apoplectic.”

Indeed, if Obamacare marketers pitched Hispanics, they would not depict the Gomezes in sombreros sleeping beside giant cacti. A Jewish outreach campaign would not feature the Goldberg family kvetching about health care while counting money.

Shame on Team Obamacare for advancing gay stereotypes!

Those who screamed about Robertson and snored through this Obamacare commercial should denounce Uganda’s new legislation that would boost imprisonment for “aggravated homosexuality” from 14 years to life. This bill, strangely enough, diluted the sponsors’ original intent: They wanted the death penalty. This measure awaits President Yoweri Museveni’s signature.

Gambian president Yahya Jammeh, before the United Nations General Assembly last September, condemned “homosexuality in all its forms and manifestations which though very evil, antihuman as well as anti-Allah, is being promoted as a human right by some powers. . . . Those who promote homosexuality want to put an end to human existence. It is becoming an epidemic, and we Muslims and Africans will fight to end this behavior.”

Meanwhile, the State Department’s 2012 human-rights report explains that in Saudi Arabia “consensual same-sex sexual conduct is punishable by death or flogging.” Iran, Mauritania, Sudan, and Yemen also consider homosexuality a capital crime, London’s Daily Mail reports. (Since 1998, in contrast, Israel has let openly gay soldiers go to war. It otherwise leaves gays in peace.)

Let’s rechannel the rage against Phil Robertson and reject Uganda’s and Gambia’s virulent anti-gay hatred as well as the Islamic regimes that celebrate the diversity of their gay citizens via execution.

Source: Daily Mail (London), October 8, 2013.

— Deroy Murdock is a New York-based Fox News contributor and a media fellow with the Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace at Stanford University.