Topics: Anxiety, depression, Procrastination, Psychology, Psychology Today, Life News

This originally appeared on Psychology Today

Imagine the following scenario: You’re running late for an important meeting. You’ve overslept because the alarm app on your phone needs to be updated. You can’t find two matching clean socks because you haven’t addressed the laundry situation in more than three weeks. To top it off, you just realized you never opened that letter from the insurance company that came a month ago and now you have a doctor’s appointment this afternoon with no new insurance card to present.

Every one of these details got overlooked because you put off taking care of them. Something better came up. You didn’t feel like it. It was boring. You procrastinated, and now you’re frustrated.

Does any of this sound familiar?

We all procrastinate sometimes, and the basic causes are well-documented: As humans, we are naturally drawn to novelty; new and interesting activities and objects stimulate our pleasure centers, while routine and mundane tasks have just the opposite effect. Some people find that they are chronic procrastinators, unable to complete any mundane task no matter how vital it may be to their daily functioning. Their idea of “self-care” may include a new membership to the climbing gym, but at the same time they might neglect items like laundry, grocery shopping, bill paying, and household chores.

Chronic procrastinators may be sad, angry, or depressed about aspects of their lives. These moods interfere with concentration and focus. Other people may suffer from an attentional problem, like ADD, and find it nearly impossible to start and stay on task.

But are there other emotions or mental states that accompany chronic procrastination?

It’s possible that when we put off certain tasks, it’s because we do not wish to identify with what those tasks might imply—a conventional, routine, and unexciting life. Behaving like the sort of person who would prioritize such quotidian matters interferes with an identity built on imagination, creativity, and spontaneity—in short, the hallmarks of youth.