After 15 months in the doldrums, Republicans feel like they’re getting their mojo back. GOP confident of Senate takeover

At an annual gathering of Republican bigwigs in Florida a year ago, a top GOP strategist was chided after he gave a presentation about how his party would win the Senate in 2014, including a handout that blared “MAJORITY” in red.

“Stop saying majority,” donors, consultants and even some senators told National Republican Senatorial Committee Executive Director Rob Collins, he recalled in an interview. “Just say you’re going to be able to pick up a few seats.”

Story Continued Below

Fast forward to early this month, when the annual event took place again at the same posh Palm Beach resort. Far from preaching caution, many of the 400 donors in attendance openly mused about what a Republican Senate would bring, and Collins was the one trying to keep expectations in check.

( PHOTOS: Senators up for election in 2014)

After 15 months in the doldrums, Republicans feel like they’re finally getting their mojo back.

Emboldened by the president’s weak poll numbers, the botched Obamacare rollout and a still-sputtering economy, GOP donors and operatives are increasingly bullish about their prospects in the midterm election — most of all capturing the Senate. Seats that a year ago looked like sure bets for Democrats now have the makings of real races — in states such as Michigan, Virginia, and, if former Republican Sen. Scott Brown runs, New Hampshire.

Worries last fall that the party would pay a heavy price at the ballot box for forcing the government to shut down have faded as quickly as attention has shifted to frustration with the health care law.

No one is saying that the party has solved its underlying problems — deep distrust between the establishment and tea party wings, and the disconnect with young and minority voters that was on display in 2012. And Republicans were similarly optimistic in 2010 and 2012 about retaking the Senate until poor candidates blew winnable races.

( PHOTOS: Governors’ offices up for grabs in 2014)

But there’s a palpable sense of optimism that 2014 will be the GOP’s year.

“People like to hang out with winners, and it feels right now as though Republicans — unlike the early part of last year — have found their sea legs and have a bit of wind at their back,” said New York investment banker and major GOP donor Jeffrey Berenson.

After getting outraised by $16 million last year, the NRSC announced recently that it collected just slightly more money than its Democratic counterpart in December. Leaders of the major conservative outside groups say that skittish donors have started to open their checkbooks with the new year after a lackluster fundraising haul in 2013.

And in a huge boon for the Republican effort, Americans for Prosperity, the group funded by the billionaire Koch brothers, has spent tens of millions of dollars already targeting vulnerable Democratic incumbents on Obamacare. That’s an unusually high level of engagement so long before Election Day.

( PHOTOS: Republican 2016 contenders)

Even with the improved environment this year, the party’s chances are still roughly 50-50, according to several election handicappers. And there is concern that contentious primaries — in states such as Georgia, Iowa, Alaska and North Carolina — will again yield nominees who can’t win a general election.

“While the mood has changed, we still have significant work to bring that about,” said NRSC Chairman Jerry Moran, a senator from Kansas.

“We could still blow it and end up hurting ourselves in some way,” added Collins. “But after last year — a rough fundraising environment, the shutdown and disagreements on the right — now people from all sides are starting to come around. … We’ve just got to go out and earn it.”

Democrats say Republican candidates haven’t put up the kind of eye-popping fundraising numbers that back up the rhetoric about a party on the march. They also caution that the election landscape is too unsettled to forecast big GOP gains; it remains to be seen whether Republican candidates in key battlegrounds such as Arkansas, Louisiana and North Carolina have what it takes to unseat incumbents.

( PHOTOS: Who's leaving Congress?)

“This is exactly what they said two years ago, and once again Republican mentality and reality are two very different things,” said Matt Canter, deputy executive director of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee. “The additional problem for Republicans this time is that voters understand that a Senate bought and paid for by the Koch brothers is not one that is good for their family.”

It’s hard to overstate how burned major GOP donors felt after Mitt Romney’s defeat and the party’s loss of Senate seats in 2012.

The poor morale continued through last year, hitting bottom during the two-week government shutdown in October. Donors were aghast at how party leaders acquiesced to the tea party wing of the GOP led by Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas).

Once the shutdown ended and attention shifted to Obamacare, though, the mood brightened. But it wasn’t just the health care law that lifted the party’s spirits.