LOS ANGELES — A couple of years ago, I was sitting at the bar having dinner in a cozy Italian restaurant in Milwaukee, just across the street from the Rockies’ team hotel. The bartender started talking about the players she had met, mentioning in particular a pitcher who was — her words, not mine — “tall, very good looking and polite.”

While I was trying to figure out who she was talking about, she mentioned that this certain pitcher came in with another guy who had a thick, dark goatee. She was talking about Todd Helton, of course, whose best buddy was Matt Belisle.

The bartender was quite smitten with Belisle, saying, “I’m going to marry him some day. He’s such a gentleman.”

“Such a gentleman?” When’s the last time you heard that expression? When’s the last time you heard that expression in the realm of sports?

OK, maybe somebody used it to describe Derek Jeter, who plays his final game for the Yankees on Sunday at Boston’s Fenway Park.

“Gentleman” seems to have become a forgotten word, but it perfectly describes two men who will likely play their final game in a Rockies uniform Sunday afternoon at Dodger Stadium.

Belisle, a righty reliever, has been with the Rockies for six seasons; outfielder Michael Cuddyer for three. These are two men who cherish the game and respect their teammates; two men who recognize they are blessed with rare athletic gifts; two men who never take being a big-leaguer for granted. They work their tails off every day they come to the ballpark.

It’s been a rough season for both, but never once have they been rude to the media, made excuses or dodged questions.

Belisle had been a Colorado workhorse, averaging just more than 79 innings pitched per year from 2010-13. But the workhorse broke down this season. Belisle’s fastball lost velocity and his breaking ball lost its bite. As a result, Belisle’s ERA shot up to 5.03 entering Friday and he lost his role as a primary weapon in the bullpen. In retrospect, the Rockies made a big mistake in picking up his $4.2 million option.

Early in the season, after giving up a crucial home run in an 11-inning loss to San Francisco, Belisle shouldered the blame and said, “My challenge, to get past this and do my job for my teammates. It is my job and I understand that, and I have to get results.”

His professionalism in the wake of personal failure was refreshing.

Cuddyer entered the weekend hitting .335 with 10 homers, despite playing in just 47 games. Cuddyer, 35, has missed significant time this season, the result of a fractured left shoulder socket and two hamstring injuries.

Hard-core baseball fan will tell you Cuddyer’s three-year, $32.5 contract was a mistake. The critics point to Cuddyer’s limited range as an outfielder and injury-marred seasons in 2012 and 2014. The criticism has validity.

But the number crunchers don’t see Cuddyer’s presence in the clubhouse — organizing fantasy football leagues and NCAA pools, playing cards with anybody and everybody in spring training. He’s a catalyst that can make a good team great.

As manager Walt Weiss has said more than once: “If a young player wants to understand how to be a pro, I tell them to watch ‘Cuddy’ and do what he does.”

Weiss wants Cuddyer to return, though the Rockies’ economic realities make that unlikely. Perhaps Cuddyer will return to the American League and thrive as a designated hitter and part-time first baseman/outfielder.

Look, I know it’s been a lousy season for Rockies fans and players. There hasn’t been much good to cheer about — or to write about. But Belisle and Cuddyer held their heads high and were true pros.

So, in case I don’t get to tell them in person, thank you, gentlemen.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp