President Obama already has his likeness emblazoned on almost as many T-shirts as Argentine revolutionary Che Guevara. But there’s been a recent wave of trademark applications inspired by the health-care plan nicknamed after him—everything from a television talk show to undergarments.

In recent months, half a dozen trademark applications with the word “Obamacare” were filed with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. Some were registered by insurers or human resources professionals for educational purposes, while others target Americans fervently opposed to the law. The “Obamacare Calculator,” a tool that appears designed to help people navigate the plan’s complex options, was filed in August by Trendsetter, a Rockwall, Tex.-based human resources firm. Meanwhile, “Obamacare. Run For Your Life,” a proposal for sports clothing and events, has already been abandoned. But lawyers expect more. “Trademark filings always mirror pop culture,” says Lara Pearson, a trademark attorney in Incline Village, Nev.

One of the most provocative applications was filed in July for “Destroy Obamacare” T-shirts. The slogan is surrounded by a stethoscope attached to a stick of dynamite. The shirts are already being sold by Damon Kirin, an attorney in New Orleans, for $20 each — $2 of which will be donated to St. Jude’s Children’s Hospital in Memphis until the government shutdown ends. “I don’t really have a particular desire to have Obamacare destroyed or saved,” he says. In fact, Kirin promises that a “Save Obamacare” shirt is also in the works. “I like helping people express their view,” he says. “There’s been so much rhetoric about it. Look what’s just happened: The federal government has shut down because of Obamacare.”

“Save Obamacare” shirts are being sold by Damon Kirin, an attorney in New Orleans.

Some filers say they hope the trademarks will help Americans sign up for insurance. Fiorella’s “Obamacare Enrollment Team,” a marketing banner for agents to help consumers, is already up and running. “There’s an overwhelming lack of understanding on health-care reform as a whole,” says Cory Lloyd, vice-president of operations at Fiorella. “Most people don’t realize they will have to carry health insurance and that there are subsidies out there for them.” Only one-quarter of Americans understand Obamacare “very well,” according to a Pew Research Center poll last month. A trademark application for “How Obamacare Works,” a proposed TV talk show broadcast, was filed by a lawyer in Zionsvile, Indiana.

Another more serious filing registered with the Patent and Trademark Office is an interactive learning tool: “Affordable Care Act University.” The tool was launched in March for the 32,000-strong members of the International Foundation of Employee Benefit Plans, a non-profit educational association in Brookfield, Wis. “We decided that it was such an important issue for our membership base that we would provide them a 24/7 resource for Affordable Care Act,” says Michael Wilson, CEO of the International Foundation. The virtual “university” has webcasts, white papers, surveys and question-and-answer sections about how Obamacare impacts the health care plans of its members.

Under trademark law, however, most of these applications might not hold up, legal experts say. “The Affordable Care Act University could work, but the only way you can register trademarks like “Obamacare” that consist of a living individual’s name is to get their express consent,” says Michael De Biase, intellectual property lawyer in Fort Lauderdale. As the latter references the president, he says, that might prove difficult. Pearson agrees. The Affordable Care Act University could be allowed though with a disclaimer stating that, because those words are so common, others should be able to use them as part of their trademarks too.

There have been some recent precedents blocking Obama-related trademarks. In 2010, the Trade Trial and Appeal Board refused to register a collection of nightwear and briefs under the names “Obama Bahama Pajamas,” “Obama Pajama” and “Barack’s Jocks.” The triple-threat trademarks were filed by Richard Hoefflin, a Westlake Village, Calif. litigation attorney. (Hoefflin was unavailable for comment.) “I am surprised by the number of attorneys who file applications for Obama marks when the rules clearly state that this is not allowed,” Pearson says. But this in itself doesn’t prevent the production of Obama Pajamas. “It doesn’t mean you can’t use the term,” De Biase says. “You just don’t have exclusive rights to it.”

More from MarketWatch