“We’ll Meet Again” was picked as Stephen Colbert’s farewell song for The Colbert Report, and while the star-studded performance featured people like George Lucas and Bill Clinton to name a few, it seems they’re one person short. An audio recording surfaced of President Barack Obama rehearsing the song with Colbert during the taping of the show’s December 8 episode. Colbert and Obama were singing the song backstage, not realizing that their microphones were still on.

However, Obama’s duet with Colbert didn’t make it to the show’s final broadcast.

Despite that, Obama was still a big part of Colbert’s farewell lap, with the TV host choosing the President of The United States as the guest for one of his final shows before he takes over The Late Show. The two had an undeniable rapport that was apparent ever since his first guest appearance, way before Obama became president.

Earlier in the episode, President Obama took over Colbert’s “The Word” segment.

“You’ve been taking a lot of shots at my job, I’ve decided to take a shot at yours,” Obama said before starting the monologue. He poked fun at the Republicans, Obamacare, and even himself. “Nation,” Obama began in true Colbert fashion. “As you know, I, Stephen Colbert, have never cared for our president. That guy is so arrogant. I bet he talks about himself in the third person.”

After the skit, Obama returned for a more traditional interview.

“When I go home, Michelle, Malia and Sasha give me a hard time,” he told Colbert. “There are no trumpets, and they tease me mercilessly.” In an example of the good-natured ribbing Colbert is known for, he made fun of Obama’s string of civilian nominees for the secretary of defense. “You have employed a lot of people – mostly as secretary of defense,” Obama joked.

The episode, which was taped at George Washington University, was a special episode Colbert dubbed: “Stephen Colbert Presents: Mr. Colbert Goes to Washington D.C. Ya Later, Legislator; Partisan is Such Sweet Sorrow: A Colbert Victory Lap.”

Before making a name for himself as the host of The Colbert Report, Stephen Colbert was an improv comic and comedy writer who began his career at the famed Second City improv theater. In 1997, he joined the cast of The Daily Show as the fictional conservative pundit named… Stephen Colbert. His tenure lasted until 2005, when Comedy Central gave Colbert his own show.

[Image via YouTube]