The grand jury system has played a pivotal role in the American court system. Grand juries have made decisions in a variety of case, including abuse of power -- as in the indictment of former Gov. Rick Perry -- and drug and murder charges.

From the inception of the grand jury system in the United States Supreme Court more than 200 years ago until 1968, grand juries were impaneled by judge-appointed commissioners who select juries, informally known as the “key-man” system.

Texas is the only state in the nation that continues to use the key-man system instead of random selection.

However, the key-man method has come under the microscope this legislative session. Earlier this month, the Texas Senate Committee on Criminal Justice voted to move forward on a bill -- proposed by Sen. John Whitmire, D-Houston -- that would prohibit the use of the key-man system. Currently, Texas judges can choose whether to use the key-man system or random selection for impaneling grand jurors.

Critics of the key-man system contend that such a system is antiquated and, if abused, unjust. The system potentially leaves room for judges to choose commissioners who they know might select a grand jury with a certain bias. Often, critics say, these commissioners have a pro law-enforcement bent, which can be problematic in officer-involved shootings.

In a 2003 case in Harris County, a grand jury investigated a case involving the fatal shooting of a Houston police officer. Alfred Brown was convicted and sentenced to death row, but grand jury testimony released years later revealed that the jurors, who included a police officer, might have gone into the proceedings thinking Brown was guilty.

The perception that judges handpick grand jurors through commissioners can erode the public’s faith in the grand jury system, according to Whitmire. That is reason enough for reform, he said during commission meetings.

In a study published by the Criminal Justice Department of the University of House, Larry Karson shows that, in randomly selected juries, fewer law enforcement agents have been indicted.

“The suspicion, no matter how unjust, will always be that of ‘one hand washing the other’ and that, with the exception of truly egregious cases, no officer will be indicted for killing the persons they are sworn to protect,” the study says. “When the community fails to perceive that the social control mechanisms are fair and just, they no longer will deem it appropriate to live by its norms, rules and laws.”

However, the key-man system has also proven to speed up the court process. In the random selection process, all candidates must be individually interviewed for eligibility, a process that becomes burdensome for court administration. The key-method allows for a panel of individuals to be selected who already have an understanding of the judicial system, according to Karson's study.

Moreover, getting citizens to appear to trial jury duty, which is only a two- or three-day commitment, is already a hard sell. In Midland County, where the issue of jury duty truancy has become so problematic that the sheriff has had to personally escort summoned jurors to the courtroom, county officials see little success in filling out a full grand jury, which is a two- to three-month commitment. One-fifth of Midland County residents summoned for jury duty actually show up, according to a previous Reporter-Telegram report.

“From a district attorney’s perspective, it will make it more difficult for us to be assured that we have a true reflection of the make-up of our county as far as diversity, other than just whoever showed up that day,” said Midland County District Attorney Teresa Clingman, who does not support the proposed bill. “What they want to go to a random wheel to select just whoever shows up, basically.”

The bill go before the full Senate on Monday.

Attempts to reach Midland County district judges were not successful.