“We are delighted to have the opportunity to serve more members of our community.”

Dr. Raymond Rion received a fantastic surprise Tuesday afternoon.

The Packard Health director got a call from Congresswoman Debbie Dingell's office alerting him that the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services awarded the nonprofit a grant worth hundreds of thousands of dollars to open a new clinic in Ypsilanti.

"To be honest, it was pretty unexpected," he said. "We had put in a grant application last fall but then we weren't in the initial list of winners in May and the announcement of a second group was kept very under wraps."

The Ann Arbor-based Federally Qualified Health Center primarily serves uninsured patients and those covered by Medicaid or Medicare.

"We are first and foremost a safety net medical center," he said. "So we have a sliding fee scale that's part of the program and ensures that people without insurance can get the health care they need."

Packard Health operates two clinics—its main location is on Packard Road east of Platt and a west office at the corner of Dexter Avenue and Maple Road.

The $650,000 in renewable annual grant funding will help open an office in Ypsilanti and expand medical care at the Delonis Center in downtown Ann Arbor. The new Ypsilanti location will be located on Arnet Street adjacent to the Forest Health Medical Center.

"Every American deserves access to quality, affordable health care," Rep. Dingell, D-Dearborn, said in a statement.

"Packard Health and other community health centers play a vital role in ensuring our most needy citizens can obtain the care they need. This funding will help Packard Health expand their services and reach even more Michigan families."

Packard Health was one of 266 Health Centers to receive funding Tuesday from the Affordable Care Act, including four other centers in the state of Michigan. The funding was announced by the Department of Health and Human Services during National Health Center week.

"Health centers now provide primary care to one in fourteen people living in the United States," Health Resources and Services Administration acting administrator Jim Macrae said in a statement. "These awards mean that more communities than ever can count on a health center to help meet the increasing demand for primary care."

Rion said Packard Health sees more than 7,000 patients every year and has more than 20,000 patient visits at its two clinics. The organization's grant proposal estimated the new Ypsilanti and Delonis Center locations would bring an additional 3,000 patients to the center.

"I hope it's even more than that," Rion said. "And I think we'll really be serving the populations we were designed to serve with these new locations."

The Delonis Center already has a medical center directed by Packard Health physician Dr. Ankoor Stoni. The grant will allow for the center to be brought under the direct control of the larger organization.

"It's always been dependent on limited-time grant funds, donated money and donated time," Rion said. "Now we can make sure that the clinic is sustainable and offering good quality care."

The new grant is does not have a specific expiration date and will be funded in perpetuity as long as congress allocates funds for the program. The Packard Health Center's current offices see a higher proportion of patients with commercial insurance than man other federally qualified health centers around the country. Rion said he believes the locations that will be added with grant funding will help the center increase its focus on the population most in need of quality and affordable care.

"The funding allows us to reach out to vulnerable homeless clients and integrate their care into an established primary care practice," he said. "We are delighted to have the opportunity to serve more members of our community."

Opening the new Ypsilanti center will include hiring multiple physicians and nurse practitioners as well as support staff. The Delonis Center clinic will employ a half-time or three-quarter-time doctor.

Ben Freed is a general assignments reporter for The Ann Arbor News. Email him at benfreed@mlive.com and follow him on twitter at @BFreedinA2. He also answers the phone at 734-623-2528.