Denial of federal matching funds expected by Casa Grande Regional Medical Center has caused the hospital to pursue reorganization that could include a sale, at least in part.

The hospital had pursued funds totaling $7 million for the year ending last June 30 and $4 million for the first half of its current fiscal year, through Dec. 31. The funds would have come through a match of an assessment the hospital would have placed on itself through a Casa Grande city ordinance.

Obtaining the funds was seen as crucial for a restructuring of the hospital’s debt through the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, which recently was denied as well, said Rona Curphy, president and CEO of the hospital. The restructuring would have saved $2 million a year.

“CGRMC is now considering potential partners that could help maintain and expand the CGRMC mission as a community medical center,” she said in a prepared statement released to the public Thursday. “The board of CGRMC and the management team are excited about the potential strength a new partner can bring to enhance the medical services provided to the Casa Grande community.”

Curphy said the reorganization could take various forms and would be the subject of negotiations. That might mean a sale of less than 100 percent ownership.

“CGRMC is considering all options at the present time, and it is the objective of the board of CGRMC and the management team to preserve the hospital and its mission moving forward.”

Curphy said she could not say more because the hospital has financing through publicly traded bonds, which are subject to federal rules against unauthorized release of information.

The hospital has struggled with unpaid bills for care of $13 million in the year ending June 30, 2011, $27 million in fiscal 2012 and a staggering $42 million in fiscal 2013.

In light of this challenge, the hospital was one of many lobbying for an expansion of AHCCCS, the state’s Medicaid system. That was granted in controversial legislation approved by the Legislature earlier this year and signed by Gov. Jan. Brewer. The additional federal funds will come after Jan. 1, but the earlier losses have been devastating.

Despite the fact that advocates for expansion of AHCCCS had gained support from rural hospitals, the only institutions getting approval for the interim “Access to Care” ordinances were under the umbrella of a Phoenix ordinance, including most of the institutions in that city. That approval came two years ago.

Denial of matching funds for the self-assessment was not communicated to CGRMC directly but came through a congressional office, Curphy said. The decision was made by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, previously known as the Health Care Financing Administration, a federal agency within the Health and Human Services Department that administers the Medicare program and works in partnership with state governments to administer Medicaid. Curphy said AHCCCS had recommended the denial.

The CGRMC statement says reorganization of the hospital is “in keeping with the recent trend of freestanding hospitals across the nation considering alternative forms of organization given the trends sparked by the adoption and implementation of the Affordable Care Act.”

Curphy said she released the prepared statement to bond holders on Tuesday and to hospital employees on Wednesday.

“I am very committed to this hospital and committed to this community,” she said.

The nonprofit hospital was built originally in the early 1950s at Florence Boulevard and Trekell Road and replaced with the new CGRMC farther east on Florence Boulevard nearly three decades ago. That was done in a partnership with a Phoenix-based hospital group, but the local CGRMC board a few years later took steps to refinance and maintain its independence.

The hospital has won a number of awards for patient care and employee satisfaction and has gradually recruited more specialist doctors.