President Obama’s 2012 re-election campaign was lauded for its social-media savvy.

After all, four years of economic malaise, anger over ObamaCare and a Middle East on fire and only getting worse — and Obama’s official tweeters still spun their way to victory. Facts were uninteresting. Hashtags ruled.

Actually governing once the election is over, however, should be a whole different ballgame.

Yet the Obama administration’s campaign Twitter habits never went away.

When more than 200 Nigerian schoolgirls were abducted by the terrorist group Boko Haram in 2014, the wife of the leader of the most powerful country on earth was left to hashtag her outrage.

First Lady Michelle Obama tweeted a picture of herself holding a sign that said “#bringbackourgirls” while looking helplessly into the camera.

But the State Department remains the worst practitioner of faux-action.

Marie Harf, the freshly departed deputy State Department spokeswoman, spends an enormous amount of time trying to win Twitter battles.

Harf recently went after The New York Times’ David Sanger for saying that Iran’s continued enrichment was a diplomatic hurdle for US negotiators trying to strike a nuclear deal with the Islamic Republic.

At 7:25 a.m. on June 3, Harf hit Sanger with a series of nine tweets. By 7:30 a.m. she was so consumed with beating back media criticism of her partisan political team that she started defending Iran to prove her point:

“.@SangerNYT And you insinuate Iran is doing something it’s not supposed to do under the JPOA or in violation of its obligations – not true.”

“.@SangerNYT Bottom lines: We know exactly what’s going on, Iran has agreed to reduce to 300kg in final deal, program frozen/complying w/JPOA.”

After literally hundreds of tweets, retweets and comments from people shocked that a US spokeswoman would explicitly say Iran was complying with its obligations, Harf made her final tweet at 7:49 a.m.:

“Not defending Iran, defending the JPOA we negotiated with Iran and making clear we’ve all been in compliance. V different things.”

Harf was so recklessly and relentlessly defending diplomacy that she lost it — and confirmed what many could see was a huge Obama administration mistake: believing that Iran is being truthful.

Harf morphed into Iran’s spokeswoman in an effort to win an argument.

Arguably worse than Harf is US Ambassador to the United Nations Samantha Power.

Power recently tweeted that something should be done about the crises in Syria and Yemen:

“Over 50m ppl are displaced worldwide, the highest number since 1945. W/ISIL, Syrian regime, S.Sudan etc, aid community struggling to keep up . . .

“Dire situation in #Yemen: @WFP says 5 governates running out of food. UN warns humanitarian pauses nec to avoid ‘looming human catastrophe’ . . .

“In #UNSC mtg on #Syria chemical weapons attacks: it’s not enough to simply verify chemicals used, that’s already painfully obvious.”

It’s as if she doesn’t know she’s one of the Leader of the Free World’s Cabinet-level advisers.

Public pronouncements from US officials should be believable because they emphasize a policy the public already knows.

Using Twitter or Facebook as a tool of outrage amounts to shallow activism for people with actual power.

Cabinet officials shouldn’t spin our adversaries’ actions. Nor should they pretend they’re on the campaign trail.

Press releases, statements, on-the-record briefings and tweets should not replace action — or genuine interaction.

French Ambassador to the United States Gérard Araud does Twitter right. His feed is poignant, funny, scathing and educational. Everything he writes supports French policy in a creative way.

These days “ambassadors don’t have access” to the president himself, Araud told Maureen Dowd.

But he knows how to get the attention of American officials. “If I was the ambassador to the US repeating every day how much Lafayette was great and how much the friendship between the two countries is exciting, I’m not sure it would be of any use,” he said.

“So the diplomat has to be more personal, which is also, in a sense, more dangerous.

There is such a noise in terms of information flowing that to be heard, in a sense, you have to shout a bit.”

What Araud has, besides the understanding that modern diplomats shouldn’t always be so diplomatic, is a strategy for communicating messages clearly and engagingly that furthers the aims of French foreign policy.

Unfortunately, for this Obama team, hashtags are the policy. The next step after an election based on Hope is governing the Change. Team Obama is still stuck in campaign mode, as the world turns — and burns.

Richard Grenell was Spokesman to four US ambassadors to the UN serving from 2001-2008.