Pennsylvanians could face higher costs for medical care if Anthem Inc. and Cigna Corp. merge into the nation’s largest health insurer, a statewide hospital group warned Monday.

The Hospital & Healthsystem Association of Pennsylvania echoed worries from the American Hospital Association, the industry’s largest lobbying group, which pressed regulators last week to scrutinize whether the deal would inflate health care costs and inhibit competition across the country.

Although the insurers control less than 5 percent of the Pennsylvania health insurance market, their proposed deal could trigger additional mergers that may hamper health care access and affordability in the state, said Jeffrey Bechtel, a senior vice president at the Harrisburg-based organization.

Merging “some of the country’s largest national health insurers may create a domino effect, spurring additional health insurer consolidations, which could have a future negative impact on the Pennsylvania marketplace,” Mr. Bechtel said in a statement. The organization represents the interests of Pennsylvania’s 164 general acute care hospitals and other health facilities.

Indianapolis-based Anthem said its top priority is “the best health coverage possible,” vowing in a statement that affordable policies and quality care are “the foundation of the proposed transaction.”

Cigna of Bloomfield, Conn., and the Department of Justice, which is reviewing the plan, did not comment.

At America’s Health Insurance Plans, a Washington, D.C.-based trade group, executive vice president Beth Leonard blamed “years of anticompetitive hospital consolidation” for steeper health care costs.

Anthem announced July 24 that it would buy rival Cigna for about $54.2 billion, a combination that would cover about 17 percent of the U.S. population — more than 53 million people. The companies announced the agreement three weeks after Aetna Inc. pledged to buy Humana Inc. for $37 billion.

If the deals pass muster with federal and state antitrust officials, they would collapse the five largest health insurers in the country into three.

Shifting insurance markets under the federal Affordable Care Act and consolidation among hospitals are helping propel the merger plans, which should help insurers pare costs and negotiate reimbursement rates more aggressively with care providers, industry analysts said.

The would-be merged companies expect the transactions to close in the second half of 2016.

“There’s great uncertainty, but it would be a surprise to me if [the mergers] didn’t go through in some form,” said Scott Harrington, a health care management professor at the University of Pennsylvania.

He said regulators could force the combined insurers to trim some services in areas where they might command too much of the market and edge too close to monopoly status.

Hartford, Conn.-based Aetna and Humana of Louisville, Ky., account for about 12 percent and 1.1. percent of the Pennsylvania health insurance market, respectively, according to state records. Cigna claims about 3 percent.

The state Insurance Department has said Anthem has no presence in the market, although the company insures some Pennsylvanians employed by firms based in other states. Downtown-based Highmark Health and UPMC Health Plan are the largest health insurers in Western Pennsylvania.

“You want choice for patients and employers,” said Dennis Olmstead, chief strategy officer at the Pennsylvania Medical Society in Harrisburg. “Whoever is paying the bill, you would hope they would have a choice in the market — not just one or two payers.”

Reuters contributed. Adam Smeltz: asmeltz@post-gazette.com, 412-263-2625 or on Twitter @asmeltz.