Buy Photo Gracie West of Freehold Township holds a photo of her and Pope Francis in her home. (Photo: Staff photo)Buy Photo

A special 11-year-old had the opportunity to wish Pope Francis a happy birthday.

But it was the child, Gracie West of Freehold Township, whose wish came true in that face-to-face moment Dec. 17.

Gracie, who was diagnosed with stage 4 neuroblastoma in November 2013, met the Pope thanks to the Make-A-Wish Foundation, a nonprofit organization that grants the wishes of children with life-threatening illnesses.

So at a recent Pope’s Papal Wednesday Audience at the Vatican, Gracie, who recently completed her 10th round of chemotherapy, was in attendance.

“I have very, very strong faith and it has helped me through tons of (my journey with cancer),” said Gracie. “We would pray all the time, and it would be a huge deal to meet the Pope and I thought, ‘I should do that, following my strong faith.’He’s like the closest person to God.”

Thousands of people attended the Audience, Gracie said. She was able to sit with her 14-year-old brother, Joey West, in a section designated for meeting the Pope.

“There were huge groups of different languages singing, and there were dancers — it was cool,” Gracie said. The Pope also gave a short speech that centered around love and family.

“The Pope is such a people’s Pope,” said Gracie. “He’s so down to earth, and when we met him he was so loving and took us in like he was our family. He was very loving and very caring to every person he went around to.”

When it was Gracie’s turn to meet the Pope, he held her hand, blessed her — and her rosary beads — and kissed her forehead. He also shook her brother’s hand.

“You could tell what he was saying by his facial expressions,” she said. “I was nervous and excited — it was like the moment stopped in time for a second. We all like, took it in.”

She told Pope Francis “happy birthday” — it was his 78th.

She even gave him a birthday card “with these cool sparkles on it” and attached a Polaroid photo of her and her brother. Gracie herself wrote him a huge, personal letter telling the Pope about her journey with cancer and how her faith has gotten her through it.

“It’s helped me through tons of things, we prayed,” Gracie said. “We would do this petition — it was a 2,000 Hail Mary petition. That helped like crazy. I do believe that people have stepped in our path for a reason — I do believe I met the Pope for a special reason.”

Sharon West, Gracie’s mother, says the experience of her daughter meeting Pope Francis was indescribable. She admits when Make-A-Wish Foundation asked Gracie early in her diagnosis for her wish, she was unsure if meeting the Pope counted as an eligible one.

“We’re so grateful to them for making it happen,” said West. “Gracie does have very strong faith. We had been going to treatment for awhile. It’s been over a year now — and she said, ‘you know, I think I want to meet the Pope.’ And I thought, ‘OK, I don’t know if we can wish for that.’”

But Gracie could — and she did.

Make-A-Wish called her with a date to meet Pope Francis, and after coordinating it with her chemotherapy treatments, they made the trip. West Freehold School and Clifton T. Barkalow Middle School — Gracie’s schools — partnered to give Gracie a pink luggage set, a crossbody bag, a camera, neck pillows and rosary beads to bring with her to Italy.

“It really is such an amazing organization that they are able to do that,” Sharon West says. “It truly makes a difference because, you know, you’re going through all this and you know it’s going to be maybe not the easiest thing and you’re going to be in it for the long haul. So it was really great just to have this, such a positive experience in the middle of all this. It refuels you.”

Gracie, Joey and their parents stayed in Italy a few more days — and she loved breathing in the country’s architecture. Among several Italian landmarks, she saw the Shrine of Padre Pio in San Giovanni Rotondo and the Catacombs of Rome.

“I didn’t want to leave Italy,” Gracie says with a light in her eyes. “Just looking around and walking down the street, there was just a random column that was thousands of years old. There is a lot of these artifacts that are just there.”

People can continue to follow Gracie and her journey — and help others in need — with the Cookie’s Crumblers Foundation; the name is after Gracie’s nickname, “Cookie.”

Originally planned to help raise funds for Gracie’s treatments and help her overcome cancer, it soon will expand to help other children do the same. A portion of donations will benefit pediatric cancer research.

“I want to help kids like me in the hospital,” says Gracie, who dreams of being a pediatric surgeon when she grows up. “That’s what I want to do. I want to help families out, and we want to help anybody that needs help.”

For more information on Gracie and Cookie’s Crumblers, visit www.cookiescrumblers.org.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1IAymx3