The Broncos’ practice squad is complete.

As expected, running back Kapri Bibbs, offensive tackle Kyle Roberts and defensive end George Uko were given three of the remaining four spots on the 10-man roster, with the last one going to tight end Arthur Lynch.

Bibbs, a former Colorado State standout who was waived Saturday when the Broncos’ trimmed their roster to the mandated 53 players, was brought back to essentially serve as the team’s No. 4 running back. Denver released Montee Ball on Sunday, leaving the fourth slot behind C.J. Anderson, Ronnie Hillman and Juwan Thompson to Bibbs, who has strong chance of being called up to the active roster.

WATCH: Denver Broncos Week 1 report by beat writer Troy E. Renck

“It had a lot to do with being able to get Kapri back on the football team. It had nothing to do with Montee,” Kubiak said Monday. “You better have four backs in this league.”

Bibbs spent four weeks of his rookie season last year on the 53-man roster after signing with the team as a college free agent, but didn’t play a game.

“I’m blessed,” Bibbs said. “When I get my opportunity, I’m going to be ready for it. I want to show everyone I’m better than they think I am.”

Kyle Roberts, a 6-foot-6, 305-pound tackle out of Nevada, started at right tackle for the Broncos in their preseason finale Saturday against the Cardinals. Roberts, one of the Broncos’ undrafted free agents, played every snap against Arizona.

Uko, a 4-3 tackle in the Buccaneers’ defense last season, played one game for Tampa Bay after spending two stints on its practice squad. At 6-foot-3, 284 pounds, Uko played both defensive end and tackle at Southern California. In his three seasons (2011-13) at USC, he recorded 83 tackles (34 solo) and 11.5 sacks.

Lynch, a 6-foot-5, 258-pound tight end out of Georgia was a 2013 first-team All-Southeastern Conference selection and fifth-round pick by the Dolphins that year. He was placed on the injured reserve his rookie season with a back injury and was subsequently waived by Miami before the Jets claimed him.

New York waived Lynch on Saturday.

Not on the Broncos’ 10-player practice squad? Ben Garland, an offensive linemen out of Air Force Academy whom the team had hoped to retain on the practice squad after it waived him Saturday. Garland entered training camp as the Broncos’ starting left guard, but lost out to rookie Max Garcia and eventually slid off the depth chart.

Practice notes

• The Broncos’ slimmed-down roster allowed for three noticeable absences: defensive ends Kenny Anunike (knee) and Derek Wolfe (suspension) and safety T.J. Ward (suspension). Wolfe and Ward will both be absent from the team and all activities until they are reinstated by the league from their suspensions.

Kubiak said that Anunike is making considerable progress from his knee injury and has been working with the trainers. During camp, Kubiak had expressed hope that Anunike would be available for the opener against Baltimore.

“The second I get the go-ahead, I’m out there. This is not me on the sideline. I’m ready to make some plays,” Anunike said.

More than anything Anunike said he’s ready to hit a quarterback again.

“One thing about Kenny is he works extremely hard and has a tendency to come back very quickly from things,” Kubiak said Monday. “I’m expecting him back pretty quickly.”

• The Broncos’ new backup center, James Ferentz, is a quick, undersized lineman who Kubiak said reminds him of starter Matt Paradis.

• Peyton Manning was in regular-season mode Monday as he wore a glove on his right throwing hand.

• Outside linebacker Lerentee McCray practiced Monday, but he is still considered day-to-day.

• Safety David Bruton (in place of Ward) and defensive end Antonio Smith (in place of Wolfe) will both start Sunday for their suspended teammates, but Kubiak said he would expect a rotation for both positions.

“You’re going to see us defensively and offensively have a lot of guys on the field,” he said. “That’s very important early in the NFL season. Not many people have been past 30 plays in this league.”

Jersey number changes

The Broncos, in addition to announcing the final pieces of their practice squad, announced jersey number changes for some players:

Quarterback Trevor Siemian will shed No. 3 for No. 13 and inside linebacker Zaire Anderson will ditch No. 47 for No. 50. And cornerback Curtis Marsh gave up No. 38 for 32.

For the newcomers, center James Ferentz will wear No. 53, tight end Mitchell Henry will take No. 84, tight end Arthur Lynch will don No. 83 and George Uko will get No. 99.

Tracing their steps

Several former Broncos found a home on practice squads across the league Sunday: receiver Nathan Palmer (Patriots), tight end Marcel Jensen (Falcons), linebacker Lamin Barrow (Bears) and quarterback Zac Dysert (Texans).

Broncos’ 2015 practice squad:

Zaire Anderson, ILB

Kapri Bibbs, RB

Dillon Day, C

Chuka Ndulue, DE

Arthur Lynch, TE

Danny Mason, OLB

Taurean Nixon, CB

Kyle Roberts, T

Jordan Taylor, WR

George Uko, DE