Photo: Mike Lucas for Dow Jones

From this morning’s LBO Wire:

Brookfield Capital Partners raised at least $3.38 billion so far for its fourth fund to buy distressed companies, writes Chris Cumming.

The firm, the private equity arm of Toronto-based Brookfield Asset Management, didn’t list a target for Brookfield Capital Partners IV LP in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission. However, a New Jersey state pension document last year said the firm is seeking $3.5 billion.

Brookfield Capital funds invest in distressed or underperforming companies in Canada and the U.S.

More stories available to LBO Wire subscribers:

SV Life Sciences Advisers and Health Enterprise Partners formed Jet Health Inc. as the two firms seek to tap into growing demand among patients for medical treatment at home, Amy Or reports…And despite the dim financial outlook of Fairway Group Holdings, its private equity backer Sterling Investment Partners may come out just fine with its investment in the grocery chain, writes Shasha Dai.

(LBO Wire is a daily newsletter with comprehensive analysis of all the investments, deals, fundraisings and personnel moves involving private equity firms. For a two-week trial, visit http://on.wsj.com/DJPEVCNews, scroll to the bottom and click “try for free.”)

Elsewhere:

Asian firm MBK Partners aims to raise up to $4 billion for a buyout fund, reports Alec Macfarlane for The Wall Street Journal, citing people familiar with the situation.

French firm Ardian entered into an exclusive pact to buy Envision Pharma from U.S.-based firm Halifax Group in a deal said to be between £200 million and £250 million in value, William Louch writes for U.K. sister publication Private Equity News. (Subscription required.)

The widow of Clessidra founder Claudio Sposito is in talks to sell her 79% stake in the Italian firm to a third party, Yolanda Bobeldijk reports for PEN.

Waterton Global Resource Management plans to do half a dozen base-metal deals this year, according to Bloomberg’s Danielle Bochove, who notes that gold’s 16% rally “is taking pressure off miners to sell assets, at least for now.”

Write to Mike Lucas at michael.lucas@wsj.com