Multiple questions on November ballot are wake-up calls for elected officials.

Vote Yes or No (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Referendums in Fox Cities elections aren’t rare, but they aren’t all that common, either.

This fall, though, voters may be faced with a ballot that’s full of them.

Groups of residents in three cities — Appleton, Neenah and Menasha — have filed petitions to place a referendum on the Nov. 4 ballot to increase the state’s minimum wage from $7.25 per hour to $10.10.

The same three cities have already agreed to November referendums about a resolution in response to the U.S. Supreme Court’s Citizens United ruling. The resolution would say that only people, not corporations, are endowed with constitutional rights and that money is not speech, so regulating political contributions and spending isn’t limiting political speech.

And the Outagamie County Board voted last week to place a referendum on the ballot about whether the state should accept all available federal Medicaid money to expand its BadgerCare health insurance program for low-income residents. The state had earlier rejected the money.

All of the referendums are advisory votes, which means they aren’t binding. But they do still hold weight — and are worthwhile for voters to weigh in on.

First, it’s a reflection of public frustration. As a grass-roots effort to get the public’s opinion and get lawmakers’ attention, it’s a noble objective.

That thousands of people — in the case of the petitions — joined together to try to get the questions on the ballot speaks to the power of democracy — however limited it might be in these cases.

And, who knows? It just might work. A strong outcome one way or another is fodder for the public to use to question their elected officials if their stances don’t represent their constituents. It might even sway their opinion.

It’s easy for people to feel like they’re being left out of the political process — that their views aren’t being heard by their representatives. The fact that in some cities, voters could decide on three referendums — so far — gives all of us a way to make our voices ring out.

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1m6wwrV