Keeping tabs

This and that

Cha-ching: Cleveland Clinic CEO Dr. Toby Cosgrove appeared on Fox News Sunday morning, and one of his statements is making the rounds as proof the Affordable Care Act is a failed venture. Cosgrove told the network, “Out of people that have signed up about three quarters will find premiums higher than previously with other insurance.” The Washington Free Beacon, a conservative publication, characterized Cosgrove as having “poured cold water on the administration's recent Obamacare enthusiasm.”

Cosgrove also appeared in this Bloomberg video where he, as he's done many times before, outlines the impact of the Affordable Care Act on the U.S. health care industry.



The innovation continues: Direct Consulting Associates, a Solon-based health care IT consulting and staffing firm has joined the HIMSS Innovation Center at the Global Center for Health Innovation in downtown Cleveland as a “supporting collaborator.” As a supporting collaborator, Direct Consulting Associates said it will showcase its technology in the exhibit space.



Changing places: Ryan Miday is the new vice president for government relations at the Center for Families and Children. Miday was most recently the director of state government relations at the Cleveland Clinic. Prior to his role at the Clinic, Miday was spokesman for Cuyahoga County Prosecutor Bill Mason.



You also can follow me on Twitter for more news about health care in Northeast Ohio.

Just a couple quick items today.First off, we had plenty of NEOMED news in this week's print edition , including the possibility of the university adding a dental school and the finalization of a big piece of its $166 million construction effort. A few more details regarding the university's fitness center have since emerged.As we detailed in this week's print edition, Akron General has pulled out of Integrated Wellness Partners, its joint venture with Signet Enterprises, an Akron-area developer, for reasons it wouldn't really get into. That said, Signet is still moving forward with the venture and its plans to develop NEOMED's fitness center. Yesterday, IWP announced Sequoia Wellness will be the operating brand for the company's fitness center business, and NEOMED's facility will be the first to carry the Sequoia branding.Moreover, Signet named Mike Stoops, a former athletic trainer for the New York Mets and Cleveland Indians, as the general manager for the NEOMED fitness center project. According to Signet, Stoops has managed health and wellness centers for the last 10 and has focused on developing and designing the fitness centers.University Hospitals is mentioned in this Wall Street Journal piece outlining how health systems are measuring how active their patients are.notes that “patient activation" is a measure of how engaged patients will be in their own care. Patients who are highly activated, for example, have better outcomes and incur lower costs.The paper notes that University Hospitals mines its patients' electronic medical records to identify those who are missing colonoscopies and other screening tests. The hospital uses automated calls to contact patients, encouraging them to schedule an appointment, update their records or learn more about a health topic.“Part of the challenge is how to touch all the people you have to touch, and will anyone have the resources," Dr. Eric Bieber, president of UH's accountable care organization, told the paper.