May 12 -- 74 calls for service

Chancey Colwell, 31, of Ca単on City was taken into custody in the 1200 block of U.S. 50 on outstanding warrants. Duane Reynolds, 40, of Ca単on City, was also taken into custody during the same traffic stop for multiple charges. Both subjects were transported to the Fremont County Detention Center without incident.

An officer responded to the 1100 block of U.S. 50 on a report of a two-vehicle accident without injuries.

A party in the 900 block of Meadows reported a burglary. Information was gathered for a report.

Officers assisted the Ca単on City Fire Department with a fire in the 100 block of South Raynolds. Information was gathered for a report. The cause of the fire is under investigation.

Officers responded to the 300 block of Raynolds on a report of a two-car accident with no injuries. Information was gathered for a report.

Officers responded to the 2300 block of Florence Street on a report of a burglary. Information was gathered for a report.

A party in the 700 block of Phay also reported a theft while the officer was gathering information on a previous report of theft.

Officers responded to the 700 block of Phay on a report of theft.

May 13 -- 47 calls for service

Officers took a report of theft in the 3100 block of Hwy 50.

A resident in the 1000 block of Allison reported theft of a firearm. Information was taken for a report.

Advertisement

Officers responded to the 200 block of Main on a report of a theft. Tyler Delaney, 18, was arrested on an outstanding warrant. He was transported to the Fremont County Detention Facility.

Officers took a report of an unattended death in the 100 block of North Fifth Street. The case is under investigation.

A male party reported that his mountain bike was stolen from the 400 block of Pike Avenue. Information was taken for a report.

Officers took a report of criminal tampering in the 400 block of Main Street.

A resident in the 700 block of Barr Avenue reported that someone had broken into her garage. Officers took information for a report.

A two-vehicle accident occurred in the area of Florence Street and Diamond Avenue. No injuries were reported.

A resident in the 300 block of Harrison reported that someone was in her backyard. The suspect ran off, but not before they were bitten by the resident's dog.

May 14 -- 59 calls for service

Officers responded to the area of South Fourth/East Douglas on a report of a two-car accident with no reported injuries. Information was gathered for a report.

An officer responded to the 300 block of U.S. 50 on a report of a two-car accident with no reported injuries. Information was gathered for a report.

Nekaybaw Jackson, 18, of Ca単on City, was taken into custody in the 700 block of Fourmile on charges of disorderly conduct, harassment and assault. Jackson is being held at the Fremont County Jail on a $1,000 bond.

An officer gathered information for a report of criminal mischief in the 900 block of Field.