While employment nationwide is improving, the Chicago area is going sideways.

Its unemployment rate for November barely budged, falling to 8.1 percent from 8.3 percent a year earlier, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

And it's not likely to get better soon. A quarterly survey by employment services specialist Manpower Inc. of Milwaukee finds that local employers expect hiring to be flat in the first quarter. That's the second-weakest regional forecast in the nationwide study.

Similarly, a recent report by CareerBuilder LLC and Economic Modeling Specialists International projects the Chicago region's jobs will increase to 4.73 million in 2017 from 4.63 million in 2013. That 2.2 percent rise leaves the area tied for 44th place with St. Louis among metropolitan regions.

Anne Edmunds, Manpower's regional vice president, says the problem is a lack of skilled workers to fill openings in information technology, engineering and high-end manufacturing. CareerBuilder spokeswoman Jennifer Grasz notes that the Chicago-based job website's report forecasts shrinkage in manufacturing, construction and finance, which account for 18 percent of jobs here, offsetting growth in sectors such as health care.

The bottom line: White-collar job-seekers will have to take a surgical-strike approach to their employment hunt. Despite the downbeat statistics, there are opportunities for people with needed skills in growing fields. In fact, the BLS ranked Chicago first among urban areas when it comes to the net annual increase in employment from 2011 to 2012 in the professional and business services sector (with 28,900 jobs); the areas of professional, scientific and technical services (12,500); and management positions (1,800), according to World Business Chicago, the city's economic development office.

In other words, there are jobs to be found in and around Chicago. You just have to know where to look. Here's a field guide.

WHERE THE JOBS ARE While employment nationwide is improving, the Chicago area is going sideways. Still, if you know where to look, there are jobs out there to be found. Here's a field guide. Stories by Kevin McKeough HEALTH CAREWhatever your opinion of Obamacare, it's fueling a boom in health care jobs.

The symbolically important arrival of a new manufacturer in Pullman marks another step forward in the tentative recovery of Chicago-area manufacturing.

Red tape spawns jobs. Is it any wonder that bean counters have never been more popular?

In your face, Silicon Valley: The Chicago area leads the nation in growth-stage tech firms, and they're hiring. And it's not just programmers they're after.

Who's most in demand? Here's a look at a few of the hottest types of white-collar jobs in the Chicago area today.