Like millions of Americans, Justin Hadley’s private insurance was canceled because of Obamacare eligibility rules. So the North Carolina dad decided to check out the HealthCare.gov site to evaluate his options.

But to his surprise, Hadley got a gander at other people’s health care options.

“I was in complete shock,” Hadley told the Heritage Foundation after he said the Obamacare website delivered him insurance eligibility letters addressed to individuals from another state.

Hadley told Heritage the letters were addressed to a pair of South Carolina residents and that each of the letters acknowledge receipt of an application to the Health Insurance Marketplace and the eligibility of family members to purchase health coverage.

Hadley told Heritage he contacted the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and N.C. elected officials about the apparent security breach but hasn’t yet heard back from the HHS — and afterward HealthCare.gov was still displaying the South Carolina residents’ personal information on Hadley’s account.

One of the eligibility letters (seen in above screen shot, which Hadley created) was addressed to Thomas Dougall, a lawyer from Elgin, S.C.

Hadley contacted Dougall on Friday, after which Dougall spoke to Heritage and made his preferences quite clear: “I want my personal information off of that website,” Dougall said.

While Dougall said he registered on HealthCare.gov, he decided not to sign up for insurance.

“The plans they offered were grossly expensive and didn’t provide the level of care I have now,” he told Heritage, adding that he never saw the eligibility letter addressed to him until Hadley sent it to him Friday.

Dougall also told Heritage he spent Friday evening trying to contact HealthCare.gov about the apparent breach to no avail, waiting on the phone for an hour and finding an online chat session unhelpful.

Dougall also told Heritage he wrote to South Carolina GOP Sens. Lindsey Graham and Tim Scott, along with GOP Rep. Joe Wilson.

(H/T: Drudge Report)

–