TAMPA, Fla., March 17, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- There are 19 million uninsured 18-34 year olds who make up the group called the "Young Invincibles." Obamacare covets this group like the NFL covets top draft picks because they are so critical to the economics of the law. But does this age group need Obamacare? A recent poll by the Urban Institute found that 27% of this age group are still unaware of the Health Insurance Exchanges, which are designed to help them sign up and potentially get subsidized premiums.

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20140317/PH84108-a

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20140317/PH84108-b

In this 47-page mini-Ebook, 'Two-Minute Warning, The Young Invincibles: What the 18-34 Age Group MUST Know by March 31, 2014', Dennis Deruelle, MD, FHM uses the National Football League as the example to help this critical age group understand their options as well as the key questions to consider. This engaging, new mini-Ebook is available free of charge through December 31, 2014 via smashwords.com and drderuelle.com and for a nominal fee of $0.99 on Amazon.com.

To see Dr. Dennis Deruelle's video about his e-book, please visit here: http://player.vimeo.com/video/77155298?title=0&byline=0&portrait=0&color=edc835

The mini-Ebook breaks this group into three segments, giving them each the keys to making an informed decision at game time. A companion website, www.dennisderuellemd.com provides additional information and resources and allows visitors to sign up for the free download.

Dr. Deruelle said, "Making this mini-Ebook available free of charge is important because there is a lot of misinformation and lack of awareness of the new insurance options available. I have children of my own, and I know they don't think of things like this." He added, "I want them to have unbiased, doctor-driven information. I want to do my part to help their generation make informed choices."

Dr. Deruelle knows that healthcare is a personal choice and keeps the book far away from the politics that plague the law. Since the majority of the public wants to hear about Obamacare from their doctor, Dr. Deruelle comes to the rescue remaining non-partisan in his explanation of the law.

'Two-Minute Warning, The Young Invincibles: What the 18-34 Age Group MUST Know by March 31st, 2014' is free and available now in Ebook format at Amazon.com. This mini-Ebook is the first in the 'Two-Minute Warning' series, which will be part of the soon-to-be-published full book (Ebook and soft cover) 'Two-Minute Warning: Are You Ready for Some Healthcare?' For more information, visit http://www.dennisderuellemd.com

About Dennis Deruelle, M.D., FHM

Dennis Deruelle, M.D., is a graduate of University of Texas at Austin, Albany Medical College, Hospital of the University of North Carolina Chapel Hill's Internal Medicine residency, and University of California San Francisco fellowship program in Hospital Medicine Leadership and is National Medical Director of acute services for IPC, The Hospitalist Company, the largest Hospitalist company in the US. As National Medical Director, he oversees over 2000 clinicians and providers in 28 states to improve health outcomes in their respective hospitals. He is also acting President of the West coast chapter of Florida's Society of Hospitalist Medicine.

Dr. Deruelle has extensive experience as a national healthcare expert speaking on the Affordable Health Care Act and its impact not only on physicians and hospitals, but also the general public. He sits on several advisory boards targeting both improving patients safety and health outcomes. Dr. Deruelle has been quoted on trends of technology in healthcare in such publications as Todays Hospitalist. Dr. Deruelle is President/CEO of Hospitalist Information Partners, a medical consulting company, which provides lectures on the ACA and training on all segments of hospitalist medicine and cutting edge technology.

Contact:

Erin Martin

Michelle Smith

Two-Minute Warning

813-966-1565

Email

Read more news from Dr. Dennis Deruelle.

SOURCE Dr. Dennis Deruelle

Related Links

http://dennisderuellemd.com