<p>Greg Johnson</p>

In the end, Community Health Alliance simply could not compete. The Knoxville-based Consumer Oriented and Operated nonprofit health insurance company, created by President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act and funded by millions in federal loans backed by taxpayers, was formed to compete with other health insurers and, in theory, drive down health insurance costs. Instead, market forces and horrendous management drove CHA out of business.

“Community Health Alliance Mutual Insurance Company (CHA), the nonprofit health insurance company serving more than 27,000 Tennesseans, will no longer offer health insurance plans,” CHA said on its website last week. Those 27,000 will have to find new insurance. But it could have been worse.

“This was not a decision that the Department took lightly, but it was the right decision,” Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance Commissioner Julie Mix McPeak said. “With thousands of Tennesseans’ coverage hanging in the balance, CHA’s financial success could not be guaranteed. Ultimately, the risk of CHA’s potential failure in 2016 was too great and would have caused substantial detrimental effects on the market as a whole if it were to collapse.”

CHA lost $22 million last year and likely would have lost even more in 2016. After setting rates too high the first year it offered coverage, CHA set rates too low the next year and had, relatively speaking, such an influx of enrollees McPeak suspended enrollment in early 2015 because of CHA’s “tenuous financial condition.”

If CHA stayed in business for next year, rates would have increased, on average, 44 percent. Such a hike would have kept enrollment pathetic, no doubt adding to the losses and costing taxpayers even more money. Jerry Burgess, CHA’s president and chief executive, lamely blamed outside forces for his failure.

“Last week’s announcement of a risk corridor reimbursement of just 12.6 percent cast doubt on the collectability of over $17 million of CHA’s risk corridor receivable and led to an unavoidable outcome,” Burgess said in the statement announcing CHA’s demise. The “unavoidable outcome,” though, had little to do with “risk corridor reimbursement” and everything to do with inept management.

Premiums too high. Premiums too low. Salaries too high (Burgess made almost $500,000 in 2013) and cost controls too low. From ideological start to ignominious failure, Burgess and crew operated CHA as if playing with other people’s money. Which they were. Ours. Now our money is gone. Forever.

To be fair, CO-OPs are falling like autumn leaves. CO-OPs in New York, Kentucky and Colorado failed recently, proving the whole CO-OP idea was malformed at birth. Yes, funding was restricted by Congress. Still, millions of public dollars are gone. The total national tab will be billions. McPeak wisely euthanized this socialistic experiment and stopped the pain of uncertainty for insureds and the drain on the treasury.

CHA was supposed to disrupt the market. Instead, the market destroyed CHA. As it should. As predicted.

Greg Johnson’s columns appear on Wednesdays, Fridays and the second Sunday of each month. Follow him on Twitter @jgregjohnson. Email him at jgregjohnson@hotmail.com.