Where to Get Started Investing in End-of-Life Services

One of the themes common to many of my columns over the past few years has been the concept of defensive investing. Broadly speaking, this involves focusing on sectors of the economy that are less impacted by immediate economic conditions because the goods and services they provide are required irrespective of what the economy is doing.

This typically involves consumer staples, grocery stores and compulsory insurance, but also includes credit card companies, defensive stocks and similar sectors.

One of the most basic needs, required by all to some degree and at some point, is health care for the elderly and infirm, along with end-of-life services.

I've only written specifically about this issue twice in the past few years, and it's been about a year since I last discussed it in the column "Revisiting a Touchy Subject," so it's appropriate to do so again.

The three companies I've discussed in this sector are Chemed (CHE), Amedisys (AMED) and Gentiva Health Services (GTIV).

In the past year, Chemed and Amedisys are up by 32% and 87%, respectively, and since I started writing about them specifically as end-of-life care investments in the March 2013 column "Investing in a Touchy Subject," they are up 79% and 232%, respectively.

Gentiva was purchased by Kindred Healthcare (KND) for $19.50 a share at the end of January, a 72% premium to when I first discussed the stock.

The biggest single event impacting these companies that's transpired since I last wrote about the issue is the implementation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), commonly referred to as Obamacare.

The most important part of that is that, contrary to the publicly offered and promised reduction in aggregate national health care expenditures and insurance costs that would result from the implementation the PPACA, the opposite has occurred so far, and is expected to continue.

Health care expenditures (HCE) by the government, individuals and insurance companies have all continued to increase.

I discussed this issue in more detail in the two-part series, "Where Health Care Is Headed," in April 2014, so I won't rehash those issues here.

The important point with respect to the potential for the companies named here is that all three groups are increasingly focusing on how to slow and eventually reverse the rate of growth in HCE, which is a national priority.

The largest percentage of HCE is concentrated in medical care associated simply with being elderly and the associated end-of-life services that go along with it.

As a result, all three groups are increasingly concentrating efforts on how to reduce those costs.

The home health care services market has traditionally been provided by small private companies and practitioners, and was a less-expensive option for all parties than institutionalized care, especially for individuals and families without insurance coverage that would support such.

With the aging of the baby boomers and the implementation of the PPACA, it has become necessary from a logistics and financial-needs perspective for the home health care industry to itself become institutionalized.

The three companies best positioned to provide that organization and institutionalization are Chemed, Amedisys and Kindred.

Related to the services offered by these companies are the goods and services provided by Service Corp. International (SCI) and, to a lesser degree, Hillenbrand (HI).

SCI provides full funeral services, while Hillenbrand has a business segment that provides support services for funeral service providers.

Of those two, Service is a better long-term investment for death care services, but because the funeral services industry is not being organized and institutionalized as actively as the home health care services industry, there will still be many privately owned funeral homes and associated death care service providers in need of the back-office support products available through Hillenbrand.