A woman looks at the Obamacare HealthCare insurance exchange Internet site (AFP)

You know who else established a universal health care system in his country? Hitler, that’s who.

As the Affordable Care Act goes into effect this month in the U.S., World Net Daily columnist Ellis Washington points out the similarities he sees between the law, commonly referred to as Obamacare, and the health care system established in Germany.

“Years before the Jews were sent to the death camps en masse, the initial mass murders of the Holocaust were performed in sanitized German hospitals and the clinical procedures for socialized governmental mass execution were created and developed there under the Nazis Aktion T4 Program,” Washington warns in a column published Friday.

“Handicapped, retarded and mentally ill persons were killed by the hundreds of thousands within Hitler’s universal health-care system, including some of Hitler’s own relatives,” Washington says. “This genocide was conducted not out of evil intent but born out of medical necessity. Hitler, in his official directives, allowing medical killing, called them ‘mercy killing’ and ‘lives not worth living.’”

Washington says universal health care inevitably leads to genocide and mass killings, just as former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin warned during her failed vice presidential bid in 2008.

“Like Hitlercare, Obamacare will inevitably lead to health-care rationing, death panels, millions of uninsured and, eventually, the systematic genocide of the weak, minorities, enfeebled, the elderly and political enemies of the God-state,” Washington writes.

However, the Independent Payment Advisory Board, which was designed to reduce influence by special interests to help hold down Medicare costs under the law and serves as the inspiration for the “death panel” claims, is prohibited from rationing care or restricting benefits.

Washington argues that extending health insurance coverage through a government undermines God’s authority.

“It substitutes natural law for the God-state of government to decide and dictate the right to of who lives and who dies for entire classes of society, as opposed to letting people make their own choices using the free market and private enterprise to secure their own health care,” Washington writes.

He says Hitler imposed Germany’s health care system on occupied countries so he could enact genocidal social policies.

“As a leftist and a socialist, universal health care gave him the power to put policy into practice, to socially engineer society according to his own wicked, racist means/ends,” Washington writes. “With an executive decree, whole classes of people would be eliminated without any judicial due process being required.”

Washington doesn’t explain how President Barack Obama will use his signature health care law to commit genocide, but he is certain that’s where it will lead because the president voted four times as an Illinois legislator to reject the Born Alive Infant Protection Act.

Obama has explained that he voted against the measure, which would have required legal protection to fetuses extracted from their mother’s womb, because its broad wording would have essentially outlawed abortion.

Washington says all universal health care systems are derivative of Marxism, socialism, postmodernism and other things that are objectionable to many conservatives.

He claims the president is using his “Gestapo” and “SS Stormtroppers” (sic), which he describes as young people, unions, Planned Parenthood, the NAACP, ACORN and La Raza, to propagandize the poor and minorities into supporting Obamacare.

“But like in Hitler’s Germany once the reality of their treachery metastasizes, guess who will be the first ones forced to sacrifice their lives for the Fatherland in our march toward a ‘perfect’ society without illness or suffering?” Washington says. “History has repeatedly demonstrated that the weakest and most vulnerable have often been the first victims to be eliminated.”

Washington doesn’t explain why Obama would target for mass murder the same demographic groups who helped elect him to the presidency and consistently support the Democratic Party.