Six months into a job he reluctantly took, Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives Paul Ryan is balancing on a narrow tightrope.

He's been raising record sums for congressional Republicans to maintain their majority on Capitol Hill amid fears that backlash from the presidential race could cost the party control of the Senate and seats in the House.

On the legislative side, he's helping craft a bold policy agenda for his party to announce this summer--including tax reform and a replacement for the Affordable Care Act, initiatives that Republicans have long struggled to produce. At the same time, he's dealing with several significant issues, from the Zika virus to Puerto Rico's debt crisis to simply passing a budget, that have yet to make their way through the House.

All the while, he's been a consistent presence on radio and TV, trying to be the positive face of the party that is struggling to unite under a national leader.

"We're living in very turbulent political times in this country and the speaker's trying to be a source of stability, both here in the legislative process and also for the country," Rep. Carlos Curbelo (R-Fla.) told RealClearPolitics.

Across the aisle, Democrats are sharpening their criticisms of the speaker, accusing Republicans of wasting time and ignoring mounting crises that demand immediate solutions, not to mention needling Ryan, a former Budget Committee chairman, for missing the deadline to pass a spending blueprint this year.

Republicans counter that on Zika funding and the Puerto Rico issue, they are working to craft the right solution rather than rush through something that's unnecessarily expensive or puts a burden on taxpayers.

Ryan still has the support of his GOP colleagues, who praise his inclusiveness in allowing

rank-and-file members to have a voice in crafting legislation, and they appreciate his effort to make the rounds on TV and radio to highlight their agenda.

"I think I do it better," Ryan told CNN in April, comparing his first six months to the tenure of his predecessor, John Boehner. "Not to knock John, but I spend more time with all of our members on a continual basis."

Plenty has changed for the Wisconsin Republican since taking the gavel, but much has stayed the same. He still sleeps in his office, rising early to exercise, and works late, and he still spends weekends with his family in the Badger State--doing most of his fundraising during the week. But rather than roam the hallways of the Capitol with headphones, listening to music, he walks with a Capitol police detail and a pack of aides by his side.

Though Ryan has warmed to the day-to-day aspects of the speakership, some members of his caucus acknowledge that obstacles remain when it comes to actually passing legislation this year, including the divisions within the party that helped force Boehner to retire.

"It's not a secret that we're a very diverse conference and on some issues we lack unity," Curbelo said. "The speaker is trying to handle that in a very delicate way without choosing sides, so to speak, without forcing issues prematurely."

Rep. Charlie Dent, the leader of a group of moderate Republicans, told Bloomberg News last month that some of the problems are "structural and it does not matter who is speaker."

"The underlying governing dynamic that forced John Boehner to depart is still there--whether on the budget or Puerto Rico or any other number of issues coming up," Dent said.

House Democrats have latched onto some of those issues with a new mantra for the majority: Do your job, a phrase borrowed from Senate Democrats who are rallying against Republican opposition to President Obama's Supreme Court nominee. Included in the criticism is the lack of substantive action on Zika, Puerto Rico, the budget and funding for the Flint, Mich., water contamination crisis.

"It's about time that the Congress did something instead of being a do-nothing Congress," Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi said in a recent press conference. "Wherever the buck stops, the fact is Congress is not doing its job and these are emergencies."

"I'd like to call them feckless. But to say that, they would have to ... [make] an effort to do something," Rep. Joe Crowley, a member of Democratic leadership, said. "They've done nothing. It's not a failure, because they haven't tried."

Republicans, however, push back against those criticisms. Negotiations continue on the Puerto Rico debt relief bill, and Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy--while acknowledging that lawmakers would miss a May 1 deadline for a debt relief payment-- said they are waiting for the Treasury Department and Democrats to sign off on the measure. He said he is hopeful they will act before a larger July 1 payment deadline.

On Zika, Republicans are pushing for more answers from the administration on how much relief money is required and how it would be spent before moving any emergency appropriations measure, and have highlighted hundreds of millions of dollars the administration has shifted from emergency Ebola funds as sufficient for now. McCarthy said recently that their preference would be to handle any Zika funding in the normal appropriations process later this year, though Democrats have called for immediate action by way of a $1.9 billion funding request from the White House.

On Flint, while Democrats want the House to act, Republicans view the problem as a local issue, not necessarily one that requires a federal response.

An aide to Ryan defended the legislative accomplishments of his speakership, pointing to a bipartisan education reform bill, a long-term transportation funding package, sanctions against North Korea, a permanent ban on taxing Internet access and reforms on Zika vaccines as just some of the measures that have passed under Ryan's leadership.

Ryan, in his interview with CNN, said he thinks having a more unified conference is benefiting the GOP agenda. "We're not focused on tearing each other apart," he said. "We don't have the kind of schisms we had before. I think we're actually getting some pretty big things done."

Members of the conservative House Freedom Caucus--the same lawmakers who consistently disagreed with Boehner and ultimately pushed him to the exit--agree that the GOP conference is more cohesive under Ryan than it was in the past. Mark Meadows, one of the leaders of the group, said the speaker has given the lawmakers an "honest hearing" and that discussions are "judged based on the merits of the argument versus the merits of the individual."

The other way Ryan has diverged greatly from Boehner is on the airwaves. While the Ohio Republican held weekly press conferences and was an occasional presence on TV, Ryan has stormed the airwaves. He recently appeared on four different morning shows over two days as well as the Late Show With Stephen Colbert.

When he was negotiating a $1.1 trillion omnibus spending bill with Democrats late last year, Ryan spoke often on conservative radio to defend the final product as the best deal conservatives could hope for, laying cover for Republicans to support the package.

Rep. Jim Jordan, the chairman of the Freedom Caucus and a regular confidant of Ryan's, said the speaker is a "great communicator" for the GOP.

"[I've seen] Paul Ryan on TV more in six months than Boehner was in 5½ years, in a very articulate and compelling way talking about conservative principles," Jordan told RCP. "I see just a different feel in the Republican conference and in the Congress on how we debate amongst ourselves about legislation, how the process is moving in a better direction."

But while Ryan maintains the support of most of his caucus, the problems before the House aren't going away soon. Pressure from Democrats to act on Puerto Rico, an issue on which they've said Ryan is negotiating in good faith, and Zika will mount as the summer approaches and the House's legislative calendar shortens. They also face the difficult prospect of pushing through appropriations measures in a limited time window without hitting any stumbling blocks.

Yet for all these immediate issues, Ryan's focus remains on his "Confident America" agenda of crafting Republican policies not meant to pass this year but to be something his colleagues can run on in November to win a mandate for passage of sweeping conservative ideas in the next Congress.

"There are still a lot of things that are getting done, but honestly, the big basics, the big issues, that's what this divided government will not produce," Ryan said at a press conference on April 28. "We have to break this logjam with a cleansing, clearing election that will give us the ability to actually pass the big things that need to get done to fix this and get us back on the path to [economic] growth."

Editorial on 05/15/2016