U.S. Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill., today moved to up the ante for companies like Walgreen Co. and AbbVie Inc., introducing a bill that would offer a new tax credit of roughly $1,200 per worker to companies that keep their headquarters in America.

Under terms of Mr. Durbin's new Patriot Employer Tax Credit Act, qualifying employers would get a credit worth 10 percent of the first $15,000 of wages earned by each employee — potentially totaling some tens of billions a dollar a year.

But the standard for qualifying is high.

Only one other senator, Ohio Democrat Sherrod Brown, now is co-sponsoring the measure. A similar bill has made no progress in the House. And Mr. Durbin's measure would replace an existing credit that's set off partisan squabbling for years.

All of which could leave Mr. Durbin open to the charge that his new plan is more about re-election politics than actually getting something through, with one top business group immediately charging just that.

Under current law, the U.S. Treasury loses about $50 billion a year from deductions American companies take for the cost of building a manufacturing plant overseas or shipping materials abroad, Mr. Durbin said in a statement and at a news conference today at Wheatland Tube Co., a Southwest Side factory. "Instead of rewarding businesses that ship jobs overseas, we should be rewarding companies that . . . do the most to help workers and here at home," he said.

The credit would apply to a company's entire workforce, not just headquarters staffers. That could be a major draw for some large employers, if the measure were to become law.

STEPS TO QUALIFY

But to get the credit, a company would have to maintain its headquarters in the U.S. and not move (or invert) its domicile abroad by acquiring or being acquired by a foreign company, as both Walgreen and AbbVie reportedly are considering.

Qualifying companies would also have to provide Obamacare-compliant health insurance and pay at least 90 percent of its U.S. workers an hourly rate equal to 150 percent of poverty-level wages (that would mean about $14 an hour for a family of three). The firms would have to offer 90 percent of non-executive workers either a defined-benefit retirement plan or a defined-contribution plan in which the employer contributes at least 5 percent of pay. And the companies must promise to make up the salary difference of any staffer called to active National Guard and reserve duty.

Companies with fewer than 50 workers "can qualify for the tax credit by fulfilling a subset of those criteria," Mr. Durbin said. Details on that were not immediately available.

It didn't take long for the Illinois Manufacturers' Association to rip the bill to pieces.

"If Sen. Durbin were truly interested in creating good-paying jobs, like those in manufacturing, he should sponsor legislation cutting the corporate tax rate for American companies," association Vice-president Mark Denzler said in a statement. "It's time for real solutions, not more political games in an election year."

I've asked Mr. Durbin's re-election foe, state Sen. Jim Oberweis, R-North Aurora, for his reaction. I'll let you know if his camp responds.

Update, 1:00 p.m. — More reaction to Mr. Durbin's proposal:

Perhaps predictably, Dan Curry, a spokesman for Mr. Oberweis, said the Democratic incumbent " is feverishly proposing a series of populist-sounding measures he knows have no chance of passage. The people of Illinois deserve better."

But Illinois Chamber of Commerce chief Doug Whitley was almost as negative.

From a statement: “To the extent that Senator Durbin's initiative helps to bring greater focus on the need for the Congress to undertake corporate tax reforms in order to assure the U.S. tax code is competitive with other countries, I think it worthwhile. If the majority leader's proposal helps to get the Congress to move a tax reform bill that reduces U.S. corporate tax rates it should be applauded. However, as a standalone measure it appears tailor-made election year stump speech material.”

Update, 4:45 p.m. — Team Durbin responds to the criticism by quoting remarks at today's event from Michael Graham, the chief financial officer of Wheatland's parent company, JMC Steel Group.

Wheatland already meets the pay, health-insurance and other standards in Mr. Durbin's proposal, Mr. Graham said. “We're glad that this bill is being proposed. It's going to help companies like JMC keep jobs in America and it's going to help us invest in capital expenditures.”

So there: ammo on both sides of the fight.

Related:

• A Walgreen HQ in Switzerland?

• Ireland-based drugmaker rejects AbbVie offer

• Aon shows Walgreen how beneficial moving abroad can be