In our quest to find “the one,” or something remotely close to what we and society leads us to believe is our “perfect match,” we make several attempts — some desperate — to find this questionable happily ever after fairytale ending. While some of us may claim we don’t have a type, for others this is pretty straightforward, as chances are we tend to find commonalities among our exes. Now, all heartbreak and nostalgia aside, popular dating site Match.com has teamed up with Los Angeles-based company Three Day Rule to create an app to help us find our perfect match by analyzing our exes and using facial recognition to pinpoint our type.

"People have a type and it's not necessarily about height or race or hair color, but a lot of it is about face shape," Talia Goldstein, the founder of Three Day Rule, told Mashable. "I always ask my clients to send me photos of their exes. They say that they don't have a type, but when I see the photos, to me they look very similar. The [exes] may be different ethnicities, or have different hair color, but their facial structures are the same."

So instead of clicking through countless online dating profiles in hopes we find someone with similar features as our ex, the Three Day Rule app does this for us, eliminating the dreaded three days to hear back from a man after the first date. The company hand-selects, personally screens, and meets every match before you do, to guarantee your first date is tailored to your liking with the help of well-trained matchmakers and dating experts from schools like Harvard Business School, UCLA, USC, and NYU, according to the website. The matchmakers use a hybrid approach to find people partners, combining in-depth personality assessments with the facial recognition technology.

The precise details on how Three Day Rule’s technology works remains unclear, but typically, facial recognition systems compare selected facial features from a photograph with a database. There are algorithms that map the relative size and shapes of features, such as the eyes, cheekbones, and chin, to search for faces reflecting these specific traits. These facial photographs do not disclose information that the person does not routinely disclose to the general public.

The effectiveness of this dating app is backed by several testimonials from men and women of all ages, ranging from mid-20s to early forties, on the company’s website. Jennifer, 31, a satisfied Three Day Rule client wrote: “They took the qualities I was looking for, listened to the type of guy I wanted in my life, and like magic, found a perfect match! I highly recommend letting these ladies get to work to find your soul mate!”

Although this can save you numerous profile clicks, it will probably cause you to break the bank. The catch 22 of this service is its hefty fee for “eternal happiness.” Match.com members who want to use the service will have to pay $5,000 for a six-month package in addition to their existing Match subscription, which will become available within the upcoming weeks. This package includes access to a team of “world-class matchmakers and dating experts,” who will meet you in person, coach you on dating, and learn your preferences in regard to personality and shared interests. The service is not available outside of the U.S., nor is it currently available for lesbian, gay, and bisexual Match.com users.

The dating app tends to be used by the wealthy and very busy, since the average Joe doesn’t have a spare $5,000 to spend on what could or could not be a “perfect match.” Chances are we may have better luck striking up conversation with a stranger at our local coffee shop or record store. Besides, we get to scope out potential partners and talk to them without paying $5,000 in advance.

Let’s face it: Meeting new people and making new friends is hard because we’re all busy, but finding the right places or activities help find and connect you with someone who shares your interests.