Geisinger Wyoming Valley Medical Center in Plains Township is among 758 hospitals Medicare is penalizing for higher rates of patient safety incidents, according to Medicare records released late Wednesday.

It is the only hospital from Luzerne and Lackawanna counties being fined.

This is the second year in a row the hospital has been on the list.

More than half of the facilities on the list had been fined last year, according to Kaiser Health News.

Geisinger Medical Center in Danville also is on the list that includes well-known hospitals such as Stanford Health Care in California, Denver Health Medical Center and two satellite hospitals run by the Mayo Clinic Health System in Minnesota, according to federal data.

Wendy Wilson, a spokeswoman for Geisinger Health System, said Geisinger tracks patient safety incidents internally and has already begun to address some of the issues before the report was released.

“We have action plans in place addressing the issues,” Wilson said. “When it comes to our patient care, we take it very seriously.”

According to Kaiser Health News, the fines are based on the government’s assessment of the frequency of several kinds of infections, sepsis, hip fractures and other complications.

Medicare will lower all its payments to the penalized hospitals by 1 percent over the course of the federal fiscal year, which runs through September 2016. In all, Medicare estimates the penalties will cost hospitals $364 million.

The penalties, part of the Affordable Care Act, are the toughest sanctions Medicare has taken on hospital safety.

Each year, Medicare also docks the pay of hospitals with too many patients coming back within a month, and it doles out bonuses and penalties to hospitals based on patient satisfaction scores, death rates and other performance measures.

This second round of the Hospital-Acquired Condition Reduction Program was based on the government’s assessment of the frequency of infections in patients with central lines inserted into veins, urinary catheters and incisions from colon surgeries and hysterectomies in 2013 and 2014. Those infection rates account for 75 percent of Medicare’s evaluation.

The rest is based on eight other complications including surgical tears, collapsed lungs, broken hips and reopened wounds between July 2012 and June 2014. Most of these complications were part of last year’s penalty assessments, but the infections from colon operations and hysterectomies were added to the calculations this year.

Congress exempted veterans’ hospitals, children’s hospitals and critical access hospitals from the list.

dallabaugh@citizensvoice.com, 570-821-2115