ASSISTANCE LEAGUE TO RAISE FUNDS FOR OPERATION SCHOOL BELL MARCH 15

The Assisteens Auxiliary of the Assistance League of Las Vegas plans to raise funds for Operation School Bell from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. March 15 at the ALLV thrift shop, 6446 W. Charleston Blvd. Assisteens will raise funds and shop for clothing for its Perfect Fit program, with funds and clothing donated to Operation School Bell to provide apparel for at-risk students in the Clark County School District.

Assisteens provides students in grades seven through 12 with opportunities to support the chapter and develop leadership skills. Assisteens will help organize clothing displays and sort and select fashionable clothing for customers.

For more information, visit allv.org.

STUDENTS TOUR MCCAW SCHOOL OF MINES

Fourth-graders from around the Las Vegas Valley toured the McCaw School of Mines at McCaw Elementary School, 57 Lynn Lane, March 2. This marked the 90,000th visitor since the McCaw School of Mines opened in 1996. The students received a hands-on Nevada history lesson and panned for gold while experimenting with rocks and minerals. They also toured the grounds where artifacts of the past are displayed.

For more information about the McCaw School of Mines, visit mccawschoolofmines.org.

PAY-IT-FORWARD PROGRAM CONTINUES AT COX ELEMENTARY

The yearlong, pay-it-forward Change Reaction program reached Cox Elementary School, 3855 N. Timberlake Drive, Feb. 26. The campaign, spearheaded by Matt Smith Physical Therapy, involves a chain reaction of local schools and students giving back by giving gifts to other schools.

As the next in line, Cox received several student-created board games from teams of fourth-graders from Robert Taylor Elementary School, 144 Westminster Way. The games were designed to reinforce first-grade math and language arts concepts, and the Robert Taylor students made the games to encourage Cox first-graders to have fun learning.

MATER ACADEMY BREAKS GROUND ON NEW CAMPUS

Mater Academy of Nevada, a public, Title 1 charter school, was set to break ground March 10 on a new 5-acre, 55,0000-square-foot campus on Mountain Vista Street, south of Desert Inn Road.

Turner-Agassi Charter School Facilities Fund, a mission-driven investment fund managed by Andre Agassi and Bobby Turner, is developing the building. Turner-Agassi works to accelerate the growth of high-performing charter schools throughout the nation by helping school operators secure long-term, high-quality facilities.

The new campus is scheduled to be completed in early August and open for the 2015-16 school year. It initially will house students in kindergarten through seventh grade, with plans to expand to eighth grade. The current projected enrollment is set for 665 students for the 2015-16 school year, expanding to more than 950 at full capacity.

Mater Academy specializes in educating English language learners and is affiliated with Mater Academy Inc., a high-performing charter school system with schools in South Florida, founded in 2002. Mater Academy of Nevada opened its original campus in August 2014 at 2525 Emerson Ave.

For more information, visit materacademynv.com.

NEVADA CONNECTIONS ACADEMY PLANS INFORMATION SESSIONS

Nevada Connections Academy, a virtual public charter school for students in kindergarten through 12th grade, plans to host information sessions regarding enrollment for the 2015-16 school year. Sessions are planned for: March 12, 6:30 to 8:30 p.m., Holiday Inn Express Las Vegas, 6220 S. Rainbow Blvd.; March 24, 6:30 to 8:30 p.m., Seven Hills Conference Center, 3215 St. Rose Parkway; April 1, 4 to 5 p.m., McDonald’s, 8120 S. Eastern Ave.; April 13, 5:30 to 7 p.m., Las Vegas Library, 833 Las Vegas Blvd. North.

For more information, visit connectionsacademy.com.

PUBLIC INVITED TO UNLV CAMPUS TOWN HALL MARCH 12

UNLV president Len Jessup is set to host a town hall with the campus and community members from 11:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. March 12 in the second-floor Student Union Ballroom at UNLV, 4505 S. Maryland Parkway. He plans to offer a legislative update and provide a briefing on key initiatives.

For more information, visit tinyurl.com/l5ooy74.

UNLV LAW STUDENTS TO TEACH FREE INCOME TAX CLASSES

UNLV law students are set to teach free income tax education classes during a Low Income Taxpayer Clinic scheduled from 5 to 7 p.m. March 13 at Hermandad Mexicana, 2915 W. Charleston Blvd., No. 4. Under the supervision of a Boyd School of Law professor and a Nevada Legal Services attorney, UNLV law students will discuss filing status, earned income tax credit, child tax credit, premium tax credit and penalties for not having health coverage under the Affordable Care Act. Each presentation will be followed by an open question-and-answer session.

Another Low Income Taxpayer Clinic is scheduled from 2 to 4 p.m. April 16 at the West Charleston Library, 6301 W. Charleston Blvd.

For more information, visit tinyurl.com/nqkejqm.

VEGAS PBS TO BROADCAST EDUCATION-FOCUSED PROGRAMS IN MARCH

Vegas PBS plans to air national and local programs in March exploring educational experiences profiling modern-day students, teachers and administrators working together to bridge the achievement gap and help students stay in school, as well as programs focusing on past struggles to overcome prejudice and desegregate Southern Nevada schools.

The national program “180 Days: Hartsville” is set to air at 8 p.m. (Part 1) and 9 p.m. (Part 2) March 17. The program is an intimate portrait of the Hartsville, S.C., community, which tries to address the urgent demand for school reform and close the achievement gap. The forces and influences of government, economic opportunity and mind-sets in favor and opposed to public schools are in play.

“American Graduate: Jessica’s Story” is set to air at 7:30 p.m. March 23. It focuses on Jessica Suarez, a Chaparral High School student, and showcases the efforts of Southern Nevada teachers, administrators and community activists who strive to educate students and help them stay in school. Dave Wilson, former principal of Chaparral, and Jennifer Lopardo, Communities In Schools of Nevada on-site coordinator, also are featured.

“School Desegregation in Southern Nevada” is set to air at 7:30 p.m. March 30. Dr. Sonya Horsford explores the turbulent history of integration in Las Vegas schools. This local production focuses on the 1960s through 1980s and tells the story of community members who made integration a reality in Southern Nevada.

For more information, visit vegaspbs.org.

KOHL’S OFFERS SCHOLARSHIPS

Kohl’s plans to award nearly $400,000 in Kohl’s Cares scholarships this year to students 6 to 18. To nominate a student, visit kohlskids.com through March 13. The program recognizes young volunteers who have made a positive impact in their communities.

Ten national winners will each be awarded a $10,000 scholarship for higher education, and Kohl’s will donate $1,000 to a nonprofit on each national winner’s behalf. Nearly 200 students will win regional scholarships worth $1,000 toward higher education, and more than 2,000 local students will receive a $50 Kohl’s gift card.

The scholarship program is part of Kohl’s Cares, a philanthropic program focused on improving the lives of children.

HEARD ELEMENTARY SCHOOL TO HOST COLOR RUN FUNDRAISER MARCH 14

Students at Heard Elementary School, 42 Baer Drive, are set to host a My School Color Run fundraiser at 8:30 a.m. March 14. The course will be a 2-mile loop starting at the school’s campus at Nellis Air Force Base, traveling around Freedom Park and back to the starting point. A post-race event is planned in the school’s multipurpose room.

To register, visit lomieheardmscr.eventbrite.com.

Volunteers also are needed. For more information, contact teacher Dennis Sizemore at 702-799-4920, ext. 3039.

BONNER ELEMENTARY PLANS RUNNING FUNDRAISER FOR MARCH 14

Bonner Elementary School, 765 Crestdale Lane, plans to host its fourth annual Bonner Run for Education from 8 to 11 a.m. March 14. All proceeds from the 5K run/1.5-mile walk will go toward maintaining low class sizes.

Along with monetary donations, organizers are seeking donated items to be used for a raffle/silent auction, such as gift certificates, gift cards and actual items and services that can be raffled individually or in gift baskets. Business sponsor opportunities also are available. For more information, call Paul Catania at 702-799-6050.

Registration to participate in the event is $15 in advance and $20 the day of for participants 11 or younger and $25 in advance or $30 the day of for those 12 or older.

For more information, call Kristi O’Donnell at 702-561-4872.

JUNIOR LEAGUE OF LAS VEGAS PLANS FASHION FORWARD EVENT MARCH 14

The Junior League of Las Vegas plans to present the event Fashion Forward: Passport to Fashion at 2 p.m. March 14 at the Fashion Show mall, 3200 Las Vegas Blvd. South. Sixty would-be fashion designers from Clark County high schools will present and model their final designs, inspired by the theme Passport to Fashion, in competition for the grand prize.

Tickets are $40 for general admission; $60 for VIP, which includes premium seating and a swag bag; and $100 for Couture Level Seating, which includes a VIP pre-event soiree with a silent auction, front-row seating and a swag bag. Proceeds will support the Junior League of Las Vegas and its mission to promote volunteerism, develop the potential of women and improve the community through the effective action and leadership of trained volunteers.

For tickets, visit jllv.org.

NEVADA POETRY OUT LOUD FINALS SET FOR MARCH 14

More than 3,100 high school-aged students are set to represent their counties at the 10th annual Nevada Poetry Out Loud State Finals, scheduled from noon to 3 p.m. March 14 at the Siena Hotel in Reno.

Poetry Out Loud begins at the local level as students learn about, memorize and present poetry out loud to an audience. Participants advance from school to district competitions and then to the state finals, where they compete for $1,000, plus another $1,000 for the winner’s school to support literary programs and a trip to Washington, D.C., to compete for the national title and a chance to share $50,000 in scholarships and school stipends.

Students placing second and third at the state finals receive $500 each and $500 for their schools.

Semifinals were held in Clark County Feb. 5 at the West Charleston Library. Organizations across Nevada are hosting events and workshops to celebrate the program’s 10th anniversary, such as the Spoken Views Youth Poetry Slam in Reno and Humanity Thru Art and Pop Up Poetry in Las Vegas.

The program is sponsored by the Nevada Arts Council and co-sponsored by the Nevada Department of Education and Sierra Arts and is made possible through funding and leadership from the National Endowment for the Arts and the Poetry Foundation. The 2015 program also received support from the NV Energy Foundation.

For more information, visit facebook.com/nevadapoetryoutloud or nac.nevadaculture.org or call 702-486-3738 or 775-687-6680.

NV ENERGY OFFERS SCHOLARSHIP

High school seniors are invited to apply for NV Energy’s Powerful Partnerships Scholarship Program supported by the Public Education Foundation. NV Energy offers $1,000 scholarships to students based on the program’s selection criteria and the number of applications received. The one-time scholarships of $1,000 can be used at any accredited university, college or trade school. Scholarship recipients will be invited to an award ceremony in May.

High school seniors are invited to apply for NV Energy’s Powerful Partnerships Scholarship Program supported by the Public Education Foundation. NV Energy offers $1,000 scholarships to students based on the program’s selection criteria and the number of applications received. The one-time scholarships of $1,000 can be used at any accredited university, college or trade school. Scholarship recipients will be invited to an award ceremony in May.

Applications are due by March 15 and be submitted at nvnergy.com/scholarship.

PBS KIDS WRITERS CONTEST UNDERWAY THROUGH MARCH 27

Children in kindergarten through fifth grade are encouraged to submit original stories for Vegas PBS’ annual PBS KIDS Writers Contest. First-place winners in kindergarten through third grade will be forwarded for judging in the national competition.

Submissions will be judged for creativity and originality of plot and/or themes, story structure and use of literary devices, and relevance, quality and originality of illustration.

Entries can be mailed or delivered to Vegas PBS Ready To Learn, 3050 E. Flamingo Road, Las Vegas, NV 89121 and must be received by 5 p.m. March 27. Local winners are set to be selected in the spring, and prizes for first-place winners include free tuition for contest partner Southern Nevada Writing Project’s annual summer writing camp.

For more information, visit vegaspbs.org/writers-contest.

STUDENTS INVITED TO ENTER EARTH DAY ART CONTEST

The city of Las Vegas’ Keep Las Vegas Beautiful program, in partnership with the Clark County School District School-Community Partnership Program and Republic Services of Southern Nevada, plans to host its fifth annual Earth Day Every Day Art Contest for Clark County students in elementary, middle and high schools.

The contest will culminate at an award ceremony for the finalists and their teachers during the Earth Day event planned for April 18 at Town Square Las Vegas, 6605 Las Vegas Blvd. South. Cash prizes, sponsored by Republic Services of Southern Nevada, will be awarded to the top three winning students of each age group and their teachers. Artwork submitted by both winners and runners-up will also be part of a Youth Earth Day art display at the Town Square event and later displayed at Las Vegas City Hall, 495 S. Main St.

For submission guidelines, visit tinyurl.com/ndb26p6.

Contest entries must be received by 4 p.m. March 27 and can be sent to The School-Community Partnership Program No. 145, Western High School, Attention: Cheryl Wagner, 4601 W. Bonanza Road, Las Vegas, NV 89107.

MINING ASSOCIATION TO HOST WORKSHOP FOR TEACHERS

The Nevada Mining Association and the Nevada Division of Minerals plans to host the 26th annual Earth Science Teachers Workshop for Southern Nevada educators March 31 and April 1 at Faith Lutheran High School, 2015 S. Hualapai Way. The free workshop is open to kindergarten through 12th-grade teachers, and attendees will receive one Professional Development Education credit.

Hands-on seminars are planned to enhance teachers’ understanding of earth sciences, the importance of mined materials and the role mining plays in Nevadans’ lives. The goal is to provide educators with creative ways to implement such studies in the classroom. The first day will focus on seminars and methods of teaching earth science to specific grades. The second day will feature guest speakers from the mining and minerals industry. The workshop will wrap up with a tour of various mine locations and Southern Nevada points of interest, including the Lost City Museum and the McCaw School of Mines.

Sessions are set from 7 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. Breakfast, lunch, dinner, beverages, snacks, safety equipment and travel arrangements will be provided by the association and Nevada Division of Minerals. Tour attendees should be prepared for a moderate amount of walking and wear closed-toe shoes, long pants and long-sleeved shirts.

To register, visit amiando.com/PFKATKA.html.

CITY NATIONAL BANK ANNOUNCES LITERACY GRANTS

City National Bank has announced that through its Reading is The way up literacy program, it is awarding a record number of teacher literacy grants to educators in four states totaling more than $115,000. The bank also announced that this year’s program received a record number of applications. Twenty teachers in Nevada received nearly $20,000.

For more information about the program and to see a list of grant recipients, visit readingisthewayup.org/literacy.php.

LEADERSHIP TRAINING SET FOR PEOPLE WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES

Partners in Policymaking plans to offer leadership training for people with developmental disabilities, parents and family members. The training is designed to teach the power of advocacy and change the way people with disabilities are supported, viewed, taught, live and work. The program will provide information about issues and policies related to disability and develop participant competencies to become more effective in influencing policy development at all levels.

Parents of children with developmental disabilities and adults with developmental disabilities are encouraged to apply. Classes are planned from 8 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. once a month through August at the University of Nevada Cooperative Extension’s Lifelong Learning Center, 8050 Paradise Road. Participants are expected to commit to all classes or complete make-up assignments. Remaining dates are: March 21, April 18, May 16, June 20, July 19 (in Reno) and Aug. 15. Participants will receive a stipend to help with childcare and transportation costs.

For more information or to apply, visit nced.info/pip.

SONS OF NORWAY OFFERS SCHOLARSHIP

Norwegian-American students who are at least high school seniors living in Clark County can apply for a scholarship from the Vegas Viking Lodge of the Sons of Norway.

Applications must be postmarked by April 10 and are available at vegasviking.com. The scholarships are worth at least $500 each and must be used for full-time, post-high school studies. Winners are chosen based on grades, financial need, involvement in extracurricular activities, and the content and quality of their essays, including how they express appreciation for their Norwegian heritage.

Tax-deductible contributions to the scholarship fund, including naming gifts, are welcome. If preferred, a donor’s name may be kept confidential. To donate, a check payable to the Vegas Viking Sons of Norway Scholarship Fund should be mailed to treasurer Warren Halvorsen, 830 Kingston Springs Way, Las Vegas, NV 89123-3643.

For more information, call Suzan Sibert, co-chairwoman of the scholarship committee, at 702-645-6666.

UNLV TO HOST FESTIVAL OF COMMUNITIES APRIL 11

The Festival of Communities, a celebration of cultural traditions, is set from noon to 5 p.m. April 11 at the Alumni Walk at UNLV, 4505 S. Maryland Parkway. Live music, dancing, readings and performances are planned, along with international food tastings, booths with displays of art and culture, balloon art, face painting and more.

The event is free and open to the public. For more information, visit tinyurl.com/ly7uezr.

REBEL PREVIEW TO OFFER LOOK AT COLLEGE LIFE

Prospective students are invited to learn about life as a UNLV student at Rebel Preview from 8 a.m. to 2 p.m. April 11. Students and families can get questions answered and tour the campus at 4505 S. Maryland Parkway, along with residence halls and specialty areas. Activities and informational sessions are planned, including discussions of degree programs and qualifying for scholarships and prizes and meeting current UNLV Rebels.

For more information, visit unlv.edu/event/rebel-preview.

COASTER OFFERS DEAL FOR STRAIGHT-A STUDENTS

The Big Apple Coaster at New York-New York, 3790 Las Vegas Blvd. South, plans to offer two-for-one ride passes to Clark County School District students who bring in their most recent report cards showing straight A’s. The offer is valid for one-time use through August. Guests must be at least 54 inches tall to ride.

For more information, visit nynyhotelcasino.com.

SPLASHDOWN FOR KIDS TO RAISE FUNDS FOR NONPROFIT GROUPS

Communities In Schools of Nevada and After-School All-Stars Las Vegas announce that tickets for the second annual Splashdown For Kids are on sale. The event is planned for April 25 and 26 at Wet‘n’Wild water park and offers a preview to summer with proceeds benefiting both local nonprofits.

Tickets are $25 and include entry to Wet‘n’Wild. For tickets, visit shop.omniticket.com/WWL/index.cfm and use the promo code “CISASASDAY.” Select general admission tickets, enter the code, and ticket options will become available.

For more information about Communities In Schools, visit cisnevada.org.

For more information about After-School All-Stars, visit asaslv.org.

UNLV STUDENTS TO GET DISCOUNT ON THE HIGH ROLLER

The High Roller at The Linq, 3535 Las Vegas Blvd. South, is offering UNLV faculty, staff members and students with a valid UNLV ID $10 off a High Roller ticket.

For more information, visit the linq.com.