Republicans aiming to keep Kline’s seat in Congress

Republican candidates running to replace Rep. John Kline in Minnesota’s 2nd Congressional District shared a debate stage Monday night at Cannon Falls High School. They were (from left) Pam Myhra, David Gerson, Darlene Miller, Jason Lewis, Gene Rechtzigel and John Howe. David Benson-Staebler did not attend. (Republican Eagle photo by Michael Brun)

CANNON FALLS — Self-described “limited-government conservative” David Gerson came away with a straw poll win Monday night following a debate between six Republican candidates vying for the state’s 2nd Congressional District.

Also on stage were John Howe, Jason Lewis, Darlene Miller, Pam Myhra and newcomer Gene Rechtzigel, who filed the day of the debate. David Benson-Staebler of Morris, Minnesota, did not attend.

“I am running for Congress because we know that Washington is a well-oiled machine for the political elite, big business, big banks, big media and big unions, and we will no longer accept the collusion between special interests and government,” said Gerson of South St. Paul.

He received 40 out of 105 votes in the unofficial poll conducted by the Goodhue County Republican Party, which sponsored the debate at Cannon Falls High School.

The GOP looks to retain the seat held since 2003 by Rep. John Kline. The Republican lawmaker announced last year he would not seek re-election in the fall.

Gerson ran a close race against Kline for party endorsement in 2014.

Lewis came in second in Monday’s straw poll with 33 votes. The former radio host faced criticism by third-place finisher Howe of Red Wing for residing outside of the district.

“If (Lewis) really wanted to help the Republican Party, maybe he should run against (DFL 4th District candidate) Betty McCollum in his own district instead of carpet bagging in this district,” Howe said in his closing statement.

Though the law does not require a candidate live in the district, Howe said it would be a “liability” in the general election.

“I live a whopping two miles outside the district,” Lewis said, calling the issue a “red herring.”

The debate covered a range of national issues, from repealing the Affordable Care Act to questions on climate change and renewable energy policy.

Myhra, a two-term state representative from Burnsville, Minnesota, said she favors a free-market approach for energy initiatives over government subsidies.

“I believe in reducing the regulations,” Myhra said. “Adding more regulations increases our premiums … which will result in greater hardship for people on fixed incomes.”

Voters in the 2nd District are most concerned about jobs and the economy, said Miller, CEO of a Burnsville, Minnesota,-based parts manufacturer.

“We need to encourage anyone who has a dream to start a new business, even if it’s in their garage, to help them and then when they grow up make sure they stay here in America,” Miller said.

Candidates also voiced opposition for federal spending on high-speed passenger trains in southeastern Minnesota, a contentious topic in the region considered for separate public- and privately-funded rail lines.

“We need to go ahead with the super highway system, not a Zip Rail,” Rechtzigel said.

The 2nd District covers the south metro and parts of southeastern Minnesota, including Goodhue, Dakota and Wabasha counties.

The presumptive DFL nominee is Angie Craig of Eagan, Minnesota.

Kline said he was “concerned” about fundraising by the field of Republican candidates, none of whom have raised much more than $100,000 for their campaigns, the St. Paul Pioneer Press reported Monday.

The congressman has not endorsed a candidate in the race.