1) The federal online health marketplace healthcare.gov is back in business for the second open enrollment season. Meanwhile, the partisan zeal to repeal, weaken and undermine the Affordable Care Act is playing in the backdrop. If successful, repeal would take away the health care access that 20 million people have gained, according to a survey published in the New England Journal of Medicine.



That includes people who signed up through the online marketplaces, people who qualified for Medicaid, people with pre-existing conditions, and 7.8 million young people between 19 and 25 who last year enrolled in their parents’ health plans. It’s enough to impress Oliver Twist’s cruel boss, Mr. Fagin.

2) At the U.S. Supreme Court, the health reform law faces another legal challenge: Did the law’s text allow health plan tax credits to go to consumers from states like Florida that didn’t open an insurance exchange?

If the challengers win and the subsidies go away, real people will be hurt; people in the midst of chemotherapy; people who need insulin and blood pressure medicine to stay healthy; people scheduled for surgery; people who need new hips and knees.

In Florida, insurance for about 800,000 people would potentially become too expensive to buy. The average price jump, by some estimates, would be in the range of 70 to 80 percent.

3) “Are these the shadows of things that must be, or are they the shadows of things that might be?”

Thankfully, they need not be. Even if the court rules against the Obama administration, Florida could take steps to protect its citizens.

Insurance exchanges set up by states worked very well in some places, especially Connecticut. The Baltimore Sun reported that Maryland, whose state-run exchange worked badly last year, ditched their software this summer and bought Connecticut’s, spending $41 million.

So a contingency plan would cost about $50 per enrollee. Setting up a Florida-based health insurance exchange would be gradually written down over the years, and it would give security to the hundreds of thousands of Floridians now enjoying the dignity of health care access.

Cue Tiny Tim.