TOKYO — A new generation of Japanese architects believes the world has fallen out of love with the 20th-century steel and concrete skyscraper.

They are pushing a human-friendly alternative that some say has roots in the elegant simplicity of the traditional Japanese tea house.

Instead of pursuing monuments that cry out with a message of economic power, these Pritzker Prize-winning architects are scoring success with a uniquely Japanese reinterpretation of the past.

Unlike their predecessors, who modernized Japan with Western-style edifices, they talk of fluidly defining space with screens and sliding doors, innovatively blending with nature, taking advantage of earthy materials and incorporating natural light, all trademarks of Japanese design.

Their sensibility is also a hit abroad, said Erez Golani Solomon, professor of architecture at Waseda University in Tokyo.

“Food and architecture,” said Solomon, stressing how the two are Japan’s most potent brands. “They are powerful — Japan’s strongest cultural identity.”

Kengo Kuma, one of the star architects, finds he is in demand not only in Japan and in the West but also in places such as China, which has tempestuous relations with Tokyo but now boasts a growing fan base for Kuma’s works.

Among the major China projects for Kuma are the recent Xinjin Zhi Museum, whose sloping angles and repeated tile motifs are characteristically Kuma, and the Yunnan Sales Center, a sprawling complex of shops, housing and a theater, where wooden lattice decorates the main structure overlooking a pond.

Kuma, an admirer of Frank Lloyd Wright, a pioneering American architect known for cherishing nature and people in his designs, at times uses interlocking wooden frames, defining a building’s shape with a collage of angles that seem to change organically.

Natural wood is everywhere — in screens, doors and furniture.

Japanese architecture offers warmth and kindness as it is adept in the use of natural light and artisanal craftsmanship, such as bamboo and paper. It is “working together like music,” Kuma said, to create a comfortable and luxurious spot even in a cramped space.

That’s the basic principle of a Japanese tea house, he said.

“It’s part of our genetic makeup,” Kuma told The Associated Press, sitting in his Tokyo studio.

Also erasing boundaries with the outside is the architecture of Sou Fujimoto, another rising star.

Fujimoto’s house of glass — literally, just that — sits in a residential area in Tokyo, stunning in how it quietly asserts itself, despite its transparency, turning housing stereotypes on their heads.

Instead of seeking shelter from the environment, residents experience the passage of time, seeing the sun and the stars above, watching and being watched by neighbors and passers-by. No room is defined by walls, as we know them, although drapes can be drawn for privacy.

Inhabitants move from one area to another within a borderless box.

At night, the home glows like a luminescent jewel.

Like Kuma, Fujimoto is busy, working all over the world, including Germany, the U.S., France and China. Eighty percent of his work is from outside Japan, and half of his staff is non-Japanese.

In a telling sign of their rising stature, four of the winners of the prestigious Pritzker Architecture Prize in the last six years have been Japanese: Kazuyo Sejima, Ryue Nishizawa, Toyo Ito and Shigeru Ban.

In the past, Japanese winners were few and far between.

Kenzo Tange, known for his statuesque, curvaceous Tokyo Olympic stadium, won the Chicago-based Pritzker in 1987; Fumihiko Maki, who infused an Eastern sensibility into his floating forms of glass, metal and concrete, won in 1993; and the self-taught and idiosyncratic Tadao Ando was the third Japanese to win, nine years after Tange.

More recently, Japanese have also been recognized with the gold medal by The American Institute of Architects. Maki won in 2011 and Ando in 2002.

Ito won the Royal Gold Medal from the Royal Institute of British Architects in 2006.

A win by a non-Westerner for such awards had long been rare.