Photo

Malibu, Calif. — LAST week the Supreme Court took an unusual step: It declined to issue a ruling in a case, Zubik v. Burwell, and instead unanimously ordered the lower courts to consider a compromise that the justices themselves suggested. The case, which concerned access to contraceptive coverage under the Affordable Care Act, raised a controversial issue about religious freedom. But by proposing a practical solution that might be amenable to all parties involved, the court avoided addressing that issue.

Purportedly, the justices took this action to avoid having to split 4-to-4 in the case. With the Senate refusing to consider President Obama’s nominee to replace Justice Antonin Scalia, the current eight-justice court finds itself increasingly vulnerable to such deadlocks, unable to make definitive 5-to-4 rulings. According to many observers, this arrangement is damaging the court and the country.

But it is not causing any real harm. Indeed, there is reason to think the opposite is true.

For one thing, 5-to-4 rulings, though not as rare as they used to be, are still not all that common. Some 80 percent of the court’s decisions in a given term typically consist of non-ideologically charged rulings on questions of statutory interpretation or other issues. In such cases, an eight-justice court operates just fine because majorities readily form.

It is only in the relatively small fraction of politically charged cases where the court may divide along ideological lines, frequently with the “swing justice,” Anthony M. Kennedy, choosing to join his conservative or liberal colleagues. Americans have learned to view these cases as central to the court’s role — which is why 4-to-4 deadlocks can seem dysfunctional. But we ought to ask ourselves whether deciding important cases in this manner is what the court should be doing.

This was not, after all, the original plan. The Supreme Court today is both political and powerful in ways that would be unrecognizable to the framers of the Constitution. They penned a mere five sentences creating a “supreme Court” and defining its jurisdiction. The judicial branch was something of an afterthought for them, because they believed that in a democracy the elected branches would be responsible for governing the country.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Judicial review, in its modern sense, did not exist. As the framers envisioned it, the justices appointed to the Supreme Court would mainly interpret and apply federal law when necessary to resolve disputes involving the rights of individuals. And though the framers’ views on the court’s role in interpreting and enforcing the Constitution are the subject of debate, it seems most likely that when disputes required determining whether a federal law comported with the Constitution, the court’s interpretation was supposed to bind only the parties in the particular case — not the legislative and executive branches generally.

Over time, however, and especially from the mid-20th century on, the court’s vision of its role in our democratic system changed, from dispute resolver to supreme arbiter of all matters of constitutional law, so that elected branches of government at federal and state levels were bound to accept its interpretations. The American people largely went along with this accretion of power. But they surely never anticipated that eventually, many politically charged and contestable questions — for example, whether the Constitution guarantees the right to possess guns, to have an abortion, to allow gay couples to marry, or to allow corporations to spend money to help elect our political representatives — would be decided by one unelected justice who straddled political voting blocs on the court.

This is democratic folly. It is this situation, and not 4-to-4 deadlocks, that poses a real threat to the American people, at least if they care about governing themselves.

Sign Up for the Opinion Today Newsletter Every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from Op-Ed columnists, The Times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world.

Ever since Magna Carta, a fundamental tenet of just government has been a system of laws applied in as neutral and principled a way as possible, not a system based on the personal inclinations of ruling individuals. The political institution that the Supreme Court has become disserves this principle. The problem is only exacerbated by the court’s reluctance to exercise restraint in deciding important issues of constitutional law (e.g., discovering fundamental rights of personal gun possession or gay marriage), when other avenues exist for resolving disputes (e.g., deciding these cases more incrementally or narrowly, or simply leaving it to the American people to deliberate on these matters at local political levels).

Which brings us back to the matter of the current eight-justice court. If Zubik v. Burwell is any indication, an evenly divided court may prompt the justices to reach practical compromises that assist real-life litigants, instead of making bold, sweeping and highly debatable proclamations about the meaning of the Constitution. Being a dispute resolver rather than a Constitution oracle surely fits better into the intended — and democratic — constitutional scheme.

Obviously, a political logjam in the Senate is not the way to bring about meaningful reform of the Supreme Court. But that logjam exists precisely because the court has become such a political actor. The current eight-member court does not represent a permanent fix, but perhaps it should not overly trouble us either.