Jim Conley, Rock Valley College Professor of Computer Information Systems, has been recognized as an Advanced Level Instructor by Cisco Networking Academy. This award recognizes Conley’s achievements as one of the top 25 percent of instructors globally.

James Rozinsky and Aimee Berman of the Employee Benefits team at Spectrum Insurance Agency, 5301 E State St Rockford, IL passed the required Affordable Care Act and Marketplace Exams for certification on the Federally-facilitated Marketplaces and consisted of 4 separate exams including ‘Individual Marketplace Exam’,’ SHOP Marketplace Exam’, ‘Individual Marketplace Agreements’ and ‘Affordable Care Act & Marketplace Basics Exam’.

Aletha Beard of Spectrum Insurance Agency completed her required Insurance Ethics class on June 20th which accounted for 3 credits towards her Illinois Continuing Education Credits.

Eve Whitaker of Spectrum Insurance Agency, Inc. passed her API 28 test on May 21st. The API 28 Personal Insurance:Underwriting & Marketing Practices class is part of the process to get her Associate in General Insurance (AINS) and Associate in Personal Insurance (API) designations. The class was based on how to Improve effectiveness with a solid understanding of personal lines insurance principles and practices, strengthen underwriting skills by building a strong understanding of personal lines risk selection techniques and increase customer satisfaction and retention by appropriately incorporating marketing techniques into the underwriting process.

Maria Salinas, Bethany Pederson and Julie Burfoot of the Employee Benefits team at Spectrum Insurance Agency passed the required Affordable Care Act and Marketplace Exams for certification on the Federally-facilitated Marketplaces and consisted of 4 separate exams including ‘Individual Marketplace Exam,’ ‘SHOP Marketplace Exam,’ ‘Individual Marketplace Agreements’ and ‘Affordable Care Act & Marketplace Basics Exam.’ Salinas also attended a seminar on August 1-2 ‘Management & Leadership skills for Mangers or Supervisors’ which taught the most effective ways to prioritize tasks, delegate responsibilities, foster accountability and ownership, motivate people, develop staff and coach individuals and teams.

Brenda Ziegler of Spectrum Insurance Agency attended ‘Employment & Labor Law for Illinois Employers’ seminar on August 7 at Hilton Garden Inn in Rockford, Ill. SmithAmundsen LLC’s Labor & Employment Law Group, discussed critical legal developments in order to help employers better manage and take control over difficult employment and labor issues impacting the workplace.

Baker Tilly Virchow Krause, LLP (Baker Tilly) is pleased to announce Teresa Castanias, CPA has joined the firm’s cooperative practice as an independent director. She brings more than thirty years of experience in cooperative services. With more than 1,600 employees, Baker Tilly provides a wide range of accounting, tax, and advisory services.

Amanda Sookraj has been promoted to Senior Manager with Baker Tilly Virchow Krause, LLP. Amanda joined Baker Tilly in 2005. She specializes in leading audit and advisory services for clients in the manufacturing and distribution services industries.

Scott Fischer has been promoted to Senior Manager with Baker Tilly Virchow Krause, LLP. He joined the firm in 1999 and specializes in providing accounting and tax services to clients in the manufacturing and distribution services industries. Scott has extensive experience in forensic accounting, tax planning, tax saving strategies, and financial trend analysis and recently obtained his masters in tax.

Craig Nemeth has been promoted to Senior Manager with Baker Tilly Virchow Krause, LLP. He joined the firm in 1999 and specializes in providing accounting and tax services to business and individual clients.

Julie Schildgen, Academic Chair and Professor of Graphic Arts Technology at Rock Valley College, is the recipient of the Academic Educator 2013 Printing Industries of America Education Award of Excellence. The awards honor distinguished educational service as a direct result of leadership, special education, and/or training accomplishments.

Peggy Shiels, M.D., a board-certified internal medicine physician, has joined Jack Lenox, M.d., to provide comprehensive care to women of all ages at Lenox Healthcare for Women, 1235 N. Mulford Rd., Rockford.

Williams-Manny has hired Cheryl B. Church as Director of Service Operations. In her new role, Church will ensure Williams-Manny delivers an ideal experience for their customers. Church comes to Williams-Manny with 26 years of experience. Previously, she worked in the wireless industry as a Director of Sales and Operations/Consultant. Church received a degree in Organizational Leadership from Bellevue University in Bellevue, Neb. Williams-Manny, the largest insurance consulting agency in Northwest Illinois has been providing exceptional service since 1896.