Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump said during a speech on April 25 in Warwick, Rhode Island, that people who protest him "do not love our country" (video below).

Some protesters interrupted Trump during his speech, and he asserted, "You know in New York we had some protesters, and they’re all paid for," reports RawStory.com.

Trump went on to call the press dishonest, insisted again that the protesters were being paid, but got interrupted again by demonstrators.

"These are just professional agitators, folks," Trump stated. "They're put in there, they're just nothing but trouble, they're nothing but trouble. I actually believe that they do not love our country, I’ll be honest with you. I really believe that. They don’t love our country."

Trump went on to say how great his poll numbers are in Rhode Island and how he insisted on coming to the state against his advisers' strategy.

Another group of protesters interrupted Trump, and his supporters shouted, "Trump! Trump! Trump!" and "Build that wall!”

Trump responded:

"Don’t even think about it, it will be built. Don’t even think about it, don't waste your breath, it will be built. Believe me. Believe me, it will be built and it will go up fast, and it will be big and it will be high and strong.

"And it’s going to help stop the drugs from pouring into Rhode Island where you have a big problem, and everywhere else."

Meanwhile in Indiana, a female Trump supporter questioned Republican presidential candidate Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas on how he won in Colorado without the residents voting -- the GOP state assembly voted, per state rules -- notes Mediaite.com.

Cruz said he did not set the rules, and added: "The Washington establishment is who I've been fighting against every day, whether it's leading the fight against Obamacare or leading the fight against amnesty. I'm the one who led the fight, Donald Trump is the one funded the Gang of Eight that pushed for amnesty."

The woman countered: "$50,000 over four years isn't funding much of anything."

"I gave zero dollars to them, and I led the fight against it," Cruz insisted. "Donald Trump in 2013 was tweeting out his support for amnesty at the time."

The woman told Cruz that he led a fight against auditing the Federal Reserve and the Trans-Pacific Partnership, but voted for the latter. She added that Cruz fought "on the wrong end."