His brother’s blood and pain are not enough, Bryan Cunningham has learned.

Kevin Cunningham has a cancerous mass nearly 9 centimeters in diameter on a kidney — but blood mixed with urine and sharp backaches won’t always get you into a surgery room any quicker when you’re insured. Even in an Affordable Care Act world.

Bryan, who oversees medical care for his brother who has bipolar disorder, has learned that lesson the hard way.

“We have seen three urologists, all saying that we need to get this kidney out, but no one will get the authorization to perform surgery,” Cunningham said.

Kevin, who enrolled in Medi-Cal in January, was admitted to a local hospital on May 2 when doctors determined all the pain and blood are due to cancer.

Two months and three different hospitals later, Kevin Cunningham, 36, has been sent home with handfuls of painkillers, mixed messages and no one available to proceed with a biopsy.

“The doctor told us that this was the biggest mass he has ever seen in someone so young and that it’s definitely cancer and we need to remove the kidney ASAP,” Bryan Cunningham said. “He said he could do the surgery but due to the size of the mass, he did not feel comfortable or skilled enough to do it laproscopically. He could do the surgery but all of his partners did not take LA Care insurance so he would have to do it by himself.”

What the Cunninghams experienced is a scenario that was supposed to be fixed under the Affordable Care Act, health advocates say.

“These types of issues existed before the ACA and it’s unfortunate because it hasn’t been resolved,” said Anthony Wright, executive director for Health Access, a coalition that advocates for affordable health care for all Californians.

“This was unacceptable before the ACA but the ACA didn’t solve the problem either,” he said. “The point of people having insurance is so that instead of being at the whim of a safety net hospital and a patchwork of care, people have coordinated care and a person isn’t going to get ping-ponged around the system.”

About 1.9 million people enrolled into Medi-Cal through the end of March, including 1.1 million through the Covered California portal and county offices. The surge was due to an expansion of Medi-Cal, or California’s version of Medicare which allowed more low-income adults between the ages of 19 to 64 without children and families to enroll.

The surge also was viewed as a success because it meant more people would receive consistent care. In Los Angeles County, those who qualified chose Medi-Cal plans through the publicly-run L.A. Care Health Plan or the private Health Net.

Advertisement

But Wright questions if L.A. Care, for example, is equipped to find providers through a layered network. L.A. Care works with sub-contracted health plans to provide Medi-Cal.

Wright and others believe it has the potential to interrupt the flow and timeliness of care, especially for those such as Kevin Cunningham who require more medical attention.

A bill by state Sen. Ed Hernandez, D-West Covina, would require that the state’s Department of Managed Health Care review county organized health systems such as L.A. Care for compliance with the timeliness standards adopted by the department. The bill also would require the DMHC to post the findings on the Internet starting Dec. 1, 2016. It’s expected to be heard in the Assembly’s health committee on June 24.

Hernandez said the impetus for crafting Senate Bill 964 was in response to complaints he received about inadequate networks in the Medi-Cal program as well as Covered California.

“We need to do all we can to ensure the people who have purchased health care coverage are actually able to use that coverage to see a qualified provider,” he said.

Hernandez said he also is concerned about the lack of primary care physicians and specialists who accept Medi-Cal.

“This bill requires annual reviews of accessibility and availability of services, including adequacy and timely access, and continuity of care reported by product line,” he said. “It’s a great first step to figure out how big the problem really is.”

About 20 organizations support the bill, but one group, the California Association of Health Plans, opposes it, saying several sufficient measures already are in place. More legislation would lead to additional cost and administrative burdens, according to the group.

“It doesn’t have to be costly,” Hernandez said. “The bill merely requires a review to ensure that the networks remain adequate. The costs of patients not having access to providers when premiums are being paid for services should be more of a concern to the opposition.”

John Wallace, chief operating officer at L.A. Care, said he could not discuss Cunningham’s case because of privacy laws. But in a statement he said the organization has about 180,000 new members as a result of Medi-Cal expansion, has increased by 350 employees and the network includes more than 20,000 physicians across 60 hospitals and other facilities.

“Care is delivered within regulatory timelines that are dependent on medical necessity,” Wallace said in a statement. “Our goal is excellent member care delivered at the right time and in the right place.”

Wright, of Health Access said what the Cunninghams experienced is uncommon for most people who do not suffer from major illnesses.

“This is not a common experience of most people who have Medi-Cal coverage,” Wright said of Kevin Cunningham’s case. “At the same time, it’s troublesome that it even happens to one person. The point of health insurance is to be there to take care of the 5 or 10 percent of folks who have serious illnesses.”

Wright suggested that anyone with complaints finding providers contact the Department of Managed Health Care at 1-888-466-2219.

Meanwhile, Bryan Cunningham said he was told to take his brother to UCLA on June 26, but after repeatedly contacting L.A. Care, was able to push that appointment to see a doctor last Thursday.

It will be the fourth hospital he has visited. But he still has one physician’s words on his mind.

“One doctor told my brother that he should just get dressed and go home and to come back in August because that’s when he can do the surgery.” Cunningham said. “How the hell do you tell someone with a softball-size cancerous growth on their kidney to come back in three months for surgery?”