For some married couples it is a tradition to renew their marriage vows on an anniversary as a display of their continued commitment to each other, so it was not unusual that at regular intervals Republicans renewed their vows to eliminate the Affordable Care Act with over 40 votes in the House to repeal the law. Apparently, the 40-plus votes was not a deep enough commitment for conservatives controlling the Republican Party, so they chose the four-year anniversary of President Obama’s first inauguration to renew their vows to obstruct any more attempts at economic recovery by taking extreme economy-damaging measures to kill the Affordable Care Act.

In January 2009, Republicans met in secret and vowed, as a party, to obstruct and block economic initiatives to repair the damage of Bush-Republican economic malfeasance that nearly crashed the entire world’s economy and financial system. After losing the race for the White House to President Obama a second time, conservatives gathered in secret nearly four years to the day of their first attempt to obstruct the President’s recovery agenda and renewed their vow to destroy the economy again. However, when Republicans renewed their vows in early 2013, instead of using obstruction to thwart economic recovery, they vowed to shut down the government and jeopardize the full faith and credit of the United States to teach Americans that when Republicans reject the results of a presidential election and a Supreme Court ruling, they will destroy the economy and close down the government.

Shortly after President Obama was inaugurated for the second time a conservative cabal led by former attorney general Edwin Meese met in secret and plotted strategy to eliminate Affordable Care Act by convincing conservative lawmakers to pressure fellow Republicans to cut off financing for the entire federal government. Like Meese, the man leading the political arm of the Heritage Foundation, Michael A. Needham, believed House Republicans “needed to use the power of the purse” to withhold funding for the government to stop the ACA’s implementation. The well-financed groups involved in the shutdown effort, Tea Party Patriots, Americans for Prosperity, FreedomWorks, Club for Growth, Heritage Foundation, Citizens United, Generation Opportunity, and Young Americans for Liberty all have deep connections to, and likely take orders from, the Koch brothers who have spent well in excess of $200 million to stop the ACA including funding the shutdown effort.

Teabaggers have lusted to shut down the federal government since 2011 unless taxes and domestic spending were abolished, but they lacked Republican support until the Koch brothers and their band of seditionists decided the government was fair game to eliminate the healthcare law. The fascist Koch brothers and their Americans for Prosperity belief tank funding the effort to abolish the ACA recently spent $5.5 million to denigrate the idea of affordable healthcare through a propaganda and misinformation campaign that would make Nazi propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels proud.

The president of the Koch-funded Americans for Prosperity said “We view this as a long-term effort, and will spend tens of millions of dollars on a multi-front effort” that includes preventing states from expanding Medicaid under the law and keeping a scorecard to threaten any Republican considering breaking ranks from the band of seditionists. The plot hatched in January was not to defund the health law; they want it gone in the same way they have wanted Social Security gone for nearly 80 years. When they say long-term effort, they mean decades if that is what it takes to eliminate the law including shutting down the government and pushing the nation to default on its debts.

It goes without saying that Republicans, teabaggers, and the Koch criminal gang hate the idea of most Americans having healthcare insurance and they will undoubtedly spend millions of dollars more to see it destroyed, but to plot to shut down the government and cause a credit default is a blatant act of sedition. Sedition is any overt conduct, such as speech and organization, which is deemed to tend toward insurrection against the established order and includes subversion of a Constitution and incitement of discontent to lawful authority. The Affordable Care Act was enacted according to the Constitution under established order, and the Koch brothers, Heritage Foundation, Americans for Prosperity, and teabagger groups are definitively inciting discontent against the U.S. Congress and Supreme Court’s lawful authority to pass and rule a law Constitutional.

Conservatives involved in the seditious plot to shut down the government intended for Republicans to tie killing the health law to “a series of C.R.s and debt limits” according to fascist president of the Heritage Foundation Jim DeMint. He said that through all the continuing resolutions on spending over the past three years, “there was discussion of ‘O.K., we’re not going to fight the Obamacare fight, we’ll do it next time.’ The conservatives who ran in 2010 promising to repeal it kept hearing, ‘This is not the right time to fight this battle.’ ” After losing the 2012 election, the Kochs and their conservative cabal had enough stalling and made the conscious decision that the right time to “fight this battle” was when they could shut down the government and not raise the debt limit to destroy the healthcare law. According to DeMint, he said he had the idea of holding funding the government and debt limit hostage since the ACA was signed into law in 2010, but he claims Republican leadership was not aggressive enough to do the right thing.

There is no conceivable way the “secret” meeting of conservatives is not an act of sedition; especially when they planned in advance to shut down the government and destroy the full faith and credit of the United States unless their demands were met. The Koch brothers, Tea Party, Heritage Foundation, and the rest of the plotters are guilty of sedition and there are paper trails and financial records to back up the charge. There can be no doubt the government shutdown alone is wreaking havoc on the economy, and the simple fact that over 70% of intelligence workers are off the job jeopardizes the security of this nation. The real damage, though, is the threat that fascists in Congress will not vote to raise the nation’s debt limit unless the health law is defunded and that is an existential threat to the nation that began with the seditious plot eight months ago.

It is time for the Department of Justice to launch an in-depth investigation into the conservative plot to harm the United States government and its financial solvency and they must start with the Koch brothers. It is one thing for Republicans to bicker on how to fund the government, but Senate Democrats gave House Republicans the spending levels they demanded but did not acquiesce to kill a Constitutional law that drove them to join the conservative plot to take down the government through a well-planned and funded plot of sedition. America cannot let the traitors go unpunished, because like they did with the debt ceiling crisis of 2011, it will be a regular occurrence until they achieve their goal and as they have shown with their attempts to destroy Social Security, there are no time constraints holding them back.

The Koch brothers, their sycophant belief tanks, and anti-American teabaggers have openly advocated for a “fundamental transformation of America” and they are deploying tactics that are not unlike the Nazis in 1930s Germany. They spent hundreds-of-millions of dollars on propaganda, fear mongering, and misinformation campaigns and when that failed to topple the established order that enacted the health law they plotted to shutter the government and destroy the full faith and credit of the United States. If Americans were timid to label conservative extremists and Republicans treasonous, they should have no doubt that a plot to shut down America’s government and create a financial catastrophe that is reaching fruition is nothing less than outright sedition against the United States government.

Editor’s Note: Thanks to reader Royce Hohn for starting the petition, which you can sign here.You can also call the Office of the Attorney General Public Comment Line – 202-353-1555.