RAISE YOUR VOICE: Share your own opinion online at dallasnews.com/sendletters. Sign up for Sounding Off or submit a guest column (and include your full name and contact information) by visiting dallasnews.com/voices.

Sen. Ted Cruz recently announced his presidential bid, making him the first major candidate to declare his candidacy. What are you looking for in a presidential candidate? What issues do you think are important in the time leading up to the election?

Paul LeBon, Lewisville: Abolishing the IRS, border security and standing “unapologetically with the nation of Israel” are certainly talking points that sound good but will never happen. Dick Armey used to talk about abolishing the IRS while taking money from the accounting profession. Secure the border? We’ll cure cancer first.

J. Paul Holcomb, Double Oak: I have been very pleased with Barack Obama and am interested in a candidate that, like Obama, reasons his way to well-thought-out stances and policy. I am not interested in a candidate who only speaks against ideas, who stands for ideals that he/she does not clearly define. It’s easy to say you stand for liberty. We all do. But what does your liberty mean to you?

I am in favor of the way of diplomacy and have been encouraged by the talks with Iran. I have been disappointed in our leaders who want to bomb Iran, no questions asked. We have tried that in Iraq, and we are still paying for it. I want a reasonable voice in the White House. The leader who shoots first and asks questions later could lead us to disaster.

Vern Olson, Flower Mound: I want a president who is proud of the United States, believes in the Constitution and is comfortable in the role of the leader of the free world, after reclaiming the title following the missteps and wimpiness of our current leader.

I think a flat tax, where everybody pays, is a good idea. There would be no deductions for the fat cats, and those on welfare would pay, strengthening their role in our country. They could get it all back as a refund, but they would still have to send it in and feel like they’re a part of society. There would be a significant financial savings in not having nearly as many IRS employees as we have now, and there would be less opportunity for corruption.

We’ve always, until now, been Israel’s strongest supporter, and that should continue. Balance in the Middle East would be good, and Israel can provide that, with our support.

The border issue is a no-brainer for our country. Our porous border very negatively impacts our security and our financial position. We need to know who is coming in, and be able to deal with them appropriately.

Gale David, Flower Mound: My ideal candidate for president or any congressional seat would be someone who is not a career politician, since it appears their only agenda is to keep being elected. I have trouble understanding why someone would spend millions of dollars to get a job that pays about $174,000 to $225,000 per year.

Conversely, I have no trouble understanding why corporations and rich individuals give hundreds of thousands of dollars to campaigns. If elected, their candidates now “owe them.” Our Supreme Court basically destroyed our election processes when they declared donations to campaigns a matter of “free speech” and granted person-dom to corporations. All campaign contributions should be “blind” and anonymous to a party “trust” that will be charged with equitable allocation of the resources.

My candidate would first respect and defend the foundation laid by our founding fathers in the Declaration of Independence, our Constitution and Bill of Rights. Pride in our country and respect for the citizens and veterans of this country is a prerequisite for my candidate as well. He or she would know what the definition of “compromise” is and that give and take is needed on all sides to reach agreement.

I do not want a candidate who is fanatically “right” nor “left” but a centrist.

I do not want a candidate who believes the government must provide anything but opportunity to the citizens and persons living here lawfully. We are not guaranteed the right to happiness. We are guaranteed the right to pursue happiness. If your happiness is a fancy car or the latest electronics, then use your opportunities to earn those items. Granted, limited assistance may be necessary in some cases. But such aid should be of short duration to meet basic needs only while the recipients of the temporary assistance avail themselves of opportunities to earn. No such assistance should be provided to any person living in this country unlawfully.

I do not want an apologist or a protagonist leading our country or making its laws. While a variety of experience is a good thing, especially in dealing with foreign affairs, the first concern should be “what is best for the U.S.A.”

Doris Taylor, Highland Village: The next president of the United States will be facing a political environment that has been escalating in divisiveness for at least 15 years. The next chief executive should seek to change the confrontational attitude of both parties. To do so, they will have to step away from the radical segment of either party and be a true statesman with the ability to respect the points of view of others and recognize that he represents all the people, not just those of his particular political or religious point of view.

Defending our country from foreign attack is a huge issue, as is securing our borders from illegal immigration. However, in this new century, this is much more complex than speaking softly and carrying a big stick. Other countries now also have big sticks, and the need for diplomacy, mediation and understanding of other cultures is crucial.

Fiscal responsibility must be of greater concern than it has been. We cannot continue to spend money we do not have. However, there must be agencies within the government to oversee the income and outflow of funds involved in running the government and paying for programs that serve the citizens. Any candidate who suggests abolishing the IRS is irrational. Neither is it rational to campaign to abolish “every word of the Affordable Care Act” unless a more workable plan is in place to meet the health care needs of the populace.

The leader of our country must be a global leader in the area of concern for the environment. We must be good stewards of the planet we will be passing on to future generations. That involves being serious about developing alternative energy sources and knowledgeable of the valid science that proves climate change is a reality, and that we must make changes in our lifestyles because of this reality.

We live on a planet of more than 7.2 billion people. The U.S. must become a leader in global family planning efforts. Other countries have proved to be much more visionary in this area than have we. To deny the impact of a human population, which continues to increase at the present rate, means that our descendants will experience a declining quality of life.

Any candidate I would vote for must also understand that “pro choice” does not mean anyone is required to embrace family planning that goes against their particular religious beliefs. It means we do not judge others for the decisions they make, and we do not attempt to legislate our own religious beliefs on the whole population of the country.

Briefly, I am looking for a candidate who has a broader perspective than those who are presently making the most noise. General qualities I would expect are honesty, integrity and leadership ability.

Kathleen Mendola, Lewisville: I am looking for a liberal, fair-minded candidate who will expand food stamps, raise welfare payments so that people are not in the streets, build more shelters, create jobs by implementing public works, and will stand up to some of the world’s bullies and against terrorism. I don’t think Ted and I see eye to eye.

David Langley, Flower Mound: The issues I think are most important are keeping us out of war, improving but not eliminating Obamacare, reducing the wealth gap, preserving Medicare, protecting the economy from irresponsible banking and Wall Street actions, and eliminating the federal deficit in a reasonable time frame. The weight of the solution should be borne by the wealthy.

Mike Aramanda, Denton: I want a candidate that is smart, honest and willing to work for the good of the country and its people, not for some stupid political party or rich private interest group. I doubt we will ever see another candidate like the Roosevelts, Truman, Eisenhower or Kennedy. Those days are over in the current political environment where money rules politics.

Rick Barozinsky, Flower Mound: I look for a level of pragmatism in a candidate. The closer a person stands to one extreme or another predetermines how far that person can look for answers to a particular problem. Good solutions cannot be bound by myopic thinking.

Joseph Holden, Argyle: Mr. Cruz certainly comes across as a well-spoken, polished and educated political candidate. I would not support a social conservative with an evangelical base for president of the United States. I would not support a one-term senator avoiding his state duties and espousing his job experience who filibustered a federal government shutdown like a spoiled whiny brat. I’m sure the families who went two weeks without pay would gladly donate that to his campaign fund. And I would not support a candidate who supports certain individual states rights in opposition to U.S. federal policy/laws.

Samuel Highley, Lewisville: In a president, we need a strong leader with a stance on issues that represents the 21st century. Republicans like Ted Cruz often take a stance on issues like LGBT rights and race that differs from that of how real people view them. We need a leader that unites, not divides, the country.

Daniel Moran, Flower Mound: I am looking for a presidential candidate who will respect the rights of LGBT and secular Americans. Sen. Ted Cruz will not do that. The most important issues are LGBT rights, and not simply marriage, but equal access to housing, employment and adoption for LGBT Americans. Climate change and income inequality also need to be addressed.

Fill out my Wufoo form!

On Twitter:

@neighborsgo