In his first varsity high school start, freshman Dalton Chandler was outstanding. He fired a no-hitter and only one Florence batter reached base in a 23-0 rout of the Huskies. Chandler allowed no runs on zero hits with 12 strike outs and no walks. (Courtesy Photo)

After more schedule changes, the Lamar Savages baseball team finally got their final two games played in the St. Mary’s Spring Invitational.

Lamar was slated to play Kent Denver on Friday night at 8 o’clock before that game was moved to Saturday morning at the St. Mary’s Grace Center.

In a showdown of Class 3A state-ranked teams, the No. 3 ranked Lamar Savages defeated the No. 6 ranked Kent Denver Sun Devils, 11-5.

Lamar held a 2-0 lead after the first inning before Kent Denver scored two runs in the top of the second to tie the game at 2-2.

The Savages erupted for six-runs in the second inning that broke the tie and never looked back.

Lamar added three more runs in the third inning of the game.

At the plate, Lamar spread out 9 hits and took advantage of six errors by the Sun Devels.

Jake Specht went 2-for-5 at the plate and had 4 RBI and 2 runs scored to pace the Savages. Draven Adame also had a solid game at the plate going 3-for-4 with 2 RBI.

On the mound, Darin Cook picked up the win and ran his record to 2-0. The senior right hander worked 5 innings and allowed four runs (one earned) on two hits. He struck out 11 and walked three.

The Savages then packed their gear and headed to Manitou Springs for a contest with the Florence Huskies.

Lamar had little trouble as they battered the Huskies 23-0 in five innings.

The Savages pounded out 18 hits in the rout and committed jus one error.

Lamar held a 5-0 lead after two innings when they opened the flood gates with 11 runs in the third and added 7 more runs in the fourth.

In his first varsity high school start, freshman Dalton Chandler fired a no-hitter and only one Florence batter reached base in a 23-0 rout of the Huskies.

Chandler allowed no runs on zero hits with 12 strike outs and no walks.

At the plate for the Savages, Kaleb Hansen went 4-for-6 with 3 RBI and 3 runs scored. Jake Specht went 4-for-4 with two doubles, 5 RBI, and four runs scored. Brent Crampton went 2-for-3 with 4 RBI and one run scored.

The Savages are now 3-1 overall and will return to action Saturday, March 28 with a doubleheader at Trinidad to begin Tri-Peaks League East Division play.