A new fast food restaurant and a new commercial development featuring a Marshalls and Aldi are one step closer to calling Spring Hill their new home.

The city’s planning commission voted unanimously to approve both a sketch plat and sketch plan for the Wilkes Development between Wilkes Lane and Campbell Station Parkway, which has a Marshalls clothing retailer and an Aldi grocery store already committed. However, the plan is contingent upon the results of a traffic study being conducted by the developer.

Commissioners expressed concerns about an egress from the property leading traffic onto Highway 31, especially since it is the same area where a fatal motorcycle accident occurred several years ago.

City Engineer Jerome Dempsey also said the developer should have a lane that allows right turns into the property from Highway 31 but not right turns out of the property onto Highway 31 on the final plats.

Theo Stone with LaCrew Engineering said he expects the traffic study to be complete before the next phase of the development comes before the planning commission. He said the issue is Highway 31 is “not functioning now” as it should traffic-wise.

Alderman Jonathan Duda said if traffic on the road is a “preexisting condition,” the question is whether the city or the developer is responsible for alleviating traffic issues around the Wilkes property.

The plan is to start construction in August on the development, Stone said.

The board also voted unanimously to approve the site plan for a new Taco Bell on Port Royal Road, and then voted 4-0-1, with Alderman Jonathan Duda abstaining, on the building design for the property. Duda abstained against the vote because he doesn’t feel the clematis purple proposed for the facade of the building fits in with the city’s “community character.”

Harold Thompson, who represented the developer, said the developer approached Taco Bell corporate regarding the color, but corporate officials would not change the plan because they felt the purple color is consistent with their brand. He said the building currently proposed already deviates from the stucco structure and elevation Taco Bell is requiring of all new storefronts.

“We believe we have made changes to comply with the city,” Thompson said. “It is not an option to change the color.”

Thompson said the purple color may also not appear as strongly in real life as it has on renderings of the structure.

IN OTHER BUSINESS

The planning commission voted unanimously to accept the dedication of two rights-of-way in the Cherry Grove Addition and Autumn Ridge subdivisions and to reduce the performance agreement for the Crossings South.

Assistant City Administrator Dan Allen said the city has inspected the water, sewer and stormwater lines installed by the Crossings South developers. The release of funds from the city is needed by the developer to pay contractors and so further work on the site can proceed, Allen said. Crossings South is the planned home to the new Carmike Cinemas and Longhorn Steakhouse.

The board voted 4-0-1, with Duda abstaining because he is a church member, to approve a minor change to the site plan for the Church of the Nativity to be constructed on Buckner Lane.