Michael Bernstein (Photo: Special to the Press-Citizen)

Tulane University’s provost, known for his innovative approaches in helping lead the largest private employer in New Orleans, is among four finalists being considered as the University of Iowa’s next president.

Michael Bernstein has served as a senior vice president for academic affairs and provost at Tulane since 2007. The university is a top research university, with more than 13,500 students and schools of medicine, law, social work and architecture, among others.

In that time, Bernstein has helped lead academic strategic planning for a $1 billion capital campaign, and create new programs, such as an undergraduate studies in social innovation and social entrepreneurship.

“I’m thrilled and honored to be in this process and to be one of the finalists, and I’m very excited to be here,” Bernstein said after he arrived in Cedar Rapids Thursday. He declined to comment further, saying it’s best to “let the process do it’s work.”

Michael Bernstein

Age: 60

60 Education: Earned four degrees from Yale University in economics: Bachelor of arts, 1976; master of arts, 1978; master of philosophy, 1980; and doctorate, 1982.

Earned four degrees from Yale University in economics: Bachelor of arts, 1976; master of arts, 1978; master of philosophy, 1980; and doctorate, 1982. Recent administrative experience: Currently the senior vice president for academic affairs and provost at Tulane University. Previously worked as the dean of arts and humanities at the University of California, San Diego.

Currently the senior vice president for academic affairs and provost at Tulane University. Previously worked as the dean of arts and humanities at the University of California, San Diego. Academic experience: Taught at Princeton University for five years before joining UC San Diego in 1987, where he served as a history professor and department chair. At Tulane, he’s also a professor of history and economics. He’s authored and edited five books, and multiple articles. His research interests include U.S. economic and political history, and macroeconomic theory.

Taught at Princeton University for five years before joining UC San Diego in 1987, where he served as a history professor and department chair. At Tulane, he’s also a professor of history and economics. He’s authored and edited five books, and multiple articles. His research interests include U.S. economic and political history, and macroeconomic theory. Family: Wife, Patti; children, Eleanor, 26, and Claire, 20.

Tulane professors with ties to Iowa said Bernstein has cultivated the intellectual culture of the university — and sought innovative ways to address challenges, an approach he’d likely bring to Iowa if selected as the institution’s next president.

A golfer and avid reader of crime fiction, Bernstein is also active in the New Orleans community, serving on boards such as the Jewish Federation of Greater New Orleans, and chairing the Louisiana Endowment for the Humanities.

“I think the University of Iowa would be lucky to have him,” said Karissa Haugeberg, an assistant professor of history at Tulane who earned her doctorate at the University of Iowa.

Professors reached Thursday said Bernstein comes across as a warm and personable leader who frequently attends student events and faculty meetings, and is open to new ideas and programs.

That’s a key trait for a university president, especially one who will oversee a medical school, said Prasad Katakam, an assistant professor at Tulane’s School of Medicine and the secretary of the graduate medical faculty.

“You have to be innovative,” he said, given changes to heath care since the Affordable Care Act, also known as ObamaCare, became law. “These things are going to be very significant issues in the next coming years, and medical schools have a lot at stake, and a lot to adapt to. The ones who adapt faster are the ones who are going to do well.”

Katakam, who completed part of his postdoctoral fellowship at Iowa’s College of Medicine, was impressed after Bernstein discussed his fundraising plans and saw how he handled faculty concerns about promotion.

When research funding from the National Institutes of Health became more difficult to secure — a requirement of earning tenure at the medical school — Breinstein’s approach became a “lifeline” for those on the verge of getting funding, Katakam said.

“There’s new guidelines that allow a little more time, in terms of tenure, to secure funding. At the same time, he hasn’t lowered the standards,” he said. “He navigated the system, and he got everyone on board.”

Bernstein’s also been a supporter of the arts, including creative writing.

He went so far as encouraging the creation of a master of fine arts degree at Tulane, although one has not yet been established, said Peter Cooley, a professor of English who graduated from UI’s Writers’ Workshop.

“He’s a very warm and enthusiastic person,” Cooley said.

Finalist town halls

Michael Bernstein is the second of four finalists for the UI presidency.

• He’ll participate in a late afternoon public forum Friday from 4:45 to 6:15 p.m. in the main lounge of the Iowa Memorial Union.

• Live video streaming of the public forums and a recording upon its conclusion will available on the UI presidential search website.

• After the campus visits, Iowa Board of Regents is scheduled to meet Sept. 3 to interview the candidates and select a new president.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1Eru27x