A full plate. Regardless of who plays quarterback, I don’t see the Broncos winning more than three games the rest of the season. I may eat my words, but I don’t think so.

Gary, Thornton

Kiz: In the span of two weeks, the perfect world that was Broncos Country has been filled with dark clouds and doubt. The No. 1 seed in the AFC playoffs now seems like a silly dream, but should coach Gary Kubiak really be checking his rearview mirror for the Chiefs or Raiders gaining on him in the division race? Listen, new quarterback Brock Osweiler will make goofs as he learns on the job. A two-game losing streak could become four. The real test for Kubiak will be not to panic in defeat and return Peyton Manning to the starting lineup before he is healthy.

Pain pills! Stat! Manning has failed the Broncos. Don’t blame John Elway or anyone else. Just be real and honest: Manning is done! He will be remembered as the best “stat QB” ever, and I know for sure Tom Brady would agree.

G.A., Indianapolis

Kiz: Ouch. That’s a 15-yard penalty. Unnecessary roughness. Are you trying out to be a member of the Broncos’ defensive backfield?

Put him in, coach. After all those years in Houston trying to stop Manning, Kubiak has finally found a way: Coach him.

Bob, repping the 702

Kiz: Snark attack! That’s mean … but funny.

Selfie. During the loss to Kansas City, Manning proved himself to be a selfish, self-absorbed man, by keeping himself in the game at the expense of the Broncos reaching a victory.

Susan, Centennial

Kiz: Going into the game against the Chiefs, Manning needed to complete one stinking pass to break the NFL record for career yards passing. Had he reached the mark the previous game in Indianapolis, would Kubiak have been more likely to tell his ailing quarterback to take the day off against Kansas City? Everybody in Denver, from the coach to paying customers, wanted Manning to break the record. That’s not selfish. It’s human.

Kiszla’s the biggest pain. And today’s parting shot is a warning the Broncos have a far bigger problem than Manning’s aching foot or the team’s two-game losing streak.

Kiz, I have met the enemy of Broncos Country, and he is you.

Stephen, bleeds orange

Mark Kiszla: mkiszla@denverpost.com or twitter.com/markkiszla