None of the doors in Carl Bennett’s home in Holgate stays shut.

He says floodwaters from Hurricane Sandy sank the back of his home’s foundation but claims his flood insurance won’t pay to fix it.

The reason he was given, Bennett says, is that natural settling of the earth over time — not floodwaters — caused his house to tilt backward.

The more he argues with the National Flood Insurance Program, which covers all flood policies, the more convinced Bennett said he becomes he’ll have to sue to get the money he believes he’s owed.

“It wasn’t just standing water; it was strong enough to push the house next door to me off its foundation,” Bennett said. “I think there’s plenty of evidence the flood caused this. There’s a house in the middle of the street; there’s a watermark on the wall.”

Many flood insurance policy holders are still trying to settle their claims as the one-year anniversary of the Oct. 29 storm approaches.

Policy holders have one year from the date of their first claim denial to file a lawsuit, which could be as early as November, or as late as November 2014, said Adam Derman, whose West Orange-based firm is taking on a number of these claims.

Dan Watson, a spokesman with the Federal Emergency Management Agency, said the NFIP received more than 74,000 claims from New Jersey policy holders, representing $3.78 billion in payouts.

He said 1,475 appeals were filed between October 2012 and July, though the program does not break them out by disaster. But Watson said “a large portion” of those appeals would be related to Sandy.

Robert Hartwig, president of the Insurance Information Institute, a nonprofit communications company supported by the insurance industry, said claim problems exist primarily because New Jersey has never experienced a storm quite like Sandy.

“Sandy was an event that has some issues associated with it that you don’t see in other events,” he said. Only about half of the homeowners affected by Sandy had flood insurance. And storm surges, like those seen in Sandy, aren’t covered by typical homeowner policies, he said.

Those who disagree with their flood insurance settlements can file a supplementary claim with their insurance company. If they still are not satisfied, they can appeal to the NFIP. Then, they can sue.

The NFIP doesn’t actually write flood policies. Instead, commercial insurance companies write the policies and arrange for NFIP-certified adjusters to survey damage. The NFIP denies or pays claims, said Gail Peterson, a spokeswoman for Selective Insurance Co., Bennett’s insurance company.

The reason for Bennett’s denial — natural settling — is one of the most common used by insurance companies to turn down claims, said Derman. These types of legal fights are so new in New Jersey that Derman’s firm is working with attorneys from the Gulf Coast who are well-versed in flood insurance issues after Hurricane Katrina in 2005.

“In New Jersey and New York, we really haven’t had these types of cases, these types of claims, up here,” Derman said.

Flood policies, he said, are very specific about what is and is not covered, and when there’s no clear evidence that damage was caused by a flood, there’s a good chance a claim will be denied.

A house that sat in floodwater won’t necessarily qualify for payment to rebuild the foundation; there has to be evidence that there was flowing water that washed away the soil, said Christopher Gerold, an attorney in Derman’s firm.

Without insurance money, Bennett said he can’t make the needed structural repairs to his expanded Cape Cod on Joan Road. It’s a second home, so he doesn’t qualify for any federal aid.

Angelita “Gigi” Liaguno-Dorr, owner of the Sandy-destroyed Jakeabob’s Bay in Union Beach, said she is still negotiating with her flood insurance company.

She’s running her restaurant from a donated building a couple of blocks from her former location on Raritan Bay.

Liaguno-Dorr said it will take $2 million to rebuild and she had $1.8 million in insurance coverage with Lloyd’s of London. She said she’s received only $450,000.

Representatives for Lloyd’s and Selective insurance companies said they do not comment on specific cases. But a Lloyd’s spokesman said the company “seeks to pay all valid claims as quickly as possible.”

“We just want to build. We just want to come back,” Dorr said. “I don’t understand why it’s taking so long for the insurance company. I think they’re waiting for us to give up.”