If registries are an invasion of privacy for citizens who choose to buy a gun, surely they are for those who have no choice but to be sick.

By Christopher Moraff

Harrisburg wants to make it easier for the feds to access your private data.

With America united in collective outrage over revelations of widespread domestic surveillance by the National Security Agency, another federal branch – the Drug Enforcement Agency – has quietly set about dismantling the Fourth Amendment when it comes to accessing our private medical data.

Last week, the American Civil Liberties Union joined the State of Oregon in federal court in Portland to challenge the DEA's attempt to use warrantless “administrative subpoenas” to obtain information on patients from the state's prescription drug monitoring database.

It's unlikely the plaintiffs will prevail; while Oregon law prohibits state police from digging into patient prescription data without a search warrant, thanks to the gradual erosion of civil liberties under the “war on drugs,” the DEA does not require a court order to request such information in the course of an open investigation.

But at least Oregon is fighting for the privacy rights of its citizens. Pennsylvania, on the other hand, seems intent on giving them away.

Since September, three bills have been introduced in Harrisburg designed to expand the commonwealth’s own prescription monitoring system by establishing a database listing all prescriptions of controlled medications and the identities of the citizens who receive them.

The latest proposal was introduced in November by Sen. Pat Vance, R-Cumberland, and, unlike Oregon, would give state and federal law enforcement officials virtually unimpeded access to the prescription records of millions of Pennsylvanians who take Schedule II drugs.

These include not only narcotic painkillers like hydrocodone, oxycodone and morphine, but drugs like Ritalin and Adderall that are used to treat childhood ADHD.

Reggie Shuford, executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union of Pennsylvania, put it best when he said: “The privacy of the child who breaks his arm on his bike or who takes attention deficit medication is being sacrificed because someone across town is abusing these substances.”

If that seems reasonable to you, imagine for a moment a law requiring the registration and monitoring of any other class of law-abiding consumer on the grounds that the product they purchase has the potential to be misused.

Well, you don't have to imagine; some of the very same lawmakers who support a prescription database have been working diligently to dismantle the state's firearms-transfer registry on the grounds that it unfairly targets law-abiding citizens.

That despite the fact that guns – many of them illegally diverted from legitimate sources – kill and maim more people each year than all legal and illicit drugs combined. If that seems hypocritical, it's probably because it is.

There are, of course, legitimate concerns legislation like Sen. Vance's seeks to address. Pharmaceutical overdoses are responsible for hundreds of thousands of emergency room visits a year; and, according to data from the Centers for Disease Control, prescription drugs led to the deaths of more than 20,000 people in 2010 – the last year for which data is available. Trouble is, there is little hard evidence that strict prescription monitoring systems are helping.

Even data from Trust for America’s Health – which strongly supports monitoring programs – calls the benefits of such initiatives into question.

For instance, New Mexico, which maintains one of the most restrictive prescription monitoring laws in the nation, has more overdose deaths per capita than Missouri – the only state in the U.S. without a database.

Patients in South Dakota and Nebraska don’t even need a physical exam before getting a painkiller prescription, but the rise in prescription drug-related deaths in those states over the past decade is on par with Vermont, whose monitoring program has been held up as a model for other states to follow.

Such data confirms what experts already know: addiction is a complex disease, the causes and treatment of which go far beyond simple access. Just ask any alcoholic, whose drug of choice is no further away than the corner bar.

There are, fortunately, better ways to address the legitimate problem of prescription-drug abuse. These include increasing penalties for diversion, educating patients on the need to properly secure and dispose of medication, passing laws requiring the reporting of lost and stolen meds and, above all, tackling the problem of addiction by alleviating barriers to treatment.

Unfortunately, the Corbett administration has slashed funding for the very behavioral health programs designed to transition people into recovery. And the governor's refusal to expand Medicaid under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act will cut off some 800,000 Pennsylvanians from guaranteed drug and alcohol treatment.

Viewed through this lens, legislation that trades off patient privacy as an alternative to tried-and-true remedies to drug addiction and abuse is a political red herring that places far too much power in the hands of investigatory agencies at a cost to consumers.

If the potential of having the federal government nose around in your private medical data isn't worrisome enough, consider that in 2009, hackers stole the records of more than 8 million patients from Virginia's prescription database and threatened to sell them on the black market if a $10 million ransom wasn't paid.

But perhaps the most dangerous side effect of unwarranted restrictions on access to therapeutic medication is the chilling effect they have on doctors and pharmacists. Research shows that burdensome restrictions on pain management have a ripple effect that leads doctors to withhold medication from people who need it out of fear of prosecution or censure, even when that fear is unfounded.

This, at a time when medical experts are warning of “a global pandemic” of untreated pain.

Sick Americans, particularly the roughly 115 million that suffer from chronic pain, already face enough burdens to treatment without having their medical information used as leverage in the war on drugs.

If registries are an invasion of privacy for citizens who voluntarily choose to buy a gun, surely they are for those who have no choice but to be sick.