House Speaker Beth Harwell, R-Nashville (Photo: Submitted)

Resurrection seems an impossible concept. Something that once was dead is dead no longer? How can that be?

But on this day, Christians celebrate hope, greeting one another by saying, “He is risen.” The tomb is empty. He’s not there. Someone who once was dead is dead no longer. Belief in resurrection is arguably the centerpiece of Christian faith. According to the Apostle Paul, without the resurrection, the whole thing falls apart.

I confess, this Easter I am disheartened. The legislative session is drawing to a close, and our legislators once again have failed to pass Gov. Bill Haslam’s health care plan, Insure Tennessee.

Given how necessary this plan is for our state, I remain bewildered by such inaction. This plan would bring more than 1 billion of our own federal tax dollars back to our state every year, saving thousands of jobs, keeping hospitals open and providing affordable health coverage to nearly 300,000 Tennesseans who currently suffer without any options.

Every day, I meet beautiful people through our programs at Room in the Inn who desperately need this plan to pass. Without it, they cannot get the quality care they need.

Many have worked all their lives but lost their employment during the recession or due to poor health. Many have declared bankruptcy due to impossible medical bills and have forfeited their homes.

Charles Strobel is founding director of Room in the Inn and its Campus for Human Development. (Photo: Submitted)

At Room in the Inn, we partner with people experiencing homelessness to pursue their development and recovery from life on the streets. Given that Tennessee leads the nation in personal bankruptcy, providing affordable health coverage for everyone is essential to eradicating homelessness.

I call on Speaker Beth Harwell and our state legislature to take the highest road on Insure Tennessee. The highest road for ministers is faith; for lawyers, justice; for journalists, truth; for doctors, health; and for government leaders, equality. These roads lead to the fullness of life. We need our elected officials to take the highest road and be leaders in providing health care for our most vulnerable citizens.

Some are trying to claim that Insure Tennessee is dead. But that is not true. This plan is still alive.

All it needs is a champion, and Speaker Harwell can be that champion. She already has the political power and capability to bring this plan to a full vote in the House.

In fact, the House just suspended the rules to reverse an earlier vote and resurrect a bill affecting the use of high school bathrooms. I am confident that, with the speaker’s support, the legislature can do the same with Insure Tennessee. She can give voice to the will of 64 percent of Tennesseans who support the governor’s plan.

Two thousand years ago, a seemingly impossible event occurred that changed our world.

This Easter, I hold on to hope that Insure Tennessee is not dead but still alive and its passage will change our state.

The time is now, Speaker Harwell. Resurrect Insure Tennessee.

Charles Strobel is founding director of Room in the Inn and its Campus for Human Development.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1RuioJy