Bryce Hedstrom teaches Spanish through conversation in Teaching Proficiency through Reading and Storytelling

Bryce Hedstrom, a Loveland Spanish teacher, talks Wednesday about how he teaches Spanish in part by using actions to symbolize each word. Hedstrom is leading the way in Northern Colorado in innovative ways to teach language through "comprehensible input." ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Bryce Hedstrom might start with five words such as cat, girl, like, give and has.

He give an action for each word and makes up silly stories about the girl who has a cat and gives it to another girl.

He adds in other words like "what" and "there" and adds on to the story. The students respond to his questions about who has the cat and what the girl has.

And by the end of the lesson where he has repeated the base words 70-100 times, the students are having conversations in Spanish with each other and understanding them.

Hedstrom is a Loveland resident and internationally renowned Spanish instructor, who is leading the movement throughout Northern Colorado and giving presentations all over the country about the method, Teaching Proficiency through Reading and Storytelling.

He teaches classes at Roosevelt High School in Johnstown and Aims Community College in Loveland.

In July, he will be teaching and presenting at the International Forum on Language Teaching Conference, an annual conference that travels to a different city each year. This year, it is located in Denver.

He started teaching with this method about 19 years ago, which was based on the work of two teachers, Stephen Krashen and Blaine Ray. Krashen had the theory that people should learn a language not by repetition but by comprehensible input. Ray furthered this study by developing TPRS, the method of teaching through reading and storytelling.

Advertisement

Hedstrom is a leader in this technique in Colorado. He also received the Best of Colorado Award from the Colorado Congress of Foreign Language Teachers.

Now, Denver Public Schools and others are moving to this way of teaching.

Spanish-learners don't want to learn the intricacies of the language, they just want to be able to order a cup of coffee when they go to Madrid, Hedstrom said.

So he only teaches his students grammar as it pertains to the sentence they are learning.

Around 19 years ago, Hedstrom was teaching Spanish to a struggling middle school class and the students just weren't getting it.

"I said I was going to try this new method. Within two to three weeks, they loved coming to class. They were speaking, understanding and joking in Spanish. They were achieving at a higher rate than my academic classes," he said.

The students don't memorize lists of words. They don't do grammar drills. They don't listen and repeat. They don't translate.

"The difference is like theoretical math and teaching someone to build a house," Hedstrom said.

The words differ depending on his audience. He starts with fanciful stories for children. Elementary-age children might learn words like push, yell and fall down. High schoolers get words like date, hug, kiss, cute and handsome.

"When I'm teaching particular words, kids will pick up 30-40 words on the side that aren't focus words," he said.

He said that the "listen and repeat" method doesn't make sense to him because he's not interacting with those words or applying them.

"We're not just me saying, 'You're going to learn these words, it's all of us creating story together," he said.

He talks in workshops about interviewing the students on a daily basis so that by the end of a semester, the class has bonded and the students know a lot about each other.

In one class, he overheard a girl tell a new person to the class, "You're going to love this class because we all know and like each other."

He said it does take a lot of teacher skill and he's still learning.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Jessica Benes at 970-669-5050 ext. 530 or jbenes@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: twitter.com/jessicabenes.