Kent Henning (Photo: Special to the Register)

On the eve of a visit by President Barack Obama and Secretary of Education Arne Duncan to North High School where they will address college affordability, we should have an honest discussion about how Washington's choices and the economy have contributed to the problems they will discuss.

Turn the calendar back to 2006-07. Our consumption-driven economy was strong, but concerns over the credit bubble were mounting. Airwaves were filled with radio ads for home-equity loans. Locally, The Des Moines Register investigated "kick-backs" from credit card companies to the ISU foundation for sales of affinity cards to students. In 2007, then-candidate Obama held a roundtable discussion on my campus regarding predatory practices of certain lenders.

When the bubble burst in 2008, the economy shed jobs at alarming rates. Home-equity borrowing ceased. College students couldn't qualify for credit cards without a co-signer. At the same time, the federal government took over student lending and then, in light of rising unemployment, proudly cut student loan interest to 3.4 percent. Let's face it, if young people were in college, they would not be on the unemployment line.

With the recession, the median family income began a $4,000 decline. Families’ net worth dropped. With less income, lower net worth and facing rising unemployment, a large number of Americans took Washington up on the deal. College enrollment nationwide grew 9.5 percent from 2008 to 2010 (nearly 1.8 million additional students), the highest rate of growth in more than a decade.

During that time, at least some consumer lending migrated to student loans. In 2013, for example, 37 percent of what my student body borrowed paid for things beyond Grand View’s charges. This is legal, of course, because students can use loans to pay for rent, groceries, and other living expenses. A closer examination suggested that some students borrowed the maximum to support general family expenditures. Where else could they borrow money at such low interest rates?

When the tally of total student loan debt crossed the trillion dollar mark, some politicians decided we had a "student debt crisis." And who's to blame? Solely the colleges and universities.

Another criticism of late is that many college graduates cannot find jobs that fully employ their four-year degrees. Could that be because unemployment overall remained high until only a year ago?

To be sure, college costs a lot. I am troubled by the amount our students borrow, and we’re taking action. Over the past five years, our net prices have remained steady. We've cut costs, made painful reductions in staff, kept tuition increases as low as possible and increased our own financial aid. In addition, we've launched an innovative initiative to make our costs completely transparent for all four years of a student’s degree, which is helping them lower their debt and graduate on time.

I welcome President Obama, and all those who want to replace him, to visit Grand View again to see what we’re doing. I believe our efforts should exempt us from the frequent scolding directed at university leaders. Our solutions can contribute positively to the public discourse about higher education. I strongly urge our leaders to acknowledge how economic trends and policy decisions may have contributed to current student debt levels and temporarily troublesome job placement.

On Monday, I hope the president and the secretary will not scare the students at North into thinking they cannot consider universities like Grand View. I further hope they will not propose policies directing North’s students, because of their socio-economic status, only to career and technical programs. Many bright graduates of North High School are thriving as Grand View students and alumni, because the environment at a private, non-profit institution suited their needs and supported their success. We need discourse and policies that will keep all institutions accessible to all students.

Kent Henning is president of Grand View University in Des Moines. Contact: president.henning@grandview.edu

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1F3lUtG