As Mitt Romney makes moves to run for the White House again, one of the nation’s best-known conservative commentators is still lamenting his last defeat.

Speaking to more than 1,500 people at the Van Wezel Performing Arts Hall Tuesday, syndicated national columnist Charles Krauthammer said he is convinced Romney would have made a very good president.

“I think the country would have been far better off if he had been elected,” Krauthammer said at the Ringling College Library Association’s annual Town Hall lecture series.

Krauthammer said 2012 should have been an impossible election for Republicans to lose, given the public’s frustration with “Obama’s liberal overreach.” He said the fact that Romney “invented Obamacare” as governor of Massachusetts hurt him.

“I underestimated the ability of the GOP to lose an unloseable election,” Krauthammer said.

Krauthammer said Romney’s private sector experience would have made him a better president than Obama, but that Obama is a better campaigner. He said Obama had no business winning given his poor approval ratings and the slow economic recovery.

Krauthammer’s comments came as Romney has been reportedly reaching out to former aides, donors and other supporters in preparation for a third potential White House bid in 2016.

Before losing to Obama in 2012, Romney lost in the GOP primary in 2008 to Sen. John McCain.

Krauthammer spent most of his 90-minute speech chronicling why he believes Obama has been a bad president, calling him a “social Democrat,” more akin to the socialist liberals of Europe than traditional America liberals. He said his “radical agenda” has led to him growing entitlements rather than reforming them. And he said Obama’s attempts to legislate through executive orders on immigration reform is both lawless and unconstitutional.

Krauthammer’s speech was the first in the Ringling College Library Association Town Hall lecture series, which helps raise money for Ringling College of Art and Design. Next up in the series could be another strident critic of President Obama: former 2012 Republican Presidential candidate Jon Huntsman Jr. returns to Sarasota on Feb. 2 to be the second speaker in the series.