EBENSBURG, CAMBRIA COUNTY -- A part of the Affordable Care Act comes into effect in January that says part-time employees who work more than 30 hours per week need to be given benefits -- which affects local school districts all over our area. People I spoke with are worried this could have a negative effect on our kids.



Lisa Urbassik is in her third year of teaching at Central Cambria School District, but remembers her days being a substitute.



Lisa Ubassik, a 7th grade language arts teacher, said, "I actually subbed so much at one local district that it ended up paying into the retirement program."



She says there were few days she wasn't working during the school year. Under these new rules, teachers couldn't work more than 30 hours per week at the same district.



Dr. Vincent DiLeo, Superintendent, Central Cambria School District, said, "It's just another piece of the puzzle that makes it tougher and tougher to finish the puzzle."



It's a part of the puzzle Joe Klezek, a long term substitute, is familiar with.



Joe Klezek, a long term substitute, said "You know it is a step inside the school, so pretty much everybody has to go through that route at some point in their teaching career."



He's been a substitute for about five years and says this is simply a step in the process to getting a full time job.



"Pretty much all teachers had to pay their dues at some point,” said Klezek.



The school uses a system called AESOP to keep track of substitute's hours so they don't go over. But Lisa is afraid substitutes paying dues could force some kids to pay the price.



Urbassik said, "Now they're going to have a limited number of days they can work in each district, and if you have to have a teacher that maybe has to be sick out all week for some reason, then how are you going to have one sub to cover for that class? How are you going to have continuity for the students?"



At Central Cambria, the superintendent says substitute staffing has rarely been an issue before. But it adds another layer of red tape for districts.



"You have to feel bad for the districts and the kids because the districts are the ones who need the subs, and the kids are the ones who are going to get hurt, and that's what we're all here for,” said Urbassik.



This issue doesn't impact some schools in our area -- including Altoona and Tyrone. They have outsourced substitute services to a third party company. Those companies can offer health insurance to those substitutes. We'll have more on how this will impact teachers in the region as the law takes effect in January.





Copyright 2016 Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.