Topics: bobby flay, Food, Food Network, Guy Fieri, Paula Deen, Ree Drummond, sandra lee, Thanksgiving, The Pioneer Woman, TV, Entertainment News

Food Network is the guiding hand for many through the stress of the Thanksgiving meal, but what happens when our trusted culinary guardian angels lead us astray? Let’s take a look back at some of the more perplexing recipes that the network has suggested we make room for on the holiday table.

1. Pumpkin Pie Smoothie

Ever reach the point when you are so strung out on tryptophan that you don’t have the energy required to lift a forkful of pie to your mouth? No fear — Ree Drummond (aka “The Pioneer Woman”) has the perfect solution. Just toss the pie in a blender with milk and yogurt and pulse until it can be sucked through a straw.

2. Turkey and Cranberry Ravioli

I’m all for fusion cuisine, but I never thought I’d hear the instructions: “Drain the ravioli into the gravy and stir to coat.” Giada’s take on the holiday meal seems more like the day after the day after Thanksgiving when you make a sad grab for whatever leftovers are still good and combine them with the pre-Turkey Day remnants stashed in the back in the fridge. It tastes fine, but then you decide to stop kidding yourself and smother it all with gravy because you know you’ve already sized out of your jeans and there’s no way to stop the cycle now. In short, Giada’s Turkey and Cranberry Ravioli recipe is self-loathing on a plate. To make it even more depressing, this is for her special “Thanksgiving for Two” episode; but I suppose that just means there’s more gravy to go around.

3. Marbled Mashed Sweet Potatoes

For the holiday table that could use a little tye-dyed flair, simply take two of the most common potato side dishes — mashed and sweet — and swirl them in a bowl. The result is simultaneously noncommittal and underwhelming (just what your parents say about your partner, right?) and it’s the antithesis of Bobby’s labor-intensive potatoes below.

4. Grilled Hassleback Sweet Potatoes with Molasses-Nutmeg Butter

Now, don’t get me wrong. These potatoes look beautiful, and they taste delicious as well, but only Bobby Flay would suggest a sweet potato side dish that has to be boiled, charcoal grilled and flambé finished, all wrapped with the suggestion to “serve immediately,” as if sweet potatoes are your only holiday meal responsibility.

Don’t worry, though. If you spend too much time ensuring that you don’t singe the potatoes (and your eyebrows) and end up turkey-less, Food Network Magazine has you covered. One of their tips for decor includes a $12 inflatable bird complete with this calming sentiment: “No matter how your Thanksgiving dinner turns out, you’re guaranteed to get ‘oohs’ and ‘aahs’ when you walk out of the kitchen with this 16-inch, golden inflatable turkey. Everyone can have a laugh — and play toss with the imposter — while you [hopefully] carve the real thing.”