Sebelius said she thought political debate over Obamacare would die down. Sebelius: I 'made some mistakes'

Former Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius acknowledged Friday that she made mistakes leading up to the rollout of the Affordable Care Act, worrying too much about whether there’d be a market for Obamacare and spending “too little time clearly on the technology side.”

“I sure made some mistakes along the way in terms of focusing on some things and not on others,” she said at the Aspen Ideas Festival. Instead of confirming what she was being told about HealthCare.gov’s readiness “was actually accurate and getting enough eyes and ears on that,” she said she concentrated on the insurers, consumers and regulators who needed to come together in the health exchanges.

Story Continued Below

Sebelius addressed several issues surrounding the health care law during the “conversation” she had publicly with Aspen Institute CEO Walter Isaacson. And she adamantly rejected the possibility that she’d make another run for elective office back in Kansas, where she served more than a decade as a state lawmaker and then governor.

( QUIZ: Do you know Kathleen Sebelius?)

“Not a chance,” she said.

Sebelius compared the future of state-run health insurance exchanges and Medicaid expansion. It’s unclear whether more states will create their own exchanges since the funding required is “pretty daunting.” But, she added, “at this point, it really doesn’t matter.”

Medicaid expansion, on the other hand, does matter quite a bit, she said, predicting that the financial case for expansion will ultimately overwhelm the politics for opposing it.

( PHOTOS: Sebelius testifies on Obamacare rollout)

As for the overall structure of Obamacare marketplaces, Sebelius said insurers are fairly pleased and report surpassing their enrollment targets across age groups. Preliminary data on next year’s premiums reveals increases that in many cases are well under the double-digit hikes critics projected — with some premiums actually decreasing.

Still, HHS needs to carefully monitor parts of the country where the marketplaces aren’t very robust and make sure that companies aren’t driven out because of poor enrollment or older and sicker enrollees, she stressed. “It’s important in states where the take-up has been relatively low … to prop up those companies so that you can wait a year or two and get the enrollment higher so that the market actually works.”

Sebelius said she thought the political debate over the ACA would wind down after the law was passed, then after the Supreme Court upheld it and then again after President Barack Obama’s reelection, but that “never happened.” Republicans’ continued opposition, and even resistance to making the law work is “most disturbing.”

“I’ve really never seen anything like this in my life,” she said.

And she skirted a question about whether the ACA will help or hurt vulnerable Democrats like Louisiana Sen. Mary Landrieu as they run in the midterm elections. But she said a debate about whether the government should provide health insurance to every American is “well worth having.”

Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell’s widely derided remarks on Obamacare — that he’d still repeal it but keep Kynect, the Kentucky health insurance exchange — offer “the best political insight” on the law in recent months, Sebelius said. Bashing Obamacare in a state where 450,000 people have benefited is a “dangerous” approach, she said.

Since stepping down from HHS in early June, life has been “so far, so good,” Sebelius allowed.