BOSTON - A new report details for the first time the extra costs incurred by Massachusetts due to the technological disaster of its health insurance exchange, which was established under the new national health care law.

The state used a mix of temporary Medicaid coverage through MassHealth and extensions of existing state-subsidized health plans to keep people insured even though the exchange website was unable to process their applications.

The report found that including the cost of that coverage, Massachusetts spent $50 million more providing insurance for residents than anticipated last year, out of total health care spending of $6.1 billion.

The state does not yet know how much it will cost to get a working website because it is still negotiating a contract with the technology vendor, Optum, that was hired to fix the problems. So far, it has spent $108 million building the site, out of an anticipated project budget of $174 million. It also spent or obligated another approximately $34 million in administrative costs due to the website problems.

"When it comes to health insurance coverage, we are spending to date very much in line with our original budget assumptions, it's just that people are covered in different places than originally anticipated," said Secretary of Administration and Finance Glen Shor.

Shor called the total cost of the exchange "a work in progress," and said the state is trying to fund the project principally through federal money.

Republican lawmakers have been pushing Democratic Gov. Deval Patrick's administration to get an accounting of the costs. State Rep. Bradley Jones, a North Reading Republican and the House minority leader, said the report is significant as "the beginning of the documentation of how many tens of millions of dollars this Connector website debacle is going to cost the taxpayers, either of the Commonwealth or the country."

The report was prepared by the state's Executive Offices of Administration and Finance and Health and Human Services for the legislature's Joint Committee on Health Care Financing and was due Thursday.

The national Affordable Care Act was based on Massachusetts' 2006 health care reform but had enough different rules that it required Massachusetts to create a new health insurance exchange. Massachusetts contracted with the company CGI to create a complex website where residents were supposed to be able to apply for insurance coverage online, and the website would determine what type of coverage and subsidy they were eligible for and let them enroll. However, the system, launched in October 2013, was incomplete and unreliable. Residents were unable to enroll in coverage and the site could not determine eligibility. The state received permission from the federal government to put people in temporary Medicaid coverage and to extend existing plans under the state-subsidized Commonwealth Care until the end of this year.

The state fired CGI and is working with Optum to get a new software system ready by this year's open enrollment in November or, if that is impossible, to join the federal HealthCare.gov system for a year. Shor said officials will determine in early August which path to pursue.

The report is the first comprehensive look at the costs of the website problems. For health care coverage itself, the report finds that the state spent $6.158 billion on MassHealth and the Health Connector in fiscal year 2014, or $49 million more than anticipated. In addition to regular budget fluctuations, this reflects the fact that the state saw more people than expected enrolling in subsidized plans – there are 300,000 people newly enrolled in subsidized coverage - but spent less than anticipated per person, according to the report.

For the approximately 251,000 people enrolled in temporary Medicaid coverage, the state has paid out $173 million for services. (Much of this will be covered by a federal match.)

One concern with the temporary coverage is that people receiving Medicaid are not eligible for it, which means the state is giving them extra benefits and will not receive federal reimbursements. The state has not made a final determination of how many people are ineligible for Medicaid, but the report wrote that the "vast majority" of those enrolled are eligible for some subsidized coverage.

"They should be viewed largely as costs that the state would otherwise incur – but appearing in a different place than originally expected," the report reads.

The report said there will continue to be additional costs in the first half of fiscal year 2015, which began in July, since people remain on temporary plans. Keeping enrollees in their state-subsidized Commonwealth Care plans costs the state around $10 million a month more than transitioning them to Affordable Care Act plans, since the federal government pays less in reimbursements.

The cost of the exchange itself is still unknown because the state is still finalizing its contract with Optum to develop and maintain the website through December 2015.

Originally, the project was budgeted at $174.4 million, of which $158.4 million came from federal grants and matching funds. The state has spent $108.3 million so far, which includes $53.6 million to CGI and the rest for other vendors, personnel, equipment and other costs.

Additionally, the state owes $26 million to Optum for work already performed; has paid $6 million for customer service and other costs for extending Commonwealth Care and implementing an insurance system for small businesses; and paid nearly $2 million for personnel who processed paper applications and staffed a customer service center while the website was broken.

The report says much of this money comes from the federal government. State money came from the existing budgets for MassHealth and the Health Connector. Going forward, Shor said the state is continuing to look for ways to pay for future expenses with federal money – whether through grants or federal reimbursements, which are higher under the Affordable Care Act.

"The project has always been principally federally funded, and it's our intention to continue to have it be principally federally funded," Shor said.

Jones said it should not matter if the state uses federal or state money. "At end of the day, it's all taxpayer money that was lost," Jones said.

Jones said he and most Statehouse Republicans believe Massachusetts should have been exempt from the Affordable Care Act, since nearly the entire population of the state already had health insurance. "We had to make all these changes, spent a whole bunch of money trying to come into compliance with the website and then broke it," Jones said.

Shor said despite the challenges, he believes the Affordable Care Act "is good for the people of Massachusetts."

"We're getting hundreds of thousands of additional people enrolled in state health insurance," Shor said. "We're confident that we'll be able to give people access to better health as we enroll more of them in heath insurance, and we're committed to working through the systems challenges and continuing to manage the finances of health reform very tightly and efficiently."

Health Connector Cost Analysis