You loved jazz in college, but these days, do you really have time to follow it? Maybe I'm only talking about myself. The jazz scene I loved so much in my early twenties begins to recede unless I make an affirmative effort to go charging toward it. So at this time of year, every year, we consult with jazz savants and musicians and ask them about the best music they heard all year.

Today we're varying our format a little, having two jazz mavens in studio and asking three of our favorite musicians, Jane Ira Bloom, Joel Frahm and Noah Baerman call in, each of them talking about just one track of a 2013 recording.

In the midst of all the getting ready, I gradually realized that Jane Ira's brand new release, sixteen Sunsets, may wind up being my own favorite this year.

What's your favorite jazz of 2013? Comment below, email Colin@wnpr.org, or tweet @wnprcolin.

GUESTS:

Gene Seymour is a writer for Newsday, The Nation, Los Angeles Times and American History.

is a writer for Newsday, The Nation, Los Angeles Times and American History. Chuck Obuchowski is the host of Out Here & Beyond on WWUH.

is the host of Out Here & Beyond on WWUH. Jane Ira Bloom is a Soprano saxophonist and composer, and her latest album is called “Sixteen Sunsets”.

is a Soprano saxophonist and composer, and her latest album is called “Sixteen Sunsets”. Noah Baerman is a jazz pianist, composer, educator, and author.

is a jazz pianist, composer, educator, and author. Joel Frahm is a tenor saxophonist and composer.

Today's songs (in order):

Keith Jarrett, "Somewhere/Everywhere"

David Weiss, "Nellie Bly"

Wayne Shorter, "Orbits"

Gregory Porter, "Liquid Spirit"

Cecile McLorin Salvant, "Nobody"

David Weiss, "Fall" (Going into the break)

David Bennett Thomas, "Christina's World 1948"

Molly Ringwald, "I'll Take Romance"

Ahmad Hamal, "The Line"

Alan Ferber Nonet, "The Compass"

Joe Locke, "Simone"

Jamie Baum Septet, "The Game"

Chucho Valdes, "Congadanza"

Songs we didn't get to, but would have if we had more time:

Cecile McLorin Salvant, "Jitterbug Waltz"

David Bennett Thomas, "Driving Home Music"

Ahmad Jamal, "Saturday Morning"

Etienne Charles, "Creole"

Etienne Charles, "Turn Your Lights Down Low"

Darcy James Argue's Secret Society, "The Neighborhood"

Marty Ehrlich Large Ensemble, "Blues For Peace"

Michele Rosewoman, "Warrior"