If the individual mandate penalty is a tax, Obamacare needed to have originated in the House. (Photo: David Kadlubowski/The Republic)

Arizona Congressman Trent Franks recently came up short on a worthy cause: getting Obamacare nullified because its enactment violated the constitutional provision that “all bills for raising revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives.”

Obamacare requires individuals to purchase health insurance or pay a fine. The initial constitutional challenge to Obamacare claimed this was an overreach by the federal government. The federal government could regulate commerce. But it couldn’t mandate that individuals participate in commerce by purchasing a particular product or being penalized.

Chief Justice John Roberts rescued Obamacare from this particular constitutional challenge by redefining the fine for not purchasing health insurance as a tax rather than a penalty. This despite the plain statutory language otherwise and incessant insistence by President Obama and his administration that it wasn’t a tax.

While Roberts’ rebaptism of the fine as a tax rather than a penalty saved Obamacare from that constitutional challenge, it made it more vulnerable to another. Obamacare originated in the Senate. If the penalty was a tax, the Constitution required that it originate in the House.

Franks, as chairman of the House Judiciary Subcommittee on the Constitution, took up the cause. He made noise about the origination clause violation and rounded up colleagues to join an amicus brief in the lawsuit.

The challenge was rejected by the lower courts. The U.S. Supreme Court recently refused to accept an appeal. So, Obamacare has dodged another constitutional bullet.

A liberal columnist browbeat Franks for attempting to overturn Obamacare on a legal “technicality.”

The founders didn’t regard the origination clause as a “technicality.” In fact, they regarded it as foundational to the constitutional structure and representative democracy. Requiring bills levying taxes on the people to be initiated by the body accountable directly to the people every two years was a central feature of the bicameral legislature they constructed.

Preserving that constitutional structure depends on a Supreme Court willing to enforce it. For the court to declare the individual mandate fine a tax and then turn its back on an origination clause challenge was a shameful abdication of its constitutional duty.

Reach Robb at robert.robb@arizonarepublic.com.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1RDZdS0