Another goal is a working data platform, so that customers — candidates, conservative groups, state parties — can more easily access the party’s voter file and swap information about contacts with voters in the field. The more customers who use the platform, the more information is added to the voter file, and the more useful the file becomes. So far, though, the platform remains in testing, and it is unclear how many state parties will agree to use it.

Organizing such data from many sources and sorting it into quickly accessible information “is a pretty elite skill,” Mr. Barkett said. In fact, he rejects 80 percent of employee prospects for lack of skill, not for insufficient ideological match. He finds prospects via friends, business networks, online job postings, professional recruiters — and talent scouts like Mr. Ginn.

“We don’t need thousands of people; we need dozens,” Mr. Barkett said. “We could do a lot of damage with 30 people. A lot. But they’ve got to be real engineers.” Of Mr. Ginn, he said: “Aaron gets that.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Barkett added: “We get 20 or 30 of those people and, watch out. The Democrats will have a hard time keeping up with that.”

But attracting even that many has proved elusive, even as Democratic groups have developed a deep talent bench. Catalist, a liberal data and analytics cooperative founded in 2006 — and the acknowledged model for Data Trust — has a thousand clients and a core staff of about 50. The Democratic National Committee and Democratic state parties already have a standardized system for sharing voter information, while a generation of liberal and Democratic activists has come up through the ranks using a single data platform.

The Republican National Committee effort is also playing catch-up among allies on the right. The political and philanthropic network overseen by David and Charles Koch, the billionaire industrialists, has financed a separate voter data initiative, known as Themis, which has been up and running for more than four years, and, with its sister company i360, employs about 50 people.

Yet the biggest gap may be cultural. Mr. Obama’s campaigns were known in the tech world for giving data and analytics staff a prominent place in the campaign hierarchy. It didn’t hurt that he enjoyed the personal support of some of Silicon Valley’s most admired executives: No less a tech luminary than Eric E. Schmidt, executive chairman of Google, helped Mr. Obama’s campaign recruit technical talent.

Mr. Barkett must draw talent to work on behalf of the party broadly, rather than for a single candidate. And the best engineers, he said, don’t see the Republican Party as the most modern place to work. “The G.O.P. has no culture of technical skill or excellence,” he said. But, he pitches recruits this way: “Who has a more interesting and meaningful big data problem right now? You can change the culture. You can change who the president is.” Mr. Barkett himself gave up stock options worth several million dollars at Facebook to join the Republican National Committee effort because he saw an opportunity to effect change.

Finding talent has been harder than finding money. The party has provided about $17 million, a substantial amount, to spend from October 2013 through November 2014, and Data Trust, which is privately held, has a comparable budget. (Themis had about $10 million in revenue in 2012, according to its tax returns; Catalist takes in subscriber fees of $5 million to $9 million a year, it says, and devotes more than $6 million to new research and development.) But Mr. Barkett says he has hired only about 14 people for the Republican National Committee and 12 at Data Trust, half the number he hopes to have by spring.

Underscoring the urgency of the party’s task, the Republican National Committee last week unveiled an initiative, Para Bellum Labs, intended to supercharge recruitment and innovation efforts. Para Bellum — Latin for “prepare for war” — is modeled on in-house incubators set up by some tech companies, including Facebook, to preserve a startup-style culture as they grow larger and less nimble. At the committee’s headquarters, the effort puts the party’s entire Beltway-based technology staff, from voter file programmers to digital-advertising specialists, under one roof. Mr. Barkett will report to Para Bellum.

“We are not taking people who have worked in politics and trying to turn them into data analysts,” said Chuck DeFeo, the Republican committee’s deputy chief of staff and chief digital officer. “We are taking people with very specific skills sets.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Among the recruits to Data Trust are Jason Chew, a software engineer who was Mr. Bartlett’s roommate at the University of California, Berkeley, and was a colleague at Facebook, and Newton Der, 34, who until July worked at a mobile game company and heard about Mr. Barkett’s efforts through the Corporate Asian American Employee Network. Mr. Der says that he’s “not really into politics,” but that he believes strongly in gun-owner rights.

Photo

Mr. Barkett says he isn’t looking to hire ideologues. He describes himself as a fiscal conservative and social moderate — for instance, he says he doesn’t oppose same-sex marriage. He figures that there are plenty like him. In fact, when he announced that he was leaving Facebook for the Republican National Committee, he learned to his surprise that he had been working with some Republicans all along.

“They outed themselves to me,” he said, adding, “It’s easier to tell who is gay at Facebook than who is Republican.”

Hacking for Republicans

Mr. Ginn grew up in Arlington, Tex., the son of a first-generation Chinese immigrant father and a mother from Arizona. His political awakening came in the 10th grade. “I read two books that changed my life,” he said. “The Bible, and ‘The Terrible Truth About Liberals,’ but the Bible much more, obviously.”

He became a Southern Baptist, and he says the religion guides his beliefs, like his opposition to same-sex marriage — though he says he favors granting rights to gay domestic partners. But since moving to San Francisco in late 2011, he avoids talking about social issues to prospects because he doesn’t want to be off-putting.

Among his fans, and someone sympathetic to his tactics, is Harmeet K. Dhillon, chairwoman of the Republican Party in San Francisco and vice chairwoman of the California Republican Party. When she ran for the State Assembly in 2008, she said, she didn’t even put “Republican” on her billboards or signs. “In the Bay Area,” she said, “opening a conversation with ‘I’m a conservative’ is an automatic loser.”

Mr. Ginn learned that the hard way when anti-conservative sensibilities nearly scuttled Lincoln Labs’ first event.

Last June, Mr. Ginn organized a hackathon to be held at the offices of StumbleUpon, the media company where he works in downtown San Francisco. A few days before the event, several employees alerted StumbleUpon’s chief executive, Mark Bartels, that the Charles Koch Institute had paid for the event. The employees wanted to know if StumbleUpon endorsed the Kochs’ views.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Bartels said the hackathon threatened to become a “distraction” and asked Mr. Ginn to move it to another site. Mr. Ginn said Lincoln Labs now relies for a significant portion of its funding on a group called Generation Opportunity, which its website describes as a “freethinking, liberty-loving, national organization of young people.” Generation Opportunity, in turn, receives most of its funding from Freedom Partners, a business league of conservative-leaning donors overseen by aides to the Kochs and former Koch employees.

The Charles Koch Institute is a major force in free-market philanthropy, but the Kochs — who also help finance an array of more overtly political conservative organizations and invested heavily in trying to defeat President Obama in 2012 — are controversial in many quarters. Mr. Ginn said Lincoln Labs did not accept Charles Koch Institute money for the Microsoft event, but added that the groups have a continuing relationship, and that such an alliance is natural, “because they’re so involved in libertarian issues; it’s very difficult to not run across them.”

Politics and Mexican Food

The Microsoft meeting was kicked off by Garrett Johnson, one of Mr. Ginn’s two partners at Lincoln Labs. (The other is Chris Abrams, 26, who also works at StumbleUpon.) Mr. Johnson, a Rhodes scholar, is gregarious and has a commanding physical presence; he was an N.C.A.A. shot-put champion when he was at Florida State University. In his nonpartisan introduction, he told the 40 or so engineers about the goals of the contest and introduced Lincoln Labs as a group “advancing liberty with the use of technology.”

“It’s as simple as that,” he said.

The hacking teams broke up. They ate Mexican food. Mr. Ginn made his rounds, speaking to Mr. Vyas and then approaching another table where a team was working on a project aimed at helping readers of news articles quickly identify financial contributions to politicians.

Mr. Ginn suspected that the engineer who proposed the project was a Democrat, but wanted to find out. To test the proposition, he mentioned terms like “Blackwater,” which Mr. Ginn later described as liberal fodder.

The programmer, Ian Webster, 23, didn’t seem much interested. So Mr. Ginn upped the ante by mentioning that he was involved in politics and had recently been elected in California to “the state party leadership.” He didn’t say which party.

Cool, Mr. Webster said. But the conversation stalled again, even after Mr. Ginn probed further by bringing up his opposition to N.S.A. surveillance.

Then Mr. Ginn got an unexpected bite. Sitting at the same table, working on the same project, was Ronald Ning, 30, a computer scientist. He overheard the conversation and expressed sharp opposition to certain aspects of the N.S.A. surveillance effort. The two hit it off, and by the end of the conference, Mr. Ginn had Mr. Ning’s contact information. Mr. Ginn said he saw Mr. Ning as someone who might not necessarily help a Republican candidate — Mr. Ning voted for President George W. Bush, but then twice for President Obama — but perhaps as someone who could work for conservative causes.

For his part, Mr. Ning said he liked Mr. Ginn’s approach. “I think he was actually nonpartisan,” Mr. Ning said. “He didn’t seem motivated much by politics.”