(CNN) -- At 15, MacKenzie Walker has accomplished more than most people twice her age. She's written a book. She's started a business, training and coaching clients online. She's amassed nearly 60,000 Instagram followers.

And perhaps most impressive, MacKenzie has lost -- and kept off -- 100 pounds.

"She never misses the gym," her dad, Scott Walker, said. "If I say, 'I want ice cream,' she said, 'Dad, I don't have the (macronutrients) for that.' She won't cheat on her diet."

MacKenzie dreams of being Ms. Olympia, the world's best female bodybuilder. Envisioning her in that role is a bit of a stretch for strangers looking at her tiny 5-foot-5-inch frame. But those who know what she's already done to reach her goals have no trouble imagining it.

Filling a never-ending void

After MacKenzie's parents divorced when she was 9, she lived with her father and brother in her grandfather's house in Windsor, Ontario, just across the border from Detroit. MacKenzie spent most of her time in the basement, looking at YouTube videos, eating hot dogs and French fries and drinking soda by the pack.

"I ate a whole pizza in a night," she recalled. "I didn't know the feeling of being full."

Entering fifth grade, MacKenzie weighed 170 pounds. By the time eighth grade rolled around, she had reached 223 pounds. She developed a defense mechanism to ward off bullies -- her friends loved when she made gross faces and mocked her own double chin.

She worried occasionally about Type 2 diabetes -- her grandmother lost a leg to the disease -- but couldn't seem to stick to diets she halfheartedly attempted.

Then, in March 2013, MacKenzie went shopping for her eighth grade graduation dress. She had made a pact with her best guy friend that they would kiss for the first time. She looked for size 16 dresses, but after she tried a few on, the salesclerk directed her to another store. She walked out with a size 22 dress.

"That was where my heart just kind of sank," she said. "Thoughts started rolling in about dying, of not waking up one morning."

On grad night, MacKenzie chickened out on the kiss. "I couldn't even look him in the eyes because I felt so bad for him."

She went home and swore she was going on a diet, but again failed to follow through.

In September, MacKenzie entered high school at around 200 pounds. She walked down the halls thinking about all the people who must be staring at her, "the fat girl." After a few weeks, she'd had enough. Her dad had signed up for gastric bypass surgery and was about to go on a presurgery liquid fast. She decided she would match his weight loss by going on a diet of her own.

On September 24, 2013, she sat her dad down and told him, "This is it. I am doing this one last time. Please don't let me quit."

The myth of the 'after' picture

The first 45 pounds were almost easy. MacKenzie stopped eating after 7 p.m., prepared a week's worth of healthy breakfasts, lunches and dinners on the weekend, and jogged every night around a local park.

In December 2013, she signed up for Instagram and her world exploded with inspiration. She followed bodybuilders who had the sculpted physique she dreamed of. She discovered the Insanity fitness program. She learned from fellow Instagrammers that she wasn't eating enough, and was doing too much cardio, so she increased her calorie intake and began lifting weights.

She tried a low-carb diet, carb-cycling and clean eating, then finally started counting macronutrients, the eating plan she follows today.

By March 2014, she had lost 70 pounds. But her dream "after" photo remained elusive.

Because she had lost so much weight so rapidly, MacKenzie had a "hang," or loose skin hanging from her stomach. It's a common problem for people who lose a large amount of weight; they often find the skin around their thighs, middle, arms or neck doesn't snap back into place. As MacKenzie's doctor told her, "Once you blow up a balloon, it's always going to have wrinkles in it."

MacKenzie used the hang as motivation, pushing herself harder at the gym. But she started experiencing back pain from having her center of gravity constantly pulled forward. And the hang got itchy and hot, even in Ontario's freezing winters.

Her trainer told her she needed an abdominoplasty, better known as a tummy tuck. But for every plea MacKenzie sent to plastic surgeons in Canada and the United States, requests were denied, her age circled in red.

Plastic surgeons have to be cautious about adolescent patients, said Dr. Felmont Eaves, former president of the American Society for Aesthetic Plastic Surgery, who was not involved in MacKenzie's case. Teens, he said, often base their decisions on social status or emotional insecurities. It's a dilemma more plastic surgeons may have to face as parents and experts fight back against childhood obesity, and more hospitals accept adolescent bariatric surgery patients.

"It's important to understand their motivation and where they are psychologically," Eaves said. "You don't