Today's top stories:

All 150 people on board a German passenger jet were killed today when it crashed in a remote area of the French Alps after plunging for eight minutes. (AFP News)

Forces loyal to Shiite rebels advanced deeper into southern Yemen, battling fighters supporting the president a day after Saudi Arabia warned it may act to restore stability in its neighbor. (Bloomberg News)

Newly announced Republican presidential candidate Ted Cruz said today he will sign up for health care coverage through the Affordable Care Act -- a law he has been on a crusade to kill. (CNN News)

National news:

A friend of one of the Boston Marathon bombers has pleaded guilty to misleading investigators. (Associated Press)

Two children who were found dead inside a freezer in a Detroit home today had been in the container for more than a year, police said. (New York Daily News)

A Pennsylvania police officer faces a charge of criminal homicide after investigators concluded she shot a motorist in the back as he lay face down after a traffic stop over an expired inspection sticker. (Associated Press)

Indianapolis Metropolitan Police detectives are investigating the deaths of four people who were found shot multiple times in a home that was broken into and ransacked. (Indianapolis Star)

Sen. Dan Coats, an Indiana Republican, said today he won't seek re-election in 2016. (Bloomberg News)

The 3,100 square-foot yellow house on a leafy street in Newtown, Connecticut, where Adam Lanza lived with his mother was demolished today. (ABC News)

Police in Vermont say they visited property last year where millionaire murder suspect Robert Durst once lived while investigating the 1971 disappearance of an 18-year-old college student. (Associated Press)

Crews pulled a car out of a huge sinkhole in South Amboy, New Jersey, this afternoon -- and some neighbors still were not being allowed back in their homes. (CBS New York)

International news:

Senior lawmakers cast doubt today on a report that Israel spied on nuclear negotiations between Iran and six world powers and shared its findings with members of Congress, a claim that comes as the international talks near a potential pivotal stage. (Los Angeles Times)

Islamic State militants have been recruited at least 400 children in Syria over the past three months. (RT News)

President Obama today said the possibility of peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians seems "very dim" in the wake of comments Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu made before his reelection last week. (Washington Post)

If Lee Kuan Yew represented the Singapore of yesteryear, his death this week raises the question of whether the generation of leaders in waiting will reshape the mold that transformed the city-state from a colonial backwater to a haven of prosperity. (Reuters)

A short circuit in one of the Large Hadron Collider's eight magnet sectors will delay the restart of the world's most powerful particle accelerator, Europe's CERN particle physics center announced today. (NBC News)