Dynamic young conservative Vince Haley* is taking the June 9 Virginia State Senate District 12 election by storm with a positive conservative message of stopping federal overreach and phasing out the Virginia state income tax.

Virginia State Senate District 12 is an open seat vacant after Senator Walter Stosch’s retirement.

Stopping federal overreach means Haley wants Virginia to take a much more aggressive stance in opposing federal intrusion into areas the Constitution reserves to the States, for example the illegal EPA power plan that will hike electricity rates in Virginia by 20-30%.

Haley’s plan to phase out the income tax, a boon to capital formation, would add Virginia to the 9 states that do not have a state income tax and which are doing better economically than states that do.

Haley’s two big messages are in stark contrast to his opponents who so far are not running on anything specific as far as we here at CHQ can tell.

“No one says it will be easy but phasing out and ultimately abolishing the state income tax here in Virginia would not be as hard as some people make it out to be,” said Vince Haley to US News and World Report’s Peter Roff. “The most important step is to be more responsible with spending. You don’t have to enact any spending cuts; you just have to make sure you control the growth in spending. If we can control spending, we can apply the resulting budget surpluses to lowering income tax rates over time until we reach zero."

Controlling state spending – what a novel idea in the Old Dominion where state spending has long outstripped inflation no matter which party was in power.

Haley’s dynamic ideas about phasing out the state income tax makes him part of a new generation of GOP leaders advocating a thoughtful and different approaching to the responsibilities of governing says Roff.

Three of Haley’s competitors will almost certainly out fundraise him; one is an establishment GOP player, one is a political dynasty family member, the third a self-funder, but Haley is proving to be the one with the most grassroots and Tea Party movement support.

And, Haley’s compelling messages, and the paucity of conservative ideas from his opponents, have begun to attract significant conservative donor support as well.

Middle Resolution PAC, a Richmond-based Political Action Committee (PAC), has announced its endorsement of Vince Haley saying, “We strongly believe that Mr. Haley is the best candidate on the issues of lower taxes, fiscal accountability, and individual responsibility. Voters would be well-served by electing Haley to the Virginia Senate,” said Angie Parker, Executive Director of Middle Resolution.

Middle Resolution made its decision after meeting with all the candidates vying for the seat. Each candidate was vetted about their vision for Virginia, their knowledge of core constitutional principles, and their belief of the proper role of government.

So far it looks like Haley is on track to have the financial and volunteer resources to get his message out no matter what the opponents spend, because at a recent candidate forum and straw poll Vince Haley ran away with the vote:

Vince Haley: 53%

Bill Janis: 26%

Siobhan Stolle Dunnavant: 16%

Eddie Whitlock: 4%

"I vote for all of them": 1%

We think Vince Haley’s dynamic conservative campaign has the potential to help shape the national conversation during this important off year election. First, on the issue of federal overreach Haley’s willingness to confront the EPA's illegal plan to shut down power plants would challenge Gov. McAuliffe to defend higher electricity rates in the fall elections. Second, Haley’s plan to phase out the income tax would force McAuliffe (and his establishment GOP enablers) to defend uncontrolled spending if they oppose the plan to control spending to enable the phase out of the unpopular state income tax.

We urge our friends in Virginia State Senate District 12 to support Vince Haley and we invite CHQ readers outside of Virginia State Senate District 12, who still have an interest in conservative governance and constitutional principles, to support Vince Haley’s campaign anyway they can. To learn more about Vince Haley and his campaign please visit his campaign website, or go to vincehaley.com to donate.

*About Vince Haley: Born and raised in Virginia, Vince Haley is a graduate of the College of William & Mary where he completed his undergraduate studies in Government and French. He earned Law and Masters degrees (Foreign Affairs) from the University of Virginia. On a Rotary International scholarship, he attended the College of Europe in Bruges, Belgium, earning a Masters in European Union Law.

For over a decade, Haley has worked with Newt Gingrich in a number of capacities: health policy researcher; Research Director at the American Enterprise Institute, Vice President of Policy at American Solutions for Winning the Future; policy director and South Carolina based primary campaign liaison, and then later campaign manager of the Newt 2012 presidential campaign; and now Vice President for special projects at Gingrich Productions.