Alex Salmond is demanding a £10 billion carve-up of Britain’s Armed Forces – including aircraft, ships and the transfer of up to 9,200 regular and Special Forces troops – if Scotland votes for independence.

The Scottish National Party leader insists his country’s share of the UK’s military assets should be handed over free of charge so his government can form its own navy, air force and army.

But last night, experts said his asset-stripping of Britain’s Armed Forces would severely damage the UK’s military capability.

Scroll down for video

From the British Army, the SNP wants three infantry battalions, including the Royal Highland Fusiliers (pictured)

They also believe that Scotland would struggle to defend itself on the SNP’s proposed annual defence budget of £2.5 billion.

Policy documents reveal the full inventory of supersonic jets, fully armed warships and army battalions the Scottish nationalists expect to get their hands on if there’s a ‘Yes’ vote this Thursday – with the Royal Navy facing the heaviest losses.

From the current fleet – already the smallest in the Navy’s 500-year history – they want two fully armed Type 23 frigates, such as the Scottish-named HMS Argyll and HMS Sutherland, four anti-mine vessels, two offshore patrol vessels, up to six patrol boats and a number of auxiliary support ships.

The SNP also says it needs 2,000 regular sailors and 200 reservists and expects the Royal Navy to provide most of these personnel.

Alex Salmond is demanding a £10 billion carve-up of Britain’s Armed Forces – including aircraft, ships and the transfer of up to 9,200 regular and Special Forces troops

The nationalists also expect the Royal Air Force to provide ‘most of the equipment’ needed to get Scotland’s air force off the ground.

This raises the prospect of the RAF supplying up to 12 Typhoon combat jets, six Hercules transport aircraft and a squadron of up to ten support helicopters such as Chinooks and Sea Kings.

The RAF is also expected to provide personnel to help the SNP reach its target of 2,000 regular airmen and 300 reservists.

From the British Army, the SNP wants three infantry battalions – with the Scottish-raised Black Watch, Royal Highland Fusiliers and The Highlanders most likely to go – and other units too.

Included on the party’s shopping list are two light armoured reconnaissance units, two light artillery units, engineering and aviation units, as well as troops expert in areas such as communication, transport, logistics and medical services.

The Scottish National Party leader insists his country’s share of the UK’s military assets should be handed over free of charge so his government can form its own navy, air force and army

RIVAL FORCES IN BATTLE OF THE 'BRIBES' UK Defence chiefs are already committed to spending £36 million in golden-handcuffs payments in a bid to keep highly skilled personnel. But with the SNP pledging to improve soldiers’ terms and conditions, experts said the enticements might amount to ‘bribes for troops’. Professor Malcolm Chambers said: ‘You could get issues of competition between the Scottish and British forces.’

Special Forces and explosives and ordnance personnel would be handed over too.

The SNP says that to recruit the 3,500 regular troops and 1,200 reservists it requires, it will negotiate with the Ministry of Defence.

But Mr Salmond’s plans came under attack last night from a former head of the Royal Navy, Lord West, who said: ‘These reductions to the Royal Navy, the Royal Air Force and the British Army would have a major impact on the UK’s defensive capability. Our capability to defend the British Isles will be diminished and the Scots won’t have the ability either. We’ll all lose out. This is very damaging.’

How Scotland will establish its defence forces by 2016 – when independence would be declared in the event of a ‘Yes’ vote – was questioned by Professor Malcolm Chambers of the Royal United Services Institute. He said last night: ‘It is not realistic to manage all these capabilities by day one and how long it takes would rely on the level of UK support. While 9,000 troops sounds affordable it is not realistic to increase the numbers of personnel to 15,000 [the SNP’s ten-year target] on the same £2.5 billion annual budget.’

An MoD spokesman said: ‘Scotland is safer and better defended as part of the UK, protected by the full range of UK defence capabilities, and benefiting from the manpower, bases and military equipment that the Union provides.’

Scots 'MI6 will get just 720 spies to fight terror

By ROBERT VERKAIK FOR THE MAIL ON SUNDAY

An independent Scotland will leave the rest of the UK exposed to acts of terrorism from groups such as Islamic State, security experts warned last night.

They say that on the day of independence Scotland will lose the services of MI5, MI6 and GCHQ and the rest of the UK’s intelligence-gathering operations.

Its newly created Scottish security and intelligence agency is expected to be left with just 720 spies to defend the new state – and it will no longer be able to rely on the cooperation of the American agencies, who view Scotland with deep suspicion after the release of Lockerbie bomber Abdelbaset al-Megrahi.

An independent Scotland will leave the rest of the UK exposed to acts of terrorism from groups such as Islamic State, security experts warned

Alex Carlile QC, the former independent reviewer of anti-terrorism legislation, said: ‘There have been many terrorist issues which have been of shared interest to the police in Scotland, the UK and the various control authorities. It’s hard to imagine Scotland would be anything like as secure if it obtained independence.

'It would be very difficult for the new security agency because any serving security service personnel would be British and their contractual loyalties would be to the UK, not Scotland.’

Robin Simcox, an expert on the threat posed by Islamist extremists, said that there were ‘real concerns’ over how Scotland would be able to monitor returning jihadis. He said: ‘They will lose a lot of capability and as result the rest of the UK would be more vulnerable.’

Expert analysis by the Royal United Services Institute, Britain’s leading defence and security think-tank, concludes Scotland will be excluded from the ‘five eyes’ intelligence sharing programme of Britain, America, New Zealand, Australia and Canada.

And former security minister Lord West warned that Britain and America could be forced to spy on Scotland, which will be considered an alien state. If Scotland doesn’t have the resources or wherewithal to guard against Islamic extremists who have returned from Syria and Iraq then the UK will have no choice but to treat Scotland as hostile.