ENLARGE Andrew Stenson as Danny Chen in 'An American Soldier.' Scott Suchman

Washington

New operas about current events can help jolt this venerable art form into the 21st century, but pitfalls abound. So it is with "An American Soldier," the most recent project of the Washington National Opera's American Opera Initiative. Composed by Huang Ruo with a libretto by David Henry Hwang, the hour-long chamber opera, which had its premiere Friday at the Kennedy Center, is based on the true story of Pvt. Danny Chen, a Chinese-American soldier who committed suicide in Afghanistan in 2011 after being mercilessly hazed by his fellow soldiers. As was the case with Christopher Theofanidis's 9/11 opera "Heart of a Soldier," when the tragedies of real people, some of whom are still living, are dramatized, reverence often trumps theater.

The opera's opening is promising: An eerie processional with a drum and an overblown, breathy flute creates the surreal quality of a Chinese opera in the military courtroom where Sgt. Aaron Marcum (a properly brutal Trevor Scheunemann) is on trial. But Mr. Huang's music quickly becomes more conventional as other characters are introduced, in the court and in flashbacks, and the ploddingly slow, declamatory vocal writing is more about conveying information than establishing atmosphere or building tension. Things get livelier when we finally get to Afghanistan and Sgt. Marcum's unbridled hostility toward Danny (an expressive Andrew Stenson), whom he abuses both physically and verbally. The hazing escalates; Danny dies offstage. But the ending flags again with a long, lyrical finale for Mother Chen (Guang Yang), complete with the obligatory lullaby as Danny's spirit comforts her.

That ending, and the focus on the mother (however eloquently sung by Ms. Yang, a big-voiced mezzo), nestles the savagery of the story in gauzy sentiment and uplift. Using the courtroom as a framing device and relying on the testimonies of other soldiers (Andrew McLaughlin, Michael Ventura and Jonathan Blalock, in multiple roles), even during the Afghanistan scenes, puts Danny's ordeal at a distance. One interesting line for Sgt. Marcum in Mr. Hwang's copious libretto—"Think your grades make you special. Better than me. Back home, you egg-rolls get every advantage, but it's different here. I'm in charge"—opens up a tantalizing angle about racism and resentment that could have made the conflict more nuanced, but it flies by. Rather, we have a pat narrative: the teenager who joins the Army to prove that he's "a real American." The fact that he's now "an American soldier who all the world sees" puts a positive spin on his martyrdom rather than letting us feel its horror.

The piece was given a simple, efficient production. Paul Taylor's sets—the courtroom dominated by a U.S. flag; the Afghanistan scenes, by a graffiti-covered wall—and A.J. Guban's lighting helped distinguish between past and present. David Paul's ritualistic direction underlined the opera's moralizing, declamatory tone. Soloman Howard brought a resonant bass to the roles of the Judge and Pvt. Manny Davis. Steven Jarvi drew a vigorous performance from the 13-member orchestra.

***

New York

Site-specific opera production is a hot trend, and On Site Opera, a recent addition to the bevy of pocket-size opera companies here, makes a specialty of it. On Tuesday, it presented Jean-Philippe Rameau's acte de ballet "Pygmalion" (1748) at Madame Tussauds New York. A waxworks museum might seem like a perfect spot for an opera about a statue that comes to life, but it wasn't. An extremely loud air-conditioning fan competed with the music and created intonation and ensemble problems for the singers, who were probably having difficulty hearing the valiant New Vintage Baroque Orchestra, led from the harpsichord by Jennifer Peterson. As a result, the performance had a scrappy quality.

The plot, drawn from Ovid, is minimal: the love of the sculptor Pygmalion for the beautiful Statue that he has created is so great that it brings her to life, and most of the opera is spent praising the power of Love. Eric Einhorn, the stage director and company founder, played a bit fast and loose with the story, however. Pygmalion's previous love, Céphise, instead of disappearing after her one sung scene in which she rebukes the sculptor for dumping her, continues moping around, watching the victory of her rival. In the end, she gets him back, and the Statue reverts back to being inert, a modern revision that gave Mr. Einhorn something to do with some of the extensive instrumental music for dance and pantomime.

As Pygmalion, Marc Molomot, a high tenor, bravely carried the lion's share of the vocal music, though he sounded strained in the upper register and breathless in the florid final aria, "Règne, Amour." Camille Zamora brought a big, focused soprano to the Statue, and nicely captured the physical hesitations of her awakening; Justine Aronson was bright as L'Amour; and Emalie Savoy was a pretty, sulky Céphise. Jordan Isadore's choreography for himself and Eloise DeLuca was charmingly folky, if brief.

Mr. Einhorn used the space cleverly, sending the four-member chorus out into the audience to distribute Cupid questionnaires that were actually On Site business cards; Shawn Kaufman's lighting was spotty and Candida K. Nichols's modern costumes, serviceable. It all took place under the waxy gazes of Robin Williams, Julia Roberts and Patrick Stewart, none of whom, sadly, came to life—though thanks to the AC fan, they didn't melt either.

Ms. Waleson writes about opera for the Journal.