Related Links

Donate Now

The funeral concluded in Hattiesburg shortly after 1 p.m. Saturday afternoon and began the nearly 200 mile long journey to his final resting place in Fox Cemetery in Starkville.

That journey brought Officer Tate through Meridian where supporters were lining roadways and overpasses in support of Officer Tate and his family.

It was the final salute to Officer Liquori Tate.

"When it comes down to the public just grasping the idea of the sacrifice, the sacrifices that are involved in our line of work," Retired Meridian Police Captain Wade Johnson said. "It makes it just amazing."

Hundreds if not thousands lined overpasses and the side of roadways as Officer Tate traveled to his final resting place in Starkville.

"To know something like this happens it just hurts your heart for people to even do this to someone," Latoya Tate who was a roadside supporter said.

Posters adorned with support for the fallen officers families were being held up by those on the side of the roadways. American flags flew high, signs that say hash tag we see you were being held in an understanding that at the end of the day behind the badge there is a lot more to the officer.

"As a family, as a mother, as a wife, as a sister or a brother, I would be very honored by what I saw today," said roadside supporter Kim Johnson.

The thin blue line as many have come to know as the signature of law enforcement was flying everywhere.

"Between here and Hattiesburg and what's going to go on between Lauderdale County and Starkville it is just amazing," Captain Johnson said. "It shows a great support."

A support that stretched for over a hundred miles across the state as the 3 mile long precession took Officer Tate on the hero's journey to his final resting place.

"It just means a lot because it represents the fact that we're all out here showing our respect for this officer knowing that he put his life on the line everyday and it just means a lot," McGill said.

A hero, a son, an officer, a brother, and a community who came out to support him on his final ride home.

"That's my family," Johnson said. "All those cars, all those different counties, all the different law enforcement agencies that just came through here with Officer Tate, that's our family. that's our extended family that goes all over the nation."

Mississippi has bad reps over the year of race issues and different stuff," 186th Fire Department Bud Brown said. "I think it shows the whole country where Mississippi is. If it's a policeman, fireman, or an EMS, we're going to support them.

The city of Hattiesburg is raising funds for those fallen officers. All funds raised will go directly to the families of Benjamin Deen and Liquori Tate. To make a donation you can text HPD to 601-777 to make a financial gift.

On Tuesday, May 19, between 11 a.m. and 6:30 p.m. donations will be collected at the following locations in Hattiesburg & Laurel.

- All The First Bank locations

- Petro Nissan in Hattiesburg

- Toyota of Hattiesburg (both locations)

- Kim's No Bull in laurel

All checks needs to be made out to the Deen and Tate Memorial fund.

For mobile users you can click the link with this article.