Healthcare providers need to upgrade their billing and payment systems if they want to tackle consumer dissatisfaction, a new report by PriceWaterhouse Cooper found.

See the slides from the study

PwC research found that consumers give positive ratings to the person who administers care, while poor experiences are blamed on the institution.

With the exception of retail pharmacies, consumers are dissatisfied with healthcare billing and payment systems, according to a 2015 survey by PCW’s Health Research Institute.

More than 31 percent of said they were dissatisfied with the transparency of billing and payment from hospitals, compared to the 11 to 20 percent dissatisfied with the transparency of their insurance plans.

In particular, cost-conscious millennials are more likely than the general population to judge healthcare organizations based on their billing practices, to challenge their medical bills, search for better deals and make value-based decisions, according to the survey of 1,000 individuals nationwide. Providers, in the short-term, should build more convenience, transparency, affordability, reliability and seamlessness into their revenue cycle and payment systems, according to PwC.

In the longer term, a sea change is needed, especially when it comes to the move to digital billing. The survey showed 76 percent of Medicare payment was sent electronically in 2013 and 65 percent of Medicare documentation was sent electronically. This compares to commercial health insurers, which conducted just 15 percent of payments and 27 percent of payment remittance advice electronically in 2013.

Follow Healthcare Finance on Twitter and LinkedIn.

The U.S. business average is 43 percent electronic payment.

The affluent are the most dissatisfied with their insurer’s billing and payment, with 33 percent reporting it not affordable, compared to 19 percent of the general population. Another 25 percent of more affluent patients were not confident in the bill’s accuracy and 27 percent said the details of benefits were not easy to find. These findings were in comparison to 16 percent and 21 percent, respectively, of the general population.

Providers need to incorporate online payment sites, mobile apps and aggregated billing as steps toward a simplified consumer experience, according to the study.

They also need to make it easier for consumers to plan for costs to reduce bad debt. High-deductible plans make it more important to consumers that they receive credit towards their deductible. Consumers lost in the complexity of their bills may abandon payment altogether, according to the survey.

Healthcare providers who successfully transition may collect more of their patients’ bills and they may collect them more quickly. They may be able to better manage cash flow, reduce reserves for bad debt and minimize administrative costs, according to PwC.

Click on numbers below to see slides from the report.