ASPEN — The skiers flipped and spun in every direction on a warm Sunday afternoon, soaring more than 20 feet above the halfpipe in one of the most exciting Winter X Games contests in years.

Leapfrogging leaders lasted mere minutes in golden position as skier after skier stepped up their game in the best-of-three contest.

With sun softening the left side of the pipe, skiers adjusted their runs for each round to accommodate the slower conditions. That meant few spins and more amplitude, thrilling the packed crowd at the bottom of the pipe.

“I realized throughout the contest that they were rewarding big for amplitude and I was like, ‘All right, I got to step up my game a little bit,’ ” said 20-year-old Alex Ferreira, an Aspen native who claimed his second consecutive X Games bronze.

Canadian Simon d’Artois increased his amplitude as he moved down the pipe on his final run, reaching 21 feet, 6 inches on his final hit — a double-corked 1080 — to steal the lead from Ferreira with 93 points.

Frenchman Kevin Rolland, competing in his eighth X Games, went next, boosting a 23-foot air on one of three double-corked hits to score 92.33 points and silver.

Ferreira held his skis for seconds as he spun a pair of lofty, dynamic double corks, including a spectacular alley-oop double flat spin 900 to score 91.66 points for bronze.

The medalists all agreed the contest was the best ever for X, powered by technical trickery, height and style. Many of the competitors threw first-ever tricks in the pipe.

“I don’t know what put me above these guys,” d’Artois said. “Both of them had runs that were beyond anything I’d ever seen. I’m just thankful that mine was able to come out on top.”

Sochi Olympic gold medalist David Wise slipped to fourth place in the final round, missing his shot at a golden four-peat in the X Games pipe. Skating hard into his first hit and spinning the contest’s only double-cork 1440 and backing up with two more of the double-flip tricks, Wise fought hard for the win.

“Obviously I could have gone for an easier run, but I’m out here to push the limits and do something new,” Wise said. “That’s the nature of the game. I feed off that progression and enjoy it.”

Of the 10 Olympic contests staged at the X Games — men’s and women’s ski and snowboard halfpipe and slopestyle and men’s and women’s boardercross — only freeskier Maddie Bowman was able to repeat her golden performance from Sochi with X Games gold in the halfpipe.

Jason Blevins: 303-954-1374, jblevins@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jasonblevins