Health Net, Inc. (NYSE:HNT) said it agreed to be sold to Centene Corp. in a cash-and-stock deal

(Marketwatch)Health Net, Inc. (NYSE:HNT) said it agreed to be sold to Centene Corp. in a cash-and-stock deal valued at $6.3 billion, as health insurers increasingly look for tie-ups that can help them cut costs and grow scale.

⇒Advance Chart

St. Louis-based Centene, a Medicaid-focused health insurer, expects the deal to boost its presence in California and other western states, while allowing for $150 million a year in synergies in the second year after closing.

Health Net HNT, +11.67% shareholders will receive 0.622 shares of Centene CNC, -5.48% and $28.25 in cash for each share held, for a total consideration of $78.57 based on Wednesday’s closing price. That represents a 21% premium to Health Net’s last closing price.

Shares of Centene gained 5% in premarket trading, while Health Net’s shares rallied 5.4%.

The deal comes amid a frenzy of merger talks in the health-insurance industry.

Changes brought on in part by the Affordable Care Act have prompted major players in the health-insurance industry to consider mergers that could help them cut costs and reap other benefits.

Health Net Equity Analysis

Health Net, Inc. (NYSE:HNT) opened trading today as $72.45 and is trading in the range of 71.91-76.67 today. Health Net’s current market cap stands at $5.59 billion.

Compared to other peers in the Health Care Plans sector, Health Net has outperformed in terms of quarterly revenue growth year over year at 0.28 vs. the industry average of 0.24. Health Net’s earnings per share is currently at 1.82, which surpasses the sector average of 1.76.

Health Net is currently covered by 14 Wall Street analysts. The mean target price is $64.83 according to First Call. This presents a solid downside to the current price of the equity. The Mean Recommendation sits at 2.6 which is based on 2 Strong Buy, 3 Buy and 8 Hold ratings.

The current quarter EPS consensus estimate is .89 with revenue estimates of 4.20B. Sales are expected to grow at a 22.80% rate. Health Net reported actual earnings last quarter of 0.74 which beats the .69 consensus estimate, a 7.20% surprise.

Corporate Profile

Health Net, Inc. provides managed health care services through health plans and government-sponsored managed care plans in the United States. It operates through Western Region Operations and Government Contracts segments. The company offers various health care services, including ambulatory and outpatient physician care, hospital care, pharmacy services, behavioral health, and ancillary diagnostic and therapeutic services. It also offers health plans, such as a matrix package, which allows employers and members to select their desired coverage from various alternatives; and commercial health care products comprising health maintenance organization plans, preferred provider organization (PPO) plans, point of service plans, and exclusive provider organization (EPO) plans. In addition, the company provides various Medicare products, including Medicare advantage plans with and without prescription drug coverage; and Medicare supplement products that supplement traditional fee-for-service Medicare coverage. Further, the company offers Medicaid and related products; insured PPO, EPO, and indemnity products; auxiliary non-health products, such as life, accidental death and dismemberment, dental, vision, and behavioral health insurance; and other specialty services and products comprising pharmacy benefits, behavioral health, dental, and vision products and services, as well as managed care products for hospitals, health plans, and other entities. Additionally, it is involved in government-sponsored managed care federal contract with the Department of Defense under the TRICARE program; and other health care, mental health, and behavioral health government contracts. The company also provides administrative services comprising provider network management, referral management, medical management, disease management, enrollment, customer service, clinical support service, and claims processing. Health Net, Inc. was founded in 1979 and is based in Woodland Hills, California.