Consumer Watch (Photo: Thinkstock/staff)

If you haven't already filed your taxes, you have about two months to decide how you'll get them done.

The military services and Defense Department have free tax prep options for you, and those options have expanded this year, said Army Lt. Col. Samuel Kan, executive director of the Armed Forces Tax Council, which includes representatives from all of the services' tax assistance programs.

When it comes to claiming all the deductions and credits you can, Kan said, "Don't leave money on the table." Even if you prepare your own tax returns, have them reviewed for accuracy by a tax professional trained in the nuances of military tax issues.

The services emphasize that troops can go to any installation for tax assistance, regardless of the branch. That's always been DoD policy, Kan said, but in the past, service members have decided to pay someone for tax help when their own installation couldn't fit them in within their time frame. "That's not necessary," he said.

Instead, troops can call other installations to see if they have time available for assistance. "Call around so you'll know in advance," he said.

Free tax preparation help

Visit the DoD Legal Services Locator for contact information for all the military legal assistance offices in your local area, at http://legalassistance.law.af.mil/content/locator.php. Tax centers with trained professionals may be in or near the legal assistance offices. Some bases, especially Navy bases, have set up kiosk centers near legal assistance offices where you can go to prepare your own taxes, with a professional to help you if needed.

MilitaryOneSource.mil offers a variety of resources, including secure, free online tax preparation, filing through H&R Block and tax consultations with tax professionals. Kan said this year's Military OneSource H&R Block software is expanded and more thorough.

There are no large military-specific changes in this year's tax law, Kan said. One Affordable Care Act change requires everyone — including troops, retirees and their family members — to report health care coverage on their tax returns. Tricare meets the minimum essential coverage requirements under the law for most people.

But troops need to be reminded about some tax provisions that are constant and can provide credits and deductions that add up, he said, such as the Earned Income Tax Credit. For a taxpayer with three children, depending on income, that credit alone could be over $6,000.

Julie Sforza-Smith, principal tax research analyst with H&R Block, said troops also should crunch the numbers when deciding whether to include tax-free combat pay in their calculations for the Earned Income Tax Credit. "The common mistake is to exclude it all the time," she said. Yet a number of factors could change the situation and the amount of the credit. She said she recently ran an example that would provide a $5,000 credit with one option, and a $244 credit with the other.

She notes that including the combat pay in the calculations doesn't mean it will be taxed. The H&R Block software — including that used for Military OneSource — automatically makes both calculations, then asks the taxpayer which option he or she chooses.

She said a common error is that troops and their spouses don't know which state to pay taxes to. The Servicemembers' Civil Relief Act allows service members and eligible spouses to pay taxes to their home of record, rather than the state where they are stationed. Under a part of the SCRA known as the Military Spouse Residency Relief Act, spouses can also retain residency in their home state if they move with their military spouse. The spouse's earned pay isn't taxed in the current state, but in the home state.

But since states have different rules and forms, and military members have constantly changing circumstances — for example, perhaps living in two or three states in one year, and having income from a second job outside their military pay — it's a good idea to have the help of a tax professional, Sforza-Smith said.

As a long-time professional and an attorney, she said, "I firmly believe everyone should be able to do their taxes themselves. But in this situation, I really believe military people need help. It's not in their best interest to go it alone. They may miss deductions, miss income exclusions, pay to the wrong state," she said.

She reminds members of the Guard and Reserve who travel more than 100 miles for duty that they can deduct unreimbursed travel expenses for those extra miles. At a reimbursement rate of 56 cents per mile, those deductions can add up for multiple drill weekends in a year. For example, if you traveled an extra 50 miles each month – 600 miles last year – that would add up to $336 in deductions.

Other tips:

*Make sure you put the correct Social Security number on the return. It's the most common mistake.

*Provide the correct bank account information to the IRS for electronic refunds.

*Have your documents ready. Kan suggests having a folder handy, ready to intercept all tax-related documents.

He also suggests bringing your previous year's tax returns, unless you're using the same tax preparer. That can help make sure you don't forget some income, deduction or credit.

Read or Share this story: http://militari.ly/1DPSTN4