Since announcing his quest for the 2016 Republican Presidential nomination, Donald Trump has dominated the airwaves, with major networks and cable stations devoting much of their election coverage to “The Donald.” Conservative talk radio is no different. But while many conservative radio hosts talk about Trump, they may actually be supporting Texas Senator Ted Cruz.

A report this week in POLITICO said that Trump may have gone too far when he recently called Cruz, “a little bit of a maniac.” Mark Levin, a former Reagan administration official who hosts a popular program with a listenership of 7 million, said, “My friend Donald Trump really screwed up…big time. We have a guy who has stood up to Mitch McConnell, who is viciously attacked in every liberal newspaper, every liberal outlet by the establishment. Who led the fight against Obamacare? And he’s referred to as a ‘maniac’? I’m sure Mitch McConnell loved that.”

Conservative host Glenn Beck has questioned the motives of hosts such as Sean Hannity, Michael Savage and Rush Limbaugh, who have said they focus on Trump to “keep the audience.” Beck wants to know what he’s missing. “Just based on his favorability ratings, Trump could never win in a general. Research shows that he may be near his ceiling now. Are they just trying to hold on to those disenfranchised Republicans to keep them in the fold?” Beck asked.

After the latest debate, some conservative talk show hosts defended Cruz when he was attacked by Florida Senator Marco Rubio for his “inconsistent rhetoric” on legalization of undocumented immigrants. “Yes, Ted Cruz offered a proposal, the result of which would have allowed some illegal aliens to stay in the U.S. in exchange for never becoming citizens. His plan failed and exposed just how intent his fellow Republican senators were in giving illegal aliens a pathway to citizenship. Now those senators and Republican elites want revenge,” said conservative host Erick Erickson.

Laura Ingraham, whose program has about 2 million listeners, recently tweeted her appreciation of Cruz for “never hiding from talk radio” and welcoming tough questions. But she is still fond of Trump, as well. “Newsflash to Establishment: Efforts to demonize TrumpCruz have backfired big time. Time to fire the donors & get right with the voters,” Ingraham tweeted last week.