House Appropriations Committee Chairman Hal Rogers, R-Ky., is interviewed in his Capitol office. Republicans take aim at IRS budget

Ever since the IRS tea party scandal broke two years ago, House Republicans have redoubled their efforts to gut the agency’s budget — year after year after year.

But now — for the first time since Lois Lerner’s infamous 2013 apology — they’re finally getting their moment to impose serious financial constraints on the tax-collecting agency they love to hate.

Story Continued Below

House GOP appropriators on Wednesday proposed chopping IRS resources almost 8 percent, reducing the agency budget to $10.1 billion. It would be a huge hit to the agency responsible not only for overseeing tax collections but administering Obamacare’s health care subsidies.

And those cuts are bound to balloon even more once the bill hits the House floor. Republicans are eager to offer further amendments snipping at the IRS — especially amid headlines about the IRS targeting conservative groups, giving rogue employees bonuses and falling short of protecting taxpayer rights and privacy.

While House Republicans in past years have had to negotiate with the Democratic-controlled Senate — which was often able to restore the IRS budget or at the very least, ease proposed cuts — this time around, GOP allies are behind the wheel in the Senate.

That means President Barack Obama — who requested an 18 percent increase for the IRS — could be forced to sign a spending bill later this year that would add new hardships for the agency, which already is reeling from scandal and begging for more money to boost taxpayer services and protect taxpayers’ information. Holding up a broader spending bill in the name of the IRS, after all, is a political no-no with an American public deeply skeptical of tax collectors. If the president were to refuse to sign a spending bill only because of cuts to the IRS, he’d risk serious political backlash.

“This will hold the agency’s budget below the sequester level and below the fiscal year 2004 level,” a House Appropriations Committee news release boasts. “This funding level is sufficient for the IRS to perform its core duties, but will require the agency to streamline and better prioritize its budget.”

The bill would cut $838 million from the current IRS budget, bringing the agency’s funding $2.8 billion below what Obama requested.

The bill, as in years past, would also block the IRS from proposing a controversial, much-awaited regulation aimed at reining in the political activities of 501(c)(4) tax-exempt groups like Crossroads GPS. Such groups are supposed to limit their campaign activity under law, but the IRS got in trouble during the tea party hubbub for holding up the approvals of conservative groups that weren’t engaging in politics but advocacy.

Still, the IRS says it needs clarity for itself and for taxpayers about what is and isn’t allowed.

Another thing it can’t do under the GOP bill: Collect penalties under Obamacare’s individual mandate. That would potentially save hundreds if not thousands of dollars for Obamacare protesters who refuse to buy coverage.

The agency argues that such cuts would only hurt taxpayers and leave a threadbare IRS unable to help people address their tax problems. The IRS also administers the core of Obamacare — health care tax credits — and recently experienced cybersecurity lapses that amounted to people’s personal information being hacked.

The bill specifically gives the IRS a $75 million boost for taxpayer services, in an effort to prevent any cuts from hurting Americans who need their tax questions answered.

The cuts are part of a $20.2 billion financial services bill filled with political red meat designed to appeal to GOP lawmakers. While Republican appropriators have decried spending caps for other appropriations bills, leaving them in a tough spot cutting key priorities, they’re more than happy to make reductions on this measure.

“While making good use of limited tax dollars, this legislation also makes great strides in reining in wasteful spending, and stopping harmful and unnecessary bureaucratic over-reach,” House Appropriations Chairman Hal Rogers (R-Ky.) said in a statement.

Overall, the bill is about $1.3 billion below last year’s level and $4.8 billion below what the president wanted.

The legislation makes cuts to prized Democratic agencies, including a proposal to bring the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau under the congressional appropriations process. Currently, it’s funded through the Federal Reserve, but the change would give Congress — namely, Republicans — more power over the agency.

The bill is also packed with conservative policy provisions like one requiring the administration to “report to Congress on the cost and regulatory burdens of the Dodd-Frank Act,” and another to bar the SEC from mandating political-donation disclosures in filings.