by Jeff Flynt

GREEN BAY, WI (WTAQ) - Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton spoke to a packed Riverside Ballroom in Green Bay on Tuesday.

The former Secretary of State opened by touting the backing she's received from union groups and promised to improve life for middle class families.

"The economy does better when we have a Democrat in the White House," said Clinton. "Here's what I will do, more infrastructure jobs, roads, bridges, tunnels, ports, airports, good union jobs for people."

Clinton, who's battling Vermont Senator Bernie Sanders in the Democratic primary election April 5, also took a shot at Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker.

"You have a governor who has been taking a wrecking ball to the rights of workers, to the rights of women, to the rights of Wisconsinites who deserve a better future," Clinton stated to loud cheering.

She also echoed economic policies put into place by her husband, former President Bill Clinton, like raising taxes on wealthy Americans. But Clinton says she will help make it possible for middle and lower income families to send their kids to college without having to incur massive debt.

Clinton also touted her plans to defend the Affordable Care Act, raise the minimum wage, create equal pay for women and engage world partners in defeating terrorist groups like ISIS.

EXPERIENCE MATTERS

Out of the several hundred supporters who attended the rally on Green Bay's east side Tuesday, many believe that it's not so important to elect a so-called "political outsider".

"I know a lot of people are looking at Donald Trump because he's not a typical politician," said Rebecca from Green Bay. "But there is an advantage to being a politician is that you know the ins and outs, and what the position is going to entail."

Bob Hickey says he's new to the political process, and attended both Democratic events in Northeast Wisconsin on Tuesday.

"We did go see Bernie this morning, just kind of see the difference between the two," Hickey says. "Definitely put her on the radar just because of her experience in politics."

While some supporters did feel Clinton's weakness is appealing to the younger voting bloc, many fresh faces were seen among the crowd. That included families with kids who aren't quite voting age yet.

"I was very involved as a child with my family, because they've been involved with politics and it's important to understand what's going on in the country around you," Nina said, attending with her husband Miles and two children Alexa and Evan. She pointed out Evan as the one who signed them up.

"I really liked how she spoke on TV, her confidence, I look up to Hillary and I think she's a good person," Evan explained.