As the Metropolitan Opera attempts to cut its labor costs amid stagnant revenue, union leaders have questioned the company's emphasis on investing in new productions, sparking debate about the root cause of its financial woes.

A Wall Street Journal analysis of box-office data shows new productions spearheaded by the Met's general manager Peter Gelb have had mixed success. While they generally sell better than revivals, some performed poorly when brought back to the stage a season or two later.

The Numbers Box-Office Performance at the Metropolitan Opera

In one striking example, the Met's biggest investment in recent years, the $19.6 million "Ring" cycle, tanked on its return in the 2012-13 season: Siegfried, the third installment of the saga, earned just 48% of the potential box-office take.

The box-office data illustrate the Met's struggle to maximize revenue as its costs increased and audience declined. The data also show that no one factor makes or breaks an opera: Even a big name like Plácido Domingo doesn't guarantee a hit.

"The answer is not in simply playing 'La Bohème' to death, night after night," Mr. Gelb said. "Opera will have no future if we don't present new work and expand the bounds of the grand opera repertoire."

"The greater risk for the Met would be to become artistically cautious or stale," he added. "That is a certain recipe for losing the audience altogether."

When he took the helm in 2006, Mr. Gelb invested heavily in new productions and live high-definition broadcasts in movie theaters. Attendance in the opera house increased during the first two seasons of his tenure, then fell, beginning in 2009. Making matters worse, a ticket-price increase in 2012 backfired, and, along with superstorm Sandy, caused box-office sales to drop sharply. The Met dialed back on prices, and ticket sales rebounded slightly this year, it said.

Mr. Gelb is now proposing changes to work rules and benefits that he says would yield between 16% and 17% in labor-cost savings. Union leaders counter that he should instead rein in spending on new stagings. The Met spent $21.8 million to create seven new productions in 2012-13, not including expenses such as set storage, costume cleaning and rehearsal pay for the orchestra and singers.

"Peter is saying that new productions sell. That's not, in fact, the case," said Jessica Phillips, a clarinetist who serves on the orchestra's negotiating committee. "Now he's asking us to pay for his mistakes."

She added: "We're for risk, we're for innovation, for new productions like 'Two Boys,' but it needs to be tempered with things that sell well."

Nico Muhly's contemporary opera, "Two Boys," was one of the weakest box-office performers in the 2013-14 season, earning 56% of its potential, according to the Journal's analysis of box-office data through February 2014.

By contrast, the Met's new production of "Eugene Onegin," a work by Tchaikovsky first performed in 1879, pulled in 87% of its potential and filled, on average, 93% of the house.

ENLARGE Albina Shagimuratova in an abridged, English-language holiday presentation of Mozart's 'The Magic Flute' at the Metropolitan Opera. Marty Sohl/Metropolitan Opera

The best seller this season was the family-friendly version of "The Magic Flute," a 2004 production by Julie Taymor that Mr. Gelb in 2006 had shortened and translated into English to appeal to young audiences.

One show with less-than-stellar results, according to the Met, was a reprise of "The Enchanted Island," a Baroque pastiche featuring Plácido Domingo. An attempt by the Met to broaden its repertory, it sold well on its debut in the 2011-2012 season, but didn't fare as well on its return this season, earning 62% of its potential and filling 77% of the house, on average, including discounted seats.

Stars such as Mr. Domingo generally boost ticket sales. But many factors contribute to the success of a production, including its familiarity, the length of its run, and the month and even days of the week it is shown.

Relying on standards like "Carmen" and "La Traviata" isn't enough, Mr. Gelb said. "This is why it is important to continue to attempt to expand the repertoire with new productions that can capture the public's imagination."

The orchestra union in June sent a letter to the company's board members, presenting its own analysis of box-office data. It argued that productions commissioned by Mr. Gelb don't sell well as revivals, an assertion the Met disputes.

The Met conceded that in the 2012-13 season, its revival of the "Ring" cycle produced disappointing results. It spent $19.6 million to create the four-part production, not including $1.4 million to reinforce the stage so it could hold the 45-ton mechanical set. A $20 million gift funded the production.

Its first installments premiered in the 2010-11 season and virtually sold out. The next two installments debuted the following year, again with strong sales. But in the 2012-13 season, the four-part cycle earned an average of 58% of its box-office potential.

Met officials attributed the weak sales to an increase in competition: The Met's "Ring" cycle was up against "Ring" productions all over the world that season, in celebration of the bicentenary of Wagner's birth. It was also a season in which the box office took a double hit from the price-hike backlash and Sandy.

"We are obliged to continue to take artistic risks, since there is no safe programming harbor for grand opera, particularly when you are talking about the Met and its 220 some performances in a 3,800-seat house," Mr. Gelb said. "It is simply not possible to coast along."

—Tom McGinty contributed to this article.

Write to Jennifer Maloney at jennifer.maloney@wsj.com