Political correctness took an ugly turn last week when a Catholic nun was excoriated for lecturing against same-sex unions at a Catholic high school in North Carolina.

And the outrage didn’t come from the left, but from students and parents.

Sister Jane Dominic Laurel told students that homosexuality is not so much a biological trait as a result of psychological factors often prompted by environmental conditions, like being raised by same-sex parents. She used studies and data to back up her claims, according to Breitbart News.

Sister Laurel, a Nashville Dominican nun with a doctorate in theology from the Pontifical University in Rome, has often lectured on church doctrine, which teaches that homosexuality is a sin. She normally teaches at Aquinas College, but often guest lectures at high schools across the country.

Breitbart News reported:

It is reported Sister Laurel also talked about the greater chance at life success that children have who come from households headed by the child’s biological mother and father in a lifelong commitment of marriage.

[* * *]

Sister Laurel has reportedly given similar talks a few dozen times all over the country all without incident. It is reported that some of the data she used came from the highly respected Anscombe Bioethics Centre in Great Britain. Most of the nun’s talks are up at her webpage.

Although no complaints were raised by other groups, students and parents from the Charlotte-area school were incensed.

Nearly 1,000 parents met at the school Wednesday to address complaints. The assembly was closed to the public, but social media posts described it as “often heated, with emotions running high on both sides,” the Charlotte Observer reported.

Laurel’s address also prompted a student petition, which said:

“We the students of Charlotte Catholic High School would like to issue a formal complaint regarding Sr. Jane Dominic [Laurel]’s speech,” according to an online petition. “We believe that same sex couples have the ability to raise happy, well-adjusted and successful children … We believe that homosexual couples are capable of monogamy. As rational people, we know that most homosexual people lead healthy, normal and productive lives like their heterosexual counterparts.”

Megyn Kelly fans call for her to fire her stylist

The nun’s remarks shouldn’t have come as a shock, according to Breitbart.

“Much of what Sister Laurel spoke about comes directly from the Universal Catechism of the Catholic Church and should have been unremarkable given that she was talking at a Catholic high school,” Breitbart reported

Still, the president of college where Laurel teaches apologized for her remarks in an April 4 statement, adding, “Sister Jane Dominic has cancelled her speaking engagements and, at her request, is preparing to begin a sabbatical from teaching at Aquinas College.”

The apology was as much an over-reaction as the anger vented by students and parents.

A Catholic college shouldn’t have to apologize for supporting church doctrine. And if the students and parents don’t like it, they can always join another church.