This sign was posted on the front of the All Med location on Chantilly Parkway. (Brad Harper/Advertiser) (Photo: .)

The All Med Physicians walk-in clinics in the River Region have all closed their doors less than a month before a new Millbrook location was scheduled to open.

A note taped to the door of the Chantilly Parkway location said the clinics were permanently closed as of July 2 and apologized to patients. It blamed "circumstances over which we have no control." It said a phone number to obtain medical records would be available "as soon as possible."

Meanwhile, patients were directed to other health-care providers in the area.

The website goallmed.com contained only a logo, and posts from patients on the clinic's Facebook page said the website hadn't functioned for months.

All Med Physicians left their old PriMed buildings a year ago and established three new primary care and minor emergency locations in Montgomery and Prattville. Four months later, they announced an affiliation with Jackson Hospital to link patients directly with Jackson Hospital specialists, outpatient imaging centers and diagnostic centers.

"This partnership will help us meet the challenges presented by the Affordable Care Act and other changes being introduced by insurers," All Med Medical Director Dr. Don Brobst said at the time of the announcement.

The Advertiser has reached out to Jackson Hospital for more information. Its public relations department is on vacation for the Fourth of July holiday.

All Med last year announced plans to open a new facility in Millbrook by August.

"Millbrook has been one of the fastest growing communities in the state," All Med Physicians CEO Joseph Herrod said at the time. "With our partner Jackson Hospital, we are excited about bringing this new location to Millbrook."

Carol Thompson with the city of Millbrook said a for-sale sign went up in front of the planned All Med location two months ago.

"Jackson confirmed it wouldn't be moving forward with that," Thompson said.

The former PriMed clinics were reopened last summer as part of the American Family Care network, under a partnership with Baptist Health.

Next to the note at the Chantilly Parkway location was a message from PriMed, which said it is now accepting patients and will assist former All Med patients in transferring their medical records.

PriMed posted this sign on the closed All Med location. (Brad Harper/Advertiser) (Photo: .)

"We have medical request forms available at each of our clinics," said Bill Kolezar, Chief Marketing Officer for American Family Care. "A patient simply needs to complete and sign the form. We will then send it to All Med. All Med is required by the State Medical Board to provide the records and should not charge for this service. The records can be sent directly to AFC."

Kolezar said AFC plans to open additional locations in the area over the next year. He also said AFC "will be revisiting our staffing levels in our Montgomery clinics to ensure that we can continue to serve the community in the best way possible."

Primary care clinics

Montgomery

AFC PriMed, 4305 Atlanta Highway

AFC PriMed, 2570 Berryhill Road

AFC PriMed, 2936 Marti Lane

AFC PriMed, 34 Taylor Road N.

AFC PriMed, 2815 East Blvd.'

Eastside Urgent Care, 14 Mitylene Park Lane

Vaughn Urgent Care, 9540 Wynlakes Place

Prattville

AFC PriMed, 1965 Cobbs Ford Road

AFC PriMed, 1595 E. Main St.

Wetumpka

AFC PriMed, 4452 US 231

Read or Share this story: http://on.mgmadv.com/1LZjsmX