Organization needs host families for next school year

International exchange students Nina Burkhardt of Germany; Mirka Zuntova of the Czech Republic; Misti Gist, local coordinator for the Council on International Educational Exchange; Asia Fava of Italy; and Belen Perez of Spain, pose for a photo Saturday at Pioneer Park in Florence. ( Carie Canterbury / Daily Record )

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

»

Corn dogs, gravy, s'mores and squirrels — just a few of things that most Americans don't give a second thought to, but things that are brand new to some people visiting from another country.

International exchange students Nina Burkhardt of Germany; Mirka Zuntova of the Czech Republic; Asia Fava of Italy; and Belen Perez of Spain each tried new foods and saw new sights during their 10-month stay in Cañon City. The students spent the past school year as seniors at Cañon City High School through the Council on International Educational Exchange, but they each will have to attend at least one more school year when they return to their homes.

Belen, 17, was nervous coming to a new place and meeting new people, but it didn't take long for her to warm up and win the hearts of her peers.

During her year at CCHS, Belen participated in art classes, cross country, the CCHS Madrigals and Encore!, and she was voted Spring Fest queen by the student body. She said school in Spain is more difficult because of the number of things students are required to know.

"I like here how there are so many activities, and the teachers want us to be involved," she said. "There are so many sports, music and art — I love it — so many nice things."

Asia, also 17, said she always has wanted to visit the U.S. and learn the language. She participated in cross country and gave tennis a try. She plans to return to the U.S. to study business at San Diego State University. Kathy Slattery, Asia's host mom, said her family will miss her when she goes back to Italy.

Advertisement

"It will be like part of the family is gone," she said. "...She taught us a lot about her culture, and an awareness there is more than just what's in Cañon."

Mirka said most people don't know where the Czech Republic is, but most people in the Czech Republic know her. Mirka, 17, competed in "The Voice" in her home country, and almost made it to the top eight finalists. She didn't participate in any formal vocal classes during her year at CCHS, but she sang in the school's talent show, and frequently spent time singing in the shower and in her room. She said she is happy that she was able live life in another country.

"I thought it was a good chance to see the world from another view and (learn more about it)," she said.

Mirka's host mom, Tara Bauer, enjoyed sharing recipes with her to take home to try with her family.

Spending a school year apart from her family was life changing for Nina. The 16-year-old said she didn't really know who she was when she came to the U.S. last fall, but during this last year, she truly "found herself."

"I feel that now I know myself, and I am happy with myself," she said. "(I learned) what I want and what I don't want, and I (gained self-confidence) with myself."

Nina decided to participate in the student exchange program because her older brother had studied one year in Evergreen as an exchange student and enjoyed the experience.

She said her school in Germany doesn't offer sports, so while at CCHS, she took part in cross country and tried out for the school's soccer team. She lives in Berlin, Germany's largest city, but she's always wanted to see what it was like to live in a small town.

"In Berlin, when you go on the street, you don't say hello because you don't know the people," she said. "Here, even if you don't know them — you say hello and how are you — that is one big difference. ... I like it that you feel somebody cares how you are."

Each of the girls said they missed not having public transportation, but they each did enjoy the time they spent with the local Young Life group. Belen said meal schedules are more relaxed in Spain, and life typically is slower paced there.

Fremont County families are needed to host students during the 2015-16 school year. Students range in age from 15 to 18, and they come from 56 different countries. Host parents must be at least 25 years old, able to provide three meals per day and a place for the student to study, and allow them to be part of their family for the school year. Misti Gist, local coordinator for the Council on International Educational Exchange, said some students stay for one semester, but most stay for the entire school year. They may attend CCHS or Florence High School. Students have their own health insurance and they bring their own spending money.

For more information, call (719) 369-0208 or email misitgist@gmail.com.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com