By Michael D. Pitman

Staff Writer

In his first campaign ad, 8th Congressional District candidate Warren Davidson pledges to repeal the Affordable Care Act, also referred to as Obamacare, and “destroy every ISIS stronghold.”

The Troy businessman released the advertisement Tuesday on his website, WarrenDavidson.com. In the ad he also touts his military experience, including being a West Point graduate and Army Ranger.

Davidson is positioning himself as the anti-establishment candidate — a movement being demonstrated in the GOP presidential race with the surge of real estate mogul Donald Trump.

Davidson has been endorsed by Washington, D.C.-based Club for Growth, Rep. Jim Jordan, R-Urbana, and Citizens for Community Values, and his campaign announced Wednesday evening the endorsement of Clark County Commissioner Rick Lohnes.

Beagle on U.S. defense budget

The soon-to-be-released defense budget “dips below the minimum standards many defense experts believe adequate,” said State Sen. Bill Beagle, R-Tipp City, in advance of the Tuesday release of President Barack Obama’s FY17 Defense Budget.

“Today, more than ever, we need a robust and strong national defense strategy along with sufficient funding to support it,” said Beagle, one of 15 Republican congressional candidates for the 8th District. “It is critical that President Obama understands the significant impact this budget will have on our nation’s ability to meet current and future security challenges.”

He said bases like Wright Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton “must also remain a key component of our national defense planning and budgeting.”

Obama is scheduled to submit a $582.7 billion defense budget to Congress next week.

Derickson adds to leadership team

Ohio Rep. Tim Derickson, R-Hanover Twp., announced his Preble County Leadership Team this week. He’s already announced leadership teams in Clark and Darke counties as well as the endorsements of dozens of office holders in Butler County.

He was also endorsed by the Preble County GOP and received an “unofficial” endorsement from the Butler County GOP.

Derickson’s Preble County Leadership Team includes:

Commissioner Rodney Creech

Sheriff Michael Simpson

Recorder Jeanne A. Creech

Eaton Mayor David Kirsch

former Preble County commissioners Thomas McQuiston and Fred Voge

Preble County GOP Vice Chairman Floyd Geeding and Central Committee member Kevin Johnston

farmer Len Vonderharr

business owner George Suggs

Spurlino offers to help build border wall

As the idea of building a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border is discussed among Republican candidates for president, 8th District candidate Jim Spurlino pledges to offer his concrete resources to help build it.

“The nation needs a concrete-strong border to protect patriotic Americans from foreign terrorists and illegal job snatchers,” Jim Spurlino, a Washington Twp. resident and owner of Spurlino Materials in Middletown, told Dayton Daily News reporter Lynn Hulsey.

Spurlino said last month that when “illegal immigrants come into contact with law enforcement, they must be arrested and deported.”

“I stand by my statement, because we must enforce our laws. The same goes for the border,” Spurlino said in an emailed statement.

Spurlino proposes excluding the project from prevailing wages and suggests he could build a concrete wall for $6 billion, and he would do this “without making a profit.”

White offers proposal for veterans healthcare

Eighth Congressional District candidate Kevin F. White wants Congress to act on improving healthcare for the military veterans who aren’t receiving it because of what he claims is bureaucratic red tape.

He proposes several action steps “in order to correct the shortcomings” of the Veterans Administration so it can “deliver world-class healthcare to America’s heroes.”

“Choice and private sector options should be part of these reforms,” White said. “Cutting waste and over-capacity is necessary in order to re-align the service providers more accurately with the customer.”