New Milford considers cuts after voters reject school budget

NEW MILFORD — School and town officials will go back to the drawing board after voters narrowly rejected a proposed school budget on Tuesday.

Even though the municipal budget was approved by voters, both must go back to referendum within three weeks, according to the town charter. The $62.2 million Board of Education budget was defeated 734 to 716, while the $36.6 million town budget passed 841 to 608.

Overwhelmingly in two advisory questions on the ballot, voters said they didn’t want either budget increased should a second vote be necessary.

The combined proposed budget of $100.3 million was about $300,000 more than the current fiscal year. This included a spending increase of $1 million for the school budget, $182,000 more for the town budget, and $1.6 million for capital projects, which is about $872,000 less than the current fiscal year.

“I’m disappointed in the budget being defeated,” Board of Education Chairman David Lawson said. “It was a very low budget, but we’re going to make it work.”

He said the school board will meet in the near future to discuss its options.

“We look forward to maintaining our programs for the upcoming school year,” he said.

Results for an advisory question on the ballot show 970 voters don’t want to see the school budget increase, while 441 said they do.

Mayor David Gronbach views the new referendum as a chance to present a more accurate budget using final state aid and health insurance figures. He is in the process of organizing a Town Council meeting to discuss the budget.

“There’s going to be a discussion about if the town budget needs tweaking to reflect the state budget,” he said.

The proposed budget includes $448,000 the Board of Finance added to the mayor’s original budget.

The Board of Finance's budget would have increased the tax rate by 2 cents to $26.77 per $100,000 of assessed value, or 0.06 percent. Gronbach’s budget would have decreased the tax rate by about the same amount.

He plans to include input from the school board on what a decrease would mean for the schools.

“We’ll see what happens with this next budget,” Gronbach said.

Following Tuesday’s vote, Gronbach said the school budget could have failed because the Republican Town Committee had campaigned against the budget.

Michael Barnes, chairman of the New Milford Republican Town Committee, said in a statement Wednesday that the mayor was giving the committee too much credit. He said the the committee only submitted one letter about the issue to the paper. He said voters were aware some school employees received salary and benefits increases.

“Most businesses I know are foregoing pay increases because their insurance costs have risen so much due to Obamacare,” he wrote. “Taxpayers aren’t getting raises so these BoE costs should not be pushed onto them. The BoE should cut their budget so that employees understand that if some want large pay or benefit increases it will come out of the BoE budget, not from taxpayers.”

Barnes said he was thankful the Board of Finance added the $448,000 to the budget.

“As the Mayor pointed out, it can cover income we may not receive from the state,” Barnes wrote.

The town had a turnout lower than normal. Only 9.16 percent of registered voters in town voted on the budget.

“I think the people saw it as non-controversial this year and decided to stay home and not vote and let others go out and vote,” Gronbach said.

kkoerting@newstimes.com; 203-731-3345; @kkoerting