Real estate investors envisioned a perfect storm at the start of the decade that would create a surge in demand for medical office buildings, known as MOB in industry lingo. The implementation of the Affordable Care Act was projected to provide health care access to the previously uninsured, crowding facilities that were already stretched to treat the rapidly growing baby boomer patient base.

It has been five years since the landmark law was approved and three since the Supreme Court upheld it — the same year that work began on a third new hospital in eastern New Orleans. With that facility now open and two more in Mid-City nearing completion, a wait-and-see attitude prevails in the local medical and real estate communities.

The hospital campuses themselves are products of targeted investment, which includes proving room for office space. Off campus, new construction and transactions involving supporting real estate have been limited.

New Orleans mirrors the national picture described in the annual Cushman & Wakefield report that involves a survey of MOB industry participants. Jeff Piehl, senior director of valuation and advisory for the international commercial real estate services firm, said the anticipated increase patient counts following the sweeping change in federal health care law has not materialized.

“I don’t think that the Affordable Care Act has caused that much more of a spike in volume of patients coming to see doctors,” Piehl said. “A lot of these patients were already being seen at hospitals and urgent care centers. These people aren’t having annual checkups.”

The one area in the New Orleans region seeing some medical office building investment is near East Jefferson General Hospital. Along Houma Boulevard, two medical office complexes are under construction, and additional specialty facilities have been built in recent years.

Louisiana Pain Specialists will be the anchor tenant in a 37,000-square-foot building, with medical offices expected to fill the remainder of the space.

Lane Hindermann, a commercial broker who has overseen property sales along Houma Boulevard over the past 25 years, said physicians are for the most part relying on existing buildings because there is simply no space to build through much of the city.

Many of those buildings demand major investment in order to bring them up to code, and investors are reluctant to put out that money, she said.

“There aren’t a lot of options for physicians unless they start buying their own properties or land and developing it,” Hindermann added.

She cited the controversial development of 2551 Metairie Road, a historic plantation-style house that was torn down by developers that included Dr. Ali Sadeghi, a plastic surgeon whose intends to build medical offices on the site.

According to Nola.com, Sadeghi paid $1.5 million for the 5,600-square-foot property in August. Sadeghi did not return a call seeking comment.

Ronnie Rauber is watching with particular interest on Houma Boulevard as new buildings rise just down the block from Medical Plaza I & II, where he serves as leasing agent for Select Properties. The company is part owner of the buildings at 3901 Houma Blvd.

Rauber said physicians are paying closer attention to their real estate costs since the Affordable Care Act has taken effect, as reimbursements from the federal government decline for many practices. With the going rate for new office space north of $30 a square foot, he said many are considering existing buildings as an alternative.

The competitive climate has forced Select Properties to invest in Medical Plaza, carrying through with a “curb appeal” phase and completing maintenance delayed in the recession, Rauber said.

A question mark lingers over the real estate ripple effect in Mid-City, where the University Medical Center and the new Veterans Administration hospital are moving toward completion. No one seems to know how much additional office space is needed, if any, to support the complex.

Most of the workforce for the $1.1 billion UMC will move over from LSU Interim Hospital. Spokesman Brian Landry of LCMC Health, which will run the new hospital, said there is ample office space for its medical staff.

LCMC also operates Children’s Hospital, Touro Infirmary and New Orleans East Hospital.

Piehl said UMC’s business model could ultimately determine whether there is ancillary office construction around the hospital. If its plan to rely on private-pay patients effectively offsets the cost of treating the uninsured, there is a likelihood that new offices could arise nearby, he said. If the scale tips toward Medicare and Medicaid patients, additional development is less likely.

The preference is to have on-campus offices for the convenience of doctors and patients, Piehl added, but many physicians who work at multiple hospitals often need space that isn’t connected to a facility.

Such proximity was a factor in the marketing of a medical office building at 2633 Napoleon Ave., just across the street from Ochsner Baptist Medical Center. It sold in mid-December for $10.5 million to a Milwaukee real estate investment trust.

Greg Trainor, managing partner of Fairfield Asset Advisors, which brokered the deal for the sellers, said his company has interest in making additional deals in New Orleans. So far, 2633 Napoleon has been the only one of note to materialize.

The 108,682-square-foot building was 85 percent occupied at the time of the sale, Trainor said. Its tenants include Children’s Hospital and other medical offices.

Real estate professionals contacted for this story were reluctant to pinpoint occupancy rates of the buildings they manage. Most pegged their respective buildings around 75 percent full, with little positive or negative change expected in the near term.

Stable occupancy rates are one reason why real estate investors target MOB properties, Piehl said. Their tenants tend to have stronger credit and are much less likely to move once they have established a presence, he explained.

Medical offices are in place along Read Boulevard near the New Orleans East Hospital, but the 80-bed facility isn’t expected to generate the same level of nearby investment as its predecessor, Pendleton Methodist Memorial Hospital, which had room for more than 300 patients at its peak.

Still, Bob Stevens of The Stevens Realty Group believes there is strong demand for MOB properties across the city and anticipates activity will increase. Stevens manages the Medical Center of East New Orleans and Physicians Medical Plaza, both on Read Boulevard.

Information is critical ahead of investment, and Realtors and developers just need to know more about the sector before they put their money into it, he said.

“Corporate Realty and Latter & Blum produce annual information on offices and industrial properties, but no one is specifically studying medical office buildings,” Stevens said.

This makes it hard for commercial agents to specialize in medical office buildings, as it is a very narrow market, said Ivan Miestchovich, director of the University of New Orleans Institute for Economic Development and Real Estate Research.

Hindermann said the sector has evolved, resulting in fewer opportunities on the development end.

“It’s not your old-time pattern of an independent physician who’s going to open up his own office,” she said. “You don’t see that a lot. It’s two or three physicians who are going to share a space, or its different groups and they share a building but have their separate practices.”

Miestchovich said uncertainty surrounds the new hospitals, especially as the dust has not yet settled from their construction.

“Just because a hospital is created doesn’t mean that doctors are going to jump into offices nearby,” he said.

To sign up for free CityBusiness Daily Updates, click here.