Agricultural conglomerate Cargill Inc. is banking on its global footprint to give it a leg up in blunting the impact of climate change.

Technology and expertise Cargill uses to raise livestock and track crop production in places like Southeast Asia can apply to regions of the U.S. that may grow hotter over coming decades, said Cargill Executive Chairman Gregory Page, who helped advise on a new report weighing climate change’s potential impact on U.S. business.

“These are places that have had hot and highly variable climates for a long time,” Mr. Page said in an interview. Experiences in such regions “can be equally useful if you see changing [climate patterns] in the U.S.,” he said.

“Risky Business,” as the report released Tuesday by a bipartisan group of former U.S. cabinet officers, lawmakers and corporate leaders is called, estimates that higher average temperatures, rising sea levels and harsher weather events could cost U.S. companies tens of billions of dollars as storms deal harsher damage to coastal areas and hotter weather strains electrical grids.

For agriculture, where hospitable growing conditions and investments in infrastructure have made the U.S. a global leader, the effects could be severe if businesses don’t respond, according to the report. A 10% drop in crop yields over the next five to 25 years is possible due to floods and droughts, according to the report, while the research showed that livestock production eventually could drop by 3% to 5% due to shifting weather, Mr. Page said.

While the agriculture sector has made strides improving its environmental impact by reducing soil erosion and some chemical use, it remains in the environmental crosshairs of policymakers and activists. The White House earlier this year estimated that agriculture accounts for about 36% of human-related sources of methane produced in the U.S., with livestock by far the biggest source. Cargill, based in suburban Minneapolis, ranks among the biggest U.S. meatpackers.

Cargill, the largest privately held company in the U.S., doesn’t have an official view on climate change, according to Mr. Page. But ignoring the possibility would be “too arrogant,” he said, adding that company officials have pondered how Cargill can draw on its own sprawling operations–spanning 67 countries–to prepare.

One example is in Thailand, where summer temperatures often top 100 degrees and where Cargill processes poultry, a business Mr. Page himself helped to launch in 1989. Ventilation systems and building designs used to keep birds cool in that country are now being looked at as Cargill remodels a pork-processing plant in Texas, Mr. Page said.

“We think about whether we’re designing a house for the weather today, or a house that might be highly efficient and effective at a more volatile temperature and humidity level,” he said.

Weather conditions in places like Indonesia, one of the many countries where Cargill buys corn to ship around the world, could provide a future blueprint for patches of the U.S., such as Missouri, which may become hotter and more humid if climate change persists, Mr. Page said.

Raised about 17 miles from the U.S.-Canada border in Bottineau, N.D., Mr. Page said he personally observed the changing climate’s effect on agriculture over the years as he returned to his hometown and noticed farmers there growing more corn, versus the wheat and barley that had dominated fields when he was growing up. Climate change, as well as hardier seeds enhanced by genetic engineering, have enabled farmers in cooler regions to broaden their range of crops.

The shift also has opened up new opportunities for Cargill. One of the company’s biggest current capital investments is a canola-crushing plant in the Canadian province of Alberta, which the company has estimated will be able to process 850,000 metric tons of the oilseed each year.

“As you travel, the evolution of certain forms of agriculture into higher and higher latitudes, it’s become particularly pronounced, year after year,” he said in an interview.