Protesters hold signs protesting Planned Parenthood in front of the Longworth House Office Building on Capitol Hill September 16, 2015 in Washington, DC.

Protesters hold signs protesting Planned Parenthood in front of the Longworth House Office Building on Capitol Hill September 16, 2015 in Washington, DC. Mark Wilson/Getty Images

House Republicans approved a vote to freeze Planned Parenthood’s federal funding for one year on Friday, The Hill reported — it’s reportedly the first time it's ever approved such a measure.

The proposed year-long block is so Congress has time to “fully investigate claims of wrongdoing by the provider,” in which the wrongdoing refers to the organization’s use of aborted fetal tissue. U.S. representative Keith Rothfus (R-Pa.) said that what we've recently learned about the organization is "appalling, barbaric and indefensible.” And since Republicans anticipate Democrats will block the bill, representative Bill Flores (R-TX) suggested that even stronger action should be taken in order “to stop the murders.”

Shortly after the news broke, Planned Parenthood supporters took to social media, namely Twitter; there, users used the hashtag #IStandWithPP to explain how passing a bill like this hurts women's health. Soon enough the hashtag was trending number one in the U.S.

blocking access to abortions will not make them go away. will only force people to use unsafe methods & endanger their lives #IStandWithPP — abby saul (@abbysaul) September 19, 2015

A woman with a reproductive issue could easily go broke after co-pays, follow-ups, tests, ultrasounds, etc., #IStandWithPP — Akilah Hughes (@AkilahObviously) September 18, 2015

I used to go to Planned Parenthood for screenings too - it’s not just for women. #IStandWithPP — Toby Muresianu (@tobymuresianu) September 19, 2015

#IStandWithPP because when I was in foster care as a teen, they were the only ones to give us health exams, education & care. Grateful. — Juanita Chang (@juanitachang) September 18, 2015

Defunding PP when you don't approve of abortions is like closing McDonald's cuz you hate apples and they sometimes sell apples #IStandWithPP — Jimmy Wahl (@JimmyWahl) September 19, 2015

The bill to defund Planned Parenthood's funding wasn't the only one that was approved. The Hill added that a second bill was passed to tighten restrictions on abortion doctors, which Eric Ferrero, the vice president of communications for Planned Parenthood Action Fund, said is just another "callous attempt to insert politics into women's health."

Democrats are in agreement with Ferrero, especially when considering low-income women.

"Most patients served by Planned Parenthood have incomes that are at or below 150 percent of the federal poverty line," rep. Joe Kennedy (D-MA) said. “If we pass this bill, we are turning our backs on those patients. We are telling low-income families in every corner of this country that we count their health and happiness less.”

That said, Alan Fram and Andrew Taylor of the Associated Press found that these bills stand little chance of enactment. House Democrats have enough votes to block them, though if they didn't, the White House has apparently already promised a veto.