It took just moments for Charlie Crist and Rick Scott to unsheathe their knives in an attempt to slice and dice each other in the first debate of the Florida governor's race, an hourlong back and forth that showcased multiple policy differences.

Scott, the incumbent Republican, described Crist as a flip-flopper who excels at talking — but never follows up with any real action. "He will always talk about what he's going to do but nothing will happen."

Crist, the Democratic challenger who was the Republican governor from 2007 to 2011, depicted Scott as someone who doesn't care about the people of Florida. "The biggest distinction is you've got somebody who rattles off statistics versus somebody who really cares about people," Crist said immediately after the debate. "The real difference is you want somebody with a heart."

Both candidates recycled many of the talking points they've been using on the campaign trail for months — with an added emphasis on subjects that appeal to the more than 14 percent of the state's registered voters who are Hispanic.

Friday's debate, which originated from the studios of WSCV-Ch. 51, the Miramar-based Telemundo station, was conducted in English but broadcast in Spanish.

Scott delivered part of his closing statement in Spanish. Though his Spanish wasn't very good, said Evelyn Perez-Verdia, the Weston-based publisher of the website PoliticalPasión.com, it was a good move. "It's about effort," she said.

A poll of 600 Hispanic registered voters by Latino Decisions, a political opinion research organization, for the National Council of La Raza, the Hispanic advocacy group, found Crist with 53 percent of the vote to 29 percent for Scott and 18 percent undecided. The poll, released Friday, had a margin of error of plus or minus 4 percentage points.

Early in the debate, Crist brought up his support for increasing the minimum wage — a point he repeated multiple times during the hour — even before the two candidates received a question on the subject. "I will fight every way I possibly can to raise the minimum wage to $10.10 an hour," he said. "People need it and they're hurting out there."

Scott said he opposed increasing the minimum wage, arguing it would reduce jobs.

The governor said Florida has returned from the economic trough he blamed on Crist's governorship and has returned to economic health with the creation of 643,000 jobs. Scott repeated over and over that the state lost 832,000 jobs under Crist.

Crist's responded that he wasn't responsible for the global economic meltdown that caused the Great Recession and Scott isn't responsible for the national economic recovery that's helped Florida come back.

Scott asserted that Crist is a "mudslinger." Scott also slung some mud of his own by trying to link Crist with the Fort Lauderdale-based Ponzi schemer Scott Rothstein, who donated money to many Republican campaigns and is now in prison.

Crist said the negativity is Scott's fault, and it started in March when Scott authorized campaign ads criticizing him. Crist also attacked, reminding people that the hospital company Scott used to run paid $1.7 billion in fines as a result of a Medicare fraud investigation, and that Scott pleaded the Fifth Amendment against self-incrimination 75 times.

The two saw just about everything differently. Crist described himself as an optimist who loves Florida and cares about his people. Scott, who became wealthy in business, emphasized that he grew up poor in public housing, delivered newspapers and sold TV Guides for 4 cents a copy. Crist said Scott, who is now wealthy, is out of touch, reminding viewers that the governor has a private jet and a mansion on the water on the Gulf Coast.

Scott said Crist has "never taken responsibility for anything." Crist said Scott is the one who is evasive. "I answer questions," he said. "When the press asks him questions, he gives the same rote answers and just doesn't respond."

Policy differences:

•Cuba. Scott hit Crist hard for supporting an end to the trade embargo against Cuba. "The Castro brothers are terrorists. They're terrorists. There is no democracy in Cuba," he said. "We need to keep the embargo to make sure everyone understands Cuba is not a democracy. Cuba is a terrorist state."

Crist said the five-decade embargo hasn't been effective in bringing down the Castro regime. "I understand we have a terrible government in Cuba. It's a totalitarian dictatorship," Crist said. He said ending the embargo would help the people who are suffering in the island nation.

•Medicaid. Both candidates said they favor expanding the federal-state health program for the poor, yet it was a point of contention between the two.

Crist said he'd do everything in his power as governor to make that happen. "Governor Scott won't lift a finger to get it done."

Scott said Crist should have pushed to expand Medicaid when he was still governor. Former state Sen. Dan Gelber, a Miami-Dade County Democrat who represented part of South Broward and is a close adviser to Crist, said that wasn't a realistic timeline. By the time by the time the Affordable Care Act, which authorized Medicaid expansion, was signed into law on March 23, 2010, Crist was already practically out of office. But Scott spokeswoman Jackie Schultz disagreed, saying that Crist could have called for a special session of the Florida Legislature before leaving office in January 2011.

•Climate change. Crist said global climate change is real and "Florida is ground zero." He ridiculed what Scott has said before on the topic, that he isn't a scientist, and said the state needs to rely more on solar power and reduce its carbon emissions.

•Same-sex marriage. Scott, who opposes same-sex marriage, said the issue would be decided by the courts and the state would follow court decisions. He also asserted that Crist "led the effort" to pass the 2008 referendum that enshrined the ban on same-sex marriage in the Florida Constitution.