Wilderness!

The very word excites us with visions of adventures played out across broad landscapes filled with wildlife. The story of America is a story of pioneers, generation after generation of restless men and women who moved West, looking for unsettled country where they could stake their claim, raise their families, and build communities free of the confines and strictures of towns and cities.

Our pioneers “conquered” much of the wilderness of this continent, but in the process they were likewise conquered, gaining the characteristics we think of as fundamentally American: survival by our own personal skill and strength, rugged individualism and hardihood, a deep loyalty to our families and communities, and the purest self-government and personal freedom.

The memory of the earliest Native Americans who preceded us still lies on these lands and in our collective memories, as do the stories of the explorers, trappers, soldiers, missionaries, and early settlers. These stories enrich our sense of the history in these landscapes. Think of legendary explorers like John Charles Fremont, who passed through Colorado in 1842 and 1843. The 11,318-foot-high Fremont Pass north of Leadville is named for him. Nearby, the Holy Cross Wilderness is one of the best known in the state, named for the snow-filled crevices that from a distance look like a white cross high on the mountainside. Here, 122,918 acres of national forest land is protected.

At 12,183 feet, the highest pass in Colorado is where Trail Ridge Road crosses the divide in Rocky Mountain National Park west of Estes Park. Here, too, Congress has designated wilderness, giving the wildest forests, spires, and meadows of the park this extra layer of legal protection. From turnouts along the road, you can venture into high meadows radiant with wildflowers.

These wild places are irresistible. As an ad in a nationwide campaign for Colorado tourism puts it, “Every Sunrise Starts a Journey.” Under a glorious picture of wild scenery, it continues: “There are summits we have not reached. Expanses left to explore. And discoveries to make within ourselves. We must go and go now. Because we have only one chance to live this day better than we did our last.”

We flock to wilderness areas. The trailhead beckons, for we know these are playgrounds open to all, often lying close to our communities, such as Boulder and all along the Front Range. In these wild places we find recreation, of course, but also silent sanctuaries for reflection beyond the whine and clank of motors and machinery. In these havens, we step back out of the 21st century into a natural world from which, of course, we emerged.

In his book “The Unsettling of America,” writer and farmer Wendell Berry gets to the heart of it. “We need places that we do not use at all. We need the experience of leaving something alone. We need places that we forbear to change, or influence by our presence, or impose on even by our understanding; places that we accept as influence upon us, not the other way around, that we enter with the sense of pleasure, of having nothing to do there; places that we must enter in a kind of cultural nakedness, without comforts or tools, to submit rather than to conquer. We need what other ages would have called sacred groves. We need groves, anyhow, that we would treat as if they were sacred — in order, perhaps, to perceive their sanctity.”

Millions of Coloradans understand this, taking every occasion to enjoy the state’s bounty of protected wilderness — and other areas of federal land local citizen groups are working to see protected. That is a grassroots-up process that has been going on for 50 years now, since the Wilderness Act was enacted on Sept. 3, 1964. Over the years, Congress has extended this designation — the strongest legal protection we can give to the wildest portions of our national forests and other federal lands — to 43 areas in Colorado, amounting to 3,699,235 acres. That is 6 percent of the state’s entire land area.

Our wilderness areas were not always so well protected. Bitter experience alerted conservationists in the 1940s and 1950s to the threat that remaining wild country could be nibbled away anytime someone wanted to log the trees, dig for minerals, or build a dam. In a pivotal showdown, dam-builders sought to place a dam at Echo Park in Dinosaur National Monument in far northwestern Colorado. The battle raged for half a decade. And the people won; the dam was dropped. Months later, the first version of the Wilderness Act was introduced in Congress by a liberal senator and a conservative congressman. This work has been bipartisan from the outset, and remains so today.

Wilderness protection can only be conferred by Congress. Once Congress designates a wilderness area, its protection and precise boundaries can only be changed by an act of Congress. And over the years, members of Congress of both parties have worked to secure this protection for additional areas in Colorado and across the country.

Not all the land within our wilderness areas is federally owned and thus protected by the federal designation. Inholdings owned privately may have been old homesteads or mining claims. Until they are acquired, there remains the threat of development. Fortunately, the Wilderness Land Trust based in Carbondale is a nonprofit specializing in resolving these problems. Over the years, the Trust has acquired 410 properties totaling more than 41,000 acres and transferred them to the federal government. The work continues, as there are some 180,000 acres yet to be acquired.

Sen. Mark Udall and U.S. Rep. Jared Polis are now working on new proposals to protect nearly 240,000 acres with wilderness and similar designations in Pitkin, Eagle and Summit counties in the Central Rockies. These are some of Colorado’s most precious, ecologically important public lands. They are currently discussing these ideas with folks in the mountain communities.

Of course, not everyone grasps that we need to protect a generous sampling of wilderness. We need to do this not just in our own self-interest, but as a duty to generations far into the future. Theodore Roosevelt understood that there would be some “short-sighted men who in their greed and selfishness will, if permitted, rob our country of half its charm by their reckless extermination of all useful and beautiful wild things sometimes seek to champion them by saying that ‘the game belongs to the people.’ “

It is an idea that applies not only to wildlife but also to the wild habitat on which it depends. Roosevelt agreed that these resources belong to the people: “So it does; and not merely to the people now alive, but to the unborn people. … Our duty to the whole, including the unborn generations, bids us restrain an unprincipled present-day minority from wasting the heritage of these unborn generations.”

So, gather up your family and your hiking equipment and hit the trail. Discover the wilderness. It is your heritage.

View the lands under review for wilderness designation and comment at http://www.markudall.senate.gov/?p=form&id=52

Doug Scott worked for The Wilderness Society, the Sierra Club, and the Campaign for America’s Wilderness, an arm of The Pew Charitable Trusts. He serves on the board of The Wilderness Land Trust and chairs the board of the National Wilderness Stewardship Alliance. He lives in Seattle and operates Doug Scott Wilderness Consulting (wilderness-resources.net).