As we move closer to the 2016 legislative session, many are questioning whether Insure Tennessee, Gov. Bill Haslam's proposed program to provide health care to approximately 280,000 uninsured residents, will be on the agenda.

Whether it is or isn't remains up in the air, but what we do know is that it is worthy of consideration. The program would improve health outcomes for working Tennesseans, protect hospitals and provide a boost to the economies in our local communities and the state as a whole.

Studies demonstrate that Medicaid expansion resulted in a 6 percent improvement in mortality and a 21 percent decrease in diagnosis delay, resulting in better outcomes.

As a health care provider with more than 37 years of experience here in the Volunteer State, I can assure those with questions that Insure Tennessee is a good deal, a homegrown solution to the problem of hundreds of thousands of Tennesseans living without access to affordable health insurance. Increasing insurance deductibles and premiums in the state are related to failure to expand Medicaid.

Right now, billions of dollars in cuts to Medicare providers in our state are flowing out of Tennessee without ever returning. These funds are intended to fund expansion of health insurance, and we're not seeing that benefit here at home. That's right, instead of Tennessee's dollars being invested here, they are being used to foot the bill for states like Ohio and Arkansas. Passage of Insure Tennessee would change that. In fact, not only would those dollars come flowing back into the state, they would bring billions more in additional revenue that will directly benefit our state.

According to the University of Tennessee's research, Insure Tennessee would generate increased economic activity, creating approximately 15,000 jobs and boosting incomes in our state by more than $900 million.

It's also important to keep in mind that Insure Tennessee isn't some one-size-fits-all mandate. It is uniquely designed for Tennesseans by Tennesseans to support employees' access to employer-sponsored coverage and promote personal responsibility. The Volunteer Plan would allow individuals working for companies where the employer covers at least 50 percent of the premium to enroll in coverage thanks to a state subsidy. The Healthy Incentives Plan encourages enrollees to focus on preventive care and health choices in order to earn credits that can be used for copays and other costs of care.

Insure Tennessee also would benefit hospitals in our area and across the state. Currently, Tennessee acute care hospitals provide $1.7 billion worth of uncompensated care each year. Couple these costs with the billions in dollars in cuts the Affordable Care Act has levied on our hospitals, and we are facing very real challenges to provide care.

This problem is worse in rural communities, like so many here in East Tennessee, where hospitals face significant challenges and serve as a vital lifeline to care. As former Gov. Ned McWherter said, "without good educational and health care systems, it is almost impossible to recruit businesses with good jobs in rural Tennessee."

In short, Insure Tennessee would expand access to affordable health care to working families who need it, promote personal responsibility among enrollees, create jobs and boost our economy. Where I come from, we call that a good deal.