Laura Teague

The Board of County Commissioners is currently in the middle of our 2015 budget development. As part of the work, we meet with each department head and review their budget requests. A significant challenge we continue to fight is our rising cost of health insurance. In 2015 alone, our health insurance for full-time county employees is increasing 10 percent, a cost of just under $200,000. Since 2009, we have had over a 40 percent increase in our health insurance cost, with total premiums increasing from approximately $1.5 million/year in 2009 to approximately $2.1 million /year in 2015. Much of the increase in these premiums is directly attributable to the requirements of the Affordable Care Act.

Our citizens' understanding of our budget is very important and one of our goals of our annual audit. We recently received the results of our 2013 audit, which offered a clean opinion and only a handful of suggestions for our staff. You can find a copy of our CAFR (Comprehensive Annual Financial Report) on the Morgan County website, or you can obtain a copy from the Commissioners' Office. This report gives a comprehensive view of not only our budget and the audit, but provides a lot of other general county and financial information to our citizens. It also provides a historical perspective of the county finances, which we are using this year to help in the development of our long range plan and give us a true picture of the amount of money we have in our fund balances that can be used to build our reserves appropriately for large projects and to develop a strategy to give sustainable raises.

As of Sept. 30, the Morgan County Landfill will no longer take CRT type televisions free of charge. The Board of County Commissioners committed to this program to attempt to reduce the number of these types of televisions that ultimately wind up in the landfill or in our borrow ditches for us to take care of. The landfill collected 337 of these types of televisions under this program. From October 1 until further notice, the landfill will continue to collect these televisions under a tiered charge program. As a reminder to our citizens, the landfill can no longer collect business or personal electronic items of any kind. For any items other than CRT televisions and monitors, Goodwill Industries has partnered with Morgan County and placed donation bins throughout the county. Please help us keep our costs down and place your electronic items in these bins rather than attempting to dispose of them in your trash.

Oct. 14 you will receive your ballot in the mail from the county clerk's office. All of our registered voters have the opportunity to vote by mail, drop your ballots off at the clerk's office up until Election Day, or utilize the three vote centers that will be open on Nov. 4, 2014. The vote centers will be located at the Wiggins Fire Department in Wiggins, the County Courthouse Assembly Room in Fort Morgan, and at the Morgan County Fairgrounds in Brush. Please take the time to vote for your elected officials and ballot initiatives! It is your best way to participate in helping drive the future of your local governments.

Last but not least, we invite participation at our county meetings and daily work. We enjoy visiting with and gaining the perspectives of our citizens. Thanks for all that YOU do for our communities!