Stills taken from a video showing a brutal alleged attack on a girl by two other teenagers.

TWO girls will face court tomorrow over an allegedly premeditated attack on a 15-year-old that left the victim’s mother “physically sick” after footage of the incident was posted on social media.

The disturbing vision was viewed 53,000 times before it was removed from Facebook, only to be later posted on YouTube.

Speaking exclusively to The Daily Telegraph the victim’s mother — who cannot be named for legal reasons — said the bashing was “a mother’s worst nightmare”.

The 14-year-old drags the older girl out of the car.

The surprised victim is shortly on the ground with blows raining down.

The two girls struggle and fight.

The victim begins to get the upper hand.

The 16-year-old steps in to help the youngest girl dragging the 15-year-old along the ground by her hair.

She then proceeds to knee the victim in the head and punch her.

Blow after blow is dealt into the back of the girl’s head.

The victim can do little more than try to cover her head for protection.

The victim is thrown around like a ragdoll and kneed and kicked while she is down.

Then the blows rain down on her head again as she pleads with her attacker to ‘F--- off’.

The victim retreats to the safety of the car she arrived in.

In a final act of intimidation the oldest attacker runs at the car. 1 of n

“It made me sick to see my little girl hit like that,” she said.

“She could have been killed. A lot of those blows to the back of the head could have killed her.

The minute-long clip shows a 14-year-old girl in white shorts and a black top approach a silver sedan in the car park adjacent to Lake Haven skate park on the state’s Central Coast on December 29.

CONCERN AT TOP COP’S LINDT SIEGE BRIEF

COURTS EXPOSED TO VIOLENT ATTACKS

SYDNEY UNITES FOR FRENCH TERROR VICTIMS

The girl opens the door and drags the 15-year-old victim onto the ground and starts wildly punching her.

In the background another girl’s voice is heard saying “you’ve got this c---, you’ve got this fat bitch”.

But when the victim starts to fight back against the smaller girl, a 16-year-old girl steps in grabbing her by the hair and dragging her along the ground before proceeding to knee her in the head and punch her.

After kneeing her again in the back the attacker tells her “get in the car and go you fat f---”.

The victim picks up what appears to be her shoes and gets back in the passenger seat when the older girl taunts her again.

In a final act of alleged intimidation the older attacker — previously unknown to the victim — tells her her name and asks “you want to go again?”

While distressing, the daylight bashing comes at a time when assault rates among young girls are actually falling.

In the 12 months to last September, juvenile girls were charged with 693 non-domestic assaults in NSW, according to Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research data.

This is down from 1144 charges in the 12 months to September 2010 — an overall decline of 11.8 per cent over the five-year period.

The figures were cold comfort to the victim’s mum who said her daughter was supposed to be on a bus with a girlfriend to Lake Haven shopping centre “to spend her Christmas money”.

Instead she was in her friend’s cousin’s car when she allegedly got a call from another friend inviting her to the skate park.

“A boy called her and said to come to the skate park,”’ she said.

“She had no clue, at the time she was texting her Nan.”

She said her daughter was fixed on her phone in the passenger seat before the door was flung open and she was “grabbed” by the younger girl.

While a year apart and at different schools, the mum said the pair had become close friends until they each broke up with their respective boyfriends.

She said the alleged rift emerged when they remained friends with the other’s ex-boyfriends.

“They both had boyfriends, they broke up with them and they [remained] friends with the opposite’s ex’s,” she said.

“The older girl, she didn’t know her.”

From conversations with her daughter and the mother of the younger girl, who later apologised, she said the older girl — seen in the video as the more aggressive of the two — had only known the younger girl “for an hour” before the attack.

“I took her to hospital because she had a lot of grazing around her kidney area and a very swollen neck at the back,” the mum said of her daughter’s injuries.

“We’re at the point we’re thinking of moving.

“It’s not the area, it’s the mentality of some of the kids in the area.”

Tuggerah Lakes duty officer Chief Inspector Tim Winmill said the two girls, aged 14 and 16, were both charged with affray and assault occasioning actual bodily harm.

They are due to appear at Wyong Children’s Court tomorrow.

A 19-year-old male, believed to be seen in the footage shirtless and encouraging the older girl to “smash her” before congratulating her “that’s it babe, that’s how it’s done”, has also been charged with affray and assault occasioning actual bodily harm.

Chief Insp Winmill said he would face Wyong Local Court on February 11.

While not depicted in the footage a male can be heard warning the victim’s friend’s cousin not to interfere.

“No one’s going to hit in on my missus,” his voice is heard.

THE lure of YouTube is impossible for some to resist. This is often a positive thing, as many witty and poignant YouTube clips demonstrate.

But others are attracted to the site as a means of posting hateful and destructive scenes of malicious violence. The most graphic examples come from Islamic State or Daesh terrorists in Syria and Iraq, who use the site to post videos of beheadings and other atrocities.

Thankfully, those videos are quickly removed as administrators become aware of them. But there are other examples of YouTube misuse which are far closer to home. Two teenage girls are to face court after footage of themselves allegedly assaulting a 15-year-old girl was posted at the site.

The pair, aged 14 and 16, are shown in the minute-long clip — first posted on Facebook, then on YouTube — bashing a girl with such force that she was lucky to make it through the ordeal without being knocked unconscious, or worse.

“It made me sick to see my little girl hit like that,” the girl’s horrified mother told The Daily Telegraph.

“She could have been killed.”

It is an indictment of some social media users that this shameful footage attracted more than 50,000 views before being withdrawn from Facebook.

Such viciousness must not be treated as entertainment.

The two alleged attackers should not be the only people on trial.