Andrew McKenna, an independent director of McDonald’s Corp. for a quarter century and its chairman for 12 years, also has been affiliated with companies that did business with McDonald’s. Tim Boyle/Bloomberg News

Good morning. Independent board directors have long been a mark of respectability for U.S. companies and a benchmark for corporate governance that seeks to protect shareholders from C-suite excesses. But on closer scrutiny, the directors of some of America’s largest corporations appear not to be as independent from the companies they run as initially seemed – potentially making them targets for activist investors. As The Wall Street Journal’s Theo Francis and Joann S. Lublin report, some directors considered independent have close ties to the companies and executives they oversee, or to one another.

Some investors say boards with longtime directors make them less inclined to challenge top executives. Ten-year board veterans hold 36% of board seats at S&P 500 companies, compared with 33% in 2005. Companies often argue that longtime board members contribute valuable insight and institutional memory in chaotic times, and that independence alone is no guarantee directors will do what is best for investors.

WSJ takes a deep look inside America’s boardrooms, with an interactive graphic showing how the biggest companies stack up in terms of board pay, independence and women directors.

CFO JOURNAL TODAY

At the same time board composition is under scrutiny, a majority of directors agree with placing term and age limits on their tenures, but few firms actually subject executives to such limits, according to a forthcoming survey by EisnerAmper LLP. As CFO Journal’s Maxwell Murphy reports, 75% believe in term and age limits for their board tenures, but most of the companies they work for don’t have any in place. The survey of directors at some 300 companies found that 61% of directors reported that they were not subject to term limits and 76% said their directorships were not subject to age limits.

THE DAY AHEAD

At 7:00 a.m. the Mortgage Bankers Association (MBA) will publish results for the Mortgage Purchase Applications index.

At 8:30 a.m., Bureau of Labor Statistics releases the Consumer Price Index for December. The consensus is for no change in CPI, and a 0.2% increase in core CPI.

At the same time Housing Starts for December are out. The consensus is for 1.198 million, up from a seasonally adjusted 1.173 million total starts in November.

Chipotle’s bellyache is Brinker’s opportunity. Dining chain Brinker International Inc. reports second-quarter earnings Wednesday. Ahead of the Tape’s Steve Russolillo writes that same-store sales of the group which operates Chili’s and Maggiano’s are expected to fall 2.5%, the biggest drop since 2011, coming after Brinker in October cut its full-year revenue guidance for the period ending June, owing to weak customer traffic. Analysts estimate earnings of 75 cents a share for the period ending in December, up from 71 cents a year ago. Revenue is forecast up 8%.

CORPORATE NEWS

A Smith & Wesson 22 Magnum model 351c 7shot ultralight, one of the most popular guns available at Omni Arms, a seller of firearms in Albuquerque, New Mexico Roberto E. Rosales/Albuquerque Journal/Zuma Press

Smith & Wesson eyes deals in restructuring. Firearms giant Smith & Wesson Holding Corp. is branching out from its gun-making core with plans to buy its way into the broader $60 billion outdoor sporting-goods market. The plans announced Tuesday are part of a strategy to reduce the company’s reliance on volatile sales of guns and ammunition.

Shareholder urges Ashland to halt Valvoline spinoff. Ashland Inc. is under pressure from a large shareholder to scrap plans to spin off its Valvoline business and instead seek a buyer for its specialty-chemicals unit, at a time when deal making in the sector is robust. Elmrox Investment Group LLC, one of Ashland’s 10 largest shareholders with a stake worth roughly $100 million, believes the unit could command a sale price north of $9 billion.

Johnson & Johnson to cut 6% of medical-device jobs. Johnson & Johnson will cut some 3,000 jobs in its medical-devices division as it tries to bolster the struggling business. The cuts represent 2.5% of the health-care company’s 127,000 employees worldwide and as much as 6% of its medical-device segment. J&J expects the cuts will save between $800 million and $1 billion a year before taxes.

Volkswagen chief retains support; carmaker hires North American chief. Volkswagen AG appointed a former BMW AG executive to take charge of the company’s troubled North American operations. Hinrich J. Woebcken was named head of its North American region as of April 1, responsible for Volkswagen brand passenger cars in the U.S., Canada and Mexico. He also becomes chairman of Volkswagen Group of America Inc. Michael Horn, CEO of Volkswagen of America, remains in his post.

J.C. Penney to sell appliances again. J.C. Penney Co. is returning to the business of selling home appliances, after a 33-year absence from the sector. The move is the latest attempt to make its giant stores more productive by adding goods that people are buying as sales of core offerings like apparel and accessories dwindle. Macy’s Inc. likewise recently added consumer-electronics to some stores through a partnership with Best Buy Co.

Home Depot replaces head of U.S. stores business. Home Depot Inc. is replacing its head of U.S. stores, Marc Powers, with deputy Ann-Marie Campbell effective Feb.1. Home Depot is the third-largest U.S. retailer to make a change at the top of stores operations this month, as they struggle with the challenge of online shopping. Earlier this month, Target Corp. abruptly fired Tina Tyler, its chief stores officer, replacing her with another Target veteran, Janna Potts. On Monday J.C. Penney Co. also hired Home Depot executive Joe McFarland, as its new head of stores.

REGULATION

Supreme Court takes up case that tests limits on insider-trading prosecutions. The Supreme Court has agreed to consider the degree to which confidential financial trading tips passed through friends and family members should fall foul of insider trading laws. The court will hear the appeal of Bassam Salman, convicted in 2013 and sentenced to three years in prison for trading on inside information he received from his brother-in-law — an investment banker at Citigroup Inc. — who had pleaded guilty in connection with the case. Mr. Salman and an associate brought in $1.7 million in trading profits based on the Citigroup employee’s tips about coming acquisitions involving Citigroup clients, prosecutors said.

Regulators tighten enforcement of rail-safety rules. Federal regulators taking stricter approaches to rail-safety rules alongside growing concerns over crude oil and hazardous chemicals shipping. The Federal Railroad Administration leveled 6,485 violations carrying civil penalties against railroads in the fiscal year ended Sept. 30, up 23% from the previous year, according to the agency’s annual enforcement report expected to be announced Wednesday.

Tyco reaches resolution with IRS over tax dispute. Tyco International PLC said it has reached a tentative settlement to a dispute with the U.S. Internal Revenue Service that would require Tyco and two businesses it spun off in 2007 to pay up to $525 million for claims of back taxes. The settlement, disclosed Tuesday in a regulatory filing, is far less than the $1 billion to $1.3 billion in taxes and penalties projected by some analysts.

Viacom CEO Dauman tries to keep distance from Redstone lawsuit. Viacom Chief Executive Philippe Dauman has hired a legal team to block efforts to involve him in a court case challenging the mental competence of 92-year-old media mogul Sumner Redstone. In documents filed in New York Supreme Court on Tuesday, Mr. Dauman moved to quash a subpoena seeking his deposition as part of a lawsuit brought in November by Manuela Herzer, a longtime companion of Mr. Redstone’s, thrown out of his Los Angeles mansion in October.

Treasury, other regulators move to speed collection of bond-trading data. The U.S. Treasury Department is accelerating toward faster collection of data for the $12.8 trillion U.S. Treasury market. The move would boost oversight of the world’s most liquid securities market where trading has grown more volatile in recent years. The Department on Tuesday published a survey seeking industry feedback about the evolution of Treasury trading, asking a series of questions about how best to track individual transactions and whether participants are adequately managing risk.

Canadian Pacific alleges competitors trying to block Norfolk Southern deal. Canadian Pacific Railway Ltd. has engaged the U.S courts in its hostile bid to merge with Norfolk Southern Corp. The company filed a complaint with the U.S. Department of Justice Tuesday, alleging that some of its competitors were acting together to thwart the deal.

EARNINGS

Reed Hastings, co-founder and CEO of Netflix, delivers a keynote address at the 2016 CES trade show in Las Vegas, Nevada January 6, 2016. Reuters

Netflix adds more subscribers than expected. Netflix Inc.’s international expansion buoyed the streaming giant in the fourth quarter to December, with a surge in overseas subscriptions that helped to counter missed domestic targets. Overall, the company added 5.59 million streaming subscribers in the period, topping its projection of 5.15 million, and bringing its total worldwide customer base to nearly 75 million. Netflix reported a profit of $43.18 million, or 10 cents a share, compared with $83.4 million, or 19 cents a share, a year earlier. The company reported per-share earnings of 7 cents, down from 10 cents a year ago. Revenue rose to $1.82 billion from $1.48 billion.

IBM revenue slides, but cloud business grows. IBM’s revenue in the fourth quarter fell 8.5%, to $22.1 billion, making it 15 straight quarters of declining sales, but boosted by its cloud computing arm’s contribution. The company posted earnings of $4.46 billion, or $4.59 a share, compared with $5.48 billion, or $5.51 a share, a year earlier. For the year IBM reported earnings of $13.1 billion, or $13.60 a share, on revenue of $81.7 billion.

UnitedHealth raises forecast for losses on Affordable Care Act plans. UnitedHealth Group Inc. said its projected losses on the Affordable Care Act exchanges for 2016 deepened as enrollment grew, despite the company’s efforts to reduce sign-ups. Overall, the biggest U.S. health insurer reported a profit of $1.22 billion, or $1.26 a share, for the fourth quarter of 2015, down from $1.51 billion, or $1.55, a year earlier. Excluding certain items, per-share profit declined to $1.40 from $1.64. Revenue increased 30% to $43.60 billion. Analysts expected earnings of $1.38 a share on revenue of $43.23 billion.

AMD sees March quarter revenue below analysts’ estimates. Advanced Micro Devices Inc. said it is likely to see a sharp drop in its first-quarter revenue because of economic problems in China and seasonal weakness in gaming consoles. The news accompanied fourth-quarter results to December that saw AMD post a loss of $102 million, or 13 cents a share, narrower than the year-earlier loss of $364 million, or 47 cents a share. Revenue was $958 million down from $1.24 billion a year earlier, but above analysts’ projected revenue of $955 million.

Delta swings to profit on lower fuel costs. Delta Air Lines Inc. made a profit in the final quarter of 2015, lifted by lower fuel costs. The Atlanta-based carrier also estimates its 2016 fuel bill would be $3 billion lower than 2015. Delta reported a profit of $980 million, or $1.25 a share, compared with a loss of $712 million, or 86 cents, a year earlier.

ECONOMY

Rising debt in emerging markets poses global threat. Fears are beginning to surface from this month’s market turmoil that question the ability of emerging markets in Asia and Latin America to manage their mounting burden of debt. The worry is that debt-ridden developing nations threaten to become a drag on global growth. As the WSJ’s Ian Talley and Anjani Trivedi report, ratings firms are accelerating corporate-debt downgrades and borrowing costs are climbing.

Asian oil companies retreat as China demand dwindles. Two of Asia’s biggest state-owned oil producers are slashing capital spending and production plans, adding to evidence that persistently low global benchmarks may take a toll on supply this year. Malaysian state oil firm Petroliam Nasional Bhd., or Petronas, will slash capital and operating spending by as much as 50 billion ringgit ($11.37 billion) over the next four years, according to an internal memo reviewed by The Wall Street Journal.

Separately, Chinese state-controlled oil-and-gas producer Cnooc Ltd., controlled by state-owned China National Offshore Oil Corp., said it would cut capital expenditures by 44% compared with 2014. It is cutting production for the first time since before the company listed in 2001. It also lowered its production target for 2017.

CFO MOVES

Trimble Navigation Ltd., a global-positioning, surveying and fleet management company based in Sunnyvale, Calif., named Robert Painter finance chief, effective Feb. 1. He will succeed Francois Delepine, who the company said was leaving in early March to pursue another opportunity. Compensation details for Mr. Painter, who serves as general manager of its Trimble Buildings division and led all acquisition activity for three years when he joined Trimble a decade ago, weren’t immediately disclosed. Mr. Delepine received 2014 compensation valued at $5.2 million, including a salary of $416,827 and equity awards valued at $5.2 million, according to its most recent proxy statement.

Federal-Mogul Holdings Corp., a Southfield, Mich., maker of powertrain and other parts to the automotive industry, named Jerome Rouquet CFO, effective immediately. He succeeds Rajesh Shah, who is retiring. Compensation details for Mr. Rouquet weren’t immediately disclosed. Mr. Shah received 2014 compensation valued at $806,833, including a salary of $415,385 and a bonus of $348,933, according to its proxy.

Fastjet PLC, a London-based airline focused on low-cost air travel across sub-Saharan Africa, named Lisa Mitchell its new financial chief to oversee operational investment amid a broader executive shake-up at the company, according to Dow Jones Newswires. Ms. Mitchell replaces Nick Caine, effective immediately. Ms. Mitchell was providing consultancy services for the airline, and was previously chief financial officer of oil and gas company Ophir Energy PLC, which has assets in East and West Africa, as well as Asia. Mr. Caine had already signaled last year that he was stepping down. Fastjet did not disclose Ms. Mitchell’s salary. The company is nearly 11%-owned by easyJet entrepreneur Stelios Haji-Ioannou’s easyGroup holding firm.

The Morning Ledger from CFO Journal cues up the most important news in corporate finance every weekday morning. Send us tips, suggestions and complaints: james.willhite@wsj.com. Get The Morning Ledger emailed to you each weekday morning by clicking here: http://on.wsj.com/TheMorningLedgerSignup. Follow us on Twitter @CFOJournal.