VITA volunteers provide free tax preparation

The Volunteers for Income Tax Assistance is providing free tax return preparation and e-filing for both federal and state. This local group of volunteers is certified through an IRS training program. They have offered this service locally for more than 10 years.

Shepherd of the Hills Lutheran Church at 801 Sheridan Ave. is the location for two sessions each week starting Wednesday and ending April 14. Wednesday sessions are from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. on a first-come, first-serve basis. Thursdays are by appointment only from 4 to 7 p.m. For an appointment or questions, call VITA at (719) 214-8949. Do not call the church phone number. Taxpayers can avoid some waiting by leaving their tax information during a VITA session and picking up their completed returns at a later session.

The program serves taxpayers of all ages with a gross income under $54,000 who live in Fremont and surrounding counties. Eligible income includes wages, tips, unemployment, disability, pensions, social security, interest, dividends and capital gains and losses plus some self-employment and small business income. Call a volunteer at the above number to for those who have a complex business or investment types of income. They do not calculate depreciation for business property.

All common credits and deductions can be done, including earned income, child tax, child and dependent care, education expenses and itemized deductions. They will complete all forms necessary for the Affordable Care Act health insurance program. They also handle Colorado property/ret/head credit (PTC) rebates.

Advertisement

Bring photo identification for all taxpayers, Social Security cards for both taxpayers and their dependents and your prior year's return whether done by us or someone else. For 2015 income, bring all W2's, 1099's and other income statements. For health insurance, bring your 1095-A, b, or C form or your exemption certificate number if exempted by the exhange. For deductions, bring form 1098's, day care statements, property tax bills, medical bills, contribution receipts and any others that seem relevant. Bring a blank check to use free direct deposit on refunds or direct debit for taxes owed.

To make an appointment, call (719) 214-8949. Additional information is also available at www.coloradovita.org.

Sale to benefit Humane Society of Fremont County

From 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. Jan. 30, there will be cookies, brownies, coffee, hot chocolate, etc. We are raising money to buy a fence for the Humane Society of Fremont County, so the dogs can run around freely and the cats don't have to listen to the annoying, barking dogs. Proceeds benefit the Humane Society.

The Time Changers are a group of fourth- and fifth-grade students at Fremont Elementary School, who are challenged with the task of helping with community needs.

Daily Record Staff