Nera White, center, reaches for the ball during a game in 1960 in St. Joseph, Mo. White played for Nashville Business College for 15 years and was inducted into the Tennessee Sports Hall of Fame in 1967. (Photo: File) Story Highlights The Nashville Business College won eight national titles in a row.

The AAU dominated women's basketball before the NCAA started its championships.

Two former Nashville Business College standouts are in the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame.

On the second floor of a long-since-demolished building at Seventh and Union, women in blue practice jerseys played basketball.

They honed soft hook shots and doggedly drilled defenses. They sweated in an entirely unsophisticated way for ladies of the 1960s — and they loved it.

It didn't matter that they dressed for practice in the building's basement, next to the laundry room. Or that they crammed five in a car, driving across the country at sunup for a tipoff at sundown.

Full interactive: Nashville Business College -- Champions before their time

On game days — when they donned satin jerseys affixed with stars and pulled their kneepads up past their canvas kicks — the women of Nashville Business College felt like hard-court sensations.

"We thought, as they say in the country, we were walking in tall cotton," said seven-time All-American Doris Rogers.

And they were.

These were the women of basketball lore.

This week, as the NCAA Women's Final Four comes to Nashville, homage is due to those from decades ago who elevated the game.

But many seated in Bridgestone Arena for today's national semifinal games have never heard of Nashville Business College. And many will identify the words "Amateur Athletic Union" only with the system through which they developed as young girls and boys.

Decades before the NCAA recognized women's basketball with a national championship, Amateur Athletic Union basketball was the only league in which female athletes could continue their careers after high school.

And so, in sheen shorts and high socks, they competed. They played for companies such as Hanes Hosiery and Lion Oil and for small schools such as Illinois Wesleyan and Wayland Baptist. And — if they were lucky enough to earn a roster spot for the 11-time national champion Nashville Business College — they dominated.

But it wasn't for fame that they ran the court, and it wasn't for wealth.

It was, as they say, for the love of the game.

"Back then it (meant) my life," said 92-year-old Alline Banks Sprouse, one of the team's legends.

It meant, she said, "everything."

Comparing the eras

How the athletes who played for Nashville Business College would stack up against today's players has been debated for years.

Their accomplishments came while playing in the AAU. Most college teams later played in the Association for Intercollegiate Athletics for Women and today are a part of the NCAA.

Nashville Business College dominated the AAU by winning 11 titles in its history, including eight straight from 1962 to 1969. No team in the modern era of women's basketball — or men's, for that matter — has matched that accomplishment. The college, which no longer exists, began sponsoring a team in the 1930s and de-emphasized basketball after winning its last national championship.

"To put that into perspective, the Tennessee women's team has won eight national championships and Connecticut has won eight, but (Nashville Business College) won eight in a row," said women's basketball historian Josh Sullivan, director of basketball operations and technology for the Women's Basketball Hall of Fame in Knoxville. "Maybe the best comparison would be what the UCLA men's team did when John Wooden was the coach and they won seven straight (1967-1973)."

In one stretch, Nashville Business College won 91 of 92 games.

A league of trivial beginnings, the AAU made its debut in 1926 and persevered through the Great Depression and World War II.

And it wasn't too many years later that 16-year-old Sprouse — then known as Alline Banks — entered the scene.

Although there was little recognition or publicity for the league and a dearth of public interest, gifted players were plentiful. Sprouse, a native of Manchester, Tenn., was the first of strong lineage of Nashville Business College blue.

The girl who developed her skills on a dirt court under the direction of two older brothers dominated the game. At the time, only forwards could score and dribbling was limited. In later years, it morphed into two stationary forwards on one side of the court, two stationary guards on the other, and two rovers who were allowed to cross the center line to play offense and defense.

"I was good, and I worked hard on it," Sprouse said. "I would go to the gym and shoot, shoot, shoot."

She wasn't the only one. Farm girls across the country coveted the hard court.

"I can remember as a little girl just wishing I could play basketball all my life," said Rogers, a native of Seymour, Tenn.

Nashville Business College capitalized on that conviction, recruiting girls from rural Tennessee towns such as Lafayette and Cross Plains and Crab Orchard — none which had a population of more than 3,300. The college offered them the opportunity to pursue a post-high-school career. It did not require them to enroll in the college, and it placed no limitations on the number of years the women could play.

In the city, these women — young and mostly single — faced the matter of making a living, practicing and playing in games, which often meant traveling with the program.

Up around dawn, some of the players would head downtown to practice at the YMCA from 7 to 9 a.m., then hop on the bus to Peabody College, where they worked on undergraduate teaching degrees and, for a few, later their master's.

The women had no gym of their own, which meant all games were on the road. They hosted home games in the high schools of their stars — packing places such as Waverly, from which Sally Smith — the team's first black All-America player — hailed. And then they embarked on small towns throughout Middle America.

While the men celebrated with championship games at Madison Square Garden, the AAU women's championships were relegated to the desert mesa of Gallup, N.M.

The schedule was wearisome, but the busy players felt little need.

Backed by Herman O. Balls, owner and president of Nashville Business College, they drove decent cars when they traveled and stayed in nice motels and hotels. They were fed three meals a day and were given skirts and jackets to travel in.

"They took care of us," said Judy Coble, 77, a native of Greensboro, N.C., who played for the college from 1959 to 1966.

For those who needed opportunity, Balls would put them to work at the college or at one of the other local enterprises he owned, such as Nashville Auto Diesel College. He also relied on his connections throughout the community to find jobs for players.

Some players actually enrolled at Nashville Business College, where they learned secretarial skills.

But the school did not provide the stereotypical college environment. There were "no frat parties, bridge games in the student union, or schmoozing with fellow students," Robert Ikard pointed out in his book "Just for Fun: The Story of AAU Women's Basketball."

It was all business.

The coach

"All business" are the words Ron Head uses to describe his father, John Head, the man who navigated Nashville Business College's 1960s AAU dominance as its coach.

A former math teacher with a perfectionist bent, John Head was demanding of his players.

It was a lot of pressure heading out on a weeklong road trip, scheduling where the team needed to go and where it would stay, all the while responsible for a dozen 18- to 30-year-old women.

And when the game wasn't unfolding on the court the way he wanted, he would look piercingly at his players and "dress them down with a stare," Ron Head said.

Still, his players revered him.

"He probably forgot more basketball than most people will ever know," Coble said.

And even half a century later, his lessons still linger with women such as Rogers.

"I remember him telling me on my first day of practice in 1961, 'Practice doesn't make perfect. It's perfect practice that makes perfect,' " she said. "If you keep practicing the same thing wrong you will never get any better. I have never forgotten that."

These women, rest assured, were practicing right.

"I would just marvel at the precision of how they would carry out their assignments," said Ron Head, now 71, who watched the team from the time he was 7 years old.

Experiencing the show

Legendary Belmont women's coach Betty Wiseman was still in high school at Portland when she first saw Nashville Business College in action in the early 1960s.

The team was set to play the Russian national team at Municipal Auditorium, and, unlike most of the business school's games, this one was well-publicized.

"The media didn't do them justice for the most part, but we heard about the game against the Russians in Portland, so that tells you word had gotten out pretty good because back then, Portland was considered a long way from Nashville," Wiseman said. "I was just a little country girl, and it was not easy for my parents to bring me to Nashville."

But Wiseman did find her way to the game and was in awe of what she witnessed.

Some of the college's greatest players of all time were on that team. Four of the five starters — Nera White, Joan Crawford, Rita Horky and Rogers — were All-Americans.

Wiseman, naturally, was flattered a couple of years later when Head recruited her to play for Nashville Business College.

She signed a contract with the college but was faced with an interesting predicament.

Wiseman could either pursue her degree at Belmont or continue to play basketball at Nashville Business College. The day before her contract took effect, she backed out.

"My dream in life was to teach and to coach," Wiseman said. "I couldn't go to Belmont and play for Nashville Business College and travel and miss that many classes."

Laying the foundation

Wiseman went on to create the women's basketball team at Belmont, one of the first of its kind in the Southeast, and relied on her connections with Nashville Business College to help get the team going.

She asked Head if he would bring Nashville Business College with all of its stellar athletes to Belmont to play the fledgling program, and he did.

"For them to come to Belmont and play us that first season twice was just huge for us," Wiseman said. "Us playing them was like David and Goliath. But it was a dream come true for me just to be on the floor coaching in the same game with a program like that."

Luis Del Rio, a senior at the time at Belmont, refereed the games.

"I hate that we didn't have the kind of videotaping equipment back then that we have today to capture the moment of Nashville Business College playing," Del Rio said. "They were something to see. It would have been a treasure."

It was the dominating manner in which White played that made the greatest impact on Del Rio.

"She could do it all — play under the basket, shoot from the perimeter, pass, dribble and score," Del Rio said. "She was very agile and could throw her weight around."

Comparing Nashville Business College players to today's college players is difficult, in part, because the business college players were allowed to play for many years. White, for instance, played for the team for 15 years.

But there have been women's pro leagues over the years and the WNBA today, and many say White, who now lives on a farm in Macon County, would have been as dominant on that level as she was in her day.

"If you talk to most players who played during that time, they would tell you that Nera White was probably one of the best female basketball players that they've ever seen play," Sullivan said. "They will tell you she was that good back then and would be today."

Sullivan pointed out that Nashville Business College has the second-most inductees in the Women's Basketball Hall of Fame. Tennessee has 10, Nashville Business College has nine, and Wayland Baptist College has three.

And there are only two AAU players who have ever been inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, which honors men and women. White and Crawford share honors with the likes of John Wooden, Wilt Chamberlain, Julius Erving and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar.

But it wasn't the accolades or recognition that inspired those who laid the foundation for today's female players.

"I just remember the fun," Rogers said, "and the love."

"I wouldn't trade it for anything."

Reach Jessica Bliss at 615-259-8253 and on Twitter @jlbliss. Reach Mike Organ at 615-259-8021 and on Twitter MikeOrganWriter.

THE FINAL FOUR

At Bridgestone Arena:

» Notre Dame vs. Maryland, 5:30 p.m. today

»Connecticut vs. Stanford, 8 p.m. today

» Championship, 8 p.m. Tuesday

In hot pursuit of women's basketball great Nera White

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/PzhLFx