Topics: Bitcoin, Bitcoin Jesus, mt. gox, Roger Ver, Satoshi Nakamoto, Innovation News, Technology News

I have sworn not to write the name of the island where Roger Ver is currently residing, the reason being that he fears for his life.

It is the second time we have spoken in four weeks, and this time his anxiety is palpable. It leaps through the phone. Ver talks about his future the way a revolutionary might: uncertain and littered with likely chances for wrongful imprisonment or assassination. He won’t start a family, he tells me, because a child’s father should “be there” — and he fears that he won’t.

Ver and his his partner of two years, Ayaka, have been lingering down in the Caribbean for several weeks now, ever since he first began to seek economic citizenship, on one of the islands (a maneuver necessary before obtaining full citizenship). That was granted weeks ago, and now he wants to renounce his U.S. citizenship as well.

Ver is a legend in the Bitcoin community, known as the “Bitcoin Jesus” for his tireless evangelism of the virtual currency. He is not Bitcoin’s only voice, but he is quickly finding himself the last man standing. Newsweek rocked the Bitcoin world this week when it claimed to have identified the elusive founder of the currency, Satoshi Nakamoto — who, it turns out, is an elderly Japanese man by the same name, living in plain sight in California. That led to a high-speed freeway car chase, and a slew of commentary (including from Salon’s Andrew Leonard) suggesting that the unmasking of Nakamoto is the last nail in the coffin for a currency beleaguered of late with scandal. Ver doesn’t buy it.

“Pretty much for sure it’s not him,” says Ver, who claims he has never met Nakamoto. “If you read the posts on Amazon.com product reviews written by the Newsweek Satoshi, and of you read the actual white paper written by the actual Bitcoin Satoshi it’s really really clear it’s not the same person.” Will the world ever know the real Nakamoto, I ask.

”I hope not,” says Ver.

The Nakamoto saga comes on the heels of a string of public relations fiascoes that have blackened Bitcoin’s image. Now the currency — whose value has fallen nearly 30 percent in the past month, to around $650 per unit — finds itself fending off image erosion on both flanks. On the one hand, there’s its close association to a now-indicted kingpin with links to an underground network of hit men. On the other hand is the perception that Bitcoin is merely a speculative bubble, like the Dutch tulip craze.

In a sting operation last year, the FBI arrested Ross Ulbricht, the alleged mastermind behind Silk Road, an illicit marketplace for unsavory and illegal things. (Ulbricht is charged with, among other things, the torture and assassination of rivals.) Shortly thereafter came the arrest of Charlie Shrem, the CEO of a Bitcoin start-up financed by the Winklevoss twins, who (according to Department of Justice authorities) sold over $1 million of the digital currency to drug dealers on Silk Road. It didn’t help matters that Shrem was the vice chairman of the Bitcoin Foundation.

This month came the biggest hit yet: The Lehman-like collapse of Mt. Gox, a virtual bank for the currency, exacerbating Bitcoin’s P.R. problem at the worst possible time. (Ver estimates he lost over $1 million.)

I first made contact with the entrepreneur earlier this year, through Twitter; then began exchanging information over email, before finally conducting a lengthy interview with him over Skype. During that conversation, I learn that Ver and his partner are living at a mid-range hotel on one of the world’s bluest beaches, where there is a swim-up bar and old ladies who sell handmade floral-patterned shirts under the banyan trees. The tourists congregate by half past 5 each winter night to watch the sunset. He is on the Caribbean side of the island. I know this because – strangely — I have stayed at this particular hotel before, more than decade ago, when my college swim team visited the island to train. Not exactly the trappings of a Bitcoin millionaire.

“What a long, long road this has been,” says Ver, who explains the frustrations he’s encountered in denouncing his American citizenship. “I tried to make an appointment with the U.S. embassy in Tokyo several weeks ago. They told me that the soonest they could fit me in was March 19. I didn’t want to wait that long, so I wound up getting an appointment four days ago … I went there with all the paperwork in order, ready to renounce. They told me I am not allowed to renounce yet and I need to have a cooling off period to think about it, if it’s something that I really want to do — which to anybody who knows me knows that I have been considering this for a long time.”

Whenever he is speaking, Ver’s discontentment with America is in plain view, unfurling itself in unintentionally humorous ways, as when he portrays his current predicament:

“The U.S. is making it extremely difficult for me to stop being American.”

The discontentment is also there when he talks about the first time he was arrested, at 18, for staging a protest against tax day in his town’s postal center. And it’s there when he refers to his eight months in federal prison, more than a decade ago, for selling firecrackers on eBay without a license.

I wonder: Why does anyone decide to cease being American? “It’s just incredibly inconvenient,” Ver says. “It’s dangerous to travel to certain places, and the U.S. government uses all the money I pay them to kill people around the world. I am not interested in participating in that type of system.”