Size doesn't matter: Tony Popovic has no qualms about playing the Sydney derby at Parramatta Stadium. Photo: Anthony Johnson

Sydney derby: All you need to know

Western Sydney Wanderers coach Tony Popovic couldn't give a damn whether Sydney FC coach Graham Arnold thinks Parramatta Stadium is big enough for Saturday night's Sydney derby, insisting it suits his side perfectly.

Arnold made his feelings clear on Thursday that the 21,000-seat stadium is nowhere near big enough to host the match, now considered the premium rivalry of the A-League, and suggested ANZ Stadium as a alternative – an idea that already has significant traction in the football community.

But Popovic doesn't care whether the match draws 18,000 or 81,000 just so long as his side, still winless after their first six matches, comes out on top.

Advertisement

"It doesn't really matter what anyone thinks of us or our stadium," he said before training at the venue on Friday. "This has been our home for 2½ years, it's a fantastic stadium for football. The fans love it, the players love playing here and we're looking forward to another derby.

"For us, we're just pleased we can give our fans another game – another big derby – here. We've had many recently here, we've had many big games here and derbies are special."

Winless though they may be, the Wanderers are firmly on the upswing, according to Popovic, who believes they are well-placed to grab their first three points of the season.

"We've improved since Central Coast and Newcastle and we can do that again in the derby," he said. "We've seen anything can happen in derbies ... We've won our fair share, we've lost our fair share, but we've played well in the last two matches and, if we continue on that path, we believe we can win tomorrow."

One of the keys to success for the Wanderers will undoubtedly be striker Tomi Juric, who scored a superb goal direct from a corner last week and is likely to lead the line once again after an indifferent start to the campaign.

But Popovic does not think he is anywhere near the finished product just yet.

"He still has a lot to improve on but he is getting better and better," Popovic said. "For the goal he scored, he created so much space for himself and that is why we see so much potential in Tommy.

"I just want to keep seeing him progress and turn into a striker that is consistent and produces week in, week out. He's like the rest of the group, he played OK against Central Coast and he improved against Newcastle and we envisage he'll improve against Sydney. He is dangerous in the box like all good strikers and I am sure he will improve again this Saturday."

Meanwhile, Wanderers goalkeeper Ante Covic said that he felt his club would have to adjust quickly to being the hunted rather than the hunter.

"We have an amazing atmosphere here, amazing support and are definitely a notch on other teams' belt," he said. "We've noticed how teams have lifted whenever they come here and that's something we have to deal with. But the derby is a great chance to get a win on the board."

The 39-year old said his side garnered a newfound respect from the opposition for their continental deeds, which meant they would have to raise their own game once more.

"You don't become champions of Asia and expect everyone to sit on their backsides and admire us," Covic said. "We've been successful for two years, having been absolutely nowhere three years ago. Teams come over here and look at us in a different light now."