Topics: amanda knox, Crime, Editor's Picks, meredith kercher, Perugia, Sollecito, Life News, News

For the last three years, I’ve been working on a novel loosely inspired by the final weeks of Meredith Kercher’s life. If you don’t recognize that name, you probably know that of Amanda Knox, the American student who was tried in Italy for Kercher’s 2007 murder. Knox, along with Raffeale Sollecito, Knox’s boyfriend of a few days, were convicted in 2009, then acquitted in 2011. The case has been an endless, expensive spiral of misery for Knox, Sollecito and Meredith Kercher’s family. Its byzantine developments have been nearly impossible to follow, even for avid watchers. And just when we all thought it was over — memoirs written, lives back on track — Knox and Sollecito were convicted again last Thursday, after an appeal of the appeal.

So why write a novel on the subject? Don’t we just want to know what actually happened? After spending time in Perugia and studying the players and the case, I thought about writing a nonfiction book. I would have had enough material, and probably could have presented the story in a slightly different light than the excellent books already published on the subject, namely “The Fatal Gift of Beauty” by Nina Burleigh and “Murder in Italy” by Candace Dempsey. Yet, even with those accounts, as well as thousands of hours of media coverage, it’s hard to come away with any real answer as to what might have transpired the night of Nov. 1, 2007. Now it’s 2014, and enough years have gone by that even those who lived in that cottage on Via della Pergola 7 would be hard-pressed to give straightforward testimonies about their memories anymore, no matter how earnest their intentions.

During my months in Perugia, and in the years after, I researched, interviewed and read as much as I could about the case. Amanda Knox is a straightforward, funny nerd, one friend said. No, she’s a cold, evil woman who wrongly put the innocent father of a toddler in jail, Patrick Lamumba, the man she accused of the murder during her interrogation, told me. Raffaele has been portrayed as a Satan worshipper, a virgin, a knife enthusiast, a sex addict and a geek. With every new revelation, a new judgment. And though in the United States Knox has a lot of support, in Italy — at least when I was last there, in 2012 — it was hard to find an Italian who thought she was innocent.

“Journalists say to me that we’ll never know what happened that night,” Amanda Knox said in a recent wonderfully candid video interview with the London Guardian. “Well, I think you can see what the truth is if you really want to see it.”

I did want to see it. But there was so little logic in the material I was given. Everyone was giving different accounts. The journalists, for all of their skill, weren’t able to synthesize the information. As a novelist, wasn’t I qualified to have a go at it? Couldn’t I get closer by creating a fictional version, where the logic of human nature is the only law?

To me, the most interesting question of it all was why. Why was Meredith Kercher killed? Forget everything after the night in question. Forget Knox’s strange early morning errand of getting a mop to clean under Raffaele’s sink. Forget the kissing at the crime scene. Forget the yoga in the police station and Knox’s accusation of an innocent man while she was under interrogation in a language she barely understood. That all belonged to the story after the murder. If I were in my fiction writing class instructing one of my students, I would tell him to cut those scenes. They just aren’t relevant, not to what happened while Meredith Kercher was alive.

You can see why Amanda Knox was pulled into this story. The Kercher murder, on its own, makes for a bad mystery. The setting — Perugia — is excellent, with its dark alleyways and thousands of years of Etruscan and Italian wars and upheaval. But there was no apparent motive, and the characters, in real life, haven’t come to an end yet worthy of a novel. That is, no new emotional truth was ever reached. In my book, I synthesized the actual facts with characters and motives that might have fit in with a story like it. In other words, I filled in the blank parts with what could have been. It was a weird way to write a book, but not any stranger than, say, Hilary Mantel’s in “Bring Up the Bodies.” The story I ended up with is surely not exactly what happened on Nov. 1, 2007. But my version can’t be any more out there than the prosecution’s story of a satanic orgy, which wouldn’t have gotten those guys into even the laxest MFA program.

I’m focusing on Meredith Kercher because, despite Amanda Knox’s celebrity, Kercher is the story. Meredith Kercher, our intensely likable victim, was by all accounts a nice girl. But let’s go further. After all, she was a real person. To reduce her to a type is to be disloyal to her memory; she had human qualities and flaws, making it all the more tragic that, at 21, she was robbed of life. Meredith Kercher’s mother was Pakistani, born in Lahore. They were close, Meredith and her mother. Arline Kercher was ill, and Meredith had a special phone so that she could call home every day. Meredith’s father was a journalist, mainly to the tabloids. The parents were not together anymore. She was the youngest of four children, which probably meant she had to fight for attention sometimes. Perhaps this was why she was so outgoing.

When Meredith was 15, she spent a summer on the west coast of Italy, meaning she was fluent and also probably not naive. Getting an Erasmus scholarship is difficult and a great honor, meaning Meredith was intelligent and driven. A few years before, she auditioned and won a part in a music video, indicating that she was confident of her doe-eyed good looks. In Perugia, she was part of a quickly formed pack of English friends whom she went out with almost every night.

Amanda Knox was just a side character in Meredith’s life. According to their testimonies, Meredith’s British friends thought she was odd. She was loud, and burst into song at random times. They didn’t always invite her along. One night Meredith and Amanda went to a club with the boys in the downstairs apartment. They both ended up bringing men home to bed, according to testimony. Meredith slept with her downstairs neighbor. Amanda with a boy in from Rome.

Later, according to the British girls, Amanda told Meredith she, also, liked the neighbor, but that Meredith could “have him.” Enough for a chafe, but not a murder. Days later Amanda met her own boyfriend, Raffaele. According to all testimonies, the new couple was all over each other. Meredith wouldn’t have seen her much anymore. The larger presence in Meredith’s life would have been the neighbor, with whom she carried on a casual relationship. Nights in bed with an Italian could never mean nothing to a young Englishwoman. If you don’t believe me, believe Henry James. It’s just not likely that Amanda Knox was at the forefront of Meredith Kercher’s mind.

On the night of Nov. 1 Meredith Kercher was doubtlessly tired, and probably hung over. This we know from the now famous photos of Meredith at Merlin’s bar, in which she is drooling blood in a vampire costume. It’s too bad that is the most prevalent picture of Meredith Kercher. I have now seen myriad images of the victim, and she was much more beautiful than that picture indicates. This could have been a motive, somehow. Jealousy or obsession would make sense in a novel. But in the real story, there has been no indication of such that I could find.

On Nov. 1, everyone in Meredith’s house, including the neighbor, was out of town. It was All Souls Day, a somber day when most Italians go to see family if they can. No one was in the cottage. It was cold and damp out. Meredith wore jeans, tennis shoes and a sporty zip-up jacket. She went over to a friend’s for pizza. They watched a sappy movie starring Ryan Gosling called “The Notebook.” Let’s lean on fiction and add what she might have been feeling. Maybe she missed her mother. Maybe the lack of sleep made her shaky. We do know that around 8 o’clock, she told her friends she was tired and headed home.

Now is when Rudy Guede enters the picture. The other main character in this scene. We know, in all likelihood, that Guede was the killer. We know because he confessed, and because his DNA was all over the room, as well as — and this is the most lurid detail — in the body. His bloody footprints were all around her, as well as his handprints. He might as well have written his name on the wall. (Guede was convicted and sentenced to 16 years in prison, but insisted he was wrongly convicted in a recent interview.)