The main protest site in Admiralty, Hong Kong, that police plan to clear on Thursday. Isaac Lawrence/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images

Lunchtime strolls, camping gear and folding origami umbrellas in one of Hong Kong’s busiest thoroughfares will soon be a thing of the past.

As Hong Kong police prepare to clear the main occupied protest encampment in Admiralty on Thursday morning, thousands turned out to witness the final hours of the site, which pro-democracy protesters have occupied since Sept. 28.

On Wednesday afternoon, a larger than usual crowd of office workers spent their lunch break at the Admiralty site, eating, taking photographs and talking politics.

“They have built up a good micro-community here,” said Jeff Cheung, 27, who works in nearby Central district. “This is a place where people who support the democracy cause but who don’t necessarily align themselves with any political party can come together,” he added, eating a homemade salad with two friends in the so-called study area of the encampment, where volunteers built rows of desks for students to use.

Leaders of the two main student protest groups—The Hong Kong Federation of Students and Scholarism— urged protesters to turn out Wednesday night for a last hurrah and to stay overnight if they could.

A painting by the artist Water inspired by Hong Kong’s pro-democracy Umbrella Movement. Courtesy of Water

Joshua Wong, the 18-year-old leader of Scholarism, said he wouldn’t be at the front line during Thursday’s clearance operation because he needs to avoid being arrested again before his Jan. 14 court appearance. Mr. Wong was arrested in November during the clearance of the Mong Kok site.

A third, small protest site in Causeway Bay remains occupied.

Some demonstrators are working to preserve the art created during the protests. Meaghan McGurgan, a theater critic who also works with a group called Umbrella Movement Art Preservation, removed some pieces from Admiralty on Wednesday night to return to the artists on their wishes. Her collective was also responsible for preserving some of the art from Mong Kok.

One of the pieces Ms. McGurgan is helping to preserve is a large banner called “Umbrella Girl” that hung between the two footbridges leading to the central government offices. The artist, who goes by the name Water, removed the 35-kilogram banner Tuesday night.

Another group, Umbrella Research, is also working to preserve digitally or physically some of the art in Admiralty, including the Lennon Wall, a staircase that is covered with neon Post-it notes of messages from supporters of the movement.

Protesters were noticeably emotional in the days leading up to the police clearance. A nightly guitar performance by artist and musician Sham Wailun, who goes by the name Bananaooyoo, drew larger crowds than usual, as people sat on the steps of Admiralty Centre sandwiched between McDonald’s and KFC, the central entrance point to the protest site.

Cyrena Leung, 20, an engineering student, was one of many who cried while listening to songs by Cantopop legends such as Eason Chan, Beyond and Leslie Cheung on Tuesday night.

“I’m crying because…we have fought for so long but the government chooses to use injunctions as an excuse to clear us out. I’m very disgusted,” said Ms. Leung, who has slept in a tent in Admiralty for more than 50 nights.

She said she won’t be able to come to Admiralty on Thursday morning because she has exams.

– Isabella Steger. Follow her on Twitter @stegersaurus