COMMERCE CITY — Nathan Leon’s widow, Katie, says it infuriates her that her husband is often only referred to as the “pizza guy” that Evan Ebel killed to steal his uniform as a disguise for the Tom Clements assassination.

“I could sit here and cry, scream and tell you how much me and my daughters lost, but Nate lost the most,” Katie recently said at a Commerce City restaurant.

Nathan Leon, who was 27 when Ebel shot him on March 17, 2013, was the type of man whose arrival home always triggered excited squeals from his three little daughters, including one from a previous marriage.

Because of his enthusiasm, discussions about nothing in particular never seemed mundane, Katie said. He was never goaded into angry responses to insults by others who criticized him for tattoos or body piercings, she said.

Nathan’s full-time job wasn’t delivering pizzas — he was a junior library assistant at IBM in Boulder. He took the part-time job because he wanted to be self-sufficient. He never missed a day of work even when it meant only getting an hour of sleep, Katie said.

“He was my big cheese! He was my life,” she said. “I want everyone to know that he was a loving man and that the man who killed him was a monster.”

Nathan’s parents, John Leon and Cynthia Jones, who were divorced when he was young, both maintained close daily or weekly contact with their son.

John Leon was proud of the way that Nate — a week before his murder — was unfazed by his daughter’s sobbing and screaming at the end of a long day at the Children’s Museum of Denver.

“He didn’t have an important job. He wasn’t important to the community. He didn’t have great ambitions,” John Leon said. “He was an amazing father.”

Nathan, a musician, could execute the perfect electric guitar riff. He shared his father’s love of computer and mechanical gadgetry and of roller coasters — the latter of which would dictate where the family took cross-country trips. Nathan once cut his Toyota in half and rebuilt it completely. With aspirations of becoming a crime-scene analyst or a psychologist, he was planning to go to college.

“He was my role model. He was a different kind of a man,” his father said. “He would always see good in people. He never raised his voice. Never.”

Katie has explained his absence to their confused daughters by telling them he is their angel — all the while dreading the day she must explain how and why he died. Their twin 5-year-olds — Irelynn and Scotlyn, for their heritage — have trouble sleeping and eating and are in therapy. Kaydance, Katie’s stepdaughter, is 7.

Katie stays strong for the kids, but every Sunday over the past year she is drawn to the desolate mountainside turnout where her husband’s body was found a year ago.

Every Sunday, Katie brings fresh flowers to the site to meditate, remember and talk. Usually, she is alone or with her mother, but those times when her daughters are there, she tells them they are visiting the location where “Daddy became an angel.”

“I ask him to watch over his three little girls: Keep them safe,” Katie said.

Katie said she wishes Ebel hadn’t taken the “chicken way out” by triggering a confrontation — a shootout with police in Texas — that led to his death.

“We’re never going to be able to tell him he’s destroyed our family,” she said.