Families, longtime customers and former employees crowded into Paris on the Platte on Saturday afternoon as the iconic Denver cafe served its final rounds of coffee and tea.

Billed as the oldest coffeehouse in Denver, Paris on the Platte opened in 1986 — long before Coors Field and the success of Lower Downtown and the Highland neighborhood.

“I think the landlord was really pretty happy to have us; there wasn’t anything down here,” said owner Faye Maguire, who started the shop nearly three decades ago. “It’s been an amazing 28 years watching everything grow up around us.”

The closure was announced on the cafe’s Facebook page Friday:

“Au revoir,” the post read. ” … after 28 years, it’s time. Tonight we have wine, tomorrow we have coffee, and then we say goodbye.”

Eager to be there on the final day of business, loyal customers flocked to the coffeehouse at 1553 Platte St.

Chad Thurman, 29, approached Maguire at the counter to let her know how sad he was to see the cafe closing.

“This was literally the first place I came when I got my driver’s license,” Thurman told Maguire. “It’s been a staple.”

Thurman said he didn’t realize the coffeehouse was closing, so he was glad he happened to stop by Saturday for tea.

“The owners have always been very friendly and welcoming,” he said. “It’s not a hustle-and-bustle coffeeshop, just trying to get the next cappuccino out. They know you. I’m going to miss it a lot.”

Jill Hamilton, 46, said her first job was at Paris on the Platte when she moved to Denver in 1993.

“It’s the best place I’ve ever worked,” said Hamilton, who stopped by to say goodbye. “It has always been a funky, eclectic, awesome, good-energy place.”

Even after moving to a different job, Hamilton said she always popped in whenever she found herself in the neighborhood.

Jacque Williams, 53, also made a special trip to the coffeehouse Saturday after hearing it was shutting down.

“I used to come here with my son when he was about 3 years old,” Williams said. “Now, he’s 28. It’s too bad some of these places are closing down. (I’ll miss) the community feeling.”

Maguire said a new cafe will move into the space. After 28 years, she said it was just time to get out.

“So many people have told me over the last couple of days how important Paris was in their lives,” she said between hugs and goodbyes to longtime customers. “It’s really been about the community.”

Anna Gauldin: 303-954-1666 or agauldin@denverpost.com