Peyton Manning is as New Orleans as red beans and rice on Mondays and Fat Tuesdays. The proud native son, who had to move to Denver because of work, adores his hometown and its greatest assets –- food, music, culture and football prospects.

Manning himself is the greatest football product to ever come out of New Orleans, the city that annually churns out NFL studs. But Peyton himself can attest that Leonard Fournette of St. Augustine is prodigious. Manning got a text this fall from his brother Cooper, who told the Broncos quarterback to turn on ESPN to see greatness.

“It was big game between St. Augustine and John Curtis, who have always been powerhouses in New Orleans,” Manning said. “So I was home on a Friday night, turned the game on and he’s an impressive linebacker –- and, oh by the way, he’s also the top-rated running back, as well. He’s some kind of athlete. And I haven’t had a chance to meet him, but watching the game that he had against John Curtis, one of the best programs in the country, that kind of told me everything I needed to know about how good of a player he is”

Fournette ran for 255 yards that night. It’s arguable he’s the best prospect out of New Orleans since Peyton Manning himself. ESPN asked the question if he was the next Adrian Peterson. The guy is considering LSU and Alabama. Lil Wayne tweeted “Leonard Fournette is the truth!”

After Fournette’s junior season, he won the Gatorade Louisiana Football Player of the Year in 2012 — the only junior ever to earn the honor. My good buddy Jeff Duncan, the columnist for NOLA.com, wrote this big piece on Fournette, pointing out that he won the state’s 100-meter dash title in a time of 10.68 seconds. And Duncan also included this tidbit:

Tom Luginbill is a former college quarterback who makes his living evaluating high school football stars for ESPN. In his tenure as ESPN’s national recruiting director, Luginbill and staff have awarded three players with grades as high 95 on their 1-100 scale: Da’Quan Bowers and Julio Jones in 2008; and Jadaveon Clowney in 2010.

Fournette, along with classmates Jabrill Peppers, a cornerback from Peramus, N.J., and Cameron Robinson, an offensive tackle from West Monroe, also received 95 grades.

Benjamin Hochman, Denver Post columnist: bhochman@denverpost.com or @hochman