Employers are working to hold the costs of healthcare benefits steady next year, but it may not stay that way.

According to the latest annual survey by the National Business Group on Health, a nonprofit association of 425 large U.S. employers, employers are making changes to benefit programs that will help employers avoid major cost increases in 2016. However, nearly half of large employers believe that by 2018 at least one of their health plans will reach the threshold that triggers what is known as the Affordable Care Act Cadillac Tax.

Beginning in 2018, employers will be expected to pay a 40-percent tax on costs of health insurance plans above a certain threshold. For individuals, the threshold is $10,200. For family coverage, it is $27,500. To avoid this, 38 percent of employers say they will implement surcharges for spouses who can obtain coverage through their own employer - that's up from 29 percent of employers making that decision this year. Meanwhile, a handful of employers will exclude spouses altogether when they have coverage available through another employer.

Nina Owcharenko, director of the Center for Health Policy Studies at The Heritage Foundation, says many employers began excluding spouses from coverage even before the Affordable Care Act.

Owcharenko

"They don't want to be picking up the cost of someone else's health insurance plan,” she says. “So those employers who previously hadn't considered having a firm policy regarding spouses with additional coverage are now really looking into it."

There have been bipartisan calls for changes or delays in the Cadillac Tax. Owcharenko expects for those calls to multiply as 2018 approaches.

"I will point out, though, that this is the whole problem with ObamaCare,” she says. “If you get bipartisan support to get rid of this tax, now we're further in the hole on paying for this monstrosity. This is why the healthcare law itself is really unsustainable in the long run and why scrapping it is really the only fiscally sound way to move forward on real healthcare reform."