The bill would task Health and Social Services Secretary Rita Landgraf’s department with crafting a list of healthy foods, and require that SNAP funds “shall only be used” to buy foods on that list. JENNIFER CORBETT/THE NEWS JOURNAL 09/03/13-Wilmington, De.-Wil 0904 Marketplase presser-Department of Health and Social Service Secretary Rita Landgraf, speaks at a press conference, Tuesday, September 3, 2013 at the Latin American Community Center kicking off the Delaware Health Insurance Marketplace. The Marketplace will help uninsured Delawareans to better access to affordable care. JENNIFER CORBETT/THE NEWS JOURNAL (Photo: JENNIFER CORBETT/THE NEWS JOURNA)

Delawareans pinching pennies near the federal poverty level – making from $16,100 for an individual to a maximum of $47,700 for a family of four – will lose health coverage through the state's Community Healthcare Access Program (CHAP) starting Feb. 1, state officials said late Monday afternoon.

CHAP is a state-run program that offers discounted medical services for those not eligible for Delaware's Medicaid program. The state earmarked $478,000 in tobacco settlement funds for the program this fiscal year.

CHAP recipients are ineligible for Medicaid either because they are undocumented immigrants or make more than 138 percent of the federal poverty level, Delaware's cutoff for Medicaid assistance. The federal poverty level is $11,670 a year for an individual.

State officials said they will offer an alternative to CHAP on a case-by-case basis, only for those who can prove they are ineligible for other plans or are exempt from the federal insurance mandate.

The news came as a surprise – and a concern – to the Medical Society of Delaware, which has partnered with the state to provide a corps of physicians and specialists willing to provide free care to CHAP enrollees. Almost 600 medical professionals are on that list of volunteers.

"Maybe they feel it needs to be refocused," said Dr. Nancy Fan, president of the Medical Society of Delaware and a physician at St. Francis Hospital. "Or maybe we assume we're providing a greater service than is needed."

There are 7,060 people enrolled in CHAP, about 6,000 of whom are undocumented immigrants. The others have incomes that range between 138 percent and 200 percent of the federal poverty level – a range that goes from $16,100 for an individual to $47,700 for a family of four.

Officials say the end of the CHAP program is part of a long-term push to get people to enroll in consistent coverage, rather than for charity care.

"This is charity care and charity care more or less will be going away based on the mandate that everyone must have health insurance," said Rita Langraf, secretary of Delaware's Department of Health and Social Services, referencing the 2010 Affordable Care Act's requirement that everyone should have health insurance.

The department is taking that mantra seriously. Landgraf said the state will continue to offer coverage for the undocumented population past Feb. 1, but CHAP recipients who make up to 200 percent of the federal poverty level will need to find new coverage.

She expects some may be eligible for Medicaid when their situations are reviewed, but individuals who make more than $16,100 a year will be pushed out to the online health care marketplace or they will have to pay out of pocket for services.

"We've been informing [them] of this transition for probably a year. Now we are actually giving them a hard stop," Landgraf said.

In September, 571 doctors and specialists throughout the state were on the list of CHAP volunteers, according to Mark Thompson, Medical Society spokesman. Since 2001, the Medical Society has made almost 54,000 referrals to those doctors and specialists, he said, and since 2007, the program has saved patients about $4.3 million in prescription costs.

"Our concern is – where will this take some of these patients who aren't going to be able to make the cutoffs?" said Fan. "We'd be more than happy to work with the state to still care for those patients, but obviously we don't know how that will work yet…. That's going to be an extensive discussion."

Those enrolled in CHAP have few financial options, she said.

"It's a small pie for these people. What are they going to be paying for? Food. Housing. Probably many are in positions and jobs – if they're working at all – where the employer is not providing insurance. And the way the [insurance] marketplace is going, employers will have less and less inclination to provide insurance."

The program was growing before the Affordable Care Act took effect. In 2011, the Delaware Health Care Commission's director predicted the number of CHAP enrollees that year would rise from 10,300 to 13,000.

Neither Christiana Care Health System nor Westside Health Center could say Monday how the state's changes would affect their programs.

Many questions went unanswered Monday.

"What does this mean for the patient?" Fan said. "How does funneling them somewhere else – how does the state save money? How will they restructure the program to meet the needs of those who get left behind? We can't answer those questions."

Jen Rini can be reached at 324-2386 or jrini@delawareonline.com. Follow @JenRini on Twitter. Contact Beth Miller at 324-2784 or bmiller@delawareonline.com. Follow on Twitter @BMiller57.

Health care help-lines

• Individuals can get information about enrolling through Delaware's online marketplace or applying for Medicaid at http://bit.ly/1subg2i

• Call the Marketplace Call Center at 800-318-2596 or TTY at 855-889-4325 for additional help

• For more information on the CHAP program call the Division of Public Health at 302-744-1040

Read or Share this story: http://delonline.us/1qBAM6c