When Kevin Stovall walked out of a Roseville jail cell two weeks after Prop. 47 lowered his burglary conviction to a misdemeanor, he was asked by a waiting television crew if this second chance at freedom would make him steer clear of a criminal lifestyle.

“Can’t make any promises,” Stovall admitted.

Two months later, Stovall was arrested for allegedly committing two violent crimes. The Roseville police officers who took him into custody had just dealt with a similar but more frightening incident, when a drug user who escaped jail time because of Prop. 47 allegedly car-jacked a mother and her young child.

Such incidents have the same experts who opposed the controversial law wondering just how many unnecessary crimes may happen now in the state’s new landscape of punishment, or lack thereof.

Michael Anthony Milan has a substantial criminal history. In 2006, he was convicted of burglary. In 2009, he pleaded guilty to committing theft with a prior theft conviction. Last November he was arrested by Sacramento law enforcement for possession of methamphetamine and possession of heroin. For Milan, the timing of his last arrest was serendipitous: Prop. 47 had just been passed by California voters, reducing the penalty of drug crimes and most property crimes to simple misdemeanors. Milan admitted to one of his two drug charges — the other was dismissed in plea agreement — and he was sentenced to 90 days in the Sacramento County Jail. Court records document that he was deemed eligible for Sacramento Sheriff’s Work Program. Sacramento Sheriff’s Sgt. Lisa Bowman said Milan was released the same day with the option to sign up for the SWP.

A few weeks after Milan’s conviction, a 26-year-old woman was driving on Douglas Boulevard with her 6-year-old daughter in the car. It was just after 5 p.m. Arriving near the intersection of Sunrise Boulevard, the mother suddenly saw a tattooed man with his head shaven forcing his way into her car.

Police say it was Michael Milan.

“He was aggressive and menacing toward the family,” observed Roseville Police Spokeswoman Dee Dee Gunther.

The mother managed to grab her little girl and bolt from the car. Milan drove out of the area before Roseville officers pulled up. Detectives later identified Milan as their suspect, ultimately tracking him down in North Sacramento. He was charged with kidnapping and carjacking, and booked into the Placer County Jail on $2 million bail.

Roseville police officers barely got a break from thinking about Prop. 47. During the same week that Milan was receiving no jail time for his drug charges in a Sacramento courtroom, Kevin Stovall was appearing in a Roseville courtroom to learn that his 3-year jail term for burglary was ending after only 16 months due to Prop. 47. Before his trouble in 2013, Stovall had a 2011 conviction for theft. When released for his last burglary case, Stovall exited the South Placer County Jail with his possessions slung over his shoulder in a see-through plastic bag and agreed to do a quick interview with KCRA. It was during this exchange he was asked if he would stop getting arrested, to which he responded that he couldn’t make any promises. But before those words came out of his mouth, Stovall was asked by a TV reporter — as if he’d just won the Super Bowl — what the first thing he wanted to do was?

“Kiss my wife,” he responded.

At 1:25 a.m. on Feb. 19, Roseville police officers were called to the area of Canevari Drive and Woodcreek Oaks Boulevard. According to authorities, an injured woman was “pounding on doors asking for help.” Arriving Roseville officers soon found the woman and learned she’d been driving through the city with Stovall when he allegedly attacked her in a meth-fueled rage. At that point, Stovall was nowhere to be found. The woman was taken to a nearby hospital to be treated for her injuries.

Later that morning, Roseville 911 dispatchers were alerted to a suspicious man walking down Lomitas Avenue. Callers said he was wandering around in a strange manner and talking to himself. Pulling up, Roseville officers realized it was Stovall. A melee ensued when they tried to cuff him.

“He challenged and fought with the officers,” Gunther said. “But he was taken into custody.”

Stovall was booked into Placer County Jail on charges of felony domestic violence, a felony count of fighting with police officers and a charge of committing a felony after serving a prior prison term.

Under California’s law AB 109, better known as Realignment, the count that Stovall is facing for fighting with police officers is now deemed a “nonviolent and non-serious” offense: He cannot legally face prison time for that charge unless prosecutors can prove a violent conviction somewhere in his past.

Prop. 47 was jointly and publicly opposed by all of Placer County’s law enforcement leaders. The bill did see strong local support from Placer People of Faith Together, based in Auburn.

“When you charge someone for a felony it ruins someone’s life and then they have to start over again,” the group’s vice president Joe Offer told the Tribune in November.

But victims advocates have an entirely different concern — the possibility that the law will create more victims.

Lynne Brown of the statewide group Advocates for Public Safety campaigned for repealing California’s Realignment law; however, when state legislators showed little broad support, she changed her focus to campaigning against Prop. 47 in the months before the Nov. 4 election. Brown says she is not surprised at all to hear about Prop. 47-related cases like those of Stovall and Milan.

“I definitely have the same concerns I had,” Brown told the Press Tribune. “The concerns that we brought forward before the election are coming to fruition all over the state now. It’s been news article after news article (about Prop.47-related crimes) across California. It’s a recipe we predicted would happen — and it’s a recipe for disaster.”

Brown also contends that law enforcement officers around the Golden State are raising concerns about loopholes in Prop. 47 that allow drug addicts to avoid treatment and rehabilitation efforts.

“That is the exact opposite of what Prop. 47 billed itself as,” Brown added.

Scott Thomas Anderson can be reached at scotta@goldcountrymedia.com. Follow him on Twitter at ScottA_RsvPT