Stacy Funk

The National MS Society is united in our collective power to do something about MS now and end this disease forever. Our vision is a world free of multiple sclerosis. We act with urgency to find solutions and change the world for people with MS.

Each person with MS can live their best life with more connections to information, resources, and others with shared experiences.

Accelerated research breakthroughs change lives and end MS forever. Everyone who wants to do something about multiple sclerosis can fuel progress. The voices of people affected by MS are heard and drive change wherever it is needed.

Each person with MS can live their best life with more connections to information, resources, and others with shared experiences. How we achieve impact: We offer more programs and services than any other MS organization in the world.

Every person affected by MS, including their families and loved ones, can connect 24/7 to the most comprehensive and reliable information and resources available, whether online, in-person or via telephone.

Each year, 200,000 people connect to the Society’s Information Resource Center; 500,000 receive Momentum magazine; 1.9 million receive monthly eNews; 600,000 connect to those with shared experiences and experts through MSconnection.org.

More MS specialists, including MS nurses, provide holistic, high quality care for each person living with MS.

We are increasing investments in wellness research, including diet, exercise and complementary and alternative therapies.

Accelerated research breakthroughs change lives and end MS forever. How we achieve impact: We are recognized as the catalyst for all major advancements in MS— we discovered and drove nerve and myelin repair in MS research.

We fund more MS research than any other organization in the world.

We continue to pave the way for MS treatments, none of which existed 20 years ago, and have provided early career support and funding to nearly every thought leader in MS.

We have invested more than $870 million since our founding and have recruited more than 800 new MS researchers to the field.

We are collaborative leaders in the International Progressive MS Alliance.

Everyone who wants to do something about multiple sclerosis can fuel progress. How we achieve impact: We raise more than $165 million through Bike MS, the 5th largest event in the nation, and Walk MS, the 12th largest event in the nation.

More than 318,000 individuals donate more than $33 million each year.

The Society is mentioned in 86 percent of all articles related to MS.

We engage more than half a million volunteers through our fundraising events.

More than 650,000 Facebook and Twitter followers drive action, awareness and engagement.

The voices of people affected by MS are heard and drive change wherever it is needed. How we achieve impact: More than 75,000 activists across the country have united to secure an additional $25 million in government research funding over the last six years.

MS activists across the country share their personal stories to create positive change for everyone affected by MS.

We increase understanding of the importance of research funding for progressive MS on Capitol Hill through briefings for congressional offices.

MS activists work to ensure people with MS have access to treatments, information and support to make the best decisions for themselves and their families.

We engage in the implementation of the Affordable Care Act through MS-specific education and outreach materials and trainings

We are here when you need us: Call our MS Navigator Center at 1-800- FIGHT-MS, stop by the local office: 1201 Story Ave, 200 or find us on the web at www.nationalmssociety.org/kyw.

How can you help? Participate in one of our many events. Join us at our Woman on the Move luncheon honoring local broadcaster, Dawn Gee. The MS Women on the Move Luncheon, slated for March 26, 12 p.m., is a unique fundraising experience creating an inspiring, motivational and empowering few hours together. The event is a social gathering for like-minded individuals to raise awareness for multiple sclerosis.

The heart of the Luncheon will be honoring our Women of Courage, who demonstrate dignity, grace, strength,compassion, and creativity in everyday life. Learn more about the work we do.

Contact me to reserve your spot: stacy.funk@nmss.org or by call 502.451.0014.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1AhnGmz