Houston Methodist hosts career fairs

Photo: Creatas RF Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Houston Methodist career fairs are scheduled for Jan. 6, 8 and 9. Houston Methodist career fairs are scheduled for Jan. 6, 8 and 9. Photo: Creatas RF Houston Methodist hosts career fairs 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Houston Methodist, a world leader in advanced medical care and a leading employer of skilled health care professionals, is hosting a series of career fairs, Jan. 6, 8 and 9, aimed at finding qualified, passionate personnel.

Through a network of community hospitals, Houston Methodist provides high quality, cost-effective care that delivers the best value to the people it serves in a spiritual environment of caring in association with internationally recognized teaching and research.

With this medical presence, including the Texas Medical Center location, Houston Methodist is always looking for qualified candidates to fill a variety of positions. The health care system's latest job fair will be in search of qualified clinical positions and, in particular, nurses and allied health professionals.

"We are offering opportunities in all areas - allied health, laboratory, management, nursing, support services, research, physicians, physician assistants and nurse practitioners," said Willie French, the director of talent acquisition at Houston Methodist. "We are looking for candidates with a commitment to excellence in patient care and those who embrace our culture and I CARE Values."

All Methodist Hospital employees are required to adhere to the hospital system's I CARE Values, which include integrity, "We are honest and ethical in all we say and do"; compassion, "We embrace the whole person and respond to emotional, ethical and spiritual concerns as well as physical needs"; accountability, "We hold ourselves accountable for our actions"; respect, "We treat every individual as a person of worth, dignity and value"; and excellence, "We strive to be the best at what we do and a model for others to emulate."

The hospital system's need for personnel is being driven by the stable growth in the health care industry; the recent and unprecedented growth of Houston Methodist, which is continuously adding new services, floors, units and even facilities; and the effects of the Affordable Care Act.

Event information is the following:

Jan. 6: Houston Methodist St. Catherine Hospital in Katy, 8 a.m. – 2 p.m.; Houston Methodist West Hospital in Katy, 8 a.m. – 2 p.m.; and Houston Methodist Sugar Land Hospital in Sugar Land, 11 a.m. – 7 p.m.

Jan. 8: Houston Methodist Willowbrook Hospital in Northwest Houston, 7:30 a.m. – 6 p.m.

Jan. 9: Houston Methodist Hospital at Houston Methodist Hospital Outpatient Center in Houston, 10 a.m. – 2 p.m.; Houston Methodist Global Healthcare Services at the Houston Methodist Hospital Outpatient Center in Houston, 10 a.m. – 2 p.m.; Houston Methodist Research Institute at the Houston Methodist Hospital Outpatient Center in Houston, 10 a.m. – 2 p.m.; Houston Methodist Primary Care Group at the Houston Methodist Hospital Outpatient Center in Houston, 10 a.m. – 2 p.m.; and Houston Methodist Specialty Physician Group at the Houston Methodist Hospital Outpatient Center in Houston, 10 a.m. – 2 p.m.