There are more than just the 19 years of his major-league career that verify pitcher Jamey Wright’s legacy.

Since July 3, 1996, when he made his major-league debut at San Francisco as a Rockies starter, Wright has crisscrossed the big-league road map. He has worn the uniform of nine other teams and had two stops each with the Rockies, Kansas City Royals and Los Angeles Dodgers.

Wright was back in Coors Field this past weekend as a member of the Dodgers’ bullpen, where he has proved to be an effective setup man (3-2, 3.24 ERA in 41 ⅔ innings).

“I’m a little older and a little wiser,” Wright said when asked about first joining the big leagues with the Rockies. “I wish I knew then what I know now.”

When Wright came to the big leagues, Coors Field had opened the year before, and Todd Helton made his debut in the majors a year later. The Rockies’ scouting department, directed by Pat Daugherty, selected Wright in the first round of the 1993 draft. The 6-foot-6 right-hander climbed through the farm system, arriving at age 21.

Did the needs of an expansion team cause him to be rushed to the big leagues?

“I don’t think so,” Wright said. “I had pitched pretty well in Double-A (New Haven) and in Colorado Springs. I was ready. The same thing would have happened if I had been with any other team.”

He tuned up with a 5-1 record and 0.81 ERA in seven starts at New Haven and a 4-2 mark and 2.72 ERA in nine starts in Triple-A.

Wright made 91 starts in his first stint with the Rockies before being traded to Milwaukee after the 1999 season. The Rockies brought him back in 2004-05, and he made 41 more starts. At one point in Rockies history, Wright ranked second only to Pedro Astacio in starts and innings pitched. Wright still holds the franchise record for career pickoffs with 33.

But overall, Wright is less than pleased with his Rockies career. He was 30-52 overall, and no team he played on with the Rockies won more than 83 games.

“I wish I could have done better,” Wright said. “This is where it all started. This is where I learned to pitch. The first time I was here is kind of a blur. I was so young. It’s a tough place to pitch, and it will turn you from a boy to a man really quick. You learn quickly that major-league hitters are a lot bigger and stronger. But I don’t make excuses for my time here. There have been pitchers here who were paid a lot more than I was paid, and they didn’t do any better.”

Wright still looks at Colorado as his major-league home.

“I love pitching here,” he said. “It’s my favorite ballpark. The fans are great. Although it has all changed, I still know who plays on their team and I pull for them. It’s my baseball home.”

Wright’s career changed in 2008 when the Texas Rangers converted him into a relief pitcher. He had been struggling as a starter. He has since thrived as a reliever, with several of the best ERAs of his career, including a career-best 3.09 in 2013.

How much longer will Wright pitch?

“As long as I have a uniform and my wife lets me,” he said.

Irv Moss: 303-954-1296, imoss@denverpost.com or twitter.com/irvmoss

Wright bio

Born: Dec. 24, 1974, in Oklahoma City

High school: Westmore in Moore, Okla.

College: None

Family: Wife Marnie, daughter Presley, sons Jett and Cash

Hobbies: Family duty in offseason

Looking ahead: Staying in uniform

Residence: Dallas