The notices arrived in employee mailboxes: Provide us with your weight, cholesterol levels and other sensitive medical details, or pay up to $2,250 in health insurance penalties — and up to $4,000 if you’re married.

The packets were delivered to employees of Honeywell, a manufacturing conglomerate based in New Jersey, as part of its annual health plan enrollment.

It started levying the surcharges two years ago, although it has eased the penalties for its wellness program for the coming year — they are now capped at $1,500.

Federal regulations require that such wellness programs be voluntary. But for some workers, it may not feel that way.

On the surface, the programs are seemingly a win-win: Encouraging workers to get up and move or submit to annual blood tests to prevent problems appears to help both workers and their employers.

But the programs’ biggest critics say they are yet another way to push more costs onto employees and, worse, potentially a backdoor way to discriminate against less healthy workers by making them pay more if, for instance, they fail to meet a goal of lower cholesterol. For lower-income employees, who may feel more pressure to participate, there is the potential for another type of discrimination.

“Even if the program fails to improve employee health or lower costs overall, they can come out ahead by shifting more of the responsibility to employees in the form of larger contributions,” said Matt Lamkin, a professor at the University of Tulsa College of Law who specializes in bioethics and medical consumerism.

Privacy is another concern. Many workers may fear that their medical information — such as their blood pressure or data collected by a wearable device — could end up in the wrong hands or become exposed in a data breach. Consider the questions in a typical health assessment: Do you feel so stressed that nothing can cheer you up? Have people annoyed you by criticizing your drinking? And don’t forget to include your waist circumference.

While most large employers — those with 500 workers or more — ask employees to complete some sort of health assessment to identify potential risk factors, nearly 60 percent also ask them to give blood for biometric screening, according to a 2015 report by Mercer, a consulting firm.

And the number of employers offering financial incentives to complete any of these wellness-related tasks has inched higher: About 56 percent of large employers dangled an incentive in front of their workers last year, the most common being a premium reduction.

The programs may have become more prevalent, at least in part, because of the Affordable Care Act. That law expanded rules for a certain type of wellness program in which incentives are contingent on a specific health outcome (like reducing blood pressure) or an activity (like walking).

Most significantly, the law said that employers could provide more rewards — or levy more surcharges, depending on how you look at it — than they could previously: Maximum rewards or penalties now cannot exceed 30 percent of the total cost of the worker’s insurance, up from 20 percent, including both the employee’s and the employer’s shares. (If a tobacco cessation program is included, the figure rises to 50 percent.)

So for a family with coverage that is valued at $17,545 — the annual average total cost in 2015, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation — it would be perfectly fine for the employer to charge up to about $5,264 more, or 30 percent, for not fulfilling a goal like filling out a health risk assessment form or completing a biometric screening. That is a significant chunk of most families’ budgets.

The financial incentives — and the whole notion of whether a program is truly voluntary — have received a lot of attention over the past year, particularly after the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission tried to stop Honeywell in October 2014 from penalizing employees who did not take medical tests. The commission contended that the penalties made the testing involuntary and so violated the Americans With Disabilities Act. A federal district judge denied the commission’s motion for a temporary restraining order last November and let Honeywell’s policy stand.

So where does all of this leave employees? For individuals concerned about privacy, this is yet another case of caveat emptor; workers need to fully understand what they are signing up for. Medical information collected through a wellness program that is part of a group health plan should have better protections, including safeguards provided by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, known as HIPAA.

But here’s the catch: Many wellness programs require participants to sign up on their website, where workers must agree to the wellness vendor’s policies.

“You have to consent to the privacy policy and terms of service, which basically says we are going to use your data in all of these ways and tell all of these people,” said Anna Slomovic, lead research scientist at the Cyber Security Policy and Research Institute at George Washington University. “It’s basically take it or leave it.”

Then there is the debate about whether wellness programs are actually helping employees. It’s hard to argue with the value of on-site gyms, help with smoking cessation and an overarching goal to adopt a healthier lifestyle. But while some wellness programs said they followed national guidelines set out by groups such as the American Medical Association, critics argue that some take screenings too far.

“Wellness vendors screen everyone every year to maximize profits, even if harms exceed benefits,” said Al Lewis, a health consultant and a frequent critic of the $7.2 billion corporate wellness services industry.

He said they routinely ignored screening guidelines set by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a well-known authority on the issue.

For now, only a minority of companies are levying penalties on people who don’t meet specific health goals. And exceptions must be made for people with medical issues who cannot participate or meet specific targets. Still, critics have concerns about a policy that requires already-stressed workers to pay extra if they miss the mark.

“If you can’t make yourself well, you have to pay more,” said Karen Pollitz, a senior fellow at the Kaiser Family Foundation, a nonprofit group focusing on health policy issues. “Some people ask, ‘How is that different from medical underwriting?’”

Tara Siegel Bernard,

The New York Times