In recent interviews and political ads, Rep. Brad Schneider has accused his Republican opponent, former Rep. Bob Dold, of voting 28 times to "repeal, defund or dismantle" the Affordable Care Act when he was in Congress.

Sitting before the Tribune Editorial Board recently, Dold didn't deny voting four times to repeal the controversial health care law, but he said the majority of the 28 votes referenced by Schneider were attempts to "fix problems within the Affordable Care Act" and that some of those amendments were signed into law.

The Affordable Care Act presents one clear partisan rift between Schneider, a Deerfield Democrat, and Dold, a Republican from Kenilworth, two candidates locked in a tight race to represent the north suburban 10th Congressional District. With outside money pouring in, the two have sought to distance themselves from each other, despite fundamentally agreeing on some issues.

Labeled a tossup by many observers, the race is coming into the home stretch. The rivals have been here before, though in reversed roles: Schneider edged out the first-termer Dold two years ago, winning by slightly more than 1 percentage point.

Dold has criticized Schneider for being ineffective in Congress and also has campaigned as an independent in the mold of U.S. Sen. Mark Kirk, another North Shore Republican who has been known to break from party lines.

"Bob Dold is independent, and that's what this district needs. … He's like me," Kirk said in a Dold campaign ad unveiled this week.

Schneider, meanwhile, has portrayed Dold as a "reliable Republican vote." He has pointed to his own endorsements from Planned Parenthood and the Sierra Club as testament to his track record on the environment and women's health issues.

And while Schneider has acknowledged the troubled rollout of Obamacare as well as some lingering problems, he has touted both the early impact and the long-term potential of the health care law.

"When Dold had his chance, every time the Republicans offered a repeal vote, he voted for it," Schneider said in a recent interview.

"I know the law's not perfect. I know the law needs improvement," Schneider continued. "But I'm working to move it forward. It's a step in the right direction."

Dold's four votes to repeal the Affordable Care Act included joining all House Republicans in support of a 2011 bill titled the Repealing the Job-Killing Health Care Law Act. Two of Dold's four repeal votes were in support of budget measures in 2011 and 2012 by Rep. Paul Ryan, R-Wis., that would have repealed the health care law.

But Dold said Schneider's assessment of his voting record on the health care law, among other issues, is misleading and amounts to campaign scare tactics.

As an example, Dold cited an amendment he voted for in 2012 to repeal the medical device tax, a 2.3 percent levy on the sale of some medical devices.

Both Schneider and Dold say the tax hampers innovation and both favor its repeal.

"When that vote comes up, when I do it, it's a vote to 'defund and dismantle the Affordable Care Act,'" Dold said. "When he does it, he says, 'Oh, we're trying to fix it.'"

On some of the other issues, the two may not look so different to voters: Both candidates say they support abortion rights and back legislation requiring employers who provide group insurance to cover contraception. Both say they support same-sex marriage rights, immigration reform and expanding background checks for gun purchases.

Outside groups have been working to make a difference in the race.

The U.S. Chamber of Commerce has spent nearly $1 million in support of Dold, according to the nonpartisan Center for Responsive Politics. The National Republican Congressional Committee has spent about $558,000.

On Schneider's side, the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee has spent about $836,000, and the House Majority PAC has spent about $113,000.

According to the most recent campaign finance reports available, from Jan. 1, 2013, to Sept. 30, 2014, Schneider's campaign committee raised about $3.95 million, ending with about $980,000 in cash on hand, according to the Federal Election Commission.

In the same time period, Dold's campaign committee raised about $3 million, ending with about $1.48 million in cash on hand, according to campaign finance reports.

gtrotter@tribune.com

Twitter @NorthShoreTrib