Sioux Falls, SD

For years the home of the Sioux Falls Food Pantry was downtown. Now the location is changing to a larger warehouse next to the Feeding South Dakota Food Bank.

It's going to be a long weekend for the Feeding South Dakota staff.

"Pretty much literally taking the pantry from one location today and opening our new location Monday morning," Food Pantry Manager John Geyer said.

For the last time, people went to this building on Phillips Avenue to get food from the Food Pantry. Now there are just empty shelves.

The focus is now on getting the new food pantry ready. The warehouse might not look like much now, but it's part of a larger plan.

"This is just phase one of the process. Overall we want it to look like it's a grocery store," Operations Manager Chad Olson said.

Since buying the building Feeding South Dakota has 12,000 more square feet to use, and it won't just use it for the food pantry.

"What's going to be wonderful about this building is all of our are going to be here. Our back program is going to be here, our CSFP program, and our pantry. So those are the programs that are bringing people into our facility," Olson said.

Food Pantry Manager John Geyer says having everything on one floor will make the operation run more smoothly, but he will remember the old location of the food pantry as a landmark.

"Every day we see somebody getting pictures in front of the green door. I mean if you got your senior picture, wedding picture, family picture, there's probably no one in Sioux Falls or the area that doesn't know the green door or have the picture taking in front of the door," Geyer said.

While it's unique, it's a building that has outlived its usefulness.

"It's a pretty neat old building in fact that it's over 100-years-old. Some of the not so neat stuff its 100-years-old with 100-year-old problems," Executive Director Matt Gassen said.

Now the food pantry has a new and improved home, and the future looks bright.

"It's always tough to leave a place like that but when we come out here and we see the improvement to that experience that we're providing for those individuals that we're helping, it makes it all worth it," Gassen said.

The new food pantry is located at 3501 North First Avenue. It will open on Monday for clients just like the downtown location at 10 a.m.

News

Hunger {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.