PINE BLUFF — Fresh off her victory in South Carolina on Saturday, former Arkansas and U.S. first lady and former secretary of state Hillary Clinton brought her campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination to Pine Bluff on Sunday night.

Her visit came two days before the Tuesday preferential party primaries, and Clinton tried to make her case as to why she should be the party’s nominee for the position.

Speaking to a standing-room-only crowd at the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Clinton said she “wanted to build America by knocking down the barriers and building ladders of opportunity.”

“It starts Tuesday, but if I get the nomination, then it’s on to the general election where there will be a great contrast between myself and the Republican Party nominee,” Clinton said.

Speaking in front of a backdrop that included a large number of students and political figures such as former Attorney General Dustin McDaniel, Clinton spoke on a number of issues, including climate change, the economy, the Affordable Care Act and took a shot at Republican Party front-runner Donald Trump when she offered her ideas on national security.

On climate change, Clinton said the Republican candidates all say they don’t know enough about the subject because they’re not scientists.

“There’s an easy answer to that,” she said. “They can talk to a scientist like the scientists right here at UAPB. The Republicans are told what to say by the Koch brothers.”

“Some nation is going to be the 21st Century superpower,” Clinton said. “Some say Germany, some say Russia and I say the United States. In my first term, I want to see a half-billion more solar panels built, and in my second term, enough energy being produced to power every home in this country.”

On the economy, Clinton said if she is elected, she “would invest in communities that are left out and left behind.”

She mentioned a program her husband, former President Bill Clinton created, New Market Tax Credits, and said while she was in South Carolina, she was told about a factory there that used the tax credits to create a number of new jobs.

“I want to invest more in small businesses,” Clinton said. “That’s important to young people, minorities and women who want to own their own small business.”

On the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, Clinton said 19 million more people now have health care than they did before the legislation was adopted, and 90 percent of all American’s now have health care.

“Before Obamacare there was Hillarycare,” Clinton said.”In the 90’s, when Bill was president, we wanted to get a program where every American would be insured but we couldn’t get it approved.”

“The Republicans vote to repeal the Affordable Care Act,” Clinton said. “They’re voting to go back to where we were before. When you hear them say they’re going to repeal the Affordable Care Act, ask they what they’re going to replace it with.”

She also said she was proud of Arkansas, and how former Gov. Mike Beebe and current Gov. Asa Hutchinson worked to accept the federal dollars and expand Medicaid.

“People have got health insurance and rural hospitals are not closing, unlike other states that didn’t accept the money,” Clinton said. “The people that complain the most about the Affordable Care Act are the ones with health insurance.”

Without mentioning his name, Clinton took a shot at Trump when she talked about foreign policy, saying his comments about Muslims and Islam will make the job of the next president more difficult as they look for a way to deal with ISIS.

“You have to build relationships, not insult people,” she said.