Photo

Florida’s governor, Rick Scott, got a well-deserved brushoff from federal health officials in May after he accused the government of trying to coerce his state into expanding its Medicaid program, even though the Supreme Court has ruled that such expansion is purely voluntary.

In a suit filed in Federal District Court on April 28, Florida charged that the Obama administration had threatened to cut off federal funding for a separate program that reimburses hospitals for charity care unless the state expanded its Medicaid program. Mr. Scott said this was an effort to “force our state further into Obamacare.”

This was a preposterous allegation. The two programs are not linked in any way, and the administration had already made clear that it had problems with the charity care program, which was due to expire soon, and had planned to scale it back.

Mr. Scott’s disingenuous argument illustrates the lengths that some Republican leaders will go to avoid being blamed for not protecting their poor and uninsured citizens by expanding Medicaid, the federal-state program. The Republican governors of Texas and Kansas, also apparently needing protective cover, have filed amicus briefs supporting the lawsuit.

On May 21, the Obama administration told Florida in a letter that it would receive less than half of what it wanted for the charity pool for the 2015 fiscal year and even less the following year. At the same time, it suggested that Florida could do itself and its poor residents a favor by expanding Medicaid. It pointed out that by voluntarily expanding its Medicaid program, Florida would increase hospital revenues beyond the payments the hospitals would be getting from the charity pool.

Medicaid expansion would cover an estimated 800,000 uninsured Florida residents, and this is by far the best way for any state to go. The federal government pays 100 percent of the costs of covering newly eligible people through 2016, dropping down to 90 percent in 2020 and future years.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Charity pools simply reimburse hospitals and other providers after the fact for financial losses they have suffered for treating underinsured people. Medicaid enables patients to get care at little cost to themselves, reduces the number of uninsured people and strengthens the finances of hospitals with big charity loads. The 21 states that have not yet expanded Medicaid ought to rethink their positions.