As the midnight Sunday deadline looms for hundreds of thousands of uninsured Californians to sign up for a health care plan -- or face steep fines -- it's gut check time for them, but also for Covered California.

The state's health care insurance exchange established under the Affordable Care Act, better known as Obamacare, kicked off its third annual open enrollment on Nov. 1. Since then, exchange officials say, 1.18 million people who enrolled last year had selected a plan, while another 329,000 newcomers had done the same.

But neither number, officials acknowledge, represents how many have actually paid for their plan to complete their enrollment -- the figure that really counts.

Peter Lee, the exchange's ebullient executive director, knows that critics will be watching carefully to see where those "real" numbers land in the coming months.

After a remarkable debut of signing up 1.1 million in Obamacare's first enrollment year, just 200,000 more people signed up last year -- 400,000 short of Covered California's goal.

The exchange this year is being cautious about setting ambitious goals. But it's hoping it can add from 295,000 to 450,000 people this year.

By comparison, 4.7 million Californians since January 2014 have signed up for Medi-Cal, the government funded health care plan for the poor and disabled. Most of them were able to enroll as part of Medicaid's expansion under Obamacare. Unlike the exchange plans, Medi-Cal enrollment is year-round.

Advertisement

Despite the uncertainty of what the true enrollment numbers in the private plans may be, Lee remains optimistic.

"I'm feeling really great about this," he said Thursday, noting that the 329,000 new applicants represent a good chunk of the 750,000 Californians who are eligible for subsidies but who remained uninsured as of October.

"It gives me comfort that we will continue to have a good, healthy risk mix that will help keep premiums low for everybody," he said.

Some Bay Area residents, however, might disagree with his characterization.

While the exchange's premiums for 2016 increased on average 4 percent statewide, premium hikes in the Bay Area jumped to more than 6 percent in Alameda and San Mateo counties, 7 percent in Santa Clara County and 12.8 percent in Santa Cruz County.

Lee attributes that increase to the consolidation of hospitals and medical groups in Northern California compared to Southern California (where the average hike was less than 2 percent), the cost of living, and the competition to hire doctors and nurses. But he said Bay Area residents might be able to reduce their premiums by shopping around.

In Alameda County, for example, consumers who switch to the exchange's lowest-cost plans in 2016 will see only a 0.6 percent decrease in premiums on average.

Still, for many Californians, health insurance remains unaffordable.

Larry Levitt, a senior vice president of the Menlo Park-based Kaiser Family Foundation, tweeted this out after the Congressional Budget Office this week dropped its estimates for Obamacare enrollment for 2016 from 21 million to 13 million: "The biggest barriers to higher ACA enrollment among the uninsured are likely affordability and insufficient resources for outreach."Covered California, however, apparently doesn't seem to lack those resources.

The exchange in November boasted a new, multilingual $29 million advertising campaign aimed at the uninsured eligible for subsidized plans and the 1.4 million eligible for Medi-Cal.

Lee is also banging the drum about the financial hit for not enrolling. This year, it's $695, or 2.5 percent of a person's income, whichever is higher.

He said that while that may seem cheaper to some than the cost of an annual health insurance plan, "they are doing bad math."

"That says insurance does not have any value," he said, noting that no one can predict when an accident or illness may send them to the hospital.

For more information about Covered California, or a list of local enrollment events happening through Sunday, go to www.coveredca.com.

Contact Tracy Seipel at 408-920-5343. Follow her at Twitter.com/taseipel.