They come for the food, music and vendors. They stay for the culture and atmosphere.

“It’s a great cultural festival,” visitor Safford Black said as Denver’s 28th annual Cinco de Mayo festival kicked into gear Saturday morning. “It’s not something we get to do every weekend. We come every year.”

The action began at 10 a.m., when the annual parade carved a route through downtown.

Around the same time, crowds began making their way through Civic Center park, where hundreds of vendors offer everything from authentic Mexican food and funnel cakes to sombreros and children’s toys.

“I do a lot of these events, and I tend to do really well,” said Latasha Bell, owner of handmade soap company Ashae. “(I like) the culture, the food, the energy. Not only is this good business for me, but I also get to have a good time.”

In addition to the vendors, the two-day festival features a full lineup of Latin dancers and musicians, plus a variety of competitions and performances throughout the weekend.

On Saturday morning, an instructor led the crowd through a Zumba dance sequence. At 3 p.m., contestants squared off to see who could consume 10 tacos the fastest.

Mark “Toothless Shark” Sutherburg won the first round after finishing in 3 minutes, 10 seconds — his 20th career eating contest victory.

Midafternoon, festivalgoers grew wary when dark clouds rolled in and a few raindrops fell. The unfavorable weather passed quickly, but not before several gusts of wind did some damage.

About 4 p.m., a large metal structure toppled when the wind caught flags attached to it. Two men received “serious head injuries,” according to Police Cmdr. Tony Lopez, and were transported to a hospital.

“I was right there, and all of a sudden, it started coming down,” Melinda Thomas said. “I let out this bloodcurdling scream. … I was in shock. It all happened so fast.”

After the incident, the structure was dismantled. Production manager Renee Ortiz said there are no similar structures remaining in the park.

The festival continues Sunday from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m. Highlights will include the Mariachi Mass at 10 a.m. and the highly anticipated Chihuahua races at 3 p.m.

Event organizers said the festival is “muy caliente” this year and urged people to come “experience Mexico in the heart of downtown Denver.”

Anna Gauldin: 303-954-1666, agauldin@denverpost.com