On the day before a game, Peyton Manning as an NFL starting quarterback meets with the national TV announcers in what is called the “production meeting.”

This week, the “Monday Night Football” game matching the Broncos against the Cincinnati Bengals will allow Manning to catch up with Jon Gruden.

When Manning was released by the Indianapolis Colts to free agency in March 2012, he confided in Gruden during the recruiting process.

“I did talk to Jon during the process,” Manning said. “I talked to a couple people who were familiar with the whole league. I talked to (wife) Ashley, my dad (Archie), (agent Tom) Condon.”

It had gotten around that Gruden, a former NFL coach who just re-upped with ESPN as the color analyst for “Monday Night Football,” helped steer Manning to Denver because he believed the veteran quarterback would be a good match with a seasoned coach such as John Fox.

“He and Fox are buddies, but …” Manning said. “Jon did like Denver. But he liked Seattle too. I wouldn’t say he was the reason I came to Denver.”

While Manning appreciated the counsel he received during the process, he downplayed Gruden’s impact, saying it wasn’t any one thing but many reasons why he picked the Broncos.

Fox and front office boss John Elway were reasons. The talented young duo of wide receivers Demaryius Thomas and Eric Decker, plus Pro Bowl offensive tackle Ryan Clady, carried influence too.

As a quarterback known for his meticulous preparation, Manning’s initial feel for offensive coordinator Mike McCoy and quarterbacks coach Adam Gase was a huge factor.

“I felt comfortable with them,” Manning said. “I had so much on my plate physically at the time and they were open to working around (his rehab schedule).”

Defensive coordinator Jack Del Rio, who as a former Jacksonville Jaguars coach had matched up twice a year against Manning’s Colts, was a reason.

Manning’s friendship with Todd Helton and Brandon Stokley didn’t hurt. It was a factor that the Broncos played in Manning’s preferred AFC. That preference, by the way, didn’t have as much to do with his younger brother Eli playing for the NFC’s New York Giants as people might think.

“I liked the AFC, not because I didn’t like the NFC,” Manning said. “I just knew the AFC better, knew the teams more.”

Denver as a place for Manning and Ashley to raise their twin children was a big reason.

Even if Gruden didn’t steer Manning to Denver, he didn’t advise him to go elsewhere either.

Look at what happened to three other finalists in the Manning Derby. The Tennessee Titans, just two years after failing to court Manning, fired coach Mike Munchak and now have Ken Whisenhunt.

Whisenhunt was available because he had been fired as coach of the Arizona Cardinals, who visited with Manning. The San Francisco 49ers are about to fire coach Jim Harbaugh, according to months of various reports.

The Houston Texans could have been a finalist, but they decided not to get involved in the Manning recruitment and last year coach Gary Kubiak was fired.

Meanwhile, Manning, Fox and Gruden happily work on.

Mike Klis: mklis@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikeklis