What do you agree or disagree with most about what President Obama has accomplished in his time in office?

Several events over the last couple of weeks are being seen as moments that will define President Barack Obama's legacy.

Supreme Court rulings upholding Obama's Affordable Care Act and legalizing gay marriage nationwide have been big victories for the Obama administration. The continued efforts to normalize relations with Cuba and ink a Pacific trade agreement are among many significant international accomplishments for the president.

"I do think it's been a significant morning, it's been a significant couple of days, and it's certainly been a significant month for not only the President and the administration, but for the country," deputy White House press secretary Eric Schultz told reporters June 26. "And if you take a moment to step back, I think the developments we've all experienced over the past few days speak to not only the modern American presidency, but also speak to the reason this president ran for office."

These actions are helping Obama shed the label of a do-nothing president that his fiercest critics have placed on him. But more events have occurred than just those in the last couple of weeks that will shape the president's legacy. Obama has done things that will earn him a place in everyone's memory – for good or for bad – throughout his 6½ years in office, even though it is what has happened lately that is foremost in people's minds.

The June 25 Supreme Court ruling upholding subsidies in the Affordable Care Act came as a big relief for a White House that has spent years and massive reserves of political capital fighting repeated Republican attempts to kill Obamacare, CNN News reported. There was a beaming smile on the face of Vice President Joe Biden, still grieving after the death of his son Beau from brain cancer, as he appeared with Obama in the White House Rose Garden that day.

"It's hard to rank happy days," White House communications director Jen Psaki told CNN June 25. "I would say that this is certainly one where we're just elated for what this means for the American people."

The Court decision means the fight over Obamacare now becomes a political one. With Obama's veto pen at the ready, any long-shot Republican effort to overturn the law is certain to fail, CNN News reported.

Led by Chief Justice John Roberts, the high court preserved Obama's signature health care law hours before a Republican-controlled Congress paved the way for an Asia-Pacific trade pact at the center of the president's international agenda. The Supreme Court also handed Obama a surprise win by upholding a key tool used to fight housing discrimination, The Associated Press reported.

"This was a good day for America," Obama said, speaking from the Rose Garden shortly after the court rulings, The Associated Press reported.

For a president deep into his second term, the legal and legislative victories were a vindication of policy priorities that have sapped his political capital and exposed rifts with his own Democratic Party, The Associated Press reported. The back-to-back successes also energized a weary White House, with senior officials and longtime advisers making little effort to hide their glee.

"I don't think that a lot of people expected that a lame-duck president could still very actively lead on every major issue being debated today," Bill Burton, a former White House and campaign adviser to Obama, told The Associated Press.

Ian Bremmer, the president of Eurasia Group, a political risk consultancy, told Business Insider the Trans-Pacific Partnership is the "most important piece" of Obama's foreign-policy legacy.

"It's strengthening trade ties for 40 percent of the world's GDP; it's making good on US commitments to allies that are most interested in improving their relations with America; it's a net economic benefit for the US long term, and, by far most importantly, it's strategically important in countering China's efforts to build trade and financial architecture that completes with US-led global standards," Bremmer told Business Insider. "A failure on this front would have been a huge blow to the US in the most important part of the world for long-term American national interests."

Yet Obama's legacy abroad remains unsettled. Ongoing violence in Afghanistan has prompted Obama to slow the pace of a withdrawal of U.S. special forces and trainers. And nearly four years after Obama declared an end to the U.S. presence in Iraq, U.S. forces are back, hoping to help Baghdad reclaim territory from the Islamic State group, the McClatchy Washington Bureau reported.

A "reset" of ties with Russia that produced a new nuclear arms reduction agreement has been replaced by Cold War-era tensions, and the U.S. redeployed military hardware to Europe after Moscow seized Crimea from Ukraine. The Guantanamo Bay detention camp remains open despite Obama's effort to close it, and it's unlikely the administration can revive peace talks between the Palestinians and Israel, McClatchy reported.

"On some very important issues that he wanted to address, like a pivot to Asia, reaching out to our enemies, he (Obama) has already made significant progress," Ivo Daalder told McClatchy. Daalder heads the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, a policy institute, and was Obama's first ambassador to NATO. "On some issues, it's too early to tell, particularly on Iran (nuclear talks)."

And two top Florida members of the U.S. House of Representatives Tuesday slammed the announcement by Obama and Cuban President Raul Castro of the re-opening of embassies in Washington and Havana for the first time in 54 years, Newsmax reported.



"The re-designation of our diplomatic facility in Havana as an embassy means President Obama can check off another item on his personal 'legacy-building' bucket list‎," Rep. Carlos Curbelo told Newsmax. "It will not further our national interests and recklessly confers legitimacy ‎on an absolutely illegitimate military dictatorship."

Rep. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen released a statement saying opening a U.S. embassy in Cuba "will do nothing to help the Cuban people and is just another trivial attempt for President Obama to go legacy shopping," CBS News Miami reported.

But while Obama has said he knows there is more work to do before his term concludes in January 2017, he has not lost sight of the significance of recent events.

"I feel pretty excited about it," Obama said at a press conference Tuesday of his remaining time in office, The Hill reported. "I might see if we can make next week even better."

Told by a reporter that some have called last week his best ever, the president disagreed, The Hill reported.

"I will tell you, [the best week] was marrying Michelle. That was a really good week," he said. "Malia and Sasha being born, excellent weeks. There was a game where I scored 27 points."