As social media use in the United States continues to grow, physicians are realizing how valuable a tool it can be for marketing and patient interaction. But the use of social media within a healthcare context introduces additional risks that physicians and practices must learn to navigate.

READ: 20 family doctors to follow on Twitter

Social media can represent a useful tool by which physician practices may advertise their services, disseminate general health information, and interact with patients. However, there are also risks involved in using social media that practices must understand and avoid.

Some physicians have faced serious consequences from poor use of social media. For example, a physician was terminated from his position at a Chicago hospital after posting pictures of an intoxicated patient on his personal social media account. In other cases, practice employees have posted pictures taken at work which included patient protected health information in the background of the photo.

These types of behavior present risks to physician practices, including potential breach of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). While there is no way to completely prevent inappropriate uses of social media, practices should develop and enforce social media policies to protect themselves. This article offers practical advice on how to evaluate and respond to risky social media behavior, and how to craft policies to address such behavior.

HIPAA Risks

By understanding how information can be transmitted on social media sites, practices can tailor their social media policies to respond to the risks presented by social media HIPAA disclosures.

READ: The big problem with most social media policies for physicians

These risks are not insignificant. Posts on social media sites are usually not “encrypted” for HIPAA purposes, and therefore are considered “unsecured protected health information (PHI).” Improper disclosures on social media therefore implicate not only the HIPAA Privacy Rule, but also the Security Rule and Breach Notification Rule.

Next: Defamation and reputation management