PALM BEACH GARDENS, Fla., Feb. 16, 2016 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- As the cost of hip and knee replacement continues to vary across the United States and international borders, consumers – insurance carriers, employers and patients – are comparing the cost and quality of doctors and hospitals abroad to find the best options for care based on a new poll, the Medical Tourism Association® announced today.

Twice as many patients contemplating medical tourism opportunities cited an interest in orthopedic surgery -- including hip and knee replacements – compared to consumers who were seeking implant, cardiovascular, oncology and ophthalmology, according to the 2015 Medical Tourism Survey.

"Cost and quality concerns including doctor shortages, hidden fees and poor coordinated care continue to move patients to consider medical care beyond their traditional boundaries," said Renée-Marie Stephano, President of the Medical Tourism Association®. "As these issues become priorities, healthcare systems – in the Middle East, Asia, Latin America and in the United States and Europe – are stepping up to satisfy the needs of patients who have 'can-do' attitudes about their health and well-being."

The 2015 Medical Tourism Survey also found, that despite the best intentions of the Affordable Care Act to increase the ranks of insured Americans, 65 percent of the respondents who traveled for medical treatment did not have health coverage.

Among the findings of the 2015 Medical Tourism Survey:

69 percent of respondents expressed an interest in travelling overseas of healthcare purposes;

Cosmetic, dental and orthopedic were procedures most in demand;

Mexico , the United States , and Costa Rica were leading destinations of choice;

, , and were leading destinations of choice; And savings from $4,900-$8,600 were enough of an influence to spur a decision to travel for healthcare.

Past experience, future interest and prime motivators for medical travel were evaluated from 1,650 sampling units of a total population of 2,300 randomly selected website registrants based on a self-administered questionnaire.

For a complete 2015 Medical Tourism Survey, visit https://medicaltourismassociation.com/en/prod33_2015-Medical-Tourism-Survey.html

About the Medical Tourism Association(r)

As the first membership-based international nonprofit trade organization and think-tank for the medical tourism and healthcare industries, the Medical Tourism Association(r) develops and implements creative and sustainable strategies for attracting direct foreign investments. The MTA provides advisory services to investors researching the industry and matches these financiers with medical tourism-related projects. www.MedicalTourismAssociation.com

CONTACT: Joseph Harkins, 561-791-2000 ext. 803, jharkins@medicaltourismassociation.com

SOURCE Medical Tourism Association