This week the government announced its plans to subsidise childcare for children up to the age of 12. For what’s it’s worth, I think it is a great idea. I’ve been a childminder and know firsthand the juggling act many working parents have to perform, and how important it is for them to find reliable, affordable childcare.

However, I found the debate completely one-sided. In all the interviews I saw with parents, not a single one said that they were choosing to stay at home to look after their children, and not return to work. Instead, the coverage seemed to imply that parents who stay at home with their children only do so because they can’t afford childcare. Apparently, staying at home with children is the ultimate parenting booby prize.

That’s simply not true. I know many parents, me included, who made a conscious decision to stay at home with their children. We don’t do it because we can’t get jobs, or because we can’t afford childcare. We do it because we think it is the right decision for our family. And it inevitably does mean sacrifices – not only the loss of a wage with all that entails, but also, for some, the possible impact on future employment prospects.

But if I could go back and change a single day, I wouldn’t. I believe that life is what you make it, and I still consider being a stay-at-home dad as my best adventure yet. I feel privileged to have had the opportunity to stay at home and be there for all my troopers’ ups and downs.

I’m not saying that the traditional idea of one parent staying at home is the Holy Grail and that anything else just won’t do. Far from it. My parents both worked full time my wife grew up in a single parent family, and her dad worked round the clock to support his three children. Instead, I believe that families have to do what works for them and their individual lives, whether that means a parent staying at home, or both parents out working full-time, or parents sharing childcare and working part-time, or in a job share, or shifts – or any number of combinations. In the UK we have a myriad of different ways that parents raise their children, yet it seems to me as if the voice of the stay-at-home parent is seldom heard.