Missouri State University will no longer offer a health insurance plan for students from the U.S. It will continue to offer the plan to international students. (Photo: Kevin White/Missouri State University)

Missouri State University will no longer offer a health insurance plan for the bulk of its students, those from the U.S.

Starting this fall, it will only offer the plan to international students.

David Muegge, director of health and wellness services at Taylor Health Center on campus, said the administrative council recommended ending the coverage for domestic students after studying usage trends.

"What they had seen was a decreasing use by domestic students and an increasing use by international students," he said.

An internal review showed up to 30 percent of Missouri State students go without health insurance of any kind each year. At one point, up to 400 domestic students participated in the university's coverage plan, but that dwindled to just 188 last year.

"It's never been huge," he said.

Muegge said some domestic students simply go without insurance while others participate in plans offered through the Affordable Care Act or take advantage of a law that allows college students to stay on parents' health coverage plans until age 26.

"We are finding domestic students have a lot of other options," he said.

The number of international students paying to be part of the university's health insurance plan has grown from under 200 a few years ago to 1,200 last year. A steady increase in the number of international students has helped fuel that increase.

Muegge said many international students are required, as part of their visa, to carry coverage while studying in the U.S.

Missouri State is not alone in making the change. Northwest Missouri State University in Maryville and Southeast Missouri State University in Cape Girardeau, among others, have recently dropped coverage for domestic students.

Muegge said the recent review also showed domestic students who elected to participate in the university's plan often did so because they had ongoing health issues, which drove up the premiums. Students must pay to participate.

Last year, the premium for health coverage through the university for any student — domestic or international — was $1,434. By dropping the coverage for domestic students, the university was able to lower premiums by $218 a year.

This year, international students can obtain individual coverage for $1,216. The annual cost goes to just over $2,000 if a spouse is added and more than $3,600 if the entire family is covered.

While the university will no longer offer coverage for domestic students, it is putting together information on private and government programs. For example, domestic students can customize a plan through Academic HealthPlans, the same company the university uses for its international student coverage.

Taylor Health Center, which is located on campus, also provides free basic office visits and reduced rates for lab work, X-rays and prescriptions. Muegge said each year, 66 percent of students have some contact with the health center — either calling with a question or receiving a flu shot — and up to 45 percent schedule an office visit.

Read or Share this story: http://sgfnow.co/1IYVbid