By Brian Bethel of the Abilene Reporter News

The movement of population from rural to urban areas, as well as the size of the vastly sprawling Texas Senate District 24 itself, helped contribute to state Rep. Susan King's loss to Austin ophthalmologist Dawn Buckingham, experts said Wednesday.

Buckingham bested King in the Republican primary runoff for the seat with 26,413 votes to King's 16,645. King won in Taylor County, earning 56 percent of the vote here, but she carried none of the remaining 16 counties in District 24.

King's spokesman Bryan Eppstein said that King, who did not attend a watch party with supporters Tuesday night at Cypress Street Station, was taking time off to be with family and friends before resuming her public schedule.

McMurry University political science professor Paul Fabrizio said the King-Buckingham runoff was a symptom of a larger geopolitical reality that Abilene must confront.

"The population growth is not taking place here," Fabrizio said. "Politicians can ignore us, and we will have to work together as a community to be heard."

Fabrizio said King had a "very difficult" road to victory in the 24th District.

"In addition to the fact that in most of the district she was unknown, the bulk of the population is in the southern part of the district, which is a boon for a candidate from that region," he said. "Geography was destiny in this case."

Geography is a factor both in state Senate and congressional races for Abilene candidates, Fabrizio said.

"Too many people live in parts of the districts that don't have much contact with us or connection to us," he said. "While we are an important economic and political hub in the Big Country, when our might is compared to that of Lubbock or Austin we are found wanting."

Jon Ashby, King's longtime treasurer for multiple campaigns, including King's time on the Abilene ISD school board, agreed.

"As population shifts away from Abilene, it's going to move to Lubbock and it's going to move to Austin," Ashby said Tuesday night. "So the representation of rural counties, rural issues is diminishing. So it's going to be more a rural-urban problem than a Republican-Democrat problem."

Health issues reported by King and her family did not help her campaign, Fabrizio said. King temporarily suspended her run in December, citing issues with depression.

Controversy over her medical records connected to that period added to the problem. King now has an injunction to prevent that information from being released until a Nov. 21 trial date.

King's health crisis limited her availability to meet voters for a time and "raised some issues about her ability to continue to be a representative," Fabrizio said.

"However, her doggedness on the campaign trail after that health crisis should have dispelled concerns about her abilities," he said.

Fabrizio said that in his opinion "anti-establishment tea party-groups" were not in King's favor.

"So she lacked a native, organized constituency when she traveled to counties she had never represented before," he said. "While other groups certainly supported her, these other groups sometimes lack a pool of activists and volunteers so essential to a successful campaign. A campaign needs both volunteers and money to win."

Eppstein, King's campaign manager, blamed her loss in part on a combination of "secretly funded attack campaigns" and an opponent who attacked her with "no regard for the truth."

He said King was a "political victim" of such a "perception-versus-reality paradigm," the runoff best described, in his opinion, as a "tale of two elections — in that some voters acted upon actual knowledge of King, whereas others may have voted upon perceptions that were completely false."

"Dark money" attack ads "played upon the district's strong opposition to abortion and anger against (President Barack) Obama," Eppstein said, one organized campaign even allegedly painting King as performing abortions.

Further advertisements misrepresented a 2013 vote in the Legislature in which opponents contended that King voted to expand Obamacare, he said.

Ashby said that with Buckingham's win, he expected that issues of interest to rural Texas, such as water, oil and land use, might go by the wayside.

"Our senator's seat has been gerrymandered all the way to Austin, all the way up here, and so the population center for it has moved to South Central Texas to the Belton area, then down to Austin," he said, a change that "diminishes very greatly the knowledge base, the experience base of the person holding the office," at least when it comes to issues important to rural Texans.

A successful politician does not need Abilene or Abilene voters to win the state Senate or congressional districts, he said.

"As we thank Susan King for her years of representation, this community must ask itself how it gets heard from here on out," Fabrizio said.