BIXBY — Local businesses and individuals were recognized for their contributions to the Bixby community at the Chamber Awards Annual Gala on Friday night.

Hosted for the first time at Renaissance Hotel and Convention Center in Tulsa, the spacious ballroom provided an elegant backdrop for guests dressed in evening attire.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

While the dress code was formal, the atmosphere was anything but. Good natured ribbing and a live auction format that encouraged crowd participation provided a lot of laughter and entertainment for guests.

The ceremony opened with award presentations by chamber president, Krystal Crockett. Voted on by members of the Bixby Metro Chamber of Commerce, golden statues were awarded to winners across several categories ranging from business to education.

There were several winners from previous years, such as Doc's Country Mart for Favorite Business, but many new ones were recognized, too, such as J. David Jewelry for Best New Business.

Commerce aside, individuals were also recognized for their outstanding contributions through education, local government and volunteering. It was a big night for Dr. Steve Greene, who was named Volunteer of the Year and received the top honor of the night, the Chairman's Award.

Another notable winner was Ron Bussert of OSU Tulsa who was named Citizen of the Year.

The gala also marked the beginning of his tenure as Chairman of the Board for the chamber.

"I'm honored to be selected for this role for 2015 and humbled to follow so many of you here tonight who have led the chamber so effectively in years past," Bussert said.

"Growth for the Bixby metro area is a certainty, so it seems incumbent upon us to help shape the progress and quality of life we will see in the years ahead. As business partners, the chamber wants to hear from you and be helpful to you in the months ahead."

In addition to recognizing leaders in the community, the event serves as the organization's top fundraiser of the year.

Lavish trips, packages to state university sporting events, and a ride on a fighter jet were some of the big ticket items offered at the live auction.

Special guest auctioneer Graham Crow promoted crowd participation throughout the raffle and live auction portion of the evening.

He took an unconventional approach to auctioning off gift cards from local businesses by opening bidding to which ever attendees grabbed his attention first.

Impromptu breakdancing and throwing dinner napkins were a few of the methods used to garner Crow's attention much to the crowd's amusement.

The night was deemed a success with attendance at an all-time high and over $15,000 raised from the live auction alone.

2015 Chamber Awards Winners: