Let the IRS be the IRS

"The Republican-controlled U.S. House has passed a series of sniping, counterproductive measures picking on the IRS. One would limit how it spends the user fees it collects. Another would freeze hiring at the understaffed agency until it obtains certification that no one there has major tax debt. The dumbest would mandate that no one at the IRS could get a bonus until customer service improves.

"But who is responsible for the decline of customer service at the IRS? House Republicans. The IRS budget is $500 million below its level in 2010, the year that Republicans won control of the House. It has been forced to shed 17,000 workers. Meanwhile, its responsibilities have increased. More people are filing taxes. The agency has to administer key parts of the Affordable Care Act. Cyberthreats have skyrocketed, including instances of identity theft.

"Hollowing out the IRS has been one of the most foolish policies the GOP majority has pursued, as our columnist Catherine Rampell has illustrated. Tax cheats are encouraged and rewarded. Performing fewer audits cost the government $8 billion in 2015.

"Honest people are harmed, too. Several customer service metrics plummeted for a time, until Congress relented a bit and gave the agency a little more money, after which at least telephone service improved for this tax season. But customer service in some other areas is still astonishingly poor. The agency, for example, admits that it is failing to answer a third of the written correspondence it gets quickly enough, even though the goal is to get back to people within 45 days, which is itself an unacceptably long time.

"April is synonymous with taxes, so it is little surprise that Republicans chose last month to harry the IRS, among the least-loved parts of government. But the solution to the IRS's problems is not more punishment, particularly of the sort that is likely to inhibit its ability to hire competent employees.

"The answer is for lawmakers to give the agency the money it needs to do its job. The country relies on a mostly voluntary system of tax compliance. If respect for and cooperation with that system decline, the government will lose the very revenue Congress expects the IRS to collect -and on which lawmakers' budgets depend." (Washington Post)

Obamacare Needs Surgery - Stat.

"News stories of recent days suggest a stabbing pain in the wallet awaiting people who buy health coverage for 2017 through Obamacare exchanges. Insurers in many states will seek major premium hikes.

"All of which contrasts with President Barack Obama's victory lap in late March, when he celebrated the sixth anniversary of his signature achievement and crowed about its rousing success.

"His verdict looks increasingly dubious.

"And looming rate increases aren't the only signs of severe stress. Each week brings new evidence that Obamacare is due for more than a checkup; it needs life-saving surgery.

"On April 19, UnitedHealthcare, the nation's biggest insurer, said it would stop offering coverage in many states next year because of heavy losses. The company had expanded coverage to 34 states, but now it says it can't afford to cover hundreds of thousands of people in most of those states.

"... In the heart of the 2016 campaign season, there's no impetus for the White House to reopen the law, especially since many Republicans have voted - and vowed - to repeal it. And come January, a president who tries to scrap the law will face sharp opposition from millions of people grateful to now have coverage.

"But as insurers raise rates and restrict coverage, the guarantee of access to insurance becomes an expensive, empty promise for millions.

"Obamacare is not about the insurance companies," insurance analyst and blogger Robert Laszewski notes. "It is about the consumers that have nowhere else to purchase individual health insurance in the United States and are already finding the offerings - with subsidies or without - lousy deals."

"The lousier the deals, the more pressure on Congress to overhaul the law to allow insurers more leeway to tailor their offerings (and prices) to fit the varying needs of people in the market.

A new president and a new Congress can't ignore Obamacare's faltering health. Prep the OR."

(Chicago Tribune)

Quotable:

" ... Pessimists still should answer two questions: If the goal is to make America great again, what era should we aspire to return to? And is there any country whose hand you would rather have?" --