It's been a year of highs and lows, but Bianca Gascoigne ensured she turned 28 in style as she hit London for her birthday bash over the weekend.

The glamour girl gathered her family and friends to attend her party at hotspot Cafe de Paris in the capital on Saturday night.

The model turned heads as she arrived in an eye-catching sheer black lace dress which showed off her curves to perfection.

Scroll down for video

Ooh la la: Bianca Gascoigne put on a glamorous show as she arrived for her 28th birthday bash at London's Cafe de Paris on Saturday night

Never one to stint on over-the-top glamour, Bianca's blonde locks were volumised to the max and cascaded down her shoulders.

She appeared to have kept in shape following a diet and fitness overhaul over the summer, when she lost a stone in just six weeks.

The beauty happily posed with guests as they turned out to celebrate her turning a year older, including her brother Mason, who escorted her into the bash

Among the revellers were former The Only Way Is Essex star Abigail Clarke, who was also keen to make an impact in a two-piece metallic number which showed off her toned stomach.

Sheer delight: The party girl showed off her newly-slim figure in a black lace dress as she was escorted into the bash by her brother, Mason

Blonde ambition: The star had volumised her mass of platinum hair for the big night, organised by the venue's PR guru Liam Norval (above)

Essex arrival: Former TOWIE star Abi Clarke also made an impact upon arrival in a two-piece metallic ensemble as she arrived with pal Junaid Ahmed

The event would have been a great way to put the past year behind her after a string of heartaches.

Over the summer, she parted ways with her fiance Brett Marshall following a whirlwind romance.

The boxer and businessman proposed to Bianca in Ibiza in June and she revealed that she wanted her troubled stepfather, former England player Paul Gascoigne, to walk her down the aisle.

She told OK! magazine: 'I would absolutely love Gazza [her step dad Paul Gascoigne] to walk me down the aisle.

'Brett even asked Paul for his permission and he’s really happy for us.'

Here come the girls: Bianca got into the party spirit as she cracked open the champagne and partied with her gal pals

Birthday girl: The reality TV star was presented with a pink and white cake and club favourite, Grey Goose Vodka

Group snap: Bianca was surrounded by her friends and family on Saturday, just days before she turns 28 on the 28th

Pucker up: Being an ex-TOWIE girl, Abi knew how to pout for the camera as she caught up with a pal

However, their short-lived love story collapsed just 10 days later, with the reality star refusing to explain the reason for them calling off the engagement.

A source told The Sun: ‘Bianca’s devastated. She is mortified she’s had to call off the engagement. She hasn’t fully confided in friends the full reasons for their shock split.'

Meanwhile, step-dad Paul - who was married to Bianca's mother Sheryl - was sectioned under the Mental Health Act and placed on a three-day emergency detox following his latest alcohol binge.

The former midfielder - who has had a longrunning battle with alcoholism - was rushed to hospital at 3am on Friday morning after police were called to his home in Dorset.