Topics: Books, Editor's Picks, Fiction, maddaddam, Margaret Atwood, science-fiction, Entertainment News

Since winning the 2000 Booker Prize for “The Blind Assassin,” the perennially Nobel-tipped Margaret Atwood has devoted most of her writing career to that literary black sheep, science fiction. She’d prefer we call her writing “speculative fiction” (in a move dismissed by Ursula K. Le Guin as “designed to protect her novels from being relegated to a genre still shunned by hidebound readers, reviewers and prize-awarders”); regardless, it’s clear that the author of “The Handmaid’s Tale” (1985) is still fond of a good dystopia. This past May, she wrapped up her Orwellian Web serial, “Positron,” on Byliner.com, and her just-published novel, “MaddAddam,” concludes a hefty near-future trilogy that started with “Oryx and Crake” (2003) and “The Year of the Flood” (2009).

The trilogy concerns “the Waterless Flood”: the mass extinction of humanity brought about by the rogue geneticist Crake so that his creations, the Crakers (like humans, but idealized pacifists), may inherit the Earth. A few humans survive, eking out a parlous existence in a rundown world; by the end, they’re repurposing bedsheets as clothes. At the center of “MaddAddam” is Zeb, a leather-jacket-wearing, wisecracking outlaw hacker who becomes a patriarch in a doomsday cult that, fittingly enough, ends up well prepared to survive the Flood.

Zeb also makes up bawdy songs, and despite the book’s bleakness, it’s often very funny. So, too, is Atwood herself. On a sunny summer day, she’s curled up with a coffee in a corner of a cafe near her Toronto home to meet journalists; she has a perpetual quarter-smile, an amused stare, and the deadpan air of a raconteur whose disconcerting tales are laced with dark humor. In SF, she has found a form that suits her voracious reading and the breadth of her interests. “MaddAddam” alone takes up religion, education, evolution, punishment and ubiquitous government surveillance. As I put my recorder down in front of her, she says, “It can join all the other little devices that are circling over our heads.” She looks up to the sky. “Hello! Enjoy the interview!”

As the trilogy is set in a potential near future, did you have to rethink certain ideas along the way from writing “Oryx and Crake” to “MaddAddam” as technology changed?

Well, since I depicted them as already happening, it was probably more of a challenge for the reader. Things pile onto my Twitter. The lab-meat hamburger which appears in this book? It’s here. The genetically modified pigs? They’ve actually blended human DNA with pig DNA at the egg level, and the resulting animals are surprisingly loaded up with human DNA.

From the time when you began the trilogy, did any technological change surpass what you were writing about?

Yeah, in “Oryx and Crake,” in the libraries, Jimmy’s job is to throw out paper books and put things on CD-ROM. [Now] it would be the Cloud. Though you never know; they still have a lot of stuff on microfiche. I think every age lives in a blend of technology so there’s always older ones mixed in with newer ones, and when the new technology goes down, the immediate fallback position is either that technology just before that or one several technologies back.

Like books.

Exactly. And books are good for a couple of things: No. 1: They’re still readable when the Cloud goes down. No. 2: They make great kindling.

The word “Kindle” takes on new meaning –

Right! No. 3: Push comes to shove, they’re great insulating material. You could make a little igloo out of books if you really had to. I think of them as a form of carbon sequestration – all the CO2 is tied up in books. They don’t decay for a long time, if you bury them deep enough. It has to be below the ant level.

“MaddAddam’s” narrator, Toby, writes down her experiences on paper, so the book itself does take on an importance.

Communications technology changes possibilities for communication, but that doesn’t mean it changes the inherited structure of the brain. So you may think that you’re addicted to online reading, but as soon as it isn’t available anymore, your brain will pretty immediately adjust to other forms of reading. It’s a habit like all habits.

One of “Maddaddam’s” characters references brain plasticity as an argument against the death penalty. There are many passages in the book where it’s tempting to view the characters’ debates as analogues to ones we’re having now –

I think they’re just the debates that people would have – that’s what they would be thinking and talking about.

But would people debate the death penalty in the same way in every circumstance?

The death penalty as we have it now depends on prisons. You have to have somewhere to put people before you death-penalty them. This is a society in the future that doesn’t have prisons, doesn’t have the manpower to do prison-guarding, etc., so what are they going to do?

So even ideas that people tend to think about as absolutes, such as the rightness or wrongness of capital punishment –

They’re not absolutes. They’re entirely dependent on what kind of resources we have to enable them. So in nomadic societies, you’re not going to have a justice system that incarcerates people for long periods of time and has long trials, are you? And you’re not going to have anything like a life sentence, because where are you going to put these people? If they’re a threat to you and your society, you will kill them, and that’s typically what happened … One of the sources for how people were treated is the Bible, and the other is the “Iliad” and the “Odyssey.” What did you do when you won the Trojan War? You took all of the males, including children, and you threw them off a cliff. You didn’t want them around, wreaking revenge on you. And then you enslaved the females … So the whole criminal justice system that we have is entirely dependent on buildings.

Sometimes genre science fiction takes people as they are today and puts them in a different situation where they manage to make things work out the way they might here; clearly you’ve done something different.

It entirely depends on what kind of technological situation you’re going to put them into. So what are the tools that they have? Because we are very tool-driven. And it’s very fascinating to me to read the speculation going on amongst paleo-anthropologists. For instance, the over-arm baseball throw – only human beings can do that because of the structure of their bodies. What’s the over-arm throw good for, supposing you’re in the Pleistocene?

Spears.

Right. So it enables you to kill at a distance, and killing at a distance enables you to kill without being physically wounded yourself. Big plus. Why did we develop drones? Same idea. Allows you to kill at a distance without endangering your own life or getting wounded. So the drones we have today are an extension of the over-arm throw. And everything we do is an extension of stuff we want to do and have always wanted to do. We never make anything [that isn’t] – with one exception: In Japan, they have a contest devoted to completely useless inventions.

When you were writing “Oryx & Crake,” did you have the idea that you’d present the back stories of its minor characters in sequels?