Darren Bloomquist, the cab driver shot to death this weekend, was a psychologist driving a cab to help pay bills incurred after his wife was disabled in an accident, his father said Sunday.

Bloomquist, 49, who drove for Metro Taxi, was shot to death sometime around 4:30 a.m. Saturday in a Green Valley Ranch gated community that neighbors say is normally quiet.

Police so far have no suspect in the case, said Denver police spokesman Eranda Piyasena.

Bloomquist “was in deep financial shape,” said his 68-year-old father, Darrell, of Billings, Mont.

Bloomquist’s wife, a nurse, was badly injured about three years ago when she fell while working at a nursing home, Darrell Bloomquist said.

The injury left her unable to walk without the aid of a walker.

The couple got a loan for their Aurora home when both were working, Darrell Bloomquist said.

After she was injured, they could no longer keep up with their bills, and Bloomquist moonlighted driving a cab.

“He never told me that he was doing it because I would have been upset and against that because cab driving is not a safe occupation,” Darrell Bloom-quist said.

Bloomquist, who had a master’s degree in psychology from Montana State University, worked as a therapist, his father said. Some insurance companies also used Bloomquist’s services as a consultant, his father said.

“Small insurance companies that can’t afford a psychologist or psychiatrist on staff, they would hire him,” he said.

Bloomquist moved to Denver about 15 years ago, his father said.

He was a U.S. Air Force veteran who served at Travis Air Force Base.

He was an animal lover who left dead trees standing on his property in Aurora because the neighborhood squirrels “loved them.”

He also fed the rodents, putting peanuts in a pickle jar and watching them eat. “He would come home at night and the squirrels would greet him in the driveway — they wanted their peanuts,” Darrell Bloomquist said.

Bloomquist was working in a high-risk occupation.

According to Occupational Safety and Health Administration, taxi drivers are 20 times more likely than other workers to be slain on the job.

Nationally, an average of 34 cab drivers were killed each year while on the job between 1994 and 2013, according to the website Taxi Library, a noncommercial, educational website serving the taxicab industry worldwide.

OSHA suggests safety measures for cab owners that include barriers such as bullet-resistant glass between drivers and passengers; security cameras; and silent alarms.

Tom McGhee: 303-954-1671, tmcghee@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dpmcghee