Times Leader

Jordan Flain singled home the winning run in the bottom of the seventh inning as Hanover defeated Green Ridge for a second time Sunday, 8-7, to capture the District 16 Section 5 Seniors Little League championship and advance to the Pennsylvania state tournament this week.

Trailing by a run in the second game, Austin Gately started the winning two-run rally with a single in the seventh inning. Lloyd Deno drew a walk, and Chad Wasickanin eventually lifted a sacrifice fly that brought Gately home with the tying run. Flain followed with his single, bringing Deno home with the run that sent Hanover to states, which open Wednesday in Boyertown.

Joey Wheeler picked up the win in the second game of the double-elimination tournament.

In the first game Sunday, Gately was the winning pitcher and ripped two hits at the plate as Hanover down Green Ridge 10-5.

Kevin Rimmer added three hits, while Flain also had two hits in the first-game victory.

District 16

9-10

Plains 15, Hanover 6

Sean Monahan was the winning pitcher and delivered two hits and two RBI and Jeffrey Kozerski cracked a three-run homer to lead Plains.

Jeremy Simonson had two hits and drove home three runs in the victory and Jason Prudente added two hits and two RBI. Also for Plains, Braeben Cook and Jacob Hunter had two hits apiece.

For Hanover, Collin Klein and Brett Martinez both drove home two runs and Nick Schiel, Caven Hummer and Aiden Kelsall all had two hits.

District 31

9-10

Back Mountain National 14, Swoyersville 4

Joe Shishkowski gave up three hits and struck out six in Back Mountain National’s win.

At the plate, Shishkowski had two singles and three runs scored. Teammates Bryan Osipower had two singles, a double and an RBI, Shane Healey had a single and an RBI, Graedon Finarelli had two doubles and 4 RBI, Cole Kaiser singled, doubled and had two RBI, while Darius Wallace chipped in with two hits and an RBI.

Swoyersville’s Brad Gill singled and tripled while Joey Lipinski singled.

Kingston/Forty Fort 8, Northwest 4

Jake Griffin struck out seven in three innings of work as Kingston/Forty Fort advances to the District 31 final after topping Northwest.

Akira Kopek, Nason Sgartlat combined for the save on the mound. John McLaughlin had two doubles, Philip Evan added three hits and a stolen base to the victory.

Northwest’s Landon Schuckers doubled, Hunter Gmiter singled and Ricky Hynick went four innings on the mound.

Kingston/Forty Fort will play Back Mountain National in the D31 final on Wednesday.

Mountain Top 19, South Wilkes-Barre 3

As a team, Mountain Top recorded 21 hits in a win over South Wilkes-Barre.

Connor Murtha had four hits, while Joseph Moratori and Mason Butash each recorded three hits.

Winning pitcher Butash teamed up with Trevor Dean and Ryan Covelens to strike out a combined nine batters.

South Wilkes-Barre’s Isaiah Parker finished with two hits.

DISTRICT 16/31

9-10 Softball

Back Mountain 8, Northwest 3

Victoria Spaciano had 15 strikeouts and added a double and single to her day as Back Mountain topped Northwest.

Maggie Ropitski and Madison Kerdesky each singled in the win.

Northwest was led by Nicole McMillan and Josie Straigis who had six strikeouts apiece.

Nanticoke 5, Mountain Top 0

Elizabeth Mendryzcki struck out 14 batters in her one-hitter in Nanticoke’s victory.

Teammate Alexis Atkins recorded two singles, while Tiffany Brogan had a single, a double and RBI.

Cat Ziegler recorded Mountain Top’s lone hit of the game.

Pittston Area 13, Plains 3

Ava Serino had seven strikeouts to earn the win and Gianna Adams got the save with three strikeouts to end the game in Pittston’s win.

Sophia Quaglia tripled and Serino had an RBI in the fourth inning to finish the game. Bella Giardina scored three runs and Sage Weidlich scored two.

Saturday

Nanticoke 7, Back Mountain 6

Jess Skiadzien drove in Rielly Miller for the game-winning run in the bottom of the sixth with one out as Nanticoke defeated Back Mountain, 7-6, for the Section 5 11-12 Softball title Saturday night.

Skiadzien struck out eight batters for the win. Kasidy Slusser, who tripled in the game, picked up the save in the circle.

Gabby Rakowski doubled, Jen Kurkoski had two singles, Emily Cullen had two RBI to go with her single and Lauren Mullery also singled for Nanticoke.

Back Mountain’s Sydney Hornlein struck out four and had two singles. Alison Francis had a single and a double and Lyndsey Hornlein had two singles.

Nanticoke heads to Mansfield for states on Tuesday.

Times Leader

Reach Times Leader sports at 570-829-7143 or on Twitter @tlsports.



VideoID: VideoType: URL: Video Embed String: Video Caption: Video Credit: Video Position: (use the “for files…” link above to associate attached files with this source)

Reach Times Leader sports at 570-829-7143 or on Twitter @tlsports.