ALABASTER, Alabama -- At the start of today's hour-long roundtable discussion with the Greater Shelby County Chamber of Commerce in Alabaster, Gov. Robert Bentley pointed to Shelby County's unemployment rate.

The county has the "lowest unemployment in the state, so I don't know what we are going to talk about," Bentley joked, before asking for questions about the economy and how the state government can help.

Shelby County's unemployment rate of 4.2 percent for July compares with the statewide rate of 6.3 percent and Wilcox County with the highest in Alabama at 16.3 percent. Bentley praised Shelby County's ongoing success and had a lack of words for ways to improve the area even further.

"I can't think of many things that I would suggest to y'all that you aren't already doing," he said during the discussion attended by about 20 chamber members at Shelby Baptist Medical Center. "I can't think of anything you're all not doing and not doing right."

The comments came as Bentley visited Alabaster and the hospital today as part of his ongoing Road to Economic Recovery Tour that stops at different counties each week. He held the chamber discussion following a tour of the hospital.

Bentley said counties need to step up to market themselves and promote industry and business environments. "I go to counties as I cross the state who are really behind in what they should be doing," he said, noting one county that does not have an economic developer.

"You really have to have that. You have to sell your area," he said. "Selling the area is up to the locals. It's really not up to the state. It's not up to us."

Answering a question about the state's economic outlook, Bentley pointed to potential industrial developments that could come to Alabama. "We don't get many companies that are interested in Jefferson County," he said.

The state is under consideration for another automobile plant, while Alabama is one of a handful of states in the running for an industrial development that could "probably be the largest industry" in Alabama, he said.

Some attendees thanked the governor for his support of infrastructure projects in Shelby County under the Alabama Transportation Rehabilitation and Improvement Program, known as ATRIP.

Alabaster City Manager George Henry said the road improvements, including the eventual widening of Highway 119 in south Alabaster, help the city "because infrastructure drives the opportunity for us to increase economic development."

The highway widening project is one that could not be done without state support, Henry said. "We're really appreciative of that because we couldn't do that by ourselves," he said.

Helena Mayor Mark Hall thanked the governor for supporting an intersection improvement project in the city that will help with traffic congestion. Hall wondered when more funding would be available.

Bentley replied that all ATRIP funding has been awarded, but he suggested other ways to fund road projects, especially considering the state receives just $150 million for new roads annually.

Rather than rely on the federal government, Bentley said toll roads might be a possibility in Alabama to help raise funds for infrastructure. "I think we can look at that," he said.

"The federal government is broke and they're going bankrupt. We're $17 trillion in debt almost," he said.

On the topic of health care, Bentley called the federal Affordable Care Act "one of the worst pieces of legislation that has ever been passed."

The healthcare law is bad for economic recovery because it creates uncertainty, a significant threat to businesses, Bentley said. "People are worried," he said.

"I believe had they never passed this bill ... the economy would have picked up two years ago," he said. "We would basically be out of the recession had they not passed this thing."

Paul Rogers, Aliant Bank's Birmingham Regional President, told Bentley the Highway 280 changes have helped the route. "So far we're seeing some significant results on that, governor, and we're appreciative," he said.

Bentley said not everyone will be pleased with changes made, but they needed to happen. "People want to raise taxes, but they want somebody else to pay for it. People want 280 to improve, but they don't want it to affect their red light," he said.

The governor recalled during a past meeting on the matter, "I said we're not trying to hurt anybody or any city, but we're moving forward."

"It's not the answer totally, but I think it is going to make it better," he said.