MIAMI, Feb. 24, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Listo Tax Solutions has opened in January its first Florida location in Miami. Listo offers tax, bookkeeping, payroll and translation services for individuals and businesses.

With tax season here, Listo has geared itself up to help clients navigate the complexities of the Affordable Care Act and how it will affect their returns. Due to the sensitive information that is given to a tax preparer, tax preparation clients can anticipate private interview areas at Listo. These areas were created to allow the client to feel assured that their personal information will remain confidential. With identity theft on the rise, Listo management takes extra precautions to avoid any breaches.

The founder of Listo Tax Solutions, Clayton Cathcart had this to say, "We are very excited with the opening of the Miami office. We have been looking for the right individual to represent Listo in the Florida market and with our newest franchisee, Daniel Leiva, we feel we have found that person. Additionally, there are significant changes to the tax return this year with the enactment of the Affordable Care Act. Taxpayers are going to need professional, well-trained tax preparers more than ever in order to comply with the complex regulations. Listo extensively trains all our staff members to be current in all tax matters. Miami will benefit from this expertise."

To entice customers to have their taxes prepared by Listo, they will be offering 50% off the price paid to prepare the same tax return as the prior year's tax return completed by any competitor through April 15th. Walk-ins are accepted but appointments are encouraged. Appointments can be made by calling (786) 577-0191. Listo's office is located at 9542 SW 137th Avenue, Miami, FL 33186.

Listo currently has additional locations in Oregon, California, Florida and Texas. To learn more about the services that Listo Tax Solutions provides, visit www.listotax.com.

If you would like more information about this topic, please contact Daniel Leiva at (786) 577-0191 or email at d.leiva@listotax.com.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150220/176893LOGO

SOURCE Listo Tax Solutions