Combatting 3 Big Revenue Cycle Challenges

A Cone Health revenue cycle executive shares strategies for reducing the health system's three biggest revenue threats: high-deductible health plans, uninformed patients, and the looming implementation of ICD-10.

At Greensboro, NC-based Cone Health—a six-hospital, not-for-profit health system with 1,242 beds and gross annual revenue of $2 billion—a number of revenue pressures are making it tougher than ever to collect payment for services provided.



"It's a combination of factors that are creating a major financial challenge," says Mike Simms, Cone's vice president of revenue cycle.

Mike Simms



Simms outlines Cone's three biggest revenue threats and discusses the system's strategies to combat them:



1.High-Deductible Health Plans a Hurdle

Like most healthcare providers, Cone is experiencing a steep increase in the number of patients who have insurance plans with significant personal liability.



"We are seeing higher out-of-pockets with plans through the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and employer sponsored plans. We are seeing $5,000 deductibles and financial obligations that are $6,000 or $7,000 in total," Simms says.

FREE Insights Report: Revenue Cycle Integrity



This creates a collections hurdle because patients are often unable to pay in full for services they receive. To mitigate the impact on revenue, Cone has recently begun working with a third-party vendor to offer a loan program for patients who need time to pay in installments.



"We needed a way to allow patients to finance the debt because we didn't want to have a lot of long monthly payment plans. So, about a year ago, we started using a firm that does recourse financing, and we've changed our whole payment plan methodology," Simms says.



"If a patient has a balance and can pay it within six months, we will keep that account internally. If they can't, they have to go to the vendor that does the financing. If their [credit] scores are good, we'll get paid in advance so we don't have to wait two or three years. We get funded immediately. We have to pay a small discount rate for this program, but it's better than waiting years to be paid."



2. Patient Education and Engagement Needed

Another area of concern, Simms says, is the lack of understanding many patients have with regard to their insurance coverage.