Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Vineland school board hosts hearing on 2016-17 budget draft. Deborah M Marko

. (Photo: File photo)

VINELAND - In a quest for potential cost savings, the school district is looking into expanding substitute services provided by private firms.

The district is advertising for a vendor “to provide substitute teachers, paraprofessionals, cafeteria/playground aides, guidance counselors, secretaries and custodians to fill positions on an as-needed basis,” according the request for proposals.

RELATED: Poor turnout at Vineland school budget hearing

This RFP does not include substitute services for nurses, assistant principals/principals or security, according to Joe Rossi, the district’s personnel director.

The submission deadline is set for May 10.

“We are consistently working to maintain a high quality educational product for the children of Vineland while addressing budgetary concerns, which most often derive from salaries and benefits,” Rossi said.

Requests for proposals do not commit the district to a contract.

District officials are “looking to see what’s out there,” Rossi said, noting the RFP results could give the district some options for next school year.

In other news: VHS marching band adds to trophy case

Central administration worked on the RFP and the school board is aware of it, Rossi said, adding “the Affordable Care Act and workers' compensation costs are factors in this decision.”

“We have maintained a long-standing discussion about if and when to expand external staffing services,” he said. “We have tried to maintain a good faith relationship with our collective bargaining units and we understand their concerns about job loss as we attempt to grapple with annual multi-million dollar shortfalls.”

In September 2014, the school district awarded contracts to two private firms to cover temporary substitute paraprofessionals, also called classroom aides, and security guards.

The school district didn’t continue the contract for security personnel this school year, Rossi said. It does continue to employ Insight Workforce Solutions to assist with long-term substitute aides.

“This is particularly helpful when new students arrive during the school year with individualized education programs,” Rossi said.

If the district opts to purse a contract with a private provider, the contract would run from July 1, 2016 to June 30, 2017, with a provision for two one-year terms or one two-year term, according to the RFP.

“An approved vendor would be someone who verifies that they can and will provide quality individuals to work with or in support of our children at a competitive price,” Rossi said, adding “all staffing vendor personnel must undergo a N.J. Department of Education background check.”

Deborah M. Marko; (856) 563-5256; dmarko@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, sports, crime, weather, traffic and more. Search "The Daily Journal" in the app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app | iPad app. And be sure to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://vineland.dj/1TJy12F