Len Henderson poses Monday, Jan. 20, 2014, holding a photo album with pictures of his wife, Virginia, who died on July 30, 2004. Some of the pictures show Virginia picnicking at Viestenz-Smith Mountain Park, where the family placed a memorial in her honor. Len has been wondering if the memorial survived the flood. ( Jenny Sparks )

For More Information To find out the fate of a memorial plaque in Viestenz-Smith Mountain Park or another flood-damaged area, call Loveland parks manager Larry Callihan at 970-962-2547.

Len Henderson knows that nothing can take away the 61 years he spent with his beloved wife, Virginia, before she died in 2004.

But he wonders if the September flooding might have stolen the memorial marker he had placed in one of her favorite spots - Loveland's Viestenz-Smith Mountain Park.

The scenic park in the Big Thompson Canyon suffered severe damage in September when the raging river overflowed its banks and cut a new channel through the property.

Virginia Henderson's family placed this memorial at Viestenz- Smith Mountain Park in her honor after she died in July 2004 because the park was one of her favorite places. ( Len Henderson )

Viestenz-Smith is closed indefinitely, and Loveland Parks and Recreation officials still are removing flood debris and assessing the damage.

The city of Loveland allows people to pay for memorial markers to loved ones on public property, and the peaceful park along the Big Thompson River was a popular area for those memorials.

"There were a bunch of plaques next to trees, on rocks and benches and those types of things," said Parks and Recreation director Gary Havener.

His department hasn't made a full inventory of which markers were washed away or damaged and which ones survived, he said.

Wondering about the Memorial

The central part of the park, with the barbecue grills and picnic tables, fared better than other areas, Havener said.

Advertisement

"We're clearing the debris out of that central area so we can see what we've got," he said. "It should be done by the end of the month."

Henderson said he has driven past the park, wondering about the fate of the bronze plaque engraved with a hummingbird and "In Loving Memory" for his Virginia. But the park entrance is barricaded.

"People can give us a call and tell us the name and when they put it in," Havener said.

"If we know there was a memorial, we will try to replace that memorial" at no cost to the family, he said.

That's a comfort to Henderson, who said he used to go up about once a month to visit the marker and the tree the city planted and care for the miniature roses he had put in.

"I would go up and water them. They got to where they were really blooming good," he said.

Lifetime of Memories

The park provides a tangible connection to Virginia and the memories Henderson treasures. His wife was cremated, and he has no gravesite to visit.

Virginia Belle King married Leonard Andrew Henderson in Las Animas, Colo., in 1943, four years after she first laid eyes on him in Sunday school and went home and told her sister he was the boy she was going to marry.

"She was my childhood sweetheart ... and a good cook," Len said fondly.

Virginia Henderson's family placed this memorial and had a tree planted in her honor at Viestenz- Smith Mountain Park after she died in July 2004 because the park was one of her favorite places. ( Len Henderson )

The two lived in Loveland for a few years in the early '70s and then moved to Denver. When Virginia had a massive stroke in 1994 and was given just a few weeks to live, Len had her brought to Loveland and admitted to McKee Medical Center for therapy.

Virginia survived, so Len bought them a house here and spent the next 10 years caring for his wife. She was in a wheelchair, and "she couldn't communicate much with anyone but me," he said.

But she loved Viestenz-Smith Park.

"That was one of her favorite places," Len recalled. "We would go up there of an afternoon. I would fix a lunch and get her set up there by the river."

When Virginia died, rather than have a funeral, Len invited everyone to the mountain park.

"We had a picnic to celebrate, rather than something sad," he said.

Havener said city officials haven't decided whether they will rebuild Viestenz-Smith.

"I don't think anything's a given at this point," he said. The city's website says "we do not anticipate there will be any public use of the site in 2014."

One might say Len Henderson, at 90, doesn't have much time to wait. But he doesn't say that. "I feel more like I was when I was 70," he said.

Craig Young can be reached at 970-635-3634 or cyoung@reporter-herald.com. Follow him on Twitter: @CraigYoungRH.