Here are the 10 comments of the week on the digital platforms of The New York Times, as selected by our readers and the journalists who moderate nearly every comment.

Supreme Court Nomination

Photo

1. In Obama’s position, a Republican president would have appointed an unabashed conservative because that’s what you’re supposed to do. All the discussion about Obama “playing chess” and “being reasonable” is beside the point.

This choice, among other decisions by Obama during his presidency, is exactly what created the entire Bernie Sanders, Liz Warren movement. Democrats want their presidents to act like unapologetic Democrats, just like Republicans act like unapologetic Republicans 100 percent of the time.

This wasn’t the time for compromise. With Trump and Cruz fighting for the nomination, Democrats and Obama should drive the ball hard up the middle and quit trying to be cute and clever.

— Principia in St. Louis, reacting to President Obama’s selection of Merrick Garland as a nominee for the Supreme Court.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

2. Obama could appoint a bald eagle pointing an assault rifle at refugees to the Supreme Court and the G.O.P. would still find reasons to be upset.

— Amer Aldi on The Times’s Facebook page.

(After The Times highlighted this comment, a Twitter user named @OhNoSheTwitnt claimed credit for first writing it.)

Photo

3. Just a reminder that Mr. Obama was one of two dozen Senators including Hillary Clinton who voted to filibuster the nomination of Samuel Alito in 2006. Perhaps Mr. Obama feels he is better qualified to make a Supreme Court nomination than George Bush and that the current members of the Senate have different constitutional rights than the rights of Senators in 2006.

— Fifty Shades of Red in Santa Fe, N.M.

4. I wish the Pres would use this nomination for someone left of center, but you gotta hand it to him — he’s doing what won’t create more division, and in doing so respects the entire electorate. President Obama always demonstrates a great deal of class, and respect for the responsibility he’s been given. We can only hope we ever have as great a president again.

— Barbara in Washington, D.C.

Her comment received more than 2,440 reader recommendations and was the most-recommended comment of the week.

5. Liberals are disappointed in the selection, but you have to look at the big picture. This is basically just bait. Obama wins either way.

Either the G.O.P. refuses to consider the most reasonable option possible, and looks foolish, or Obama gets his nominee and can be respected for making a selection that was actually electable and will make a difference. People hoping for a hard-left candidate aren’t able to see the forest through the trees.

— T in New York. His comment received 391 reader recommendations.

The Republican Party

Photo

6. I understand the appeal of Trump. I wish I didn’t, but I do. Family members who support him are good people who have watched the cost of living rise while their wages for service and industry jobs have not.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

They seem to watch a lot of TV (CNN, Fox) and fear that if immigrants don’t take their jobs, terrorists will get to them first. They have American-made cars, flat screen TVs, and fenced-in yards for dogs that are there to protect private property. Their children are christened and they go to mass on holidays.

Donald Trump is a kind of political Dr. Phil. He gives them the opportunity to vent deep disappointment, frustration and resentment.

His candidacy is a collective catharsis. His rallies are not about policy; they’re about being heard: The supporters I know simply don’t feel heard, not by me, not by our leaders. And unfortunately they don’t engage in civil discourse or civic life because the work of life — houses, jobs, kids, health — is enormously weighty.

I loathe Mr. Trump and I am terrified of his candidacy. But he has helped me to see that a “silent” if not “majority” at least portion of his supporters are ordinary working people who feel left behind.

— MS in Boston, in response to an editorial contending that Donald J. Trump incites violence at his rallies. This comment received 43 reader recommendations.

Photo

7. Really sad to see a young guy like Rubio who appealed to a lot of young voters like myself drop out. I never agreed with his social stance nor how much he would allow religion to affect his decisions, but I liked his optimism and his hope for young men like myself.

He was moderate, had strong economic views, great foreign policy, but sadly people did not recognize this or just could not trust him. Hopefully as he matures and gets more involved with the Senate he can grow onto people, Democratic and Republican alike.

— BG in Radford, Va., in response to Senator Marco Rubio’s exit from the Republican presidential race. His comment attracted 26 reader responses.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

8. He’s a smart, honest, experienced and decent man. He does adhere to some of the Republican platform — as he would have to in order to avoid to total excommunication. But give him credit for embracing Obamacare for the sake of the children in his state.

— Robert Selsor on The Times’s Facebook page, reacting to a Gail Collins column about Gov. John Kasich’s primary victory in his home state of Ohio.

The Democratic Party

Photo

9. Trump vs. Clinton. So I guess I’ll vote for Hillary. Kind of like wanting a Coca-Cola, but you drink the Pepsi because you really don’t want the Faygo.

— Chad Vaughn, on The Times’s Facebook page, in response to Mrs. Clinton’s win in the Ohio primary. (Faygo is a soda popular in the Midwest.)

10. I can hear Bernie’s army firing away from their keyboards in response to the revelations in this article.

In 2008, Hillary Clinton’s candidacy was in the same slow-arcing death spiral that Sanders’s is in now — so President Obama can empathize with what Clinton is facing.

However, Sanders has every right to stay in the race through June, as did Ms. Clinton eight years ago. His candidacy has vociferous and progressive support, though outnumbered in the electoral system we have in place.

Even if Sanders doesn’t win, Democrats and the nation both win as Sanders’s message continues to nourish the political soil for future progressive change to take root.

— Ed Sugden in El Segundo, Calif., in response to President Obama asking Democratic donors to unite behind Mrs. Clinton’s candidacy. His comment received 1,222 reader recommendations.