The Provision

Cheese and Crackers Rolled Into One

ENLARGE Farmstead's blue cheese shortbread F. Martin Ramin/The Wall Street Journal, Styling by Anne Cardenas

Once in a great while there comes a snack we obsess over because it's just that good. The latest addition to that pantheon (and heir apparent to the cheese straw, that holiday-entertaining stalwart): blue cheese shortbreads from Farmstead, a Providence, R.I., specialty foods store and restaurant. The cookie/cracker hybrid "is mostly cheese and butter," according to resident baker and co-owner Kate Jennings. She uses whatever leftover blue cheese she has on hand in the shop that day—could be a Stilton from England, say, or Bayley Hazen from Vermont—and mixes it with butter, flour, sugar, salt and cornstarch to create a hefty shortbread with a shattering crumb. The salty-sweet flavor (the dough is rolled in coarse sugar prior to baking), flaky texture and lactic tang are addictive. A natural addition to a cheese plate, the shortbreads also make a delicious snack on their own or with tea or coffee. $20 for 24 shortbreads, farmsteadinc.com

The Beverage

Some Like It Hot (and Fizzy)

ENLARGE Rachel's Ginger Beer F. Martin Ramin/The Wall Street Journal, Styling by Anne Cardenas

With the season of overeating upon us, there is nothing like the tummy-soothing bubbly refresher ginger beer. No, not the sugary mass-produced soda: Once we tried the homespun version from Rachel's Ginger Beer, we could never go back to the super-sweet stuff. The three-year-old business, which recently opened a ginger-beer bar in Seattle's Pike Place Market, has just started shipping its namesake libation nationally. Founder Rachel Marshall handcrafts the Original flavor by carbonating a blend of freshly squeezed lemon and ginger juices, organic sugar and water. The result is a concentrated quaff that's fiery yet tart, and tastes as good on its own as it is does mixed into cocktails. (Try it in a Moscow Mule.) Also on offer are seasonal varieties, such as pomegranate, blood orange and cranberry—a perfect non-alcoholic alternative for the Thanksgiving table. $78 for four 32-ounce bottles, rachelsgingerbeer.com

The Condiment

Give Cranberry Sauce a Rest

ENLARGE Casa Forcello preserves F. Martin Ramin/The Wall Street Journal, Styling by Anne Cardenas

Cranberry sauce may be the usual accompaniment to the Thanksgiving turkey. But for those looking to branch out this holiday season, Casa Forcello, a maker of small-batch preserves in Mantua, Italy, has just the thing. Owner Paola Calciolari has been producing mostarda—the spicy candied-fruit condiment typically served in Italy with boiled meats—and preserves, some of which are based on her grandmother's recipes, for almost 20 years. Her plum smoked-tea compote is a full-flavored mix of plums, lapsang souchong tea and sugar, and her blood-orange marmellata, made from organic Sicilian fruit, is sunshine-bright. Like the rest of her creations, both would complement any rich bird, be it turkey or roast duck. From $10 for plum smoked-tea compote, fairwaymarket.com

—Gabriella Gershenson