A shortage of doctors in Michigan is expected to get worse. (Photo: Paul Lachine Special to the Free Press)

America is in the midst of full implementation of the federal Affordable Care Act. Among the objectives of that legislation was to expand access to health care for more people. In Michigan, and in many other states, that objective is hampered by a current and looming shortage of primary care physicians.

In a recent study, the Citizens Research Council found that many Michigan counties have insufficient numbers of primary care physicians, including family doctors, internists, pediatricians, obstetricians and gynecologists, general surgeons, and especially psychiatrists. Many of the most severe shortages are in the northern half of the Lower Peninsula, but southeast Michigan is not immune — especially the city of Detroit.

CRC examined shortages using two methods. First, we looked at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Health Resources and Services Administration designated primary care shortage areas where the number of physicians relative to the population is lower than their standard ratio or, alternatively, based on demonstrated need such as economic or cultural barriers.

By this measure, Wayne County has the most shortage areas in the state with 16. Most of these shortage designations are for facilities that treat high-need populations, such as those with especially high infant mortality rates or areas where more than 20% of the population lives below the poverty line. Other designations are for census tracks with high need populations. Other southeast Michigan facilities that serve high need populations are found in Milan, Mount Clemens, New Haven, and Pontiac.

CRC also examined shortages across the state by looking at the ratios of each type of physician to the population for each county. This was compared with research-based suggested physician-to-population ratios. This criteria suggests that access to medical care is an issue in many outstate counties. Wayne, Oakland, and Washtenaw counties, on a county-wide basis, had a sufficient number of physicians. Macomb and Livingston counties lack a sufficient number of psychiatrists, but the supply of the other physicians analyzed is at least sufficient.

The main issue that arises from county-wide shortages is access to proper and continuous health care, especially for high need or at-risk populations. From these two shortage metrics, we know that, although Wayne County has a sufficient number of primary care providers on a county-wide basis, those doctors are not strategically located in the places that serve the needs of all county residents. Limited transportation options in Detroit and across the county further limit access to already existing practices and hospitals.

Primary care is an integral part of an affordable and effective health care system. CRC’s report, Where are the Primary Care Doctors? examines shortage data across Michigan, looks at the causes for primary care physician shortages, and provides some options for policy-makers to both increase the supply of primary care physicians and alleviate some of the service demand placed on these providers. The future of our public’s health relies on primary care services, provided from a variety of provider types, and needs the support of policy-makers and citizens alike to reinstate a sense of value.

The CRC analysis suggests that this issue must be addressed with both supply-side and demand-side solutions. Supply-side changes might include addressing the reimbursement rates for doctors by revising Medicaid reimbursement rates; using loan forgiveness programs; and working with medical schools to affect the programs students are entering, their placement in underserved areas, and retention of these new doctors upon graduation. Demand-side policies would include an expansion of the use of medical homes; expanding scope of practice to allow nonphysician professionals to fill voids; and greater investment in public health programs. To be most effective, policy-makers will need to utilize a combination of these policy changes.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1UzxvTg