Draft is a series about the art and craft of writing.

A few years ago, I went out for a night at the opera, right after approving a book review I had written that would soon be sent to the printer, posted on the Internet and generally released into the world.

I had conscientiously checked and rechecked all the places where I had quoted the book, to make sure that the author’s wording and the punctuation were correct. And then I did my usual last-minute agonizing over some awkward phrases of my own. The job was done. As I settled into my balcony seat, and the lights went down, I was running through those now very familiar paragraphs in my mind, saying goodbye to them, letting them go.

And then my brain got stuck. The very first line of my book review, I was suddenly convinced, was something that I had read somewhere else. I had opened with a “writerly” statement that was maybe out of keeping with my usual prose style — and it was suddenly obvious to me that, in reaching for that literary cadence, I had grabbed onto something that someone else had said. My opening phrase — it was only seven words long — hung suspended in my brain. It was bolded, it was italicized, it was underlined. It was illuminated in the theatrical darkness of the concert hall.

And then, of course, I thought, I have to get to Google. I have to get home and turn on my computer and search for that opening line (this was before I owned a smartphone). And what would I do if I found it, what would I do if I was right? I conjured panicked thoughts of calling the editor, begging for one last shot at revising the piece. But it would be too late. Maybe if I left right now and called?

But of course, I didn’t get up and push my way out of my row. I just sat through the performance, thinking about those seven words, as my mental font grew ever larger and ever bolder. Sometimes I let it go for a few minutes and listened to the music, but always the thoughts came back. If I had indeed taken it from somewhere else, then what? Well, I wouldn’t wait for someone else to notice. I would call the editor and explain, apologize. I would offer to write an apology; they could post it online immediately. I tried to soothe myself with this promise, though at one particularly fraught point in the second act, I got as far as returning an award I had received several years earlier, and writing a long, sad, self-accusatory op-ed.

But this is not that op-ed, because when I eventually did get home, after the performance, and plugged my seven words into Google, guess what, not a single match. It was just a particularly severe attack of closing anxiety, the panic that writers feel at the moment when the final revisions are made, and the words become public property. Some writers regularly, predictably, discover one more correction, one more error, one more problem, as soon as a piece has closed.

There are probably writers who make all their corrections and changes at the first opportunity, and never revisit the question — but I am on the worrywart side of the spectrum, and my usual self-soothing mechanism during the editing process is to tell myself over and over that there is still time to catch mistakes and make fixes — until there isn’t, and then I take a deep breath or a strong drink and tell myself to let go.

Usually my panics and my last-minute tremors are about mistakes or misinterpretations. But I have found myself, more and more often in recent years, worrying about inadvertent plagiarism, sitting over my laptop late at night and Googling any particularly highfalutin metaphors or plangent turns of phrase.

I worry that as I browse the words on the web, as I click on links and read polemics and paragraphs on websites I can’t even name, metaphors and metonymies may catch on my brain like burdock burrs, with the tiny hooks that inspired Velcro. (And yes, I did just check whether anyone else has invoked plagiarism and the burdock plant in the same sentence; it’s a poor thing but, as far as I can tell, mine own.)

I am not actually careless about picking up other people’s words. My memory is not quite what it used to be (if it ever was) and I have my share of those moments when I can remember everything about a book or a movie (or a person) except the name. But do my senior moments mean that I am more likely to commit inadvertent plagiarism (because I might read something and forget that I’ve read it) or less likely (because who can remember a phrase long enough to use it somewhere)?

Related More From Draft Read previous contributions to this series.

No, I think my anxiety, or at least its increasing fierceness, is actually rooted in the technology. Just because it is now possible for me to know — and know instantly — whether a particular phrase has been used before, I feel the weight of responsibility. I can check this, and therefore I should check this. And while I’m at it, how many other phrases should I run, just to be sure?

I have known the pain — and it is painful — of catching a student plagiarizing, of seeing whole paragraphs match on a search engine. But there was nothing inadvertent about those cases. My fear is not that I will knowingly borrow narrative and get caught — my fear is that a sticky sentence or apt aphorism will be caught up in my least attentive literary browsing, and I will find it all too readily as I search to complete my own thoughts. That burdock burrs will catch on my socks and come home to seed my garden.

O.K., one last time. I just went back on the Internet and searched again for that opening phrase, “pain and death are the physician’s familiars.” Nothing came up except my book review. No one else had said it first, and no one has borrowed it since.

Perri Klass, a professor of journalism and pediatrics, is the director of the Arthur L. Carter Journalism Institute at New York University.