Advertisement - story continues below

Former Speaker of the House John Boehner drew a great deal of contempt from the Republican base during his time in office.

His repeated unwillingness to challenge President Obama on issues central to the Republican platform, including his tacit acceptance of Obamacare and refusal to challenge overreaching executive orders, caused many within the party to lose faith in the system.

After Boehner unleashed an attack on Sen. Ted Cruz on Wednesday, calling him “Lucifer in the flesh” and a “miserable son of a bitch,” Cruz has fired back by revealing a secret about Boehner’s conduct during the only major Republican effort to challenge Obama, the 2013 government shutdown.

Advertisement – story continues below

“During the government shutdown, I reached out to John Boehner and I offered for Mike Lee [and] me to go over and work with the speaker. Can we resolve this and actually get something meaningful to stop the disaster that is Obamacare? John Boehner’s response was, ‘I have no interest in talking to you,'” Cruz said.

The government shutdown, which occurred from Oct. 1 to Oct. 16, 2013, was initiated by Cruz as part of a real effort to defund Obamacare and protest increases in the debt ceiling, which has continued to rise during the entirety of Obama’s presidency.

Advertisement – story continues below

In order to end the shutdown, Obama simply had to sign off on the federal budget in the absence of appropriations for the Affordable Care Act, which he refused to do.

The effort ultimately failed, however, as Republican leaders eventually broke ranks and caved out of fear that a hostile media would blame them for the shutdown and would subsequently cost them the 2014 congressional elections.

Cruz had pressured Republican leadership to stand by their principles, and because of this his reputation in Washington tanked.

Later in his response, Cruz linked Trump to Boehner, saying if Republicans want real change, they shouldn’t vote for someone who is friends with the former speaker.

Advertisement – story continues below

“I will say this, if you’re wondering who actually has stood up to Washington, I think John Boehner has made it crystal clear. John Boehner in his remarks described Donald Trump as his ‘texting and golfing buddy.'” In the same interview where Boehner called Cruz an “SOB,” he also described Trump as a “texting buddy” and golf partner.

“So if you want someone that’s a texting and golfing buddy, if you’re happy with John Boehner, speaker of the House, and you want a president like John Boehner, Donald Trump is your man,” Cruz added.

h/t: Mediaite