Democrats are 1.3 times more likely to talk about Mars than Republicans. (Post composite of a Reuters/NASA photo)

Politicians talk a lot. Once they are elected to Congress, those words go on the record, officially cataloged by the Government Printing Office, which is like a tracker paid with tax dollars. And what that means is that we can see how their political party influences what they talk about.

Our headline is accurate. Democrats are more likely to use the word "Mars"; Republicans are more likely to use the word "genus." (We tried Venus, which Democrats talk about more, and another word that rhymes with Venus, but that one was used by both parties equally. And may not have been allowed in the headline.) We know this because of the Capitol Words tool from the Sunlight Foundation, which indexes and categorizes everything in the Congressional Record back to 1996.

We built a tool -- which you can try yourself at the bottom of this article -- that compares the use of any term by political party. We pulled out a few interesting topics to serve as an example. (On the charts below, the size of the circle is scaled to the number of total mentions, but only within each group.)

Democrats have used the term "health care" 1.2 times as much as Republicans. But Republicans have said "Obamacare" almost nine times as often. They're also much more likely to say "taxes" than Democrats.

You can look at the differences in how things are framed:

You can look at gender-oriented issues and at language.

You can compare religions ...

... and emotions. Full phrases work perfectly well.

There are some points of agreement, it's important to point out. Both parties say "America" and "United States" about equally. And when it comes to music, on one point everyone agrees: Democrats and Republicans make references to the Beatles at the same rate.

So, without further ado: Try the tool. Remember: This is everything since 1996. Find something interesting? Put it in the comments.

Which party said it more?

Powered by Capitol Words from the Sunlight Foundation.