The HealthCare.gov website, where people can buy health insurance, is displayed on a laptop screen in Washington. Expect insurers to seek significant premium increases under President Barack Obama’s health care law, in a wave of state-level requests rippling across the country ahead of the political conventions this summer. (Photo: AP file photo)

Developers should pay for traffic woes

I see where officials are considering a new housing development north of Pirate Lane, east of Babcock, some 1,350 houses, more or less. Having lived in Brevard County for almost 40 years, I am continually amazed at how the council downplays the ensuing traffic issues in the name of economic development. Have any of these members driven Babcock between Palm Bay Road and New Haven around 5 p.m.? Imagine maybe 2,000 more vehicles in and around FIT.

[More: FLORIDA TODAY opinion section]

If you argue that they are considering the traffic, just look at north Wickham between Murrell Road and the traffic circle. Describing it as a nightmare is actually being kind. To me, it seems like they are giving the developers a pass and betting the public will be so fed up with the ensuing traffic that they will gladly accept using taxpayer money to go back and fix the problem, rather than making the developers put up the money up front. If you drive around Melbourne, West Melbourne and Palm Bay you will see new subdivisions on Dairy Road, Eber Road and Minton Road, as well as existing subdivisions still building out.

Traffic in the New Haven, Minton, Palm Bay and Babcock rectangle is horrid now. Just imagine how it will be in a year or two. Then we taxpayers will be footing the bill to somehow address the problem. Make the developers put up the money.

Stephen Hemming, Palm Bay

Mirror, mirror on the wall

A recent letter to the editor suggests FLORIDA TODAY should “have just inserted a large mirror finish to reflect back the image of the real culprit: the voters who keep re-electing them” (elected officials). Elected officials are only indirectly culpable. Their inaction does not put nutrients into the water. To quote Pogo, “We have met the enemy and he is us.”

For many who live within the lagoon’s watershed, the face that would be reflected back is the face of an individual who contributes directly to the lagoon’s problems. A large portion of the nutrients in the lagoon comes from fertilizer we put on our lawns. The lagoon is dying from a thousand cuts. Stop fertilizing your lawn, along with your neighbors, and we could save much of the vast sums still to be spent to remove nutrients from runoff. That may mean accepting a new standard for what a “good” lawn looks like, but that standard certainly need not be dirt and weeds. You will be joining a growing cadre of individuals taking personal responsibility for fixing the lagoon. And it may be that severely limiting or banning lawn fertilizer is part of the only solution set we can afford.

John Fergus, Satellite Beach

Do only the wealthy matter?

Having just completed a research paper comparing the U.S. health care system with the health care systems of other rich, capitalist and democratic countries, I would like to share what I learned.

The U.S. health care system costs more than any other country in the world — about 17 percent of our GDP and over $8,000 per person yearly. We spend 50 to 70 percent more for drugs. We have fewer doctors per capita and the highest mortality amenable to health care. Part of the reason for this disparity is that we depend upon for-profit insurance companies for our health care. We all know insurance policies cost a lot of money. We are the only country in the world that does this.

Currently, about 40 million citizens are uninsured. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act helped in regards to some of the crueler practices of health insurance such as denying coverage for pre-existing conditions and canceling coverage when a person gets sick. I perceive an underlying feeling that people who do not have health insurance somehow don’t deserve health care. A nation’s health care system is a reflection of that nation’s moral values. I ask, are we a nation that thinks that all people matter, or that only the wealthy do?

Laura Healy, Satellite Beach

Higher minimum wage affects all

In a survey by Rasmussen Reports, just 12 percent of those polled want their state to set minimum wage at $15. Recently, the CEO of a restaurant said increased minimum wages laws would result in higher prices.

For those who may not understand how a company, at least one that wants to stay in business, prices the cost of their product or service, here is a quick lesson:

A company that does not make a profit will not remain in business unless it gets a taxpayer, government-mandated subsidy.

In setting a price for a product or service, a company will generally consider: the cost of materials, the cost of labor (wages), the cost of benefits (health care, payroll taxes, retirement plan matches), income taxes and profit.

If the cost of labor increases, either the price customers pay must increase, or one of the other factors may decrease.

If profits decline, the price of the company’s stock, or dividends paid, may decline, affecting the savings of anyone invested in that company.

Could it be that the majority of Americans understand that ultimately, it is customers, investors or employees, not “the business,” that will be be paying that higher wage in higher prices, lower dividends or lost jobs/hours?

Ilene Davis, Cocoa

Read or Share this story: http://on.flatoday.com/1TJvhCt