Mag and Mayme were the unofficial names of the two female figures gracing the fountain at the Federal Building in Port Huron. (Photo: Brian Martin / COURTESY)

Writing a newspaper column isn't exactly an enduring legacy. This morning's essay is training puppies by nightfall.

As a reminder of that evanescence, this weekend marks the 100th anniversary of the passing of Heil Bennet Buckeridge, who died on Feb. 7, 1915, at the age of 69.

Buckeridge is all but forgotten, but once upon a time, he wrote a popular column for Port Huron's leading newspaper, the Daily Times.

It was Buckeridge who came up with Mag and Mayme as nicknames for twin statues of scantily clad, nubile young women. The girls adorned an ornate fountain outside the Customs House — known today as the Federal Building — at the corner of Sixth and Water streets.

Mag and Mayme sat back to back, each with chin in hand, behind jets of water cascading from the fountain's upper bowls. One of the girls gazed east toward the St. Clair River and Canada, while the other looked west toward Lapeer Avenue and the Michigan interior.

Buckeridge played on this, using the twins to debate issues from opposing viewpoints. If he were writing today, he might offer this conversation:

Mag: Obamacare is the bomb!

Mayme: You smokin' crack, sister?

«« »»

FIVE YEARS AGO, I wrote about the mystery surrounding the fate of Mag and Mayme. They disappeared circa 1932, vanishing without a trace.

My reporting raised as many questions as it answered, which is why the late U.S. District Judge Lawrence P. Zatkoff asked federal historians to dig deeper.

If you're not familiar with His Honor, you should be. Port Huron owes him a deep debt.

Zatkoff, a Ronald Reagan appointee and a former chief judge for the Eastern District of Michigan, spent the late decade of his life presiding over the federal courtroom in Port Huron as a senior judge. He died of cancer on Jan. 22. He was 75.

His legacy includes his oversight of an extensive and loving restoration of the Federal Building, the crown jewel of Port Huron's architectural treasures.

Built in the 1870s, it is the oldest federal courthouse in the Midwest. Because of Judge Zatkoff's care, it may remain useful for another 150 years.

«« »»

AMONG THE QUESTIONS posed by the judge: Why did the statues disappear? Where did they come from in the first place? Was an artist commissioned to create them? Are there other similar fountains?

"Thanks to research in the Supervising Architect of the Treasury's records at the National Archives in College Park, Maryland, those questions can now be answered," Jeff Jensen, of the federal Office of Historic Preservation, reported in a blog entry two months ago.

"The fountain and cast iron sculptures arrived at the site unceremoniously in 1878," he continued. "At Michigan Representative Omar D. Conger's urging ... the fountain, including the two statues, was purchased from the J.W. Fiske Ornamental Iron Works company out of New York for $875.

"The construction supervisor declared it complete in the letter dated July 25, 1878, and said it presented a very nice appearance.' For many years it graced the corner of Water and Sixth streets providing a bit of Classical inspiration for the bustling port town."

«« »»

TIMES CHANGE, and so do social mores.

In the Gilded Age, as Mark Twain described the 1870s, no one batted an eye at sculptures of curvaceous, half-naked young women. With the turn of the century came more temperate — some might say prudish — times.

"By 1913, the fountain had fallen out of favor," Jensen wrote. "On September 5, 1913, the custodian of Port Huron received a letter from Washington about a petition from local businessmen to have the fountain removed, and soon a government inspector was on site to assess the situation."

The following month, the inspector called for removing the fountain, which he described as "old, rusted and needing of repair."

According to Jensen, the inspector complained that the fountain was out of scale and stood too close to the curb, so that "the mist is a public nuisance." Its "barn-like" winter cover was "considered unsightly," and the building's custodian complained of finding rubbish and dead dogs in the fountain's catch basin.

"Children have nearly drowned," the inspector added.

And then there was this: "In this age of modern society and general censorship, it is said to be considered morally objectionable."

The inspector interviewed the city park commissioner, who said he wouldn't erect such a fountain in a public park because of the "nudity complained of."

«« »»

THE FOUNTAIN was sold to the U.S. Lighthouse Service and moved to the grounds of the Fort Gratiot Light, built in 1829 to overlook the place where Lake Huron empties into its strait.

A century ago, the city toyed with the notion of creating a park to the south of the lighthouse, where the U.S. Coast Guard moved into its current station in 2004. The city's water board also looked at the property as a potential site for a new water plant.

Historian Ruth E. Mills, the foremost expert on the history of the Fort Gratiot Light, found a reference to "men working on a fountain base" in the lighthouse keeper's log for December 1913.

From studying old photographs, she has a good idea of where Mag and Mayme were relocated.

"If I had to take a guess at its current-day location," she told me, "I would say it was somewhere on the west side of the new Coast Guard Station parking lot."

«« »»

THE COAST GUARD and the Lighthouse Service would merge in 1939, but they were still separate agencies in 1923 when the southern portion of the lighthouse property was granted to the Coast Guard.

"The last time I can definitively place the fountain on the grounds is in a photograph dated May 12, 1931, held by the U.S. Coast Guard historian's office in D.C.," Mills reported. "In this photo, the figures (Mag and Mayme) appear to be missing, and there's no sign that the fountain is in working order."

That fits with reporting done by the late Grace Crimmins Filion, a Times Herald staffer who launched a hunt for the long-lost statues in 1971.

Readers sent her yellowed photographs of the fountain, and she also heard from Fred Matthews, of Port Huron Township, who remembered the construction of the original Coast Guard station in 1932.

He said the fountain's location put it in the way of work crews, and the foreman ordered its removal. Matthews and his brother volunteered to break the cast-iron catch basin apart with sledge hammers. As payment, they were allowed to sell the metal for scrap.

"It wasn't an easy job," he told Filion. "It was at least one-and-a-half inches thick, and it rang like a bell when it was hit."

Matthews could offer no clues in the search for Mag and Mayme. While the catch basin remained, the twins had disappeared by 1932.

"If they had been (there), we would have sold them, too," he observed.

«« »»

IN HIS BLOG ENTRY, Jensen reported finding sisters of Mag and Mayme also manufactured by J.W. Fiske, the most prominent American maker of decorative cast iron and cast zinc in the latter half of the 19th century.

"There are versions of the fountain in Delaware County, N.Y.; Washington Courthouse, Ohio; Edisto, S.C.; and most interestingly, one called the Maids of the Mist on the other side of the state in St. Joseph," he wrote. "There the statues are known as Constance and Patience."

He shared a link to a YouTube video by Darrell Humbles — http://youtu.be/YsiGRzcEmng — that shows the St. Joseph fountain. Constance and Patience, it seems reasonable to assume, are the spitting images of Mag and Mayme.

Carol A. Grissom, author of "Zinc Sculpture in America: 1850-1950," said St. Joseph obtained its fountain from Chicago, where it had stood in the Crystal Palace for the Interstate Industrial Exposition of 1873.

While the fountain's catch basin is made of cast iron, the sculptures are of cast zinc, a softer and more brittle metal.

«« »»

THAT SOFTNESS LIKELY doomed Mag and Mayme, according to two people who helped with my reporting in 2010.

Ed Moore Jr., a history buff who lives near the lighthouse, said he was told by "a Port Huron old-timer" — he thinks it may have been Al Carlisle, the city engineer for many years and an avid historian — that "the statues were made of lead or some soft metal. Local fishermen discovered they could carve out pieces of the statues to use as sinkers. It didn't take long for the statues to become so disfigured (they were ruined)."

T.J. Gaffney, founder of Streamline Historic Services and a former curator of the Port Huron Museum, recalls hearing a similar story from his late father, Thomas.

"The story Dad and Fred Vincent (of the Times Herald) always told was that the two statues were so riddled with holes from kids who used the lead as sinkers ... that they were unsalvageable," he said.

Read or Share this story: http://bwne.ws/1D8wXye