Buy Photo In the Lakewood neighborhood off of Forest Park Circle, a 2-year-old girl was fatally hit by a car. (Photo: Peter Ackerman/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo

Local media have identified the township toddler killed by a 2002 Toyota Sienna minivan in a driveway accident Wednesday afternoon on Forest Park Circle.

The victim is 2-year-old Batsheva Esther Wolfson a”h, according to the Lakewood Scoop, an Orthodox news website. The abbreviation a”h is an honorary title in Hebrew, wishing peace for the deceased.

The Ocean County Prosecutor’s Office declined to confirm the name, out of respect for the family, said spokesman Al Della Fave. Nor is the office releasing the name of the driver, whom police have not charged.

The family declined to comment when reached at their home by the Asbury Park Press Thursday afternoon. Phone calls made to the family Saturday afternoon were not returned.

RELATED: No charges in Lakewood toddler driveway death

Wolfson, the second toddler killed by a vehicle in Lakewood this year, died as the celebration of Hanukkah drew to a close. She was walking with her siblings with their father along Forest Park Circle at 2:10 p.m. Wednesday when the driver of the minivan attempted to back the vehicle out of a driveway, Della Fave said, citing the police report.

She was taken to the Jersey Shore University Medical Center in Neptune, where she died from her injuries.

The accident occurred deep within Forest Park Circle, a residential neighborhood that lies a few blocks from U.S. Route 9. Families with children can be seen throughout the circle. Near the entrance of the neighborhood is a sign that reads “Watch Children.”

MORE: Lakewood toddler hit by car in May buried by sundown

In May, another toddler was killed in a Lakewood residential neighborhood, in a driveway accident involving a 2006 Chrysler Town and Country Minivan.

Two-year-old Yocheved Abraham, was walking down the 300 block of 11th Street with her sibling and father at 2:08 p.m. May 23 when she was killed.

The minivan, driven by Yehoshua Klein pulled into a driveway next to a large tree and struck Abraham. She was taken to Monmouth Medical Center Southern Campus and was pronounced dead just before 3 p.m.

Police ruled the death accidental, and no charges were filed against Klein at the time.

In the most recent accident, Della Fave said the Prosecutor's Office will undertake a "secondary review'' of the police investigation findings and the decision not to file charges.

Steph Solis: 732-643-4043; ssolis@app.com; @stephmsolis.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1AVUGAD