The lack of dominant businesses in eating disorder treatment has attracted private equity firms interested in acquiring small to mid-sized companies and building them up through acquisitions.

McCallum Group Inc., a provider of in-patient and out-patient treatment in St. Louis and Austin, Texas is seeking to capitalize on that trend by putting itself up for sale, LBO Wire reported this morning.

Described by market research firm IBIS World as “fragmented,” with a large number of small-scale establishments, the eating disorder treatment industry is estimated to have grown to $2.7 billion in 2013. The National Eating Disorder Association cites research estimating that nearly 30 million American men and women suffer from eating disorders such as anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa and binge-eating.

Treatment centers such as McCallum, categorized as behavioral health service providers, have benefited from the tailwinds of the Affordable Care Act and the updated Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008, which puts mental health coverage on par with that of physical maladies.

Such businesses may also benefit from the Affordable Care Act’s extension of the amount of time children can stay on their parents’ insurance, given that anorexia typically appears in early to mid-adolescence. Previously children were only eligible to stay on their parents’ coverage until age 18, now the limit is 26.

But some PE firms ventured into the space long before those developments.

Trinity Hunt Partners bought St. Louis-based Castlewood Treatment Center, which focuses on psychologically acute patients in eating disorder, in 2008 and was also an owner of Denver’s Eating Recovery Center between 2010 and 2013 before selling it to Lee Equity Partners. Eating Recovery Center treats patients who are suffering physically from physical disorders like anorexia and bulimia.

Webster Capital, meanwhile, in 2011 invested in Discovery Practice Management, a Los Alamitos, Cali.-based operator of residential treatment programs for adolescents and women suffering from eating disorders and substance abuse or emotional disorders.

Write to Amy Or at amy.or@wsj.com