Four years after the fall of Howrey LLP, another batch of the law firm’s former partners have agreed to settle with its bankruptcy estate.

That this time, 47 ex-partners are chipping in $75,000—an average of just $1,595 each—but are also agreeing to drop $6.1 million in claims that they were pursuing in the case, according to court filings. Removing those claims means more money will be available for other creditors. The settlement frees the ex-partners from future Howrey-related liability.

Howrey trustee Allan Diamond said in a Tuesday filing in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in San Francisco that the settlement, more than a year in the making, “eliminates contentious claims that would otherwise develop into costly and time-consuming litigation.”

Mr. Diamond claimed the ex-partners owed the estate money they earned when Howrey was allegedly insolvent as well as money paid on employment contracts that he alleges were violated. Some of the settling parties had also been pursued for so-called unfinished business claims, which claw back money earned on legal assignments that originated at Howrey and were taken to new firms.

The group of 47 partners, jointly represented by San Francisco law firm Dumas & Clark LLP, denied that they owed anything to their former employer. Instead, they thought they were in line for $6.1 million.

An attorney for the ex-partners did not immediately respond to a request for comment Thursday. Mr. Diamond said Thursday in an email that he’s settled with “all but a few remaining former partners.” He added: “There remain other complex issues but we are currently working on a liquidating plan.”

The agreement still needs a bankruptcy judge’s approval.

The settlement is the latest in a series of deals Mr. Diamond has reached in the drawn-out bankruptcy case in recent months, including ones with Howrey’s former Washington, D.C., landlord, another group of former partners, and Howrey’s former dissolution committee.

Mr. Diamond said in a December court filing that he hopes to have a creditor-repayment plan confirmed by the court “well before” the end of 2015.

Howrey has already paid off a $37 million debt to its largest creditor, Citibank, thanks to a $41 million deal reached last year with Baker & Hostetler LLP, a firm that inherited several large contingency fee cases from Howrey.

At its peak, Howrey employed hundreds of attorneys and was known for its antitrust, intellectual property and litigation work. The firm voted to dissolve in March 2011 following an onslaught of partner departures and fell into bankruptcy the next month.

Write to Sara Randazzo at sara.randazzo@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @sara_randazzo