Lucas Bumack during the Canon City Tigers' baseball game against the 4 Corners Club Sox on Saturday at Justin Field. The game was part of the 23rd annual Bubba's Bash. (Brandon Hopper/Daily Record)

Tigers pitcher Lucas Bufmack earned a tough-luck loss on Saturday, the kind no one deserves but someone must take after a pitchers' duel.

Two unearned runs crossed the plate in the top of the fifth inning for the Four Corners Club Sox and it was enough as pitcher Cam Baird shut down the Tigers for a 2-0 victory in the 23rd annual Bubba's Bash at Justin Field.

“He was a high-velocity kind of kid, mid-80s or so, somewhere in that area,” Tigers coach Tim Ritter said of Baird, the more dominant pitcher of the morning game. “It's tough for our kids when they're swinging wood and they're not used to that (velocity). … I liked how we competed – we put the ball in play for the most part.”

The loss dropped the Tigers to 1-2 on the tournament and they finished third in the National League division behind South Denver and Four Corners. The Tigers' win came against Hays, Kansas on Thursday after they lost in extra innings to South Denver. Cañon City missed finishing in the top two of its division for the first time in at least five years. The top teams from both divisions will play Sunday to decide the champion.

Cañon City will play Sunday, too. Its game will be against Vista Ridge, which Cañon City played last week in a doubleheader split.

Bufmack needed to work out of some tight jams early, and his defense helped him out multiple times. He was able to leave the bases loaded full of Sox in the first inning and picked off a runner in the second to end that frame.

Advertisement

In the third inning, a leadoff error followed by a stolen base found the Sox with a runner at second and nobody out. Bufmack induced pop-outs to right-fielder Michael Green, first baseman Trace Hildebrand and catcher Zach Manchester to end the threat.

Cañon City's defense made some big plays to save runs in the fourth inning. With nobody out and runners at first and second, Manchester caught a runner trying to steal third. That was followed by a diving catch by Green in right field and a putout from Cameron Brosh to Hildebrand, where Hildebrand made a nifty scoop to save a run.

The Tigers left runners in scoring position in the first, second and fourth innings and the Sox made them pay for it in the fifth. After a leadoff runner reached on an error and a moved up on a wild pitch, a two-out triple scored the opening run of the game. That was followed by a double and it gave Baird all the run support necessary.

Bufmack was pulled after that in favor of Michael Hawver, who limited the damage to only two runs. Ritter said both pitchers threw well.

On the other side, will-be college sophomore Baird finished the game with 11 strikeouts and allowed only four hits.

The crossover games have been decided and the Tigers will play the Wolves at 9:30 a.m. Sunday. Pueblo West and 4 Corners will match up at 11:45 a.m. and South Denver and Mitchell will play at 2:30 p.m. The winners of the final two games will meet for the championship.