House Majority Whip Jeremy Durham and his wife, Jessica Durham, listen to proceedings during the early portion of the caucus meeting. (Photo: Larry McCormack / The Tennessean.com)

With the first week of the General Assembly wrapped up, there was no shortage of interesting news ranging from protests to bill introductions, an $8 billion fiscal note and House Republicans retention of a beleaguered lawmaker.

Republicans retain Durham in leadership role

An hour after lawmakers convened for their first day of session, the House Republican caucus met to decide whether or not to keep embattled Majority Whip Jeremy Durham, R-Franklin, in his leadership role. The caucus underwent a long discussion that largely focused on parliamentary procedure and not on Durham's actions before the caucus took a vote that fell one shy of having a chance to discuss removing Durham from leadership. After the meeting, Durham spoke to media at length about lessons learned and his desire to move forward.

Prior to the Republican caucus vote, Tim Stillings, a Franklin Special School District board member, said he was considering challenging Durham in the upcoming Republican primary.

Lawmakers get an earful from Insure Tennessee supporters

Buy Photo Justin Jones, a Fisk University student, speaks during a rally in support of Insure Tennessee at Legislative Plaza. (Photo: Samuel M. Simpkins / The Tennessean)

Hundreds of supporters of Insure Tennessee, which is not expected to be on the Republican-led legislature's agenda, gathered at the Capitol in hopes of pressuring lawmakers to pass legislation that would provide coverage to an estimated 280,000 Tennesseans. Protesters could be heard bellowing in the background as lawmakers gathered in their chambers for the first time this year. Insure Tennessee supporters vow to continually return to the statehouse to remind lawmakers of the importance of addressing the issue this year.

Businessman donates to Dems

Buy Photo Nashville businessman Bill Freeman announced Tuesday his plans to donate $100,000 to help bolster House Democrats efforts in the 2016 election. (Photo: Joel Ebert / Tennessean)

Former Nashville mayoral candidate and businessman Bill Freeman pledged $100,000 to Democrats in the House of Representatives to help in their efforts in advance of the 2016 election.

Freeman, who came in third place in the 2015 Nashville mayoral election after spending more than $4.5 million, said the Republican-led House has been disappointing and ignored major issues facing the state.

An $8 billion bill

State Rep. Mark Pody, R-Lebanon, and state Sen. Mae Beavers, R-Mt. Juliet, announced in September they were filing the Tennessee Natural Marriage Defense Act. (Photo: File / The Tennessean.com)

A bill filed last year by Republican lawmakers Rep. Mark Pody, R-Lebanon, and Sen. Mae Beavers, R-Mt. Juliet, that would make all marriages of same-sex couples "void and unenforceable in Tennessee" would cost the state more than $8.5 billion, according to a fiscal note.

The bill, which received national headlines after its initial introduction, is being closely watched by supporters and detractors, including the Tennessee Equality Project, an advocate group for the LGBT community, that alerted supporters about the bill's fiscal note.

Lawmakers set to introduce birth control bill

Margot Riphagen of New Orleans wore a birth control pills costume when she protested in front of the Supreme Court on March 25 while the court heard oral arguments in the challenge to a contraceptives requirement in the Affordable Care Act. (Photo: File / AP )

Two state Senators — Jeff Yarbro, D-Nashville and Steve Dickerson, R-Nashville — are working on separate versions of legislation that would provide adult women in Tennessee easier access to birth control.

The legislation would permit women 18 and older to obtain contraceptives directly from pharmacists in addition to physicians, who currently write prescriptions for birth control.

Supporters of the legislation argue it would make it easier for women to access contraceptives. Others, including the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, say allowing pharmacists to prescribe and dispense contraceptives only replaces one barrier with another.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1RuAmA1