The streets of Denver will run green Saturday as the city’s celebrates St. Patrick’s Day.

Nearly 10,000 people will march in the 2016 Denver St. Patrick’s Day Parade. Officials expect close to 400,000 people to head downtown for the event.

The parade will feature close to 225 floats and entries, along with performances from bagpipers and step-dancers.

“The Irish culture is here,” said Theresa Melaragno, who serves on the parade’s board of directors. “It’s not just a day to come downtown and drink beer. It’s really to share the Irish heritage with the state of Colorado.”

The parade will block vehicle access to Blake Street, 17th Street and Wynkoop Street starting at 8 a.m., Melaragno said.

The event will leave from the Coors Field parking lot and begin its route on Wynkoop Street at 9:30 a.m. The procession will disband at the Coors Field parking lot at Blake and 27th Streets.

The downtown streets will reopen immediately following the parade. Officials expect the event to last roughly four hours.

Limited parking will be available in the Coors Field parking structure and at the Colorado Convention Center. Parade officials encourage participants to use public transportation or arrive before the streets close to find a spot. Parking passes are also available for several lots and garages adjacent to the parade route.

Drinkers who plan to enjoy a pint in honor of the holiday will have a chance to test their impairment before they hit the road.

Representatives from the Colorado Department of Transportation will be stationed at Irish Snug, a pub on Capitol Hill, to provide breathalyzer tests for anyone interested in knowing their blood-alcohol concentration. The tests will be offered from 2 to 5 p.m.

“What we’re trying to do is go to places where they drink to help people understand their limit when it comes to drinking and driving,” said Sam Cole,CDOT communications manager. “We think there needs to be more awareness around blood-alcohol content and how that impairs you.”

Katy Canada: 303-954-1043, kcanada@denverpost.com or @KatySusanna