In a speech Wednesday at a Washington think tank, outgoing (at least in theory) Attorney General Eric Holder joined fellow Democrats in dialing up the pressure on Republicans who still haven’t held a vote to confirm his successor, Loretta Lynch, even though they’ve kept her waiting longer than almost anyone else who’s been considered for the job.

While he was at it, Holder – who’s spent so much time in the hot seat being grilled by angry Republican lawmakers that he could've used some asbestos Underoos – got in a nice personal dig at the GOP, too.

First, the setup:

“There’s no place I’d rather be in my closing days as attorney general than here, with you all,” Holder said at a Center for American Progress event marking the year anniversary of President Barack Obama’s My Brother’s Keeper initiative. “Or at least, these should be my closing days.”

Then, the kill shot:

“Given the Senate’s scheduling and delays in considering Loretta Lynch’s nomination for a vote, it’s almost as if the Republicans in Congress have discovered a new fondness for me,” Holder deadpanned as the audience chuckled. “I’m feeling love there that I haven’t felt for some time. Where was all this affection over the last six years?”

[READ: Obama, Holder Hailed for Openness at Transparency Celebration]

Holder was joking, sort of, especially compared with the heat Hill Democrats – and at least one outsider Republican – are putting on Republicans for blocking the appointment of the first African-American woman attorney general.

On Tuesday, the Congressional Black Caucus all but called the GOP holdup an act of racism, strongly suggesting that the all-white nearly all-white Republican Senate delegation doesn’t want a black woman to become the nation’s top cop.

"I think race certainly can be considered a major factor in the delay,” Democratic Rep. G.K. Butterfield of North Carolina, the caucus’ chairman, told reporters on a press call.

Surprisingly, though, Butterfield didn’t break new ground with that insinuation. Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill., went off about it back in February, when Lynch’s holding pattern had stretched a mere 100 days or so.

[ALSO: Loretta Lynch Embraces Eric Holder's Legacy on Civil Rights]

"I would think, as we approach the 50th anniversary of Selma, that Republicans should be more sensitive about what they're doing to this woman," Durbin said. “She's being held up for no substantive reason. That's not an implication. That's a statement. You can't celebrate civil rights and ignore the reality that one of the most important civil rights milestones, the appointment of an African-American attorney general, is being held up for no good reason."

The civil rights comparison Durbin drew – one he took even further Wednesday by saying Republicans had put Lynch “in the back of the bus” – was more than appropriate. After all, the same GOP Senate leader – Mitch McConnell of Kentucky – who’s holding up the Lynch vote didn’t celebrate civil rights, at least not in person, when the Bloody Sunday anniversary in Selma, Alabama, rolled around a week and a half ago.

Bottom line: Both Holder – who’s tacitly suggested that race was a factor in the way congressional Republicans treated him – and Lynch, whom others imply is the victim of racism, are stuck in neutral for the moment, unless and until Senate Republicans change their ways.