A new undercover videotape may spell further doom for the campaign of Wendy Davis, the pro-abortion candidate for governor in Texas whose sole claim to fame is having filibustered against a bill to ban late-term abortions.

The tape has the Davis campaign mocking her pro-life opponent, Greg Abbott, for being paralyzed. This is the second time the Davis campaign has come under criticism for mocking Abbott’s disability.

Conservative activist James O’Keefe released the video today:

While investigating Obamacare Navigators, Battleground Texas, and their connection to Obama’s Organizing for America, we caught some deeply offensive comments on tape.

It seems Battleground Texas and Wendy Davis’ strategy to win the Governor’s seat is to mock Attorney General Abbott’s disability. We caught Davis supporters and Battleground Texas staff on tape making crude statement such as “isn’t that amazing to think of? He’s in a wheelchair and we want to stand with Wendy?”

Even more disturbing was an election official who when asked about forging signatures covered her ears and then went on to admit, “People do that all the time.” A Battleground Texas volunteer then added, “I don’t think it’s legal but I didn’t hear you say that.”

UPDATE: Davis has responded to the video, calling it “abhorrent:”

“Greg Abbott has persevered through great personal challenge to raise a family, have a productive career, and for that he deserves our respect,” she said.

At age 26, Abbott was struck by a falling oak tree that injured his back as he jogged by. He has used a wheelchair ever since and has become an eloquent pro-life advocate — speaking up for both the disabled and the unborn.

CLICK LIKE IF YOU’RE PRO-LIFE!

The accident serves as a reminder that regardless of someone’s circumstances, he or she deserves a chance at life, Abbott has said.

“As I laid there motionless on the ground, gripped with pain, as helpless as a child in the womb, I knew my life had changed forever,” he said at the National Right to Life convention in June. “Some people think it’s easy to write off the lives of the disabled or the different. But every day, God reminds us that all life has value, no matter the form.”