Family card games as child brought lessons that remain

HANDS with pocket aces (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto )

When I was growing up, my family didn’t play Parcheesi or checkers. We played poker. We gathered ’round Friday nights with our loose change in hand, swapping pennies for poker chips and bored looks for game faces. We played for hours, learning new poker games and strategies, but the biggest lesson wasn’t knowing when to fold or that a flush beats a straight. It was learning to make the most of what we were dealt.

Just exchanging coins for chips was an experience, fishing pennies from my piggy bank and receiving stacks of antique tokens in different colors. Ah, the life of a gambler.

Dad had an affinity for change, with a seemingly endless supply, while Mom dug coins from the bottom of her garbage-bag-like purse, unearthing nickels and dimes caked with a combination of tobacco, makeup and purse lint.

Poker forced us to look each other in the eye, if only to get a hint of the cards the others held. Our family never paid closer attention to each other than when pennies were on the line. Victory depended on being able to discern if that smirk on my sister’s face was high school high-jinks or a hidden pair of aces.

Everyone bluffed from time to time, taking advantage of the opportunity to lie and get away with it. Mom always knew when we didn’t have the cards, but folded anyway, not wanting to take unfair advantage. She had watched our faces so many times when we told her we hadn’t broken the lamp or we were at a friend’s house that she could recognize every line and gesture of dishonesty.

Mom seldom bluffed, but if she did, nobody called her on it. It was inconceivable that she would deceive us. We were young and naive, not understanding that parents were equally deceptive. They just had better poker faces.

Dad introduced new poker games such as Midnight Baseball Rained Out and always commented while dealing, with a “two, no help” and a “club, possible flush.” It’s possible he did it to help us understand the game, but more likely Dad enjoyed, as most fathers do, describing the world around him as if he were a radio sports commentator, explaining what others couldn’t see.

His running comments became the backdrop for numerous other conversations. Some were to gain insight into a player’s hand, while others were to gain knowledge into us. By channeling all of our energy into maintaining the perfect poker face, we became susceptible to questions that fell below our gambling radar. I may have hid the fact that I was bluffing, but failed to conceal how my day went at school.

We were just happy to be gambling like adults. Being the youngest, I was always torn between the purchasing power of the penny and not wanting to miss a single hand. My older siblings felt like high rollers on the Vegas strip as they learned lingo such as “full boat,” “trips” and “ladies,” raising Dad’s bet with a nonchalant flick of the wrist and the steely-eyed gaze of a professional gambler. I tried to mimic that gaze and might have succeeded if I weren’t busy crying because I’d lost the last hand.

Conversations were different on poker night, as was the atmosphere. It was like spying on our parents. We heard about their day instead of the other way around. My dad told jokes he heard at the office. They usually had complicated storylines that built up to an even more convoluted punch line like, “Pardon me, Roy. Is that the cat that ate your new shoes?” delivered to the “Chattanooga Choo Choo” melody.

The deal went around the table as we each took turns calling the shots. We named the game, dealt the cards and slowly transitioned power from parents to kids. We learned to read faces, understand the odds and make decisions based on limited information. We weren’t just following rules, but defining them as we became gamblers.

I still play cards on Friday nights, but I miss the complicated jokes, tobacco-infused nickels and parents I can no longer bluff.

The cards haven’t changed, still 52 of them, but I am different and the ante seems to get higher every year.

Speaking of 52, I want to say happy birthday to my beautiful wife. The best bet I ever made.

— Christopher Kunz is a Neenah resident. He can be reached at pcletters@postcrescent.com

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1txNgPc