Loren Nowland has worked the oil fields in Weld County for seven years.

He started cutting trenches around rigs, and moved his way up to working on the rigs. Then oil prices began to drop. Eight months ago he was let go.

"The money was really good, really good," Nowland said.

"It's a tough place to work but its rewarding. You put in 12-hour days and come home exhausted and it feels really good," he said.

Nowland, 34, misses the work, and he's hoping to get back in.

"It's a place where guys can go, who don't have a lot of higher education, and make an honest living. And they can work their way up," he said.

A drilling site is seen in Weld County. Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer Sept. 23, 2015 (Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer)

If there is weakness in Colorado's otherwise glowing economy, it lies in the traditional energy industry, where prices have slumped, jobs have evaporated and drilling rigs silenced.

"As long as prices remain subdued, we won't see the activity we've had for the last few years," said Brian Lewandowski, who in August wrote an energy study for the Business Research Division of CU's Leeds School of Business in Boulder.

Oil and gas rig counts in Colorado have declined steeply this year, averaging less than 40 for the first half of the year compared with an average of 68 in operation during 2014, Lewandowski said.

Advertisement

The Leeds study noted July oil prices are down 49 percent since last year, with natural gas prices down by 30 percent over the same period. The decreases in production and prices, Lewandowski said, could ultimately mean significantly less tax revenue for Colorado municipalities.

"The sharp decline in prices has had delayed but measurable impacts on rig counts, industry employment and taxes," said Lewandowski. "While production thus far has remained stable, we anticipate a fall."

The Leeds School report looks closely at the depletion rate of wells.

"Starting in about 2000, each successive five years the depletion rate of wells in Colorado has been getting steeper or they've been depleting faster," he said, "meaning that the greatest volume occurs in year one and we see much less volume in year two and year three and thereafter."

With few if any new wells being drilled, production will fall.

Weld County, just east of Boulder County, stands to lose the most. Weld now accounts for 85 percent of the oil pumped in Colorado and it has already seen job losses and a reduction in new wells drilled.

In January, for instance, Encana said it would drill 30 new wells, but by late summer, as the pricing slump continued, it stopped drilling altogether.

"Given the current price environment, we have narrowed our focus to our four high margin assets - the Montmey and Duvernay in Canada and the Eagle Ford and Permian in Texas," spokesman Dale Hock said last week. "We temporarily curtailed drilling activity in Weld County earlier this year. In addition, this summer we laid off about 200 staff across the company." The company offered no specifics on where those layoffs took place.

On the flipside, Anadarko Petroleum remains active across Weld County.

"The Wattenberg field continues to be one of the best performing assets in the U.S. onshore. We approached the current market environment as an opportunity to get better, not necessarily bigger," said Robin Olsen, external relations manager for the Anadarko Petroleum Corporation.

"Because we've been able to achieve efficiencies and safely reduce costs, we're one of the few companies in our industry that has maintained its employee work force in Colorado," Olsen said. "We expect the volatility of the market to continue to be a challenge; although, we've successfully managed difficult market conditions before and believe we are in even better position to do so today."

Rebound?

Operators are eager for prices to rebound However some analysts have recently stated that it could be years before prices climb out of the 2015 doldrums.

Just two weeks ago, Goldman Sachs put a damper on anyone who believed prices would climb back. They reported that the price of crude oil could even fall to $20 per barrel, saying the global oil glut is proving to be far worse than forecast and shows no fix in the short or medium term.

"The oil market is even more oversupplied than we had expected and we now forecast this surplus to persist in 2016," the analysts wrote in a note to clients.

Goldman Sachs had reportedly previously that oil could be stuck at $50 a barrel until 2020.

"If prices remain this low, there will be concern. Operators want a higher-priced more stable market." said Stan Dempsey, president of the Colorado Petroleum Association. "My sense is demand might go up, but demand has been pretty soft this year."

Industry leaders such as American Petroleum Institute President Jack Gerard, however, remain optimistic on where things are headed.

"The industry has become more efficient, we are cutting costs, we're tightening up what it takes to produce," Gerard said in an interview with Bloomberg on Sept. 17.

"Looking at China, India and other places around the world, we believe what we see today is a downturn and a challenging time across the industry as we look at becoming more efficient. We believe the long-term opportunity is still great and we are still going to be a major player."

But that's of no use to the companies that drill the oil, repair the trucks or supply the parts needed in the industry.

Baker Hughes, one of the world's largest oil field services companies, has laid off 13,000 workers over the past year. Last month, it began a layoff of 114 staffers at its Colorado office in Brighton. The company notified labor officials in Colorado on Aug. 12 that it expected those layoffs to be permanent.

"Throughout 2015, we have lowered spending across the business, closed or consolidated facilities and made the difficult decision to reduce our work force," said Baker Hughes spokesperson Melanie Kania.

Each month this year there has been a steady decline in job numbers for the industry. In January, 36,000 people were employed, said Joe Winter, a senior economist with the Colorado Department of Labor. By May that number had dropped to about 34,400.

"Jobs aren't sinking rapidly but they are trending downward," Winter said.

Despite struggling to maintain a profit, those in the industry say the state is much better positioned to deal with the current slump than the last time it was hit.

"While we are experiencing a difficult pricing environment, through technology and efficiencies the industry has been able to continue producing and provide a buffer to weather this storm reasonably well. If you compare the downturn in the 1980s to today's, we are not experiencing the same volatility," said Doug Flanders, director of policy and external affairs for the Colorado Oil & Gas Association (COGA).

In order to conserve domestic supplies, Congress adopted the Energy Policy and Conservation Act of 1975 making it illegal to export U.S. crude oil without a special license. Flanders hopes to see this policy reversed, allowing oil exporting once again.

"One way to help keep our economy moving is by lifting our nation's self-imposed trade sanctions on crude oil exports. This would have major positive impacts by opening up new markets to the state's oil resource as well as strengthening U.S. geopolitical influence," Flanders said.

Tax revenue

Weld County Assistant Treasurer Renee Fielder said that the cost of the downturn in terms of tax revenues won't be known until 2016 or 2017.

"Oil and gas that is produced in the current year (2015), will be reported by the oil and gas company to the assessor and valued in the following year (2016), and taxed by the treasurer the next year (2017)," said Fielder in an email.

For the 2014 tax year, she said Weld County collected $356.7 million in oil and gas tax revenue.

"Due to the valuation taxation cycle - basically collecting two years in arrears - we will not be adversely impacted on oil and gas until 2017," said Weld County Treasurer John Lefebvre.

Consumers

Meanwhile lower fuel costs have been a benefit for consumers everywhere.

"I am sure some people in the oil and gas industry have lost their jobs and some projects have been delayed, but the largest effect I have seen is lower gas and oil prices for consumers and transportation companies and lower or stable prices for all of our utilities, both of which are good things," said Longmont city council member Polly Christensen.

And some companies continue to invest in Weld County.

Platteville-based oil and gas producer Synergy Resources Corp. (NYSE: SYRG), announced this month that it is purchasing the lease rights for 4,300 acres and the ownership in 25 horizontal wells in the Wattenberg Field.

The company will pay K.P. Kauffman Co. Inc., $78 million. Synergy officials said current production associated with the assets purchased is 1,200 barrels of oil per day.

"The assets purchased in the Kauffman transaction are located in the core of the Wattenberg Field where we have existing leases and production that fit nicely into our operational footprint," said Synergy President Lynn Peterson in a press statement. "Our focus remains on aggregating assets in the Wattenberg where we are achieving increasing efficiency rates in our drilling and completion activities."

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel