Karen D. Lincoln is an associate professor in the University of Southern California School of Social Work and the director of the university's Hartford Center of Excellence in Geriatric Social Work.

Over 10 million Americans now require long-term care annually and Medicaid is the primary source of coverage. Medicaid spending on long-term care services has been rising sharply.

With 10,000 baby boomers turning 65 every day, the United States is in a long-term care crisis.

Those without assets cannot get care at home. Low-income seniors are often enrolled in lower-quality nursing facilities.

Growing racial and ethnic diversity adds another level of complexity to this crisis. By 2050, the number of African-Americans age 65 and older will more than triple, and the number of older Latinos will increase 11-fold. Consequently, the number of multiple, complex chronic conditions, rates of Alzheimer’s disease and dementia, and social and health care needs will also increase.

Between 1999 and 2008, the number of whites in nursing homes had decreased by 10 percent, while the number of African-Americans increased by 11 percent and the number of Latinos by 55 percent.

Rising rates of admission likely reflect the lack of long-term care options. Medicaid forces those without assets into nursing homes, while those with the ability to pay can opt to receive care at home. Low-income seniors are often enrolled in lower-quality skilled nursing facilities, in part because of their reliance on Medicaid, which has much lower reimbursement rates than private or self-pay rates. In addition, low-quality nursing homes are more likely to close than higher-quality ones, leaving the poor to compete for health care and direct care services already in short supply, or rely on family caregivers who simply can’t keep up with the demand.

Luckily, provisions under the Affordable Care Act might help increase access to preventative care. The direct benefit of prevention, high-quality and accessible services, and better continuity of care earlier in life could reduce costs and complications prior to needing nursing home care, which unfortunately, is the most likely option for many seniors. A focus on prevention might also reduce preventable and expensive hospitalizations, as well as inadequate support, when transitioning from a skilled nursing facility back home.

Let’s ensure that seniors receive the care that they want and need by supporting policies, programs and services that encourage preventative health services and help keep seniors in their homes for as long as they desire. This is an achievable long-term care plan.



Join Opinion on Facebook and follow updates on twitter.com/roomfordebate.