ASU Aetna Student Health Insurance offers new prescription coverage

By William Parker | 09/07/14 2:04pm

ASU Student Health Insurance is now offering prescription coverage under Aetna Student Health Insurance. (Photo by Sean Logan) ASU Student Health Insurance is now offering prescription coverage under Aetna Student Health Insurance. (Photo by Sean Logan)

ASU Student Health Insurance is now offering prescription coverage as a benefit for students insured under Aetna Student Health Insurance.

Most students have the ability to enroll in medical insurance provided by the University.

The new benefit of prescription coverage will include birth control and smoking cessation products, Insurance Manager for ASU Health Services Karen Hagerman said.

“The student plan is a very comprehensive plan with low out-of-pocket costs,” Hagerman said.

She said there has been an increase in enrollment in ASU health coverage the last couple of years.

Hagerman said it is difficult with the Affordable Care Act to determine exactly what has caused their increased enrollment over the last couple of years, but she hopes the prescription benefits adds to this increase.

Students trying to enroll in the ASU student health insurance plan must enroll prior to enrollment deadlines, which is the end of the second week of classes.

English sophomore Shandiin Ramsey said prescription coverage would be beneficial to many students that have health insurance through the University.

“I liked ASU’s student health insurance when I had it, but I am now under my parents,” Ramsey said. “I wish I could have had the prescription coverage last year, though; it would have been helpful sometimes.”

Landscape architecture sophomore Majed Bushnag said international students are required to have the ASU student health insurance.

Bushnag said he appreciates being enrolled in the health insurance, because he expects to pay little to nothing for the medication he has to take.

“Having to refill on your medication can be expensive sometimes,” he said. “Hopefully this new benefit will help me save some money.”

With ASU Health Services, there are four convenient locations that are available. The Tempe, Downtown Phoenix, Polytechnic, and West campuses all have an ASU health services building.

Health services offers more than 20 certified physicians and nurse practitioners. All locations have an on-site pharmacy and lab services available for the students.

Communications sophomore Zach Lytle said he really likes the ASU student health insurance and has been enrolled since freshman year. He said he has no intentions of using the prescription coverage but is very happy with ASU Health Services.

“It is nice knowing that if you are sick or not feeling well that you can simply walk to the location closest to you and get help,” said Lytle. “Not many colleges offer that.”

Correction: Due to a reporting error, a previous version of this article incorrectly stated which of ASU Health Services facilities offer X-rays to those who need them. This version has been updated to reflect the correct information.

Reach the reporter at William.A.Parker@asu.edu.

Related Stories