Supreme Court forced the government to admit it could find another accommodation for religious groups.

A rally before the Supreme Court in Washington in March 2016. (Photo: Mark Wilson, Getty Images)

The justices of the Supreme Court have taken an important step that should result in protecting the religious liberty of all Americans. With their new order in the case of Zubik v. Burwell, they have, in effect, ordered the government to come up with an accommodation to the Obamacare Health and Human Services mandate that does not force religious non-profit groups to violate our faith.

In March, the court heard oral arguments in Zubik, which is a consolidation of seven lawsuits that includes the one filed by the group I lead, Priests for Life. The Zubik petitioners, and scores of other religious non-profit, faith-based charities, colleges and organizations across the country, object to the HHS mandate because it forces us to be complicit in the distribution of items that our faith informs us are evil — including contraception and abortion-causing drugs and devices.

Following the oral arguments, the justices took the highly unusual step of asking the parties for supplemental written briefs. The court wanted to know whether the government could come up with a plan that both satisfies its interest in providing insurance coverage for abortifacients, contraceptives and sterilization to the employees of religious non-profit groups and protects those groups’ religious rights.

In effect, the court was asking the government to devise an accommodation to the HHS mandate that didn’t result in the more than 100 lawsuits.

We petitioners responded to the court’s request, stating that such an accommodation was not only possible, it's also what we’ve been requesting and suggesting through more than four years of litigation.

The Obama administration, lo and behold, admitted in its response that, yes, although it really didn’t want to issue such an accommodation, it could. In effect, it admitted that enormous amounts of taxpayer dollars spent defending the government’s position and untold resources expended by charities defending religious rights have really been unnecessary.

Now, the Supreme Court has ordered all seven Zubik cases back to their respective courts of appeal with the implied message to the government and religiously based groups that, in light of the agreement expressed in the supplemental briefs, we all should try to work out a solution.

The order is a tremendous victory for the scores of other Catholic and Protestant organizations that have sued over the HHS mandate. It's also a win for the Orthodox Jewish Rabbis, Muslims, Krishna adherents and Native American religious practitioners who have filed friend-of-the-court briefs in support of our case. Actually, it’s a victory for all Americans.

The Religious Freedom Restoration Act forbids the federal government from placing a substantial burden on the practice of religious beliefs when it could achieve its intended goal or compelling interest by a less restrictive means.

Here, the substantial burden placed on groups such as Priests for Life, the Archbishop of Washington and Dioceses of Pittsburgh and Erie, and Geneva College was that we were being made to file the paperwork that initiated distribution of contraceptives and abortion-causing drugs to our employees. The government’s stated “compelling interest” was ensuring that our employees had “seamless” access to such drugs.

While we oppose the government’s plan to make abortifacients more available — opposing abortion is, after all, our reason for existence — we object in our lawsuit only to the government’s coercing us into being accomplices to its scheme.

POLICING THE USA: A look at race, justice, media

And “coerce” is not too strong a word. Organizations that fail to comply with the HHS mandate can be fined $100 per employee a day. Such levies would create serious holes in the social safety net provided by religious charities.

Technically, the Supreme Court's order does not resolve any of the substantive issues raised in these lawsuits, but it acknowledges that the government itself resolved one. The government’s response brief admission that an accommodation can be devised that does not require the violation of religious rights means that the current HHS mandate violates the Religious Freedom Restoration Act — that a “less restrictive means” of implementing the administration’s agenda exists.

But the fight is not over. Not by a long shot.

The Obama administration must draw up a new plan to implement its agenda, and that plan must not violate anyone’s religious rights. In response to this proposal, settlements might be reached in the Zubik lawsuits — or the lawsuits will continue.

Our cases could even return to the Supreme Court. By then, the presidential election might have passed and the Supreme Court might have nine members. But regardless of the circumstances, the wording of the court’s latest order in the HHS mandate controversy indicates that the justices, indeed, will be concerned with protecting our religious freedoms.

To that, I say, “Amen!”

Father Frank Pavone is the national director of Priests for Life.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns, go to the Opinion front page and follow us on Twitter @USATOpinion.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/27vyQnx