ENLARGE Hillary Clinton and Madeleine Albright at a rally on Saturday in New Hampshire. Photo: Bloomberg News

CONCORD, N.H. – Former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright offered a warning to young women who aren’t inclined to elect Hillary Clinton the first female president.

“Just remember,” Ms. Albright told the crowd at a get-out-the-vote rally for Mrs. Clinton’s campaign. “There’s a special place in hell for women who don’t help each other.”

The familiar phrase was a hit in the room, drawing cheers from Mrs. Clinton’s supporters. But online, the reaction was much different.

Played in short video clips online or quoted in tweets, the quote almost sounded like a threat to other women: Help Hillary Clinton or else.

Some on social media asked if they should also be helping the other woman in the 2016 race, former Hewlett-Packard chief Carly Fiorina. Others expressed surprise at the idea that a women should be forced to vote for a woman — instead of being free to chose based on issues. And some on Twitter took it a step further, with references to Bill Clinton’s history with women during his time in the White House.

@madeleine I’m a good woman! But apparently I have a special place in hell? Thanks-but My God can decide that. #SetBackToWomen #FeelTheBern — canamgirl (@onmiemtp) February 6, 2016

But, Ms. Albright, who served in the Clinton administration was quoting herself. It’s from a speech she gave in 2006 as a keynote speaker. As backlash spread, Jesse Lehrich, Mrs. Clinton’s rapid-response spokesman, tweeted “peeps freaking out about that Madeleine Albright quote: It’s not new — it was literally on a Starbucks cup.”

Nick Merrill, Mrs. Clinton’s press secretary, pointed out on Twitter that Ms. Albright had said this “literally hundreds of times.”

With only three days remaining until New Hampshire’s primary, Mrs. Clinton deployed some of her high-profile supporters, including Ms. Albright and Sen. Cory Booker (D., N.J.), during a busy day on the campaign trail.

In Concord, Ms. Albright shared stories of working with Mrs. Clinton during her eight years as first lady. And Ms. Albright made a forceful push for making history by electing a woman to the country’s highest office.

“People are talking about revolution, so what kind of a revolution would it be to have the first woman president of the United States?” Ms. Albright said, referring to Sen. Bernie Sanders’s call for a political revolution.

In an effort to reach the young people the Clinton campaign is aiming to attract from its rival, the campaign advertised the event on the Students for Bernie Sanders subreddit group on the website Reddit and streamed it online on Facebook and received more than 100,000 views.

Ms. Albright said some young women don’t understand the importance of supporting Mrs. Clinton, adding that there’s more work to be done to break gender barriers.

“It’s not done, and you have to help,” Ms. Albright said. “Hillary Clinton will always be there for you.”

High Stakes in Tonight’s GOP Debate

Hillary Clinton Knocks on Doors to Close Gap in New Hampshire

Clinton, Sanders Jockey in New Hampshire as Primary Looms

PAC Payments Raise Questions Over Rubio Campaign Finance