Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins filed on Tuesday for re-election, bringing along more than just family and friends for the occasion.

Turning in his paperwork at the Dallas County Democratic Party headquarters, Jenkins also proudly showed off his support for two unpopular ideas that are consuming his time: the fight against Texas’ voter ID law and the rollout of Obamacare.

Though he won election in 2010 with only 49.6 percent of the vote, Jenkins was cheerful Tuesday as he pointed to recent polls that show many people don’t share his views on voter ID or President Obama’s health care overhaul.

“That’s our re-election plan,” Jenkins said with a chuckle. “To pick two issues where less than 20 percent of the people strongly agree with us.”

To be sure, Jenkins’ brazen support comes in a county that features a strong Democratic base – one that provided Obama with an easy countywide victory in 2012. But Jenkins’ “all in” approach on such contentious issues is unusual heading into an election year.

Republican Ron Natinsky has already announced his candidacy. The local GOP has already started blasting away at Jenkins. And some of the early returns on the voter ID law and Obamacare have provided Jenkins’ opponents with fodder.

The county judge said his approach boils down to “real people.”

Joining Jenkins’ mother, wife and daughter at the filing were community volunteer Edna Pemberton and 19-year-old Luis Veloz. They — along with county Democratic Party Chair Darlene Ewing — shared their stories of why Obama’s health care overhaul was important.

Using those examples, Jenkins said he was concerned about numbers beyond polls. That included what he described as tens of thousands county residents affected negatively by the voter ID law and the hundreds of thousands who might now have access to health insurance.

“My opponents say ‘Judge Jenkins either can’t read polls’ or ‘He doesn’t understand math,’” he said. “But they’re focused on polls, and we’re focused on people.”