Topics: Edmund Pettus bridge, Jesse Jackson, Poverty, Selma, Selma march, Life News, News

Washington, D.C., is the capital of American power, but the small town of Selma, Alabama, is the capital of American democracy. As long as one group of citizens could not vote freely and safely, America’s government, along with the idealistic claims it made, had no legitimacy or authenticity.

For its historical value and moral power, every American citizen should make a pilgrimage to Selma in an attempt to gain access to its inspiration and the courage of its martyrs and heroes. Such a trip would force Americans to confront the devastating disparity between Selma’s importance and its infrastructure. The disparity comes to represent the consistent American violation of its history, the betrayal of its people, and the inequality that undermines the victories of Bloody Sunday, and threatens to poison its future.

When I crossed the Edmund Pettus Bridge, and felt my feet against its sacred ground during the 50th anniversary commemoration, I was moved by my surroundings – people of various ages and races united in tribute to those whose faith and strength injected life into America’s claim of egalitarian representation and governance. I was stirred by the immediacy of history, imagining both the beauty and brutality of what transpired on that same slab of concrete. I was also shocked and saddened by the hideous neglect of Selma’s lone attempt to honor its spirit and significance.

I traveled to Selma on a bus with staff and members of the Rainbow/PUSH Coalition, Jesse Jackson’s civil rights organization in Chicago. One member tried to prepare me for what I would see immediately after crossing the bridge, saying, “The first time I came here and saw the memorial, I was so hurt that I had tears in my eyes.”

At the foot of the bridge, and next to a sign welcoming visitors to Selma, sits a small park of dirt and gravel. Empty soda bottles and fast food wrappers litter the ground where plaques paying tribute to John Lewis and Hosea Williams stand, showing visible decay. It is the size of a children’s playground in a tiny village of the Midwest, and there is hardly anything there to indicate its meaning in American and world history. The edge of the park connects with a vacant strip mall, giving visitors a connection between the disgusting state of the park and the disrepair of the American economy. Across the street is an abandoned used car lot. With its broken surroundings, its dirty trappings, and its placement among the wreckage of bankruptcy, it is ugly; there is no other word for it. But far exceeding the aesthetic wound of the memorial is the grotesquery of the betrayal it represents. If America cannot pay proper respect to its bravest citizens, the citizens who cried and bled to give their country credibility, it belongs on a map far outside the moral universe.

The memorial park resembles a war zone. It is a casualty of the spiritual violence America wages against its own memory and humanity. The violence goes beyond an assault on the spirit, and into the realm of physical reality, in the Selma that exists before the bridge, and the desolate rural outposts of obliteration that neighbor it.

On the bus ride into Selma, I looked out the window and thought about the words to Lynyrd Skynyrd’s rock ‘n’ roll classic: “Sweet home Alabama / Where the skies are so blue.” Much of the state is so undeveloped, and so naturally beautiful, that the sight of the sky, which seems to stretch into space, stole the breath out of my lungs. Down below the beauty, however, is the monstrosity of modern poverty, hardly different from that of the Great Depression.

Ramshackle trailers, barely able to stand, with holes and tears in the structure, almost crumble into barren fields of dirt and burnt grass. Many people subsist on the crumbs and garbage of the world’s wealthiest nation. With no running water, no indoor plumbing, no central heating or air, they struggle to survive in a cesspool of squalor.

Walking through downtown Selma is like crossing the threshold of a time warp. It is not only a ghost town, but a ghost town of 1960s America. There is no real commerce, and from what I could tell, no hope for employment or opportunity for its residents. Hundreds of thousands of people had descended upon the tiny town for the 50th anniversary proceedings, but food was available only through street vendors, the majority from cities like Atlanta, Birmingham and New Orleans. Selma had no restaurants or diners of its own to serve its tourists.