OAKLAND, Calif., Oct. 16, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- For the third time this month, Kaiser Permanente health plans in California are being recognized as the highest rated in the state. Covered California — the state's marketplace for the federal Patient Protection and the Affordable Care Act — has given Kaiser Permanente's plan 4 stars, the highest possible rating, for quality and service.

Last week, Kaiser Permanente's Medicare health plans in California earned 5 stars — the highest overall rating for quality and service — from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. In addition, the California Office of the Patient Advocate announced that Kaiser Permanente's health plans in Northern California and Southern California were given 4-star ratings, again the highest possible, and that they were the only health plans in the state so ranked for overall quality of care. This is the third year in a row Kaiser Permanente's health plans have been rated 4 stars by Covered California.

"We are proud to receive 4 out of 4 stars in Covered California's 2015 quality ratings. These ratings affirm Kaiser Permanente's deep commitment to being a leader in providing an exceptional level of service to the members, patients and communities we serve," said Patrick Courneya, MD, executive vice president and chief medical officer for Kaiser Foundation Hospitals and Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Inc. "This recognition reflects not only our integrated approach, but also the work of our dedicated physicians, nurses, clinicians and care teams, who excel in providing high-quality care and service."

As open enrollment begins this week, Covered California provides consumers an additional resource to select the best health plans for them and their families. Covered California's ratings reflect exchange enrollees' satisfaction with their health plan, as well as their experiences with their doctors, hospitals and other health care providers. California residents using the "Shop and Compare" tool on the Covered California website will see the quality ratings displayed with each plan that meets their shopping preferences in the geographical area where they live.

"Kaiser Permanente is focused on bringing extraordinary value to our members. The Covered California Health Plan Quality ratings demonstrate that we are providing the high-quality care and service that consumers need and expect," said Wade J. Overgaard, Kaiser Permanente's senior vice president for Health Plan Operations. "We also applaud the type of transparency Covered California promotes — giving consumers the ability to easily compare standard plan designs, without the fine print."

According to Covered California, a 4-star plan placed in the top 25 percent of all rated plans. Three stars are given for those that landed in the 50 percent to 75 percent range, while a 2-star plan means it scored in the 25 percent to 50 percent range for all plans. One star is given for those plans scoring in the bottom 25 percent.

About Kaiser Permanente

Kaiser Permanente is committed to helping shape the future of health care. We are recognized as one of America's leading health care providers and not-for-profit health plans. Founded in 1945, our mission is to provide high-quality, affordable health care services and to improve the health of our members and the communities we serve. We currently serve more than 10 million members in eight states and the District of Columbia. Care for members and patients is focused on their total health and guided by their personal physicians, specialists and team of caregivers. Our expert and caring medical teams are empowered and supported by industry-leading technology advances and tools for health promotion, disease prevention, state-of-the-art care delivery and world-class chronic disease management. Kaiser Permanente is dedicated to care innovations, clinical research, health education and the support of community health. For more information, go to: kp.org/share.

Contact:

Marc Brown, (510) 271-6328

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130718/SF49717LOGO

SOURCE Kaiser Permanente