Folsom Field was a ring of wood bleacher seats, some pine trees and a pair of candy cane-striped goalposts when Joe Romig played guard in a wing-T offense for the University of Colorado in 1961. Really, it was not much different from his former home digs at Lakewood High School.

Football was a dusty game back then, the one-platoon era in which Romig truly starred as a linebacker. And in football’s family tree, Romig, who is still considered one of the toughest hombres ever to put on shoulder pads in this state, is not far removed from Stanford tailback Christian McCaffrey.

Saturday in New York, McCaffrey finished second in the Heisman Trophy race as college football’s best player in 2015. His record-breaking sophomore season, which includes 3,496 all-purpose yards, set McCaffrey apart.

It put the former Valor Christian star in elite Colorado company, right next to Romig. McCaffrey is only the fifth Colorado high school product to finish in the top 10 in Heisman voting.

“I’m delighted McCaffrey is up for it,” Romig said. “He’s a great player. And a Colorado guy. And he’s a great student.”

CU’s Byron “Whizzer” White, from now-defunct Wellington High School northeast of Fort Collins, finished second in the Heisman race in 1937 and Romig was sixth in 1961. White, like Romig a Rhodes scholar, was runner-up to Yale star Clint Frank.

Romig trailed Heisman winner Ernie Davis of Syracuse. Davis topped Ohio State’s Bob Ferguson in one of the closest votes in Heisman history.

For Romig, it all came as a surprise. “I thought if things went well, I’d make the starting lineup (at CU) as a senior,” he said. “I never thought I would get that kind of attention.”

McCaffrey’s rocket rise to the Heisman presentation ceremony in New York was equally sudden. National observers started pegging him as a dark-horse candidate in October. By November, he had wrestled attention. Last weekend, playing in the Pac-12 championship game against USC, his 461 all-purpose yards included 207 rushing. He ran for a touchdown, threw a TD pass and had a TD reception against the Trojans.

“I had no idea what the season was going to hold,” McCaffrey told reporters Friday in New York. “I just try to put my head down and focus each and every day by doing my job. To be here right now is extremely special. I’m honored.”

In the past 40 years, only three others from Colorado figured highly for the Heisman. Terry Miller, a tailback from Mitchell High School in Colorado Springs, was a two-time Heisman finalist with Oklahoma State, finishing fourth in 1976 and second in 1977. He fell short of Pitt’s Tony Dorsett in 1976 and Texas’ Earl Campbell in 1977.

Kansas State QB Collin Klein, from Loveland High, carried the Wildcats in 2012 and finished third in the Heisman voting. Texas A&M’s Johnny Manziel won it that year.

McCaffrey entered Colorado football lore in high school when he set the state record for career touchdowns with 141. He went a step further with his Heisman run.

“I was teasing him; one day he’s going to be the governor,” Stanford coach David Shaw said in November after McCaffrey led the Cardinal to a 42-10 rout of CU.

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or @nickgroke