UPLAND >> Crozer-Keystone Health System has hired a consultant to determine whether Delaware County’s largest employer and health care provider should remain independent or seek a partner to assist with operations.

Through an announcement, system officials said they are considering options for the organization, which includes five hospitals: Crozer-Chester Medical Center, Delaware County Memorial Hospital, Taylor Hospital, Springfield Hospital and Community Hospital, as well as several outpatient centers, the Healthplex Sports Club and a physician network comprised of more than 1,100 doctors.

“As Crozer-Keystone Health System makes the changes needed to succeed in a rapidly evolving health care landscape, we remain focused on ensuring that the health system is able to meet the healthcare needs of the people of Delaware County,” Crozer-Keystone President and CEO Joan K. Richards said.

In July, Crozer’s board of directors hired advisers Kaufman, Hall & Associates to evaluate the best alternatives for the health system.

Advertisement

The announcement noted that hospital admissions continue to decline nationally as the trend moves from inpatient care to observation status and outpatient care. Crozer-Keystone officials also noted the decrease in reimbursements and the increase of patients with health insurance coverage that have higher deductibles and co-pays.

“Based on these trends, we are proactively exploring whether our mission of providing health care to the people of Delaware County is best met by remaining independent or working with another health care system,” a statement released by Crozer-Keystone Vice President of Public Relations and Marketing Grant Gegwich said. “It is important to note that in making this decision, we are continuing our practice of making and implementing proactive decisions to ensure the vitality of CKHS. This has included efforts to improve efficiency and evolve into a system best equipped and designed to meet the health care needs of our community.”

It is unknown how or if this will impact system employees, the statement said.

Officials from the Pennsylvania Association of Staff Nurses and Allied Professionals, the parent union of the Crozer-Chester Nurses Association that has been negotiating with the health system since April and without a contract since June, said a change could be beneficial.

Bill Cruice, executive director of PASNAP, said the phenomenon of health systems searching for methods to best address the changing dynamic of the health care industry is happening elsewhere.

“Hospitals all over the state are going through similar processes to figure out how they can be more effective and more profitable with changes in the ... Affordable Care Act,” Cruice said. “Crozer is no different.”

His organization also released a statement Wednesday with it perspective of the Crozer-Keystone action.

“For Crozer, we believe a change in leadership at the top levels could be just what the system needs,” the PASNAP statement read. “For too long, the current administration has let down the highly skilled doctors and nurses at Crozer by not providing the staff, supplies and leadership that our patients and community deserve.”

Cruice said administration has spent too much on executive compensation.

“At the same time, this very administration has squandered millions of dollars on exorbitant salaries, benefits and special deals for retiring executives,” he said. “It’s our hope that the first recommendation that this consulting firm makes is to cancel the $10 million Supplement Executive Retirement Plan that CEO Richards plans to take with her on her way out the door.”

Crozer officials said the announcement was not about the union or compensation for administrators.

“It is about a comprehensive assessment of the rapidly changing health care landscape and our work to assure that we will continue to be the leading health care provider and employer in Delaware County,” a statement read.

In addition for the potential for merger, Cruice said he would also bring the issue of Crozer’s Ebola readiness at the next negotiation session on Nov. 6.

Crozer-Keystone officials said as the exploration decisions are finalized, they will be made available.

“CKHS has consistently and will continue to remain focused on meeting the health care needs of our community,” Richards said in a statement. “Being proactive in exploring our options is in keeping with this focus. We take our responsibility — to the people of Delaware County, our physicians and our 6,000 dedicated employees — very seriously. We are announcing this decision because we are being transparent in our efforts to proactively plan for the future.”