Topics: Afghanistan, Afghanistan War, Bowe Bergdahl, conservative media, Editor's Picks, Fox News, Islam, james rosen, Media, Media Criticism, prisoner of war, Taliban, Terrorism, Media News, Politics News

The years-long realignment of national security politics and the visceral conservative opposition to everything Barack Obama touches reached a dramatic confluence with the news that Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl, for years a prisoner of the Taliban, had been released in exchange for five Guantánamo Bay prisoners. Conservatives, once self-appointed wardens of the honor of “the troops,” rushed to tear down Bergdahl and question the price paid for (or the merit of) a POW’s freedom. He was a deserter, he’s anti-American, and his father, per Bill O’Reilly, “looks like a Muslim.”

And now, Fox News’ James Rosen has uncovered an EXCLUSIVE scoop that Bergdahl himself is a Muslim and a terrorist. In reporting out this bombshell story, Rosen broke new ground in hilariously thin sourcing.

U.S. Army Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl at one point during his captivity converted to Islam, fraternized openly with his captors and declared himself a “mujahid,” or warrior for Islam, according to secret documents prepared on the basis of a purported eyewitness account and obtained by Fox News.

I can offer a quick translation here: Fox News is reporting that the freed American POW is actually a secret terrorist, according to a report based on a report based on the testimony of someone who was there, maybe.

But it gets worse … so much worse. Rosen gave some more details about the source of this obviously credible piece of intelligence:

These real-time dispatches were generated by the Eclipse Group, a shadowy private firm of former intelligence officers and operatives that has subcontracted with the Defense Department and prominent corporations to deliver granular intelligence on terrorist activities and other security-related topics, often from challenging environments in far-flung corners of the globe. The group is run by Duane R. (“Dewey”) Clarridge, a former senior operations officer for the Central Intelligence Agency in the 1980s best known for having been indicted for lying to Congress about his role in the tangled set of events that became known as the Iran-Contra scandal. He was pardoned by the first President Bush in December 1992 while on trial.