By the Kitsap Sun editorial board

Last Tuesday evening more than 600 readers attended an event the Kitsap Sun organized at Bremerton's Admiral Theatre, where a panel of experts in emergency response and preparedness discussed earthquakes.

The impetus behind the panel discussion was a series published by the Sun in January, "The Danger Below Us," explaining the Seattle Fault that lies beneath our peninsula and its potential to devastate our community.

That's right — devastate. As explained in our reporting and emphasized often during the recent event, the potential for loss of life and property is immense, and very much real. At Tuesday's forum a skeptical audience member asked whether a tsunami following a Seattle Fault earthquake could really inundate Bremerton, perhaps poking a bit at the hype.

"Absolutely," deadpanned Tim Walsh, chief hazards geologist for Washington Geological Survey at the Department of Natural Resources, without hedging an inch.

Wright and his fellow panelists, from FEMA, the county's Department of Emergency Management, a local fire agency and a neighborhood preparedness organizer/author, weren't there to spread scare tactics or create overwrought fear. They answered questions about basic readiness and earthquake science, shared advice, and encouraged neighborhoods to unite on this issue as soon as possible. Part of the forum, including a preparedness checklist published last Sunday and online now at www.kitsapsun.com/earthquakes, was empowering for individuals and neighborhood groups who should start preparing for a situation where they may need to be self-sufficient for days.

An issue raised during the forum goes beyond personal preparation, and it's one that should alarm more of us. Too many of our homes and public buildings are inadequate to withstand a major tremor, including those housing first responders and equipment, and even renewed efforts from state and federal governments to fund warning systems remain underfunded.

For example, half of Kitsap County's fire stations are not up to current seismic code; only 30 of 3,000 schools across the state have been inspected for earthquake resilience; and a system that could detect a major earthquake and give a few crucial minutes of warning time, which has received funding for early testing of a communications app from the state and feds, is now delayed thanks to an appropriations bill hung up in Congress, where there seems to be ample time to raise campaign cash or take ideological votes against Obamacare rather than deal with this need, among many practical matters we face.

That system, called ShakeAlert, shows that the technology exists to make us incredibly more prepared — just imagine what it would mean to have two minutes to evacuate kids from an old school building, or get fire engines out from a station that may collapse. But expansion for such a system must be funded, and those preparing their homes and neighborhoods should push their elected officials to make sure that happens. That's going to cost money, likely seen by most of us through fire or school bonds for construction — but again, imagine the post-quake school or fire station, then picture your own home and family in such a scenario, and do the cost calculation.

The potential should be frightening, but the reaction doesn't have to be despair. Scott James, another panelist Tuesday, put this spin on it: "Start with a party." That is, get to know your neighbors, start a "Map Your Neighborhood" project with the county's assistance, understand how you could survive together. That doesn't have to be expensive or time consuming; the resource list the Sun has prepared outlines steps to take over a 12-month period to spread out the cost and effort.

After all, we still have lives to live. But we also have a responsibility to be aware of a very serious reminder that FEMA's Kelly Stone left the crowd with the other night: "In the Puget Sound region, every day is earthquake season."

Editor's note: Tim Walsh's name was incorrect in the original publication of this column.

The Kitsap Sun editorial board is Editor David Nelson; Opinion Editor emeritus Jim Campbell; and community members Martha Burke, Susanne Hughes, Bart Kale, Drayton Jackson and Jim Stark. Any opinion expressed here is the consensus of this group.