Buy Photo Gil Walter (front), CEO of CompleteCare will retire on December 30, and current president James Edwards (rear) will take over as CEO/President on Jan. 1. (Photo: Staff photo/Craig Matthews )Buy Photo

When Gil Walter took command of CompleteCare Health Network 14 years ago, he set in motion a series of choices that have since transformed the health care nonprofit into a full-fledged, regional network.

But after a 41-year career in the community health industry, the 74-year-old Bridgeton native has decided to retire at the top of his game and pass the torch to a younger generation, naming executive vice president J. Curtis Edwards, 38, his successor.

"When the board selected Gil as president and CEO, we knew he was the right choice, but there's no way we could have predicted what a godsend he has been to the organization," Gwendolyn Gould, board chair of CompleteCare, said. "We are happy to have Curtis filling this position."

With his retirement set for the end of the year, Walter will hand over a company on track to reach its stated goals of meeting residents' health needs and serving as a one-stop shop for health care.

Over his 14-year tenure as president and CEO, Walter oversaw several significant shifts at the nonprofit, including expanding from two health centers and two school clinics, to 20 locations throughout Cumberland, Gloucester and Cape May counties, as well as increasing its outreach to include the uninsured, Medicaid recipients and migrant farm workers.

The expansion increased CompleteCare's reach from 10,000 patients to more than 60,000 patients served, Walter said.

"I see a company where there's a lot of excitement in building a better health system with more accessible locations, more accessible hours and adequate staffing," Walter said. "We're very comprehensive."

In addition to expanding the company's size and scope, under Walter's leadership the organization has also met nationally-recognized standards of quality, including accreditation by the Joint Commission and implementation of a network-spanning electronic health record system.

Most recently, all of CompleteCare's 20 locations were certified as Patient Centered Medical Homes, a new gold-standard in health care.

"We have always had a strong drive to improve care, improve results and outcomes," Walter said. "We hold ourselves to a high standard."

Walter's long tenure ran concurrent with other community partnerships, including active roles in the Bayshore Center at Bivalve, the Bridgeton Lunch Rotary Club and Bridgeton Main Street, where he currently serves as vice chairman.

He was Big Brothers Big Sisters's "Big Brother of the Year" in 2007, and was recognized by the National Association of Community Health Centers with their Louis S. Garcia award for exceptional health services to farm workers in 2004 and their Lifetime Achievement in Migrant Health Award for 2013.

A former Peace Corps volunteer, Walter is a graduate of Indiana University, and the University of North Carolina, where he received a master's degree in public health.

In his retirement, set to take effect Dec. 31, Walter said he plans to devote more of his time to family, travel and his photography hobby.

Taking over his position as leader of CompleteCare will be Edwards, who was hired in 2004 and quickly moved into the ranks of the organization's executive team, where he was charged with orchestrating the organization's community engagement and government relations.

In 2012, Edwards became the company's executive vice president, where he oversaw the establishment of five new health centers in the region and started work on the organization's largest project to date — a planned 20,000-square-foot, two-story full-service health campus set for construction on Sherman Avenue in Vineland.

The project, which is still in its site evaluation phase, Edwards said, will begin construction next year, with a planned opening date later in 2015.

As Walter's successor, Edwards said he hopes to continue his dedication to the project and many more at CompleteCare.

"I have a very clear vision for CompleteCare and the role it can play in improving the lives of those we serve both now and into the future," he said.

Edwards was unanimously named Walter's successor in July by the organization's board of directors. He is set to take over Jan. 1, 2015.

"I feel very honored and privileged to step into Gil's footsteps," Edwards said. "It's some big shoes to fill."

In addition to his work at CompleteCare, Edwards boasts a host of active community engagements, including the position of vice president of the Bridgeton Board of Education, and a seat on Bridgeton's City Council.

He is also president of the Bridgeton Lunch Rotary Club and Secretary for Gateway Community Action Partnership.

Edwards graduated from Rowan University with a bachelor's degree in business administration, and received his MBA from Wilmington College.

He served in the U.S. Navy, where he received an honorable discharge.

In 2009, he was awarded the MCN Unsung Hero Award for distinguished dedication to migrant health.

"He's a collaborative animal," Walter said of his successor. "He brings collaboration out of people. He has become superior in the business of crafting good relations."

One area Walter said he hopes Edwards will succeed in is expanding the company's network further and working with other agencies under the Affordable Care Act.

"These are changing times, and we need new blood, we need change," he said. "The Affordable Care Act, which a lot of people know as Obamacare, puts emphasis on collaboration with facilities. I think Curtis is a network builder, and that's where we need to go."

Working with the new health law has been a challenge, Edwards said, but the company in 2014 has signed up 8,000 new patients under Medicaid, with a 95 percent retention rate.

His hope for 2015, when the health law's penalty for exclusion increases from $50 to $350, is to draw in even more patients.

Each company site provides prospective patients with financial counselors to sign up under the new health law, Edwards said.

"This whole year has been a challenge, but there's more work to do," he said.

For the latest local news, follow@dailyjournalkov

For more information on CompleteCare or to schedule an appointment, visit www.CompleteCareNJ.org or call (856) 451-4700.

Read or Share this story: http://vineland.dj/1uGA6S3