LAS VEGAS — Yes, Jay Mohr ripped on Danica Patrick.

But she wasn’t the focus of the comedian’s barbs Friday night at the Sprint Cup Series Awards show at the Wynn Las Vegas.

MORE: Harvick celebrates Cup at awards show | Shots at Keselowski | Best photos from awards show

Mohr couldn’t avoid talking about the fights and current most-hated driver Brad Keselowski. He made fun of Jeff Gordon's age and Michael Waltrip's dancing outfits, too.

But it was an unlikely target — Joey Logano’s pit crew — that probably got hit the worst. Mohr saved the best for last.

Back to Danica. She wasn’t at the banquet in the same room where a year ago she seemed to stare down Mohr who had made fun of her struggles as a rookie in 2013.

In an opening video skit that made fun of NASCAR’s “Nation” commercials, Mohr is told by his mother: “You be nice to Danica this year!”

Mohr didn’t listen.

“This is my fifth time hosting the NASCAR awards, and I have learned, the drivers, you guys have proven to me that you can really take a joke,” he told the crowd. “Well, you guys.”

While Patrick wasn’t there for fans to see her reaction, Keselowski obviously was. He laughed at the jokes that he later said helps bring drivers back to a little bit to the outside world.

“In Kentucky, Brad Keselowski cut his hand in victory lane opening a bottle of champagne,” Mohr needled. “Even booze hates Brad Keselowski.

“Where is Brad? Let me look for the table of one.”

Mohr also made fun of other victory lane moments, as he repeatedly joked about NASCAR now giving “winner” stickers to drivers after a win.

“That’s the same reward for winning a race that my 2-and-a-half year-old son gets for making a potty,” he said. “A sticker? … What idea did they turn down?

“Stuffed animals? Free hugs? A goldfish in a plastic bag?”

He also talked about the sticker when trying to figure out how Denny Hamlin’s diagnosis at California in March (which was done at the track infield medical center) went from a sinus infection to later being diagnosed with a piece of metal in his eye. He suggested Hamlin just put stickers over his eye.

“How do you misdiagnose metal in your eye with a sinus infection?” he said. “Who’s your doctor? Dre? Seuss? Phil?

“Is that Obamacare?”

If that stung, no one was stinging more than Logano’s pit crew, who had a rough championship race, dropping a lugnut on one pit stop and then having the car fall off the jack on the pivotal late-race stop.

“I hope I’m not talking too fast,” Mohr said. “I don’t want Joey Logano’s pit crew to miss any of my jokes. … I’m not saying that Joey Logano’s pit crew is slow, but tomorrow they’re celebrating Thanksgiving.”

In addressing 2014 Cup champion Kevin Harvick as well as Harvick's 2-year-old son Keelan, Mohr found away to rip on Logano's crew again:

“You earned it," he told Harvick, who made his Cup debut in 2001. "It took you 14 years to get here. Fourteen years. That’s like six Joey Logano pit stops. … Joey Logano's pit crew is so slow, Keelan just turned 9."

Of course, Harvick himself also got a little ribbing. And it tied into Mohr’s jokes about the NASCAR fights.

“I have to admit I’m a little uncomfortable up here with Kevin Harvick behind me,” Mohr said. “Can somebody please let me know if he tries to push me into the audience.”