International exchange students Aiya Negmutulla from Kazakhstan and Baty Mohamed from Kuwait enjoy a brief stop at Point Sublime on the first guided tour Saturday at the Royal Gorge Bridge and Park. (DC Spencer / Daily Record)

More than 200 people braved chilly temperatures and biting wind Saturday morning to be the first participants in the guided tours of the Royal Gorge Bridge and Park.

Spring break season typically brought 2,000 people each day to the bridge prior to last June's devastating fire that consumed nearly 3,000 acres and 48 of 52 park buildings. The park closed due to the fire on June 11.

"Every day we have about a hundred cars that drive up to the gate," said Mike Bandera, vice-president and general manager. In spite of the brisk weather conditions, Bandera's opening day expectations were met.

Tour guides narrated park history and details of the fire to guests riding on an open-air people mover and two enclosed buses.

Royal Gorge Park visitors ride the open-air people mover to the accompanying narrative of tour guide Jean Adarus and driver Jason Reinholdt. (DC Spencer / Daily Record)

"We took a week to get away from the snow and ice," said Minnesotan Troy Mankie who was vacationing with his family.

Exchange students Baty Mohamed, 17, from Kuwait and Aiya Negmutulla, 17, from Kazakhstan viewed the bridge and park with their host family Stan and Marianne Miller from Little River, Kansas.

"We're happy to see that we were able to go across," Marianne Miller said. Only recently had she learned about the fire, after making plans to enjoy spring break in Colorado.

"The first time I saw the Royal Gorge Bridge was when I was in the eighth grade when it was more natural and open-looking," Miller said. She visited three years ago and was surprised by the commercial growth around the gorge.

"I think it looks more like it did the first time," she said. "I thought there might be this charred look to the land, but there isn't."

Tour guide Jean Adarus explained that more than 1,200 visitors and 200 employees were in the park when the June 11 fire jumped the gorge, yet all made it safely off the premises, as well as the wildlife that was part of the park attractions.

"The park is a construction zone except for the bridge," Adarus said.

Royal Gorge Bridge construction zone. (DC Spencer / Daily Record)

Several visitors asked about the incline railway that was constructed in 1931, two years after the bridge was built. The incline may be one of the last attractions re-established.

"It's proving to be economically unfeasible to replace," Bandera said. The most recent bid Bandera received Friday came in at $9.225 million for the incline railway alone.

"It can be replaced with something," he said, but perhaps not exactly as it was before.

The tour stopped once in the center of the bridge allowing visitors to walk and feel the give and sway of the massive span in gusty winds. The tram and buses also stopped at Point Sublime on the south side of the bridge.

"It's a breathtaking place," Baty Mohamed said as she and her hosts took pictures from the point.

Marina Otto from Brazil was equally moved by the surprising grandeur of the area. "This is amazing," she said.

Guides told visitors that 2,300 pounds of wild flower and native grass seed have been spread on the park grounds, and charred trees mulched to promote restoration.

The first phase of the park's re-opening is scheduled for August and will introduce the new 14,000-square-foot Visitors Center, the mini train, a new children's play area and the Sky Coaster, guides said.

Contingent upon weather and construction, the 40-minute guided tours will continue between 10 a.m. and 3 p.m. Saturdays and Sundays until the park's grand re-opening in August for a cost of $10 per person. Children 3 years old and under are admitted free of charge, as are persons with a valid 2013 Season Pass.

Electricity and weather permitting, guests will be able to ride the Royal Rush Skycoaster, beginning Saturday. Cost is $25 for one rider, $45 for two riders, and $60 for three riders.

For more information, visit royalgorgebridge.com or facebook.com/royalgorgebridge.