Photo

After winning 648 games as a Division I coach, Tom Penders now retreats to a winter home in Miami during college basketball season.

Much to the chagrin of his wife, Susie Penders, his evenings are rarely spent enjoying the fruits of retirement near South Beach. Instead, Penders sits in front of a television with a laptop close by so that he can continually fire off 140 or fewer characters throughout the night, tweeting a wealth of anecdotes, analysis and opinions, still beguiled by the game he left five years ago.

“It starts at 7, and it ends at 3 a.m.,” Susie Penders said. “And then he tapes the ones he can’t watch. We must spend $500 a month on TV programming.”

“Money well spent,” Tom Penders said.

After Penders began his coaching career in 1971 at Tufts University, he became one of the game’s most outspoken figures. A natural fit for a television studio, where many former colleagues have landed during their postcoaching careers, Penders, 69, favors the freedom that Twitter provides as a soapbox.

“I would say just about every one of them, former coaches that are on television, they’re all looking to get back into coaching,” Penders said. “They don’t tell you anything. They’re auditioning for another job.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Penders signed up for Twitter in November 2009 at the behest of his daughter Karli Penders, who was helping him plan the promotion of his book, “Dead Coach Walking: Tom Penders Surviving and Thriving in College Hoops.”

At first, Penders would tell Karli or Susie what to tweet. Shortly after he left his final coaching job, at the University of Houston, in March 2010, Penders signed in more regularly.

As he learned the nomenclature of RTs and LOLs, Penders began interacting with associates from the world of college basketball, like Dick Vitale, Tim Brando and Fran Fraschilla. Former Tufts players, some of whom he had not talked to since their time together in the Boston area, began following him and catching up through direct messages.

While enamored of how he could maintain more than 40 years of college basketball networking in a few sentences on Twitter, Penders also quickly learned how a single tweet, like an offhand postgame quote, could foster controversy.

On Sept. 5, 2012, Penders alleged that Billy Gillispie, a former Texas Tech coach, tried to take Penders’s job while he was at Houston. Penders described Gillispie in a derogatory way. Media outlets in Texas and Kentucky, where Gillispie formerly coached, picked up the tweet.

Penders said that Karli still kept track of her father’s online presence and had to occasionally reprimand him.

“If you’re telling the truth and you’re giving an honest opinion, so what?” Penders said of his brash tweeting style. “I don’t set out to hurt anybody. But I do think if I have experience in the field, I have an obligation to the 7,200 followers that follow me.”

Photo

Jeff Goodman, who covers college basketball for ESPN Insider, said he first interacted with Penders on Twitter a few years ago, while covering a game at Barclays Center.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“He was just annoying me, honestly,” Goodman said. “We kept going back and forth. He was hard to take. Kind of since then, I’ve kind of come to appreciate him on Twitter. He is frank, he is honest, he is entertaining, and I think there’s not enough guys out there who have his background who utilize Twitter and aren’t afraid to express their opinions.

“Just like me, he’s right a bunch, he’s off a bunch. I love the fact there’s no filter with him. You want to hear the truth.”

Goodman said that a majority of active coaches with Twitter accounts often used them as promotion tools, without substance.

“I don’t follow most of them,” Goodman said.

Penders’s provocative style isn’t restricted to college basketball. Last fall, he used Twitter to criticize the strategies of Kansas City Royals Manager Ned Yost and the Giants’ offensive coordinator, Ben McAdoo.

He has also made public his ire for N.C.A.A. President Mark Emmert, N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell, and Phil Jackson’s efforts to introduce the triangle offense to the Knicks.

The tweets are not always full of vitriol. When Jerry Tarkanian and Dean Smith died, Penders shared with his followers unknown morsels from his friendships with the coaches.

“I just try to speak to people and reply to people that come through my Twitter,” Penders said. “Five to 10 percent of my tweets, I just originate. I feel like I can give information that people might be interested in. It’s like a conversation.”

Penders, who endured several heart ailments during his coaching career, is currently not interested in getting back into the business. He admitted that he would not be tweeting if he were pursuing another job.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“You can’t be as truthful when you’re coaching,” Penders said.

During his postcoaching career, Penders has occasionally worked in television, covering college basketball games for local stations in Texas and the Atlantic 10 conference. He chose not to accept broadcasting commitments this season because his younger sister, Kathy von der Lieth, was seriously ill with uterine cancer. She died on Dec. 26.

Penders is unsure if he will return to television. Instead, he said he approached Twitter the same way he did when in front of a camera, treating the audience “as a friend” and providing people with insightful and appealing material as they follow the games together.

With no superiors to report to, Penders has become liberated through his keyboard. To the pleasure of his followers and the likely dismay of others, including fellow coaches and co-workers, that means calling out overused jargon by color commenters, suggesting rule changes and advocating systematic overhauls that he could not voice as a coach.

Penders believes there is substance to be found in his tweets, that he is not kvetching for the sake of it.

“Basketball and coaching was my life, and I care about the profession,” Penders said. “I care about the direction that it seems to be going in.”