On March 21, state legislators, health plans and foundations convened to celebrate the gains in health coverage options for Californians over the past decade. California Coverage & Health Initiatives (CCHI), a state-wide association of outreach and enrollment organizations, honored six notable individuals and organizations as “Champions for Coverage.” The annual event recognizes and celebrates the commitment these champions have made to connect Californians with the health coverage opportunities which have been created by the Affordable Care Act.

One of CCHI’s honorees included Lily Caravello, an employee of the Mendocino County Health and Human Services Agency. Caravello was selected as one of two “Assisters of the Year” for 2016. For over a decade, Caravello has worked on behalf of uninsured members of our communities, particularly families with children. She has been an integral part of Healthy Kids Mendocino since it was founded in 2006, and continues to work in the spirit and integrity of the initiative — advocating for the ability of local families to obtain quality, affordable health insurance coverage. The clarity of her work and the original enrollment tools she has developed have been recognized, and replicated, at the highest levels within Covered California outreach and enrollment initiatives. Most importantly, she is personally responsible for providing compassionate expert assistance and support to hundreds of families as they navigate their way through the enrollment processes for Medi-Cal and Covered California.

“In Mendocino County, we have long, winding, mountainous roads to picturesque little towns, but when you look past the natural beauty, you find families struggling to pay off hospital bills, parents choosing to put food on the table instead of go to the doctor, and elderly unable to afford their prescriptions,” says Caravello. “This is why I am a public servant. I strongly believe in the selfless role that government can play. Although we have new health insurance programs available to our community, the fight is not over. We need to continue to reach towards quality, affordable health care for all.”

Additional honorees at the Champions for Coverage event included Senator Ricardo Lara (D-33), who was recognized for his sponsorship of SB 4, “Health4All Kids” a bill to expand Medi-Cal eligibility to undocumented immigrant children; Anthony Wright, Executive Director of Health Access; Kaiser Permanente Child Health Program; Suzie Shupe, CEO of Redwood Community Health Coalition, and Olga Patricia Lopez, Certified Assister at Venice Family Clinic.