Syrian army personnel load howitzers near the village of Morek in Syria last month. (Alexander Kots/Komsomolskaya Pravda via Associated Press)

President Obama’s biggest domestic “accomplishment,” Obamacare, and his biggest foreign policy objective, extracting the United States from the Middle East and redesigning our alliances (Iran in, Israel out), are now Exhibits A and B in the argument for jettisoning the Democrats from the White House. At the very least these issues, combined with a lackluster economy, suggest Hillary Clinton will have trouble running for a “third Obama term.”

On the Obamacare front, CBS News reports, “Sign-up season started Sunday for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, now in year 3. Premiums are going up an average of 7.5 percent, but they could be much higher depending on where you live.” It is not hard to see that if this keeps up we are headed for the infamous “death spiral,” as Sally Pipes, a health-care expert and critic of Obamacare explains:

People are avoiding the exchanges in large part because Obamacare has pushed the cost of insurance to new heights. . . . When insurers began announcing these massive rate increases, he told his supporters not to worry. State regulators, [the president] said, would knock down such rate hikes. That didn’t happen. In most cases, insurers were able to show regulators that they had lost significant amounts of money on their Obamacare plans in their first year — and would continue to do so if they didn’t increase their prices. In places like Florida and Oregon, state regulators ordered insurers to raise premiums even higher than they’d requested in order to reduce the risk that they’d go under.

As premiums soar, fewer people choose to sign up, the pool of those participating becomes older and sicker, and premiums in turn must rise again. You can only bludgeon people into buying insurance they don’t want for so long. (“In other words,” Pipes writes, “the average uninsured person would spend several times more on health care with insurance than without it — even after taking into account next year’s $695 or 2.5 percent of income whichever is greater, penalty for remaining uninsured. As a result, the authors of the [National Bureau of Economic Research] report concluded, many uninsured ‘will prefer to remain uninsured at the current penalty levels for violating the individual mandate.'”) Clinton keeps promising to “fix” Obamacare, but her fixes (like ending the Cadillac tax on high-end plans) only make the economics of Obamacare less tenable.

With all that you would think Republicans would be focusing more intently on the health-care train wreck coming down the tracks. (Maybe after they stop whining for more sympathetic moderators they’ll get around to critiquing a major policy problem for Clinton.)

If the domestic scene looks less than attractive for Democrats, the foreign policy front is abysmal. The president’s latest, cynical move to send just 50 Special Operations forces to Syria — but not into combat! — encapsulates the absence of a coherent strategy that will leave the region bloodier, less stable and more violent than when Obama took office.

His latest move on Syria has unsurprisingly been poorly received. Fred Kagan of the American Enterprise Institute writes:

The situation is now beyond dire and all anyone can do is offer first steps that might start to drive it in a more positive direction. But any such steps must begin from the understanding of what this conflict is really about and who must actually resolve it: the Sunni Arabs and the non-Assad Alawite community. Those are the groups that will have to decide to put down their weapons and work out a mutually-acceptable deal. Defeating ISIS will still be hard in that context, but at least it might be both feasible and meaningful. We don’t need 50 Special Forces troops in Syria to help the Kurds. We need an entirely new strategy. It must start with the recognition that Assad, and his regime, really do have to go; that the United States and its allies must work actively to constrain and reduce Iranian and Russian support for him; that we have to reach out to the Sunni Arab population and convince them that we are on their side against the existential threat they face before demanding that they fight the enemy we want them to fight; and that the Sunni Arabs are the people amongst whom we need to embed our forces and with whom we need to work.

The president won’t accept that proposition, although he continues to mouth meaningless platitudes that Syrian President Bashar al-Assad should go. Relying on negotiations (including of all parties, Iran) to rectify what has been lost on the battlefield (i.e. the destruction of the non-jihadist opposition) is foolish. David Adesnik and Evan Moore argue:

Success at the negotiating table depends on establishing favorable positions on the ground. On Friday, foreign ministers from 20 nations gathered in Vienna to discuss the future of Syria. Ahead of the meeting in Vienna, the Obama administration had already begun to make concessions. Once insistent that Bashar al-Assad must step down in order to facilitate a peaceful transition in Syria, the administration now says that Assad may remain in power several months longer. It is particularly troubling that these U.S. concessions have followed Russia’s intervention and Iran’s deployment of combat forces to Syria. To reverse that dynamic, the U.S. ought to increase its own leverage by establishing a no-fly zone, whose humanitarian benefits should be complemented by a serious effort to train and equip Syrian opposition forces in areas no longer accessible to Assad’s air force.

And where is Clinton’s plan for untangling the mess she and her former boss are leaving behind? Again, Republicans should be focused on the debacle the Obama-Clinton-Kerry brain trust is leaving behind. Instead, too many Republican presidential candidates play to the know-nothing crowd and argue we have no interest in the Syrian “civil war.”

Republicans should extract themselves from internal squabbles over debate rules and look around. The country and the international scene are fraught with problems, the direct result of the Democrats’ policy choices. Republicans, isn’t is time to leave the debate bickering and take up the policy cudgel?