INDIANAPOLIS--(BUSINESS WIRE)--WellPoint, Inc. (NYSE: WLP) announced today that Julie Goon has been named senior vice president of public affairs. An industry veteran who has more than 30 years health care-related policy leadership and management experience, Goon will be responsible for leading WellPoint’s state and federal government relations activities, issue management and policy development, regulatory affairs, and managing the company’s relationships with industry, state and national associations.

Goon has held a number of senior positions in the federal government and in the private sector. Most recently she served as Senior Health Policy Director for the U.S. House of Representatives Energy and Commerce Committee, where she developed and managed Committee strategy surrounding the Affordable Care Act, and Medicaid and Medicare reform. Previously, she served as Director of General Electric’s healthymagination marketing initiative, where she developed and executed a strategy focused on GE’s global government partners and non-government organizations; and as Special Assistant to the President for Economic Policy in the National Economic Council. Earlier in her career, Goon held management posts at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services, America’s Health Insurance Plans (AHIP), Humana, Inc., and the Colorado Legislative Council.

“Julie’s extensive leadership experience in both public and private sectors will be a great asset to our company as we continue to work with and create new partnerships with key public and private stakeholders at both the federal and state level in a post-health care reform marketplace,” said John Cannon, executive vice president, general counsel and chief public affairs officer for WellPoint.

Goon received her bachelor’s degree in history from Colorado State University.

About WellPoint, Inc.

WellPoint is one of the nation’s leading health benefits companies. We believe that our health connects us all. So we focus on being a valued health partner and delivering quality products and services that give members access to the care they need. With more than 67 million people served by our affiliated companies including approximately 36 million enrolled in our family of health plans, we can make a real difference to meet the needs of our diverse customers. We’re an independent licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. We serve members as the Blue Cross licensee for California; and as the Blue Cross and Blue Shield licensee for Colorado, Connecticut, Georgia, Indiana, Kentucky, Maine, Missouri (excluding 30 counties in the Kansas City area), Nevada, New Hampshire, New York (as the Blue Cross Blue Shield licensee in 10 New York City metropolitan and surrounding counties and as the Blue Cross or Blue Cross Blue Shield licensee in selected upstate counties only), Ohio, Virginia (excluding the Northern Virginia suburbs of Washington, D.C.), and Wisconsin. In most of these service areas, our plans do business as Anthem Blue Cross, Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Georgia and Empire Blue Cross Blue Shield, or Empire Blue Cross (in the New York service areas). We also serve customers in other states through our Amerigroup, CareMore and 1-800 CONTACTS, Inc. subsidiaries. To find out more about us, go to wellpoint.com.