Photo

Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, a drug company whose business model has been under siege, announced on Monday that J. Michael Pearson, its chairman and chief executive, was on medical leave and that a team of executives would run the company while he was out.

Valeant confirmed last week that Mr. Pearson had been hospitalized and was being treated for a severe case of pneumonia.

Mr. Pearson is known for an aggressive strategy that has helped propel Valeant into the ranks of the world’s largest drug companies in less than a decade. But this strategy has also thrust some of the company’s more controversial tactics into the spotlight. The drug maker’s action of acquiring old drugs and sharply raising their prices, often by several hundred percent, has attracted widespread condemnation.

The company’s stock price fell more than 10 percent on Monday after the news, a sign that investors link Valeant’s growth to Mr. Pearson, according to David Steinberg, an analyst with Jefferies. “Michael Pearson is most closely associated with his company than probably any other pharmaceutical executive,” Mr. Steinberg said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Valeant’s shares have fallen more than 50 percent since their 52-week high in early August.

Valeant also faced scrutiny over its relationship with Philidor Rx Services, a mail-order pharmacy that dispensed some of Valeant’s expensive dermatology drugs and handled getting them reimbursed by insurance companies. Valeant severed its ties to Philidor in October, after questions were raised about the practices.

Valeant did not name an interim chief. Instead, its board created an “office of the chief executive,” which will include Robert Chai-Onn, its executive vice president and general counsel; Dr. Ari Kellen, executive vice president and company group chairman; and Robert Rosiello, executive vice president and chief financial officer. Valeant also created a board committee to oversee and support the new office of the chief executive.

Related Valeant Coverage

“The committee will be working closely with the entire management team to ensure that the company continues to operate normally while Mike focuses on his health,” Robert A. Ingram, Valeant’s lead independent director, said in a statement. “I am confident that with the vast industry and business knowledge from the management team and the board of directors, we will manage through this period.”

Antibiotics can help patients suffering from a typical case of bacterial pneumonia feel better within a week or two, according to Dr. Alan Glaseroff, the director of coordinated care at Stanford Health Care. But recovering completely could take four to six weeks, he said. Recovery times can vary widely, however, depending on the age and immune system of the patient, he said.

Mr. Pearson, 56, became chief executive in 2008 and has spearheaded the enormous growth that has defined Valeant since. A 2010 merger with Biovail, one of Canada’s largest drug makers, effectively put Valeant on the map and preceded a string of aggressive acquisitions that would help Valeant’s stock price to skyrocket over the next five years.

“I think he’s been sort of credited with creating a vision for the company and a set of guiding principles in terms of how they look at deals,” said Irina Koffler, a senior analyst at Mizuho Securities USA.

That vision included moving toward elective spending like cosmetic dermatology and consumer products, as the Affordable Care Act and other factors were helping to reshape the insurance landscape. Valeant agreed to acquire Medicis Pharmaceutical Corporation, the maker of Restylane and other injectables, in 2012. The following year, it made a deal to buy Bausch & Lomb, one of the largest makers of contact lenses, solutions and other eye-care products.

But Valeant’s tactics have also come under fire. Last year, Mr. Pearson took the highly unusual step of partnering with the hedge fund manager William A. Ackman in a hostile takeover bid for Allergan, the maker of Botox.

While the monthslong pursuit ultimately ended unsuccessfully, the partnership has had lingering implications: In anticipation of the deal, Valeant sold off a line of aesthetic products, including Restylane, to avoid overlapping with Allergan’s products. And both Valeant and Mr. Ackman’s hedge fund, Pershing Square Capital Management, face an insider trading lawsuit related to an investment Mr. Ackman made in Allergan before the takeover bid was publicly disclosed. Representatives from Valeant and Pershing Square declined to comment on the suit.