A true winner in politics is the gracious loser and the three Republicans who didn’t reach their goals in the gubernatorial primary were just that, immediately promising to back Bob Beauprez in November.

Beauprez received 30 percent of the vote in Tuesday’s election, besting fellow former congressman Tom Tancredo, with 27 percent; Secretary of State Gessler, 23 percent; and former Senate Minority Leader Mike Kopp, 20 percent. (For a fascinating look at which candidate carried which counties, check out The Denver Post’s map of the election results.)

Beauprez will try to unseat Democratic Gov. John Hickenlooper, a tall task considering Colorado: 1) hasn’t kicked an elected governor out of office since 1962 (Democrat Steve McNichols) and 2) since 1974 has supported the GOP nominee only twice, in 1998 and 2002 (Bill Owens).

Here are the messages the three GOP candidates sent to their supporters:

From Scott Gessler:

As you know by now, this election did not turn out the way we hoped. But I remain incredibly grateful to everyone who contributed time or money to help build a new conservative vision for our state. Almost 5,000 Coloradans were part of the effort. When I started this campaign, I believed that Colorado is a special place. And after meeting and talking to thousands of people across the state, I know that Colorado truly is a great state! We should be proud of the campaign we ran. We raised over $600,000, with an average contribution of just $50 dollars. And we ran the most efficient campaign, using our raised funds to advertise on TV. We made 200,000 phone calls and knocked on thousands of doors — plus thousands of miles travelled, and hundreds of speeches and events. Our campaign has ended, but the fight goes on. As I said before, I refuse to stand by and let our state sink ever deeper into left-wing mediocrity. We need to remove the current weak and feckless leadership. That’s why I’ve thrown my full support behind our nominee, Bob Beauprez. I ask that you do the same. I’ve known Bob for many years — he is a man of integrity and character, who has the moral fortitude to lead our state. So it’s onward to November! Thank you again for everything.

From Mike Kopp:

Shannon and I want to thank you. You can’t imagine how grateful we are for you. Thank you for believing in us and backing our effort to empower Coloradans by embracing freedom. Thank you for welcoming us into your homes, communities, businesses, parks, churches, restaurants and lives. Thank you for donating, endorsing, emailing, Facebooking, Tweeting, parade walking and sign waiving. And thanks to my dear friend, Vera Ortegon, an incredible conservative leader and American patriot. She is the kind of leader our state needs right now more than ever. I was the luckiest candidate on the ballot to have her join me and to step up as a Lieutenant Governor candidate. Vera and Tony Ortegon, thank you. We all came together from around the state and demonstrated the power of the grassroots in Colorado. We surged in the final weeks, but of course, it wasn’t quite enough. So now we turn our attention to the general election and winning the governor’s seat…and the future. I called Bob Beauprez last night to congratulate him and to offer my support. He ran a good race. We fought hard on the campaign trail, but now we’re united in the work ahead of us. Please join us in supporting Bob and Claudia Beauprez in the months ahead. They will make a great team for Colorado. Finally, a quick word of thanks to my friends Scott Gessler and Tom Tancredo. Last night the three of us had to give Speech B, rather than Speech A; but you both brought honor to our party by so quickly leading the effort to support the Beauprez for Governor team. You are both gentlemen and good examples for others to follow. In closing, the whole Kopp team thanks you for all you have done. Please join Shannon and I now in supporting Bob Beauprez. Let’s get our state back on the right track. With gratitude,

Mike and Shannon

From Tom Tancredo: