ARLINGTON, Va., Aug. 27, 2014 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- FBR & Co. (Nasdaq:FBRC) (FBR), a leading investment bank serving the middle market, will host its inaugural Healthcare Conference at the Four Seasons Hotel in Boston on Wednesday, September 3, 2014. In addition to one-on-one investor opportunities with nearly 50 companies, the conference will include timely conversations about the future direction of the healthcare industry. Consistent with FBR's proprietary research approach, coined The Debate TM, this conference will give investors the opportunity to participate in deep dive discussions around key debatable issues facing this sector.

The breakfast panel, "Political and Legal Risk of Inversions", will feature Chris Cox, partner at Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft. Mr. Cox was named one of the "Dealmakers of the Year" by The American Lawyer for his work with Elan and received the "2014 Global M&A Deal of the Year: Europe/Ireland" award for representing Elan in its sale to Perrigo. This session will provide an update on the legislative and regulatory outlook for inversion policy, highlight what to watch as Congress returns from a five-week recess in September, and discuss what Treasury is expected to announce in its efforts to limit the tax benefits of inversions. This panel will be hosted by FBR's Washington Policy Analyst, Edward Mills and FBR's Healthcare Analyst, William Tanner, Ph.D.

The lunch panel, "Healthcare Pricing Pressure", will focus on the implementation of the Affordable Care Act in the U.S., austerity measures abroad, and the increasing amount of regulation placed on the healthcare industry. The four panelists each provide a unique and complementary perspective, that when combined will create a holistic view from the various key constituents. Chapin White, senior policy researcher at RAND Corporation, will discuss price transparency and its potential to slow health spending growth. Mike Jacobs, Director of Business Development at IMS Health, will focus on the payer marketplace and how employers and health insurers are reducing prescription costs. Mitch Rothschild, CEO of Vitals.com, will cover consumer engagement tools to empower health plan members to make cost effective decisions. Michael Kuehn, Partner at Simon-Kucher & Partners, will talk about strategic global pharmaceutical pricing strategies, as well as the valuation of pharmaceutical portfolio assets and licensing/partnering options. This panel will be hosted by FBR's Healthcare Analysts, Andrew Berens, M.D., and Steve Halper.

"This conference will provide our clients with access to key executives and decision makers across the healthcare sector, and it is a powerful complement to our in-depth and thought-provoking research," said David Hilal, Senior Managing Director and Director of Research for FBR. "The panels we have assembled will focus on some of the key debatable points that investors care about today. We are excited to host these topical panels."

Registration is required for attendance and is limited to FBR clients. For more information about this conference, including a list of participating companies, or to register, please visit, www.fbr.com/healthcare14.

FBR & Co. (Nasdaq:FBRC) provides investment banking, merger and acquisition advisory, institutional brokerage, and research services through its subsidiary FBR Capital Markets & Co. FBR focuses capital and financial expertise on the following industry sectors: consumer; diversified industrials; energy & natural resources; financial institutions; healthcare; insurance; real estate; and technology, media & telecom. FBR is headquartered in the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area with offices throughout the United States. For more information, please visit www.fbr.com.

Investors: Bradley J. Wright at 703.312.9678 or bwright@fbr.com Media: Shannon Hawkins at 703.469.1190 or shawkins@fbr.com