MORGANTOWN, W.Va — A son of Parkersburg, W.Va., and a recipient of two degrees from West Virginia, Shane Lyons grew up with the Backyard Brawl and understands what the Mountaineers’ annual football game against Pitt once meant.

Since taking over as athletic director at his alma mater in February, few topics have been more pressing than whether the rivalry, which has been dormant the past three years, would be reinstated.

One week after Pitt athletic director Scott Barnes said he and Lyons had begun conversations about potentially renewing the series, Lyons reaffirmed that commitment.

“It’s one of my top priorities in scheduling,” Lyons said in an interview Monday with the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. “I think it’s a great thing for us as a university, it’s a great thing for Pitt and it’s a great thing for college football as a whole.”

Barnes and Lyons’ recent comments confirm the hope of renewing the rivalry that some had with the arrival of new athletic directors at the respective universities. The former Big East foes haven’t played since 2011, the final season before Pitt joined the ACC and West Virginia joined the Big 12.

Several obstacles must be cleared before the two schools, separated by 75 miles, play again.

Neither team has an open out-of-conference date until 2017. The Panthers have existing series agreements with Penn State, Oklahoma State and Tennessee; the Mountaineers have similar arrangements with Maryland, Penn State, Missouri and Virginia Tech, among others.

In addition to West Virginia’s nine Big 12 games, Lyons said he plans on scheduling two teams from Power Five conferences and one from a non-Power Five conference each year. Three of its next five non-conference schedules with open dates already include two Power Five opponents.

But for now, a shared desire to restart the rivalry at least exists.

“I’ll continue those conversations with Scott and see where it heads,” Lyons said. “Obviously, he’s only been on the job for a couple of weeks now, but we did have a preliminary discussion of saying ‘Hey, I’d like to talk to you about scheduling.’ He was open to talking about scheduling, so it’s just a matter of getting both schools to sit down and look at what we have and what they have open and trying to make something work.”

Craig Meyer: cmeyer@post-gazette.com and Twitter @CraigMeyerPG.