Rhonda is a resident of the state of Massachusetts. She had recently moved back to the state. A month before the discovery of her breast cancer, she had a bout with kidney stones. At that time she did not have insurance. The individual mandate in Massachusetts meant going forward she had to have insurance, in her case partially subsidized.

Because Rhonda had insurance she had no fear of going to the doctor. She knew she would be covered. She knew that visit would not bankrupt her. She said, “If I did not have insurance, it would have been a big issue for me.”

There are millions of Americans outside of Massachusetts who would have put off going to the doctor. They would rather take a chance than to lose the little they have. How many Americans have died because their states, their country did not provide a human centric health care infrastructure as opposed to a profit centric one?

Rhonda’s story is a happy one because her state government earlier than most decided to do right by their citizens. Her story is proof that it isn’t only older people that should have reliable health insurance, but the young as well. Even a 29-year-old can get breast cancer.

When the Affordable Care Act is implemented fully in 2014, Rhonda’s story can be the story for most in similar situations. Unfortunately for millions in red states where governors have inhumanely decided not to adopt the Medicaid expansion of Obamacare, many will die unnecessarily.

After receiving lots of support from her community, Rhonda wanted to do something to give back. She created The Paint Her Pink Foundation. On Oct. 20 her foundation will be hosting the Paint Her Pink Ribbon Rally. She intends to raise breast cancer awareness in her community by wrapping trees in pink ribbons in several of the surrounding parks.

Julian said many young people never think about getting cancer yet alone breast cancer. She wants to use her foundation to foment awareness in young women. She also wants to make those who are going through the treatments to feel good about themselves throughout the process. After all one heals better with personal positive affirmations.

Rhonda Julian is not a particularly political person. She is a single mother who works to take care of her family. She makes up a part of the complicated American fabric. Because she lives in a state where her government is responsive to the needs of its people, as difficult as her breast cancer ordeal is, she has the support of her government and her community. Good government should be seamless.

Would it not be wonderful if her story was possible in every corner of America? Those that oppose universal health care, Obamacare being that transition, ensure that many with Julian’s difficult but bearable experience with breast cancer will be relegated to an inhumane and debilitating experience.