More than five years ago, a Medina Township woman sent a letter to newly elected President Barack Obama that begged him to reform the nation’s health care system.

After two major Supreme Court challenges, and efforts by Republican leaders to repeal the Affordable Care Act, the law stands tall and so does Natoma Canfield.

Canfield’s letter to Obama sent in December 2009 asked him to continue pushing to reform the private health care industry. Canfield was a breast cancer survivor, then 50 years old. She had beaten cancer once, but couldn’t provide health care for herself because her health history made the costs of private insurance astronomically high.

“I was self-employed,” she said. “After breast cancer in 1995, my rates went up every year. It was just too expensive and I didn’t make enough to afford it.”

In the letter, Canfield said she had increased her deductible to the highest possible level, but the premiums kept increasing. She said she paid about $6,075 in premiums alone in 2009. Her work running her own cleaning service couldn’t cover the cost of more than $500 a month for insurance.

“I simply can no longer afford to pay for my health care costs!!!” she wrote. “Thanks to this incredible premium increase demanded by my insurance company, January will be my last month of insurance.”

She wrote that she was proud to be cancer free for 11 years, but said the insurance company still viewed her as a risk and had made it impossible for her to get care.

“The health insurance industry has technically not denied me insurance directly,” she said. “But indirectly they have by increasing my costs.”

Several months after dropping her insurance, Canfield was diagnosed with acute lymphoblastic leukemia, a type of blood cancer.

Canfield was lying in a hospital bed receiving treatment in 2010 when she got a call from the president about her letter.

His interest and response in Canfield’s case brought media attention to her hospital door.

“I don’t think Medina Hospital was prepared for the amount of attention I received,” she said.

Canfield had become an example of what many health care analysts said they believed was wrong with the health care industry. Canfield was able to receive treatments for her cancer through a compassionate-use program sponsored by the federal government for her specific type of cancer.

“In a way, I was lucky it was one of the few things that could be treated by compassionate care,” she said. “But what if I wasn’t?

“What about all the other sick people who need insurance?”

In the days and weeks that followed Obama’s conversations with Canfield, she became well known to journalists covering the health care debate. She also became the target of opponents of what eventually became the Affordable Care Act who argued the law was the wrong approach to solving the nation’s health care problems.

“There are people that thought I was making the whole thing up,” she said. “They called me a liar.”

But Canfield said she mostly remembers the letters of support she received.

She still keeps all the cards and letters she received in binders, dated by the year and month that they arrived.

“I kept everything,” she said. “I received volumes of letters and cards.”

Now at age 56, the two-time cancer survivor also has had the opportunity to witness the law she worked so hard for get challenged twice and be upheld twice as constitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court.

In 2012 after the Supreme Court upheld the law for the first time, Obama mentioned Canfield’s struggle in a speech he delivered as his official response to the ruling. Most recently, the court issued a ruling in June upholding another challenge to the law by a vote of 6-3.

Canfield said she wasn’t ever really worried the law would be overturned by the high court.

“I just never really worried about it,” she said. “I knew they would do the right thing.”

Canfield said she never intended to become one of the human faces of the Obama campaign for health reform, but she’s not afraid to share her story.

“I’ve had so many people come up to me and say their son or daughter now has health care,” she said. “That’s what’s important.”

A few years back after she was mentioned in Obama’s 2012 speech, a United Kingdom journalist asked Canfield if she felt used by the White House for political gain.

“I said, ‘I don’t feel used, I feel privileged,’ ” she said.

Her letter to Obama hangs in the Oval Office in a frame, and she’s met the president in person on more than one occasion. One month ago, shortly after the Supreme Court’s most recent ruling, Canfield was invited aboard Air Force One, where she traveled with the president to a speaking engagement in Nashville, Tenn.

“We had lunch on the plane. It was just a sandwich, but it was a really good sandwich,” she said. “We got a tour of the entire plane, and got to see the conference room area.”

After getting off the plane in Nashville, Obama gave a speech about health care reform and said he “felt good” about the direction health care reforms were he headed. He mentioned Canfield’s fight against cancer and her fight for reform during his remarks.

“He called me a friend,” she said. “And I think that’s true.”

She said Obama always makes her feel welcome when they visit. She said she believes he wanted to see health care reform become a law with the goal of keeping people like her from slipping through the coverage system and facing insurmountable costs.

“I think he does care about what happens to people like me,” she said. “Health care is important for everyone. You like to think you won’t ever need it, but you just never know.”