If You Go What: Boulder Valley high school graduations When/Where: Fairview High School, 2 p.m. today, 1STBank Center, 11450 Broomfield Lane, Broomfield Boulder Universal, 6 p.m. Friday, Education Center, 6500 E. Arapahoe Road, Boulder New Vista High School, 9:30 a.m. May 31, Chautauqua Auditorium

Themes of perseverance and overcoming challenges wound through the student speeches at this morning's Boulder High graduation ceremony under cloudy skies at the school's Recht Field.

Yaire Gutierrez spoke about overcoming people's preconceived notions and representing the Latina community, Devin Malone chronicled going through chemotherapy after being diagnosed with cancer as a junior and Aldo Peter drew a standing ovation for his speech about fleeing war torn South Sudan with his family and taking a full slate of online classes so he could graduate high school.

"Challenges can turn into achievements," Peter said. "I can make the first steps in creating changes and being a voice for my people."

Most Boulder Valley School District students will receive their diplomas this weekend. Monarch High and Boulder Preparatory celebrated graduations on Friday; Boulder, Peak to Peak, Centaurus, Broomfield, Arapahoe Ridge and Nederland high schools held ceremonies today; and Fairview seniors will graduate on Sunday.

At Boulder High's ceremony, the graduates also showcased their musical talents, with the senior class choir singing its own arrangement of a bubbly "Happy" by Pharrell Williams, the senior class orchestra performing Adele's "Skyfall" and two sets of graduating seniors singing duets -- Helaina Christie and Sarah Chicoine sang "That's What's Up," an ode to friendship by Edward Sharpe, and Anna Cutler and Isabelle Davis sang an original song written by Davis titled "This I Know."

Malone, the student speaker who faced cancer, said he had the "absolute best support group" while he was undergoing chemotherapy, continuing to play lacrosse, learning to kayak and having "a lot more fun and joy than anyone might imagine."

"Your life's path can change on a dime," he said. "Enjoy your time here to the fullest."

Speaker Eric McCarty, an orthopedic surgeon and '83 Boulder High alum, continued the perseverance theme by talking about a hard won football game he played as a senior against Fairview High, overturning an almost 10-year losing streak.

"In football, just as in life, you have to keep moving forward," he said.

He also poked fun at Fairview for its prison-like construction and the fact that the school doesn't have its own football field, noting he has a daughter graduating from Fairview and a son attending Boulder High, making for spirited discussions. He also urged the graduates to work hard and find their passions.

"Nothing is worth spending a lifetime doing things you don't enjoy," he said.

Community that continues to amaze, inspire

In Lafayette, an enthusiastic crowd packed into Warrior Stadium for Centaurus High School's ceremony. The school's parking lot overflowed, as did the neighboring streets around the school. The large crowd also spilled out of the stadium onto the perimeter of the field to cheer for 2014's blue-and-red clad graduates, many of whom added a splash of white by decorating their mortarboards.

The ceremony kicked off by recognizing teachers, Jules Mullison from Angevine Middle and Bill Day from Centaurus, and principal's secretary Karen Melin. Melin was lauded for her friendly smile and dedication to the school.

"I love Centaurus," Melin said. "I love all the parents and students."

Graduating senior Enrique Moctezuma Cano received the spirit award for being the school's third male cheerleader and cheering on the school's sports teams for all four of his years at Centaurus, with the honor going to him because of his "genuine love" for the school.

Principal Rhonda Haniford also recognized the graduates' academic achievements, highlighting those who took International Baccalaureate classes, the 17 graduating seniors who earned a three or higher on three or more advanced placement exams, the 37 pre-engineering graduates going on to study engineering in college and the 17 graduates who completed the AVID program for students who will be the first in their families to go to college. She also noted the many graduates who took a pledge to "take action for a more eco-friendly future."

"All of us here today are so proud of each and every one of you," she said.

Student speaker Annette Kendrick used a passage from "A Tale of Two Cities" to illustrate the highs and lows of high school, with one the lows coming from losing two classmates. What makes Centaurus special, she said, is students' willingness to "pick each other up and band together."

"The inclusive and supportive community that has been fostered here at CHS continues to amaze and inspire me," she said.

Melanie Torres urged her fellow graduates to create their own rules when met with challenges, make their mark and improve the world. She ended with the rallying cry of "once a Warrior, always a Warrior."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Amy Bounds at 303-473-1341 or boundsa@dailycamera.com