ATHENS, Ga. (AP) - “If you don’t understand my silence, how would you understand me & my words.”

Visually pleading with the world, those white-chalked words stood in stark relief on the blackboard in front of the young man who wrote them.

Behind him, in an art classroom at Cedar Shoals High School on Tuesday afternoon, a young woman worked to fill the foot-or-so-square blackboard in front of her with her own words, eventually writing, “I fear telling people about my past. I don’t want to be judged for the things I can’t change.”

And in a back corner of the classroom, another Cedar Shoals student struggled with the classic grammatical conundrum of when to use the verbs “lie” and “lay.” She eventually decided on “lie,” for the double meaning it contains, and finished writing, “They see my smile, but not the pain that lies behind it.”

The two dozen students in Hunter Wright’s art class were among the people participating in this week’s “Chalk Talks,” a public art project being led by Wing Young Huie, a Minnesota-born photographer who is in town this week as part of the community’s ongoing development of a public art master plan.

Briefly, the “Chalk Talks” require participants to think through a question, answer it on a chalkboard, and then have a photograph taken featuring them and their chalkboard.

At Cedar Shoals, Wing asked students to pair up for the exercise, and after suggesting some questions to them on Monday - things like “What are you?” or “What advice would you give someone?” he said - gave the young people a night to think things over. On Tuesday, the partners wrote separately on their individual blackboards, and then headed out of the classroom to compose photographs of each other.

For one set of partners, Cedar Shoals seniors Wendy Hare and Diamonique James, composing their photographs was relatively easy. James said she was surprised to find out that, as the two worked in front of a window near the art classroom, she just knew what Hare was going to do to compose her photo.

While both young women have had classes together during their years at Cedar Shoals, Hare said the exercise led by Wing left her “able to deeply find out more information” about James.

“I think she’s a very open person,” Hare said.

Asked whether the Chalk Talk had changed her perception of James, Hare said, “If it changed, it’s in a way that makes her seem stronger.”

Hare called the exercise “a great experience” and said she “would love to do a lot more things like this.” On a broader scale, Hare suggested the exercise could help the entire school, given the hard times that students have experienced in recent weeks, in the wake of learning that a fellow student had been raped on campus by three male students.

James said she felt the Chalk Talk helped to break down racial barriers, prompting students to “open up to each other, be in another person’s shoes.”

Wright, a substitute art teacher who inherited the Chalk Talk from the regular teacher of the art class, said the exercise forced students to move well beyond the regular scope of the class, which is focused on principles and craftsmanship, and to move into thinking more critically about themselves and the world around them.

Wright was surprised that the class dived so deeply into Wing’s Chalk Talk.

“They’re one of the more shy classes I’ve had,” he said.

And, he added, “Cedar is a place where student voices haven’t been heard.”

Bolstering Wright’s point, Wing closed out the Chalk Talk at Cedar Shoals by asking the class, “How often do you have conversations like this?”

“Never,” came back a soft, barely audible reply from a young woman in the class.

If the students in the class choose to post their photographs online, they’ll be available for viewing on Instagram under the hashtag #athenspublicart.

___

Information from: Athens Banner-Herald, http://www.onlineathens.com