Craig Coursin, MSI General Corp. president, says the company has experienced strong growth. MSI General is making its first appearance on the Future 50 list. Credit: Katie Klann

By of the

If the annual Future 50 list from the Metropolitan Milwaukee Association of Commerce is any indication, construction is making a comeback.

Construction firms took seven spots — up from three in 2013 — on the list, which recognizes the fastest growing, privately held companies in the Milwaukee area.

Design/build firm MSI General Corp., which is making its first appearance on the list, offers a glimpse into some of the reasons behind this renaissance. The Nashotah company designs and builds everything from smaller renovations to entire buildings for industrial and office uses.

Craig Coursin, MSI's president, said the company has experienced strong growth over the past three years due to an increased demand for new industrial space.

"What we're starting to see now is larger-sized projects being contemplated," Coursin said.

While sales haven't been nearly as strong as they were before the recession, they have been steadily climbing, Coursin said. Furthermore, he sees a general change in attitude among his clients.

"We've seen a shift from the people that we're building for being very cautious to more optimistic," Coursin said. He believes this is indicative of the growing strength of the Milwaukee economy.

Mary Steinbrecher, executive director of MMAC's Council of Small Business Executives, said in a statement that this newfound sense of optimism in the Milwaukee economy is leading many companies to reinvest in their businesses.

"For years following the recession, we saw businesses hesitant to expand or build," she said. "The same held true for many residential customers. I think we are now witnessing a cautious end to that hesitancy."

This year's Future 50 features companies from a variety of industries with a makeup that's very similar to last year's list: 15 from manufacturing, 15 from other services, eight from technology, seven from construction, three from wholesale trade and two from finance/ real estate/ insurance. Companies on the list range from Angelic Bakehouse, a maker of sprouted grain baked goods that's making its second consecutive appearance on the list, to Titan Spine, a maker of spine implants.

In 2014, Future 50 companies amassed $1.37 billion in total revenue, up 18% from the previous year, according to the chamber. The companies are projecting to employ 4,385 people by the end of this year, up from 3,883 in 2014. In a departure from previous years, more companies on the list were located in Waukesha County than Milwaukee County.

Unlike 23 companies on the list, MSI does most of its business within the region. Coursin said it will perform work outside the area at times, but usually only if it is following clients.

MSI's sweet spot has been small to midsize projects, part of the reason why it has experienced such growth in recent years, as industrial companies have focused less on large projects.

But Coursin said companies are starting to look at larger expansion projects, and the partnerships his company has developed with its clients on smaller projects are expected to open up opportunities for MSI to start doing bigger projects.

Even with the increased demand for larger projects, Coursin doesn't expect the market to explode because companies are still cautious about building more than they need.

"In the past, companies were more willing to build a larger facility and grow into it over five to seven years," he said. "I would say that today you still have companies that are willing to build to what they feel they need for a much shorter time frame, one to three years maybe."

For now, Coursin said, his only fear is a slowdown of the industrial market, which would affect 50% to 70% of his business. In all though, MSI expects the good times to continue to roll at MSI, albeit in a controlled fashion.

"Because we do work in a lot of different segments, I think it's less choppy for us," he said.