Does the GOP have problems with women? Are the Kardashians overexposed?

I’ve been watching a marathon of "The Simpsons" on FXX, so it’s understandable that my first reaction to a new GOP study on female voters was “d’oh!” The headline in Politico said it all: “ GOP poll of women: Party 'stuck in past'.” If I had written the headline, it would have been “GOP collateral damage in its own war on women.”

Women who talked to Republican researchers had many unkind things to say about the Grand Old Party, including that it was “lacking in compassion." The report stated that women are “barely receptive to Republican policies.” The study also contained this nugget: “Republicans fail to speak to women in the different circumstances in their lives.”

In other words, why does the GOP prevent women from making decent money to support their families? Or why are Republicans limiting access to birth control when women may not be ready for kids?

[SEE: Cartoons about the Republican Party]

The GOP research also found that, among women, Democrats had a 39 percent advantage on affordable health care and tolerance of other lifestyles. Among women who care about jobs, the Democratic Party had a 35 percent advantage over the GOP. In the spirit of the U.S. Open tennis tournament, point, set and match for Democrats.

Discovering the GOP has a problem with women is like inspecting Willie Wonka’s chocolate factory and finding candy on the premises. I could have told the party the same thing on election night in 2012 when I examined the exit polls from the presidential race. A majority of men (52 percent) voted for Mitt Romney, but an even larger majority of women (55 percent) supported President Barack Obama. Not only that, but more women voted in 2012 than men.

Let me emphasize that Republicans, not Democrats, did the study Politico covered. Two GOP-aligned organizations, Crossroads GPS and the American Action Network, sponsored the survey.

The Republican National Committee did a post-election autopsy in January 2013 and found the same thing. But the GOP hasn’t done anything since then to fix the problem. In fact, the party has gone out of its way to alienate female voters. For instance, an overwhelming number of the workers who make the minimum wage are women, but the House GOP never even voted on a Senate bill that would have raised the rate to $10.10 an hour. Women make only 77 percent of what men in the same jobs make, but the Senate GOP filibustered a Democratic proposal to make sure women were paid the same wages as men for the same jobs.

[MORE: Cartoons about Congress]

And if that wasn’t enough, the GOP geniuses could have looked at a national survey that CNN conducted earlier this year. A majority (55 percent) of Americans said the GOP doesn’t understand the problems of women. Even larger majorities of women (59 percent) and women over the age of 50 (64 percent) felt the same way.

So should we be surprised that the GOP has trouble with women? I don’t think so.

If these organizations had conducted studies on Latinos, African-Americans and Asians, their researchers would have found the same thing: that all kinds of voters have problems with the Grand Old Party. The only dependable groups of voters who have stuck with the GOP are old white guys. Don’t get me wrong, I’m an old white guy, but I’m a Democrat. Some of my best friends are old white guys, but there aren’t enough of them left to win a presidential election.