FARGO, N.D.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--The Healthcare Trends Institute announced today the results of the third annual Healthcare Benefits Trends Benchmark Survey, now available for download.

The 2016 Healthcare Benefits Trends Benchmark Study report provides insights into the adoption of new healthcare benefits options, including the use of defined contribution and insurance exchanges, along with wellness and healthy lifestyle programs. In addition, the survey included questions about future reform legislation such as the health insurance mandate for small employers and the impending Cadillac Tax.

The research was sponsored by the Healthcare Trends Institute, an educational platform for employers, consumers, and other healthcare benefits stakeholders. The survey polled human resources (HR) executives, benefit specialists, and other benefit decision-makers to explore the state of current and expected healthcare benefits offerings under the continuing changes brought forth under the Affordable Care Act (ACA).

“Now in its third year, the 2016 Healthcare Benefits Trends Benchmark Study takes a deeper look into the changes made by benefits professionals in the wake of reforms and the anticipation of future changes,” said Tiffany Wirth, Executive Director of the Healthcare Trends Institute. “We are excited to share this information to all interested stakeholders throughout the healthcare continuum.”

The complete 2016 Healthcare Benefits Trends Benchmark Study can be downloaded here.

About the Healthcare Trends Institute

The Healthcare Trends Institute is an educational platform to help employers, third-party administrators, health plans, brokers, banks, payroll providers, consumers, and other stakeholders keep up with the rapidly changing healthcare benefits industry. It covers a range of topics related to the administration and management of healthcare benefits, including defined contribution, health exchanges, insurance, legislation, and more.

Healthcare Trends Institute programs include an educational web series, an annual awards program, newsletters, training programs, a resource library, a real-time health exchange infographic, and more. To ensure all content and programs achieve the highest level of quality and relevancy, the Institute is guided by an Editorial Advisory Board comprising of subject-matter experts that represent diverse aspects and perspectives within the healthcare benefits industry. The Institute is sponsored by Evolution1 – a WEX Company, a leading provider of cloud-based, consumer-directed healthcare (CDH) and defined contribution payments and technology solutions More information is available at www.healthcaretrendsinstitute.org.

Follow Healthcare Trends Institute on Twitter, LinkedIn, Facebook, and Google+ to get the latest information on benefits trends in the workplace.