AMSTERDAM: As the airport lounge filled with passengers waiting to board Malaysia Airlines Flight 17, a renowned professor rushed to the gate while texting a colleague, saying that he was "superbusy."Veering into the business class line, Dr. Joep Lange, an AIDS researcher, passed a former election observer who had just returned from Ukraine. They were among 298 passengers and crew aboard the flight, which was apparently shot down over Ukraine on Thursday.The disaster claimed the lives of a number of people headed to the International AIDS Conference , scheduled to begin on Sunday in Melbourne, Australia , the International AIDS Society said Friday. Lange, 59, was accompanied by his partner, Jacqueline van Tongeren, 64. He was the executive scientific director of the Amsterdam Institute for Global Health and Development, and she worked as a communications director there."Joep was always traveling," said Michiel Heidenrijk, the managing director of the institute, who received Lange's hasty text. "I didn't even wish him a good flight."The World Health Organization confirmed Friday that Glenn Thomas, 49, a communications officer, had also been aboard the plane. So had Pim de Kuijer, 32, a Dutch AIDS activist and former European Commission diplomat."We are bracing ourselves to hear of the deaths of others who worked in the AIDS response," Michel Sidibe, executive director of UNAIDS, the United Nations agency fighting the disease, said in a statement. "The deaths of so many committed people working against HIV will be a great loss."At a White House news conference Friday, President Barack Obama said, "These were men and women who had dedicated their own lives to saving the lives of others, and they were taken from us in a senseless act of violence."News of the plane crash greeted other AIDS researchers as they made connections in Sydney and elsewhere. The apprehension and grief along the journey were "enormous and pervasive," Dr. Mike McCune, a professor of medicine at the University of California, San Francisco, said in an email.After checking into his hotel in Melbourne, McCune went for a run and returned to find scientists from all over the world milling about the lobby, many in tears.Lange, a former president of the AIDS society, began researching the epidemic in 1983 and had worked at WHO, heading up clinical research and drug development in the mid-1990s. Even before the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria or the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief were created, Lange was a prominent advocate of affordable drugs for AIDS patients in poor countries.He argued that the private sector should lead the way, especially companies that had factories, breweries or mines in developing countries and many employees there, said Dr. Catherine Hankins, who was Lange's deputy at the Amsterdam institute.Lange created programs that improved health care in remote regions of Africa, inspiring WHO and the Global Fund to start initiatives. He had just returned from Tanzania, where he was setting up a program to get antiretroviral medications to patients in remote areas, Hankins said."My friend always tried to be there where politics and humanity were at odds with each other," said Onno Schellekens, the managing director of the Investment Fund for Health in Africa. "Maybe I'm being philosophical, but dying by being shot down by rebels in a way symbolized his life."Lange was eulogized Thursday night at a dinner for AIDS researchers in Melbourne who had arrived for early meetings of the AIDS society.Dr. David Margolis, an AIDS researcher at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill who attended the dinner, said speakers had recalled a quotation by Lange: "If we can get a cold can of Coke to any part of Africa, we can certainly deliver AIDS treatment."Lange and Dr. David Cooper, an Australian AIDS researcher, founded a research program with doctors in Thailand known as HIV-NAT, with the last three letters standing for Netherlands, Australia and Thailand."It was one of the first models of international collaboration on clinical research in a developing country," said Dr. H. Clifford Lane, the deputy director for clinical research at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. It served as a model for many later collaborations with African medical schools, he said."Joep was a very engaging person," Lane added. "He spoke his mind, but never with anger. He was one of those people you'd seek out for a good discussion."De Kuijer was a lobbyist at Stop AIDS Now, a Dutch advocacy organization, and had worked as an election observer in Kosovo, Ukraine and Egypt, said his brother, Paul de Kuijer."He was an outspoken advocate on human rights , especially the position of women in society and position of gays in society," Paul de Kuijer said.Lousewies van der Laan, vice president of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe, met last week with Pim de Kuijer over coffee at a Starbucks in The Hague."Pim was so proud to contribute to democracy in the Ukraine," she said. "It is just so bizarre to think he was killed by a rocket fired from that country."