Several presidential campaigns made stops in Tucson last week in which the city spent more than $130,000 to provide security, but in some cases, political rallies can cost taxpayers big bucks.



At times, presidential campaigns don’t pay for their own costs while local organizations have to do it on their own, and according to the associated press, it is not always easy for some of these cities to recover these costs.



Take Henrico, Virginia for example. In 2012, the county billed the presidential campaigns more than $180,000 for providing police for security on a visit by New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani. The state GOP reimbursed them just under $2,000, leaving the rest not reimbursed.



"I can't make them pay it, but I want them to be aware that it's not free for you to come here," said Henrico, VA, Police Chief Douglas Middleton in an article published by the Richmond Times-Dispatch.



For some, that doesn't seem fair. Co-founder of the Festival and Events Association of Tucson and Southern Arizona Mia Hansen has spent more than 30 years managing major Tucson festivals, and believes the campaigns need to pay.



“Political rallies are great events,” said Hansen. “It brings people out, it’s a time for people to come together and to debate, but they’re still private events that turn into public events and thus, they should follow the same rules as any other event organizers require to.”



Hansen said when local groups host similar events, organizers are required to get permits and pay for officers the provide security.



“We work with the city to figure out: Can we use off duty police officers? Can we use private security?” said Hansen. “The city of Tucson is requiring now that people have a much higher liability insurance policy as well.”



Spokeswoman for TPD Sgt. Kim Bay said the city will pay the officers through its general fund but will bill the campaigns.



Here’s the breakdown according to TPD billing records:



For the Bernie Sanders' rally held on Friday, March 18 - 76 officers worked 638 hours at a cost of $44,013.



The Donald Trump rally on Saturday, March 19, cost the city $81,838 after 180 officers worked 1,171 hours.



On Sunday,March 20, former president Bill Clinton spoke at a rally for his wife, Hillary. That event cost the city $7,312 for the 23 officers who worked 96 hours.



Tucson News Now reached out to the three campaigns asking if they'll pay for the cost of their rallies.



Stephanie Grisham with the Trump campaign says, "it will depend on if it was agreed to in the contract or if the city just did it themselves. A lot of times cities, towns, venues, will do that without clearing it with the campaign first."



Tim Hogan with the Clinton campaign said they do not control security issues, therefore they don’t request any additional security.

Meanwhile, TNN hasn’t received a response from The Sanders campaign.

Copyright 2016 Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.