BARRINGTON — U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, in a mix of a stump speech and Sunday sermon, rallied Republicans here over chili and talk of what it takes to make America great.“Let’s get back to what has made America a beacon of hope and freedom for the world for centuries,” the Texas Republican said. “From the beginning of this country, God’s providential blessing has been on America and I tell you I’m convinced God is not done with America yet.”..Cruz, at the start of the possible presidential hopeful’s two-day visit to New Hampshire on Sunday, spoke to the Strafford County Republican Committee’s “Chili & Chat” event at Turbocam International...“There is an urgency of politics today that is unlike anything any of us has ever seen,” Cruz said. “It is now or never. I don’t think we’ve reached the point of no return yet, but we are close. We are close and I believe if we go four or eight more years on this same path we risk losing the greatest country in the history of the world.”..Cruz said his travels around the country underscored the urgency.“The Obama economy is a disaster. Obamacare is a train wreck and the Obama-Clinton foreign policy of leading from behind … the whole world’s on fire.”..After delivering that line, a young girl sitting on her mother’s lap in the front row blurted out, “The world’s on fire?”As audience members chuckled, Cruz walked over to her. “The world’s on fire, yes. Your world is on fire. But you know what, your mommy’s here and everyone’s here to make sure that the world you grow up in is even better.”..Cruz was also interrupted once by a man who urged him to run for President.He won applause when he called for a flat tax and abolishing the Internal Revenue Service, and he said the Affordable Care Act and Common Core curriculum standards should be repealed...America needs to get back to free market principles to foster job growth from the private sector, not Washington, Cruz said. He said Washington is a place of “despair and despondency.”Cruz was the keynote speaker for the Grafton County Lincoln-Reagan Dinner on Sunday night in Lincoln. He is scheduled to speak at “Politics & Eggs,” co-hosted by the New England Council and the New Hampshire Institute of Politics at St. Anselm College this morning...Jack Kimball, a former state GOP chairman from Dover, said constitutional conservatives like himself want to see leaders like Cruz push back against President Obama.“Barack Obama is the most lawless President this country has ever seen,” Cruz replied...Several Republicans in attendance also had a chance to hear former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush speak at a house party in Dover and Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker deliver remarks to a GOP event in Concord.David Scott, a former Dover city councilor, listened to Bush and Cruz. He said Walker and Cruz are right now the most interesting possible candidates in the field. He is critical of Bush’s support for Common Core curriculum standards, which Cruz said should be repealed...Nodding to Cruz, Scott said, “He’s up there – very close to Scott Walker.”Cruz held an impromptu meet-up with state legislators in attendance and, before leaving Turbocam, autographed Marga Coulp’s pink cowboy boots...“He’s one of my favorites,” Coulp, of Dover, said after meeting Cruz. “I just love his conservative values.”Many Republicans in the audience, estimated by an organizer at 200, wore “Constitutional Conservative” stickers...Cruz said he is seriously considering a run. He said one question is, “If we’re going to win in 2016, how do we bring the many conservatives who have been staying home back into the fold?”dtuohy@unionleader.com..