ENLARGE Tan Boon Hui, the new director of New York’s Asia Society Museum Photo: National Heritage Board

Asia Society, as part of a strategic plan to emphasize global engagement, has appointed a new director of its museum: Tan Boon Hui, who will also serve as vice president for global arts and cultural programs.

Mr. Tan, 45 years old, is an expert in the art of Singapore, where he served as director of the Singapore Art Museum from 2009 to 2013.

His appointment comes after a nearly yearlong search to replace Melissa Chiu, who left last September to be the director of the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden in Washington, D.C.

Headquartered in New York, Asia Society has 10 additional locations around the world devoted to presentation of Asian art and cross-cultural understanding, a mission set out in its founding in 1956 by John D. Rockefeller III.

Asia Society President Josette Sheeran said the institution’s search for a museum director was the first arts hire in a strategic plan that began a rollout in 2014.

Among the ongoing agenda items is to build a board in which half the trustees are from Asia and half from the West.

“We are a globally deployed institution,” said Ms. Sheeran, adding that to maintain and heighten that active presence, the society interviewed people from all over Asia for the museum role. “We were determined to find someone with a finger on the pulse of the exploding, dynamic art scene in Asia.”

Mr. Tan managed Singapore’s pavilion at the 50th Venice Biennale and was assistant chief executive for museums and programs under Singapore’s National Heritage Board.

“He brings expertise from curation and administration,” said Ms. Sheeran. “Singapore is such a crossroads. It really showed in his perspective.”

Asia Society’s museum exhibits traditional Asian art, as well as an extensive collection of photography and new-media works by Asian and Asian-American artists.

Among Mr. Tan’s new duties will be overseeing those collections, as well as orchestrating dialogue about the Asian art field through directing the Asia Society Arts and Museum Network and its Arts & Museum Summit.

Write to Pia Catton at pia.catton@wsj.com