VISAKHAPATNAM: In a bid to tide over power shortages, Eastern Power Distribution Company of AP Limited (APEPDCL) has decided to procure solar power from a private power player for a period of 25 years. If everything goes as per plan, the discom will be able to procure an additional 250MW solar power from 2016.The state-wide proposal will see APEPDCL joining hands with Tirupati-based SPDCL to jointly procure 500 MW of solar power per day from the private developer. As part of the project called Grid Connected Solar Photo Voltaic Projects in Andhra Pradesh (GCSPVPAP), APSPDCL has been given full powers to select a suitable solar power developer through a global tender.The selected solar power developer will have to generate 500 MW power in the 13 districts, including the five districts under Vizag-based APEPDCL and eight under APSPDCL. The generated power will be equally shared between the two discoms, who will pay the developer a per the price fixed at the time of selection of the developer.According to a senior APEPDCL official, the signing of the power purchase agreement (PPA) between the discoms and the selected developer will be held on October 29, after which the developer will be given around one year to set up the project and power generation is expected to commence from 2016.When contacted, Ch Tata Rao, divisional engineer of APSPDCL, said, "We will start receiving bids for the project from September 2 to 17."The selected developer will have to install solar power equipment at locations identified by the two discoms in the 13 districts. As per APEPDCL, 26 locations are viable for solar power generation, including five each in Srikakulam and Vizianagaram districts, six in Visakhapatnam, three in East Godavari and seven in West Godavari. The solar power will be directly supplied to the nearby sub-stations of the discoms in the identified locations.Confirming these plans, B Ramesh Prasad, chief general manager (commercial) of APEPDCL, said a pre-bidding meeting was held on August 22. "Both APSPDCL and APEPDCL will procure power from the developer as per the terms of the power purchase agreement. We will pay the developer at the per unit price to be decided at the time of finalisation of the suitable developer through the open bid. The discoms will just purchase power from the developer at the decided per unit cost. The rest of things like installation of solar plants, manpower and all other works will have to be taken care of by the developer alone," Ramesh Prasad explained.At present, of the total 14,000 million units of power supplied per annum by the discom, only 0.09% is solar energy but the discom is hoping to increase this component to 4% with the implementation of this project, Ramesh said.