Professor Patrick Dolenc, Keene State professor of economics and recipient of the Barbara Burch Award for Faculty Leadership in Civic Engagement from the American Democracy Project, practices what he preaches in terms of civic engagement. He sits on the board of directors for Keene Housing Kids Collaborative, a newly formed non-profit agency working to provide low-income children living in Keene Housing access to the same opportunities available to their more well-off peers.

As executive director of the Keene Housing Kids Collaborative, I congratulate Dr. Dolenc on this well-deserved honor. As was reported in a recent Sentinel article, Dr. Dolenc was recognized for his work on an initiative to raise awareness and educate college students about economic inequality.

Dr. Dolenc’s students at Keene State will have to look no farther than their own backyard to find evidence of economic inequality. On the one hand Keene is a college town with a well-educated, largely affluent population; on the other it is a town where, according to the most recent NH Kids Count data, 33 percent of elementary school students qualify for free and reduced-price lunch.

Put another way, one in every three children in Keene lives in a low-income household.

Research has shown that by the time a low-income child reaches 6th grade they have received 6,000 fewer learning hours than their more well-off peers. These lost learning hours include being read to by parents, enrollment in preschool programs; participation in activities like sports, school clubs and after-school programs; visits to museums, aquariums and parks; attending summer camp; and taking dance, art or music lessons. In addition to being a whole lot of fun, there is a real benefit to doing all these things.

Success in life depends on more than cognitive skills, and these informal learning opportunities help children develop valuable socio-emotional skills like adaptability, self-control, attentiveness, motivation, confidence, teamwork, organizational skills, creativity, perseverance, and communication skills.

Without these varied experiences accessible to many children in Keene, socio-emotional skills are not as well-developed. This leaves low-income children with fewer tools to navigate the world.

It is a disadvantage that they carry with them in school, in the community and eventually into the workplace. Regardless of how smart they are, this often translates into lower school achievement, lower educational aspiration and attainment, and lower earning power in adulthood.

This is not only bad for individual children and families, it is bad for Keene. We are losing out on the social, scientific, business and creative talents of children who will not reach their potential as fully successful adult members of our community.

Keene Housing Kids Collaborative is working specifically to address the 6,000-hour learning gap faced by low-income children. With start-up funding and infrastructure support from Keene Housing, the Kids Collaborative is building on a foundation of good work already occurring in this community and establishing and reaffirming partnerships to provide low cost and no-cost participation for our children in programs related to literacy, recreation, dance, theater, music and science. This is a model that is unique in New Hampshire.

Youth-serving organizations in Keene have embraced this approach, stepping forward to partner with us to make wonderful opportunities available to children residing in Keene Housing properties and assisted through its Housing Choice Voucher program. Because of their generosity and willingness to collaborate with us, our children have attended the Kids on Campus science day camp at Keene State College, explored the Cheshire Children’s Museum, taken classes at Keene Family YMCA, played soccer and football through Keene Parks and Recreation Department, participated in Project KEEP after-school program, and learned to dance and act through classes at MoCo Arts.

Next spring they will be able to attend performances at Redfern Theater on the Keene State campus. We are thrilled to be working with so many wonderful local organizations that offer these valuable and enriching experiences for children.

And we are grateful to have on our board of directors — talented, insightful people like Dr. Dolenc, who are advancing awareness of economic inequality and working to find solutions.