The U.S. government will publish sweeping new rules on Tuesday requiring chain restaurants and large vending machine operators to disclose calorie counts on menus to make people more aware of the risks of obesity posed by fatty, sugary foods.

美国政府于25日出台一项食品行业新规定，要求连锁餐馆和大型自动售货机商家在菜单中标明食物所含的卡路里，以提醒人们高脂高糖食物会带来肥胖的风险。

"Obesity is a national epidemic that affects millions of Americans," Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Margaret Hamburg told reporters on a conference call on Monday.

“肥胖已成为一项全国通病，影响了数百万美国人，”美国国家食品和药物管理局（Food and Drug Administration）专员玛格利特·汉伯格（Margaret Hamburg）在24日的电话会议上告诉记者。

"Strikingly, Americans eat and drink about a third of their calories away from home."

“美国人摄入的卡路里中有约三分之一来自于在外就餐，这很令人惊讶。”

The FDA's new rules, which are part of the 2010 Affordable Care Act, set a national standard for restaurant chains with 20 or more outlets.

食品和药物管理局出台的这项新规定是2010年美国平价医疗法案(Affordable Care Act)的一部分，适用于全美范围内拥有20家及以上连锁店的餐厅。

Under the rules, calories must be displayed on all menus and menu boards. Other nutritional information - including calories from fat, cholesterol, sugars and protein - must be made available in writing upon request.

它规定所有的菜单和菜单板上必须标明卡路里数。其他营养成分的信息如脂肪、胆固醇、糖类和蛋白质所含的卡路里信息，如有要求，也必须能够以书面形式提供。

The new calorie rule covers meals at sit-down restaurants, take-out food, bakery items, ice cream from an ice-cream store and pizza, which will be labeled by the slice and whole pie. Seasonal menu items, such as a Thanksgiving dinner, daily specials and standard condiments will be exempt.

餐馆内就餐、外卖、面包店内、冰淇淋店内的食物都必须遵循这一规则，比萨也会按每片或整张标记卡路里；但这一规则不包括时令性菜单如感恩节晚餐、每日特卖和标准调味品。

The final rule, unlike a 2011 proposal, includes movie theaters, amusement parks and alcoholic beverages served in restaurants, but not drinks mixed or served at a bar.

最终版本与2011年提案有所不同，它包含了电影院、游乐园内的食物和餐厅提供的酒精饮料，但不包括调制饮品和酒吧提供的饮品。

Restaurants have one year and vending machine operators have two years to comply with the new rules following publication in the Federal Register.

联邦公报公布后，餐厅的调整期限为一年，而售卖机为两年。

Panera Bread Co in 2010 became the first company to voluntarily display calorie information at all its cafes nationwide. Others, including McDonald's Corp and Starbucks Corp, followed suit.

2010年帕尼罗面包连锁餐厅（Panera Bread Co）成为第一家自愿在全国范围内的咖啡馆里标明卡路里的公司。其他公司像麦当劳和星巴克也效仿了这一做法。

The agency said it amended its proposals after considering more than 1,100 comments from industry, public health advocates and consumers.

管理机构称，食品行业、公共卫生倡议者和消费者对此提案提出了一千一百多条建议，他们在考虑过这些提议之后进行了修订。

It narrowed the scope to clearly focus on restaurant-type food. Still, there are nuances: Foods such as deli meat bought at a grocery store counter will be excluded. But the rules will apply to food eaten in grocery stores, such as meals purchased at in-house cafes.

它缩小了针对的食品范围，仅限于餐厅类食物。但这一概念本身也有细微差别：不包含像是在杂货店柜台买的熟食这一类食物。但在杂货店里吃的食物，如在咖啡馆里买了在店里吃就需要遵循这项规则。

Hamburg acknowledged that calorie counts for pizza slices and many other foods made on the premises will vary. Restaurants may draw on databases, cookbooks and food package labels to calculate calories.

汉伯格承认不同店里披萨片和其他食物所标注的卡路里会有所不同。餐厅可以根据数据库、食谱和食物包装上的标签来计算卡路里。

The restaurant industry has supported a national standard for years and welcomed the changes.

餐厅行业多年来支持这一规则成为全国标准，并欢迎这一变化。

"We believe that the Food and Drug Administration has positively addressed the areas of greatest concern," said Dawn Sweeney, chief executive of the National Restaurant Association, which represents 990,000 restaurant and food-service outlets.

美国国家餐馆协会（the National Restaurant Association）代表了99万家餐厅和食品专卖店。其首席执行官道恩·斯威尼（Dawn Sweeney）说，“我们相信国家食品和药物管理局已经积极地处理了这一广受关注的问题”。

Not all industry groups were satisfied.

并不是所有行业都满意这一规则。

"We are disappointed that the FDA¹s final rules will capture grocery stores, and impose such a large and costly regulatory burden on our members," said Peter Larkin, president and CEO of the National Grocers Association.

美国食品杂货商协会（the National Grocers Association）主席兼任首席执行官彼得·拉金（Peter Larkin）说，“国家食品和药物管理局出台的这项规则的最终版本将包括杂货店，会给我们的成员施加沉重的规则负担和经济压力”。

National Automatic Merchandising Association, representing the food and refreshment vending industry, said it will "reserve judgment" on the impact on the industry, but said that two years was insufficient "implementation time", especially for small businesses.

美国自动售货协会（National Automatic Merchandising Association）作为食品和甜点售卖行业的代表，表示对这个规则所带来的影响持“保留”态度，但称两年不足以让企业尤其是小企业适应这一规则。

The rules aim to close a gap in the 1990 Nutrition Labeling and Education Act, which established nutrition labeling on most foods, but not restaurant or other ready-to-eat foods.

1990颁布的《营养标识和教育法》（Nutrition Labeling and Education Act）规定大多数食物必须标明营养成分，但没包含餐厅和其他即食食物。这项规则旨在对此进行改善。

Katie Bengston, Panera's nutrition manager, said menu labeling has not affected its business: "We did not notice a jump in sales from higher calorie items to lower calorie items."

帕奈拉冷饮西餐厅（Panera）营养经理凯蒂·本斯顿（Katie Bengston）则表示在菜单上标明卡路里这一变化对生意没有影响，“我们没有看到高卡路里食物销售额猛降和低卡路里食物销量猛增”。

（翻译：eileen7 编辑：Julie）