GIBSON CITY — During a special meeting last Thursday, Gibson City Council members decided to renew the city’s existing employee health insurance plan, but they were not happy about it.

Marty Nuss, a broker for Insurance Providers Group in Gibson City, spent about 45 minutes at the meeting summarizing other rates and plans that he found when trying to reduce the 28.5 percent increase in the existing plan’s premiums. That increase is scheduled to take effect Dec. 1.

Nuss’ first effort was to try to negotiate with the current insurance company, Humana. However, the company was not interested in reducing its rate increase.

“They stuck to their guns,” Nuss reported.

A Humana representative told Nuss that the rate increase is primarily based on two factors — the general insurance trend, which accounts for 14.5 percent of the increase; and factors of the group’s demographics, including the age and sex of the participants. Recent claims that indicate a higher future rate of claims made up the rest of the increase.

Nuss pointed out that the city has lost some younger male employees and replaced them with older workers. That trend may positively impact work experience, he said, but it negatively impacts insurance rates.

Nuss also noted the employee group has experienced some claims in the past year for longer-term health issues. Nuss said that by law, a company cannot penalize a group for its past claims, but it can increase rates based on expectation of future claims.

In discussing other options with the city council, Nuss first explained that he would be making comparisons between “apples” — pre-Affordable Care Act (ACA) plans such as the city’s current plan — and “oranges” — ACA-compliant plans. If a customer elects either a new plan or a new carrier for health insurance, then an ACA-compliant plan is the only option.

Nuss said that, in general, an ACA plan will require higher deductibles and generally offer less coverage due to ACA coverage requirements.

Nuss also said he would not recommend new ACA cooperatives, such as Land of Lincoln, which have offered significantly lower premiums for ACA plans but now are either experiencing or are expected to experience significant financial difficulties.



Other plan comparisons

Nuss said he sent the city’s health plan out for quote with multiple companies “to see what we could get.”

Nuss confirmed that he is an independent broker and does not work for any particular insurance company.

“I’ve been looking under every rock,” Nuss said of his efforts.

Nuss said the most competitive plan overall came from Blue Cross Blue Shield (BCBS).

Nuss had prepared a comparison between Humana and BCBS policies, and it indicated that if the city changed its health plan, the deductible would rise from $500 to $1,000 per individual, and the out-of-pocket maximum would increase by $500 per year per individual. There would be a savings of $1,500 for total out-of-pocket costs with the BCBS plan, however.

The total new premium per month from Humana would be $14,752 and $14,587 from BCBS.

Nuss said the comparison showed what he had predicted of an ACA plan — lower overall benefits and not that large of a savings on premiums.



Questions addressed

Several city council members asked if the employees understood the choices and which one they preferred. Nuss said that employees who attended a meeting on the subject were in favor of staying with the Humana coverage.

Nuss’ statement was confirmed by two employees attending the meeting: Administrative Assistant Peg Stalter and City Superintendent Randy Stauffer.

“They are upset about the increase, but they understand that staying with the current policy is the best option,” Stalter said.

Employees pay 25 percent of the monthly premiums while the city pays the other 75 percent.

“If they want it, that’s important,” said Alderman Barb Yergler.

When asked if the budget could take the increase, Alderman and Finance Committee Chairman Scott Davis said that because a 15 percent increase had been factored into the current budget and the balance of the increase would not take place until Dec. 1 — with the fiscal year ending June 30, 2016 — then existing appropriations would be sufficient.

Alderman Jan Hall asked if city employees had access to local physicians and medical providers because her recent call to the hospital indicated that Humana did not have a contract with Gibson Area Hospital.

Nuss said that was true, but that employees gain local provider access through a third-party network known as Community Partners, which Human does have a contract with. Nuss said there is no change from past provider availability.

Nuss said the city will likely be able to renew its existing pre-ACA policy one additional year and perhaps two, but after that, a move to an ACA type of plan will likely be mandated by federal law.

While the vote to stay with Humana was unanimous, comments showed that council members were not happy with the available choices.

“We’re stuck,” said Hall, whose “yay” vote was clearly given reluctantly.

Davis said the council chose “the best of the worst” of the choices available to it.