Oklahoma cornerback Zach Sanchez speaks to the media at a press conference in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., Sunday, Dec. 27, 2015. Oklahoma will play Clemson in the Orange Bowl on New Year's Eve. (AP Photo/Gaston De Cardenas)

Clemson’s offense includes first-team All-Atlantic Coast Conference players at every position group in the bunch, led by a Heisman Trophy finalist at quarterback.

Oklahoma’s defense is not impressed.

The Sooners allow an average of 350.7 yards per game, which is 31st nationally but a miniscule number by Big 12 standards. Three of Oklahoma’s conference opponents average more than 560 yards per game, and three others are in the 400s, so the league champion Sooners (11-1) feel perfectly battle-tested as the fourth seed facing No. 1 Clemson (13-0) in Thursday’s College Football Playoff national semifinal at the Orange Bowl.

“I mean, we play in the Big 12. It’s hard to say they’re the best offense we’ve seen, with Baylor, TCU, (Oklahoma State,)” junior cornerback Zack Sanchez said during media interviews Sunday. “They’re juggarnauts, man. You look up and down: it’s the way they spread you out, the way they attack you — it’s difficult week in and week out to limit those big plays and keep scores under 30. There’s not another conference that puts up the offensive numbers this conference does.

“To hold opponents the way we did this year speaks a lot about our defense. It’s a good challenge for us, so when we get into these bowl games, we’ve seen the explosive offenses and athletic guys. It’s nothing new to us.”

Sanchez and defensive end Charles Tapper, both first-team All-Big 12 selections, likened Clemson’s style to Tennessee. The schemes might be similar, led by the Vols’ Josh Dobbs and the Tigers’ All-American quarterback Deshaun Watson, but Clemson is No. 11 in total offense while Tennessee is No. 48. Oklahoma won, 31-24, in double overtime at Tennessee on Sept. 12.

“We really looked back at that game because we know they’re going to take some things from what Dobbs did to us,” Tapper said. “We’re going against another great duo with Watson and the running back from Clemson (Wayne Gallman). We know they’re trying to try to pound us inside. But we know if we fly around like we’ve been doing all year, we should stop the zone read.”

An element the Sooners have not had to deal with: a productive tight end. Oklahoma’s own freshman, Mark Andrews, has 17 catches for 286 yards for six scores; no other Big 12 tight end is over 200 yards or two touchdowns.

“Over in their conference, they don’t really play against a tight end that runs routes,” said Clemson TE Jordan Leggett, a Mackey Award finalist with 34 catches for 442 yards and seven TDs. “It’s a really basic gameplan going in. We’re going to be able to do what we want when we want. I know our offensive coordinators are going to find all their tendencies, and we’ll be able to pick them apart.”

Clemson handed Oklahoma one of its worst bowl defeats in program history last Dec. 29, a 40-6 result in the Russell Athletic Bowl further north in Orlando. That was with Watson shelved with ACL reconstructive surgery, but the Sooners remember facing receivers Artavis Scott, Charone Peake and Germone Hopper.

“Obviously, they didn’t have their quarterback, so the gameplan will be a little different this year,” Sanchez said. “We’ve been able to see them before and figure out their tendencies. Those guys have some good receivers over there, but we’ve got some pretty (darn) good DBs too.”

Peake’s counter: “They have every reason to be confident. They’re very athletic. They do a good job with the ball in the air. They go up and get it just like the receivers. We’re going to have to help in the run game and be technicians with our routes.”

Sanchez went on to compare Watson to another All-American candidate quarterback, TCU’s Trevone Boykin. Boykin was injured in Oklahoma’s 30-29 win Nov. 21, but faced the Sooners last season.

“I don’t think we’ve seen an athlete like Trevone,” Sanchez said. “Maybe Deshaun will be different, but in my career, Trevone is hands-down the best quarterback we’ve seen in that area of creating plays and extending plays. If he’s one-of-a-kind, Deshaun probably brings some of the same challenges, but it’s definitely nothing we haven’t seen before.”

Of the negative reputation Big 12 defenses are saddled with, Sanchez said, “Yeah, of course you hear it. It is what it is. People will say what they want. We’ll just show up and play the game.”