Broad constituency was consulted in drafting plan

Longmont's Public Works and Natural Resources department has a new tool for figuring out how a new park or a major street improvement could affect several facets of the city.

The Sustainability Evaluation System was developed specifically for Longmont and will serve as an internal process that department employees can run a major project through and evaluate it on nine different criteria.

Those criteria include best practices, energy use, how it impacts the community as well as how it would impact transportation or the natural environment.

The history of this effort goes back to 2008, when city staff began the lengthy sustainability plan process. The plan would have set environmental goals the city wished to attain, like Boulder County's "zero waste or darn near" by 2025 action plan.

To draft the Longmont plan, a broad cross-section of the community was consulted, said Dale Rademacher, Public Works and Natural Resources director.

"There were representatives from the health club industry, from non-profits, from the chamber of commerce and the business interests, the Sierra Club and environmental interests — we must have had 30, 40 people in some of those meetings," Rademacher said.

The draft plan that resulted was broad in scope as well, touching on health care and the general well-being of every Longmont resident.

When the City Council saw the plan in 2011, some members gave feedback that the social aspects should be scrubbed from the plan. Ultimately, PWNR department was told to develop a formal internal system to evaluate projects. The broad goal-based version of the plan that integrated social concerns was basically shelved.

Advertisement

Longmont staff hired the Brendle Group in 2013 to develop the system, based off of the similar Envision system endorsed by the American Society of Civil Engineers, the American Public Works Association and others. The cost of the system is $80,000, although Rademacher noted that some of the amount is still in reserve for staff training.

The internal system that the department will use requires a project manager and a team of different employees from various parts of the department to rate large-scale projects using a computer program.

"The idea is that the process is bringing in people from different disciplines, in the case of our department, it could be bringing in engineers ... together with people in the business services area that look at financial impacts with people in natural resources department all in conversation with each other," Rademacher said.

The new process would ensure that a project like the St. Vrain Improvement Project is taking the effects on the environment, the economy and the community into consideration.

"You look at those tradeoffs as opposed to the sort of old style of where you would look at the cost and look at if it was meeting our standards and specifications and do a lifecycle analysis," Rademacher said.

The new system, which shouldn't require any new staff, might be used as a template for similar decision-making systems in the city.

The city is relying more heavily on a computerized priority-based budgeting system this year when deciding where to allocate money. The system allows city staff to evaluate individual programs or a whole department on how integral it is to the community and to city goals.

City Manager Harold Dominguez said that he has seen technology get more involved in the decision-making process in municipal government, but rather than an algorithm making the decision, the systems are providing more information to the decision makers.

"It lets us take numbers, data sets, we've always had, and allows us to look at those from different angles and allows us to understand what the variables are and how they impact (the decision)."

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci