ENLARGE Tomaz Razingar of Slovenia, wearing blue, collides with Johnny Oduya of Sweden in the third period during the men's ice hockey quarterfinal on Day 12 of the 2014 Sochi Winter Olympics at the Bolshoy Ice Dome on Wednesday. Getty Images

SOCHI, Russia—The Slovenians did not go quietly.

The Olympic men's hockey tournament's Cinderella team fell to Sweden 5-0 in the quarterfinal on Wednesday, sending the Scandinavian hockey powerhouse into the semifinals for the first time since 2006.

But Slovenia, a country with about the same number of registered men's hockey players as the United Arab Emirates, and playing Olympic hockey for the first time, again showed its surprising scrappiness and stayed within a goal of Sweden for 42 minutes.

After appearing nervous in the early going against a Swedish team that is one of the favorites to win gold, Slovenia picked up speed and created chances in front of the net with aggressive, physical play. The Slovenians, lacking the stickhandling and passing finesse of the Swedes, fought hard for the puck along the boards and kept the game at 1-0 through two periods.

They drew four penalties, the first of which proved to be their undoing. After Slovenia's Jan Mursak went off for high-sticking seven minutes into the game, a hard shot bounced off the boards behind goaltender Robert Kristan and ended up on the stick of Sweden's Alexander Steen, who flipped it into an open net.

But the Slovenians kept fighting, pushed on by a Russian crowd that energetically cheered on their Slavic brethren. They were outshot by Sweden 38 to 19 but forced Sweden goaltender Hernik Lundqvist to make some brilliant saves, such as one on a Tomaz Razingar shot in the first period on a 2-on-1 breakaway.

"We tried to score," rather than focus on defense, Slovenian forward Ziga Jeglic said. "Why not? We have nothing to lose."

Third-period goals by Daniel Sedin and Loui Eriksson, and two by Carl Hagelin, made it 5-0, putting the game out of reach even as the Slovenians kept attacking.

The hockey team's loss concludes a chapter in what has been a remarkable Olympics for Slovenia. The country's athletes have already captured seven medals in Sochi, matching their total for all prior six Winter Games that Slovenia participated in. The hockey run into the quarterfinals marks the best ever Olympic result for any part of the former Yugoslavia, and included upset wins over Slovakia and Austria.

"At the moment in our country, it's euphoric," Blaz Perko, deputy head of the Slovenian delegation in Sochi, said before the third period began.

For Sweden, the reigning hockey world champion, the battle is just beginning. In the semifinal, it will face the winner of the Finland-Russia game in Sochi this afternoon.

Write to Anton Troianovski at anton.troianovski@wsj.com