CMA Awards 2013 Twerk Performance With Carrie Underwood : 'Duck Dynasty' Cast Mimics Miley Cyrus 'Blurred Lines' MTV VMA With Robin Thicke Segment (VIDEO)

Sign Up for Newsletter

The 2013 CMA Awards referenced Miley Cyrus' controversial performance at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards several times on Wednesday.

The 47th annual Country Music Association Awards was held in Nashville at the Bridgestone Arena. During their opening monologue, hosts Brad Paisley and Carrie Underwood sang a country-style version of Robin Thicke's Blurred Lines by changing the track's lyrics to "you're country girl, I know you want it, I know you want it."

Two cast members from Duck Dynasty, Willie Robertson and Jase Robertson, joined them on stage during their rendition. Willie at one point leaned against Underwood and began to twerk against her.



Miley Cyrus VMA 2013 Performance With Robin Thicke Impersonated by Playboy Hugh Hefner & Crystal Harris For Halloween

Cyrus was mentioned a second time when Paisley gave a shout-out to Taylor Swift. He thanked Swift for "never once humping a teddy bear and gyrating with Beetlejuice."

Even Cyrus' Wrecking Ball music video was mocked. During the ceremony, Underwood quipped, "I gotta say, if anyone in music today was gonna be caught naked licking a hammer, I think we all thought it'd be Blake Shelton."

CMA Awards 2013 Red Carpet PHOTOS: Tim McGraw, Faith Hill, Taylor Swift, Brad Paisley, Keith Urban & More

Paisley and Underwood, who have hosted the show together for six years in a row, also joked about Keith Urban, his wife Nicole Kidman and Obamacare.

Paisley said he knows for a fact that Urban and Kidman send sext messages to each other to keep their marriage spicy. He said he decided to give it a try and while trying to send a sext to his wife Kim Paisley, he accidentally sent it to Urban instead.

Miley Cyrus 'Saturday Night Live' 2013 Season 39 Promo VIDEO, Spoofs MTV VMAs 2013 'Blurred Lines' Performance

Underwood mocked Obamacare by citing the website', infamous technical glitches that have caused major delays in uploading pages. Together with Paisley they sang about it so long to sign up for Obamacare that they'll end up with various health issues by the time the process is complete.

"I'm gonna wind up with hemorrhoids if I sit here til dawn/We'll have cataracts and dementia, oh this is getting on my last nerve/ Obamacare by morning/Over 6 people insured."

Watch Brad Paisley & Carrie Underwood and Duck Dynasty cast mimic Miley Cyrus' VMAs performance here.