Sioux Falls, SD

While the rain stayed light in Sioux Falls with amounts of a quarter to a third of an inch, parts of KELOLAND had a good soaking of rain on Wednesday. Amounts totaled over an inch in Aberdeen, Chamberlain, and Rapid City.

If you missed the rain, there's more on the way, especially for the second half of the weekend.

The raw model data for that day suggests high ranging from the 20s in Custer to 80 degrees in Spencer, Iowa. In fact there's a 30 degree difference from Spencer to Marshall.



With a temperature difference like that, it's easy to see a chance for severe weather in eastern and southeast KELOLAND. So, it could end up being one of those days when we have severe weather in southeast KELOLAND and snow in western South Dakota.

We seem to get this type of contrast in the weather at least once or twice a year. The timing is right as we should expect in once in the spring and once in the fall.

Forecast {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.