Video

Image Edelsten's new flame calls Brynne 'tacky' 7:56 Play video Geoffrey Edelsten's new flame Gabi Grecko says she doesn't want to be compared to his ex-wife Brynne as she's 'tacky'. Courtesy Sunrise/Channel Seven

AFTER hitting back at her ex’s new squeeze on social media last week, Brynne Edelsten has now penned an open letter to “nasty” Gabi Grecko.

Brynne initially kept a relatively low profile while the flame-haired model-DJ was doing the rounds with various media outlets, but it appears she has sold her side of the story to New Idea magazine.

Geoff steps out with Brynne lookalike

WHO IS GABI GRECKO?

In the lengthy letter, published in today’s issue of the magazine, the reality TV star pleads with Grecko to leave her alone, saying it is “bizarre that you’re obsessing about me.”

Brynne begins: “Dear Gabi, I’m not sure what your issue with me is, but please leave me alone,” before calling the 24-year-old “obsessed” and “nasty”.

“Clearly you’ve got something against me, which is a bit confusing. I don't understand why you’ve said the things you’ve said. I don’t know if it’s jealousy or insecurity or what it is. I understand you’re only 24, so maybe you’ve just got a lot of learning to do,” the 31-year-old writes.

30 LIFE LESSONS LEARNT BY 30

Last week, Grecko accused Brynne of being “rude”, “tacky” and of treating her ex-husband badly during an appearance on Seven’s Sunrise.

“I’m not sure how you think I’m rude. I think you’re rude and your opinion is judgmental, to be honest. If anything, you’re revealing a lot about yourself.”

The recently single star revealed in the letter that Grecko had sent a Twitter picture of herself kissing Geoffrey via email to Brynne’s mother Mariel Gordon.

“I contacted Geoff and asked for you not to contact myself or my family and your message back was basically: ‘All publicity is good publicity’.

“It’s one thing for me to put up with it, but to try to attack my mother like that is just disgusting. Leave me and my family alone, they have nothing to do with you,” Brynne writes.

Geoffrey denied such an email exists.

Brynne also hit out at Grecko’s claims that she is a gold-digger, saying: “From the day I came to Australia, there were people calling me a gold-digger. It’s a low blow but it’s nothing new. If you want to hurt me, be more creative.”

It didn’t take long for Grecko to hit back on Instagram, posting this morning: “To be honest and clear I only said the things I said because of how horribly she treated Geoff and I’ll stick up for my man.

“Who would want to stalk her.

“If anyone knew even close to the truth about how horrible she treated him after he gave her so much you’d do the same! #standbymyman.”

Last week, Brynne posted a quote from designer Coco Chanel on her Facebook and Instagram in response to Grecko’s cruel words.

“I don’t care what you think about me. I don’t think about you at all,” the quote reads.

Brynne’s manager Rob Menzies said that the My Bedazzled Life star won’t be “dragged into” the Grecko drama.

The medical entrepreneur and his new love, who is 47 years his junior, first made headlines last Monday, causing a stir at the funeral of AFL legend Tom Hafey.

Brynne, who parted ways with her 71-year-old husband in January after four years of marriage, has received an outpouring of support from her fans on social media in the wake of the split.

She spent most of last week in her new Port Melbourne apartment but ventured out for first time publicly last night, appearing as a judge at the Mr World competition.

Surrounded by shirtless muscle men, the party girl helped crown Nick Kennett Mr World Australia, before continuing on to her favourite nightclub Eve until early this morning.

Brynne and Geoff are trying to settle their divorce, and it is understood the pair did not sign a pre-nuptial agreement.