Active Minds, an organization at the University of Arizona, is hosting the first Mental Health Awareness Week starting Monday, March 28.

The week will start with 1,100 flags placed on the U of A mall, in honor of the more than 1,100 students who die by suicide each year on college campuses.

"A lot of these students are coming away from home where they're on a new campus. They're away from family. And they don't realize that there are these things can happen to you if you don't know the warning signs. Depression is very prevalent among college students, as well as alcohol addiction, drug addiction," said Joshua Sanchez, president of Active Minds.

Sanchez said there are many resources on campus to help students who need help, but many do not reach out when they need help.

He also said he hopes the week will not only create awareness, but help start an ongoing conversation on campus regarding mental health.

"There's negative connotations with (mental health.) People are called crazy or some things of that nature. It's very hurtful and it makes people shut down rather than to open up," Sanchez said. "So if we can open up the dialogue and let people know what's going on now. Let them know that if they need help everybody's here, it's an open community and they can seek help."

For resources visit the Campus Health website here: http://oasis.health.arizona.edu/hpps_oasis_program_resources_agencies_community.htm

Mental Health Awareness week events:

March 28:

Noon to 1 p.m.: QPR training (suicide prevention training) at the SUMC Agave Room

March 29:

11 a.m. to 1 p.m.: CPNP on the mall

Noon to 1 p.m.: Letter home on mall

4 p.m. to 5 p.m.: Student Panel at the SUMC Agave Room

6 p.m. to 6:45 p.m.: Stress busters at the Rec Center

March 30:

11 a.m. to 1 p.m.: Depression screening on the mall

6:30 p.m. to 8 p.m.: Guest speaker Kevin Breel at the ballroom

March 31:

11 a.m. to 1 p.m.: Mental health pledges and hope notes on the mall.

Noon to 1:30 p.m.: QPR training (suicide prevention training) at campus health

5 p.m. to 6 p.m.: Discussion panel at SUMC Santa Cruz Room

April 1

Noon to 1 p.m.: Yoga at the rec center Larson room and art expression on the mall

Copyright 2016 Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.