John Dean wasn’t recognized as we sat in Washington’s new power restaurant Thursday night and contemplated the vagaries and transient essence of clout in the capital.

“This place represents money power, not so much governmental power,” Dean surmised as he scanned the 12,000-square-foot main room at Joe’s Stone Crab. It was packed with upscale professionals of diverse generations, including lobbyists and a senator.

I told Dean, who is forever associated with our greatest political scandal, Watergate, how I’d seen Kathleen Sebelius ambling to a Union Station taxi line all by her lonesome that morning.

A few hours later, in a congressman’s waiting room, I’d seen an otherwise unrecognized James Woolsey all by his lonesome.

They are, like Dean, all part of the city’s Army of Formers.

She may now always be the maligned “former secretary of Health and Human Services” during the Obamacare website debacle. Woolsey will be a “former CIA director,” which is how my congressman friend referred to him.

Once they traveled with large retinues of security and others. They were on the “A” social list in a town that, perhaps more than any other, equates status with title.

Now they’ve entered a certain hazy, undefined twilight zone between the past and present.

In most cases, it almost doesn’t matter what one does after government service — how much money they make or what achievements or troubles they experience. They’re often locked in time as what they were.

For a former senator I had lunch with recently, the onetime high rank had become an avenue to improbable riches. You trade on your past and market your wisdom about the town’s supposedly mysterious inner workings.

Some can’t manage to leave; the economic incentives are too alluring, especially as the law-lobbying-consulting world has exploded. One firm just reported earning $8.6 million in lobbying revenue in the year’s second quarter. It’s a world of hefty six-figure and even seven-figure annual retainers, often paid by companies (or even foreign dictators) merely seeking to maintain a legislative or regulatory status quo.

Some won’t leave; an incestuous elite culture has sucked them in, and the district or state they represented now seems such distant, small potatoes. They might keep a summer place back there.

Then there’s Dean, who had to leave and is now 75, though he’s testament to the potential of charting a new, even rehabilitative, course after exiting.

The history of Dean might have been known to a few geezers at Joe’s, whose marble columns, Palladian windows and clientele would, suggested the Washington Post dining review, suit the opening montage of “House of Cards.”

He was the young and dashing White House counsel with a knockout wife (they’re still married) who testified against Nixon and others in congressional hearings that riveted the nation. He was convicted of obstruction of justice and sentenced to the four months already spent in the witness protection program. A felony conviction meant losing his law license.

He moved to Los Angeles and morphed into a best-selling author, respected commentator and teacher of ethics courses nationwide that lawyers attend to maintain their state license as part of continuing legal education mandates.

His soon-to-be-published tenth book, “The Nixon Defense,” is a prodigious effort that required transcribing hundreds of hours of Watergate-related Nixon White House recordings.

As we discussed Washington’s cultural anthropology, he recalled how John Ehrlichman, a key Nixon aide who served time for the Watergate cover-up, plaintively asked Nixon if he could still use the presidential retreat at Camp David after his forced resignation.

“The perk was important,” said Dean.

Dean acknowledges vast change in the city: its demographics, its look, its unprecedented political polarization and its ever-more-entrenched lobbying-consulting sector.

But he finds that a certain essence remains. There’s a lack of genuine friendships. Pragmatism and utility rule. It’s not who you are as a person, he says, “it’s what you are.”

“That hasn’t changed a bit.”

When Ehrlichman and H.R. Haldeman, the other key Nixon aide and co-conspirator, were booted, “they didn’t have a friend in town.”

Of course, they were total jerks, unlike Kathleen Sebelius, whose sin was not criminality.

“But,” said Dean, “I bet if she goes to a party tonight and stands in a corner, there’ll be maybe two people who go up to her.”

jwarren@nydailynews.com