After President Obama told CBS reporter Major Garrett at yesterday afternoon’s White House press conference that ”he should know better” for questioning him about the four Americans currently held in captivity in Iran, I made the case that it was Obama who should know better for seeing fit to negotiate a nuclear agreement with a country holding Americans in captivity in the first place.

Not surprisingly, the mainstream media is more upset with Garrett than they are with the American hostages in Iran particularly over at CNN. Dana Bash bashed Garrett stating, “There’s a fine line between asking a tough question and maybe crossing that line a little bit and being disrespectful, and I think that happened here.” Her CNN colleagues Don Lemon and Gloria Borger also took aim at Garrett. Lemon said, “Wait a minute, that was a little out of school,” while Borger chided Garrett for making Obama “angry and upset.”

Obama’s petulant attitude towards Garrett and CNN’s eagerness to defend Obama is emblematic of how spoiled Obama has been by the media from the moment he hit the national stage at the 2004 DNC. No doubt Bash, Borger & Lemon prefer the approach taken recently by their colleague Jim Acosta who said to President Obama, “I wanted to ask you about what some people are calling your best week ever.” The “some people” Acosta was referring to was CNN anchor John King who said, “This may well be the best week of his second term,” last month following the Supreme Court ruling in favor of Obamacare and congressional approval of TPA for the TPP. During this time, CNN offered headlines such as, “Best week in Washington: Barack Obama’s legacy,” and my personal favorite, “Barack Obama gets his groove back”.

I remember when David Axelrod said that Fox News was not a legitimate news organization. Well, CNN bears a greater resemblance to an adjunct of the Obama White House than they do an actual news organization. I also remember when former Time reporter Nina Burleigh said she would be happy to give Bill Clinton oral sex for keeping abortion legal. Well, quite frankly CNN and much of the mainstream media have been giving Obama the Burleigh treatment for the past 6½ years. It’s high time we had reporters like Major Garrett who stood up to Obama rather than dropped to their knees.

So Major Garrett made President Obama “angry and upset.”Well, too damn bad. The families of the American hostages have far most just cause to be angry and upset than Obama does. Now that he has his precious little nuclear agreement with Iran, Obama needs to man up and get our four American hostages freed.

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.