Keeping it weird, 13 years running

NEDERLAND — A parade of hearses and coffins accompanied by metal music is not the typical signifier of a celebration, but in Nederland, things are done a little differently.

The 13th annual Frozen Dead Guy Days is taking place this weekend in the mountain town of Nederland. Although the town may be small, it has proven year after year that it knows how to throw one deadly party.

Dave Felkley, otherwise known as "Bigfoot," has been announcing parades in Nederland for "the last 20-something years," he said, and this parade was no different. He explained that Frozen Dead Guy Days commemorates the cryonically frozen body of the town's most infamous Norwegian resident, Bredo Morstoel.

Steven Moss goes backward into the icy water during the polar plunge Saturday at the 13th Annual Frozen Dead Guy Days in Nederland. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

Morstoel, better known as "Grandpa," died over 20 years ago, and his grandson, Trygve Bauge, had his grandfather's body stored in a shed behind his house. Although Bauge was eventually deported, the town made sure "Grandpa" was not forgotten. Once a year a celebration is thrown in his honor.

"I like how thoroughly absurd it is," Jenni Halsted, local resident said. "I think our society needs to do a better job accepting the idea of death, but also I just like the silliness of it."

This year, the three-day festival featured events like the costumed Polar Plunge, coffin races, frozen T-shirt contest, and Ice Turkey Bowling. Food and drink trucks, tents, and the usual Nederland shops welcomed the onslaught of visitors.

Today, teams of decorated hearses and coffins made their way up First Street while equally eerie spectators watched from the sidelines.

A spookily dressed Esmee Halsted, 10, beamed from the sidewalk next to her mom and sister. She wore a white veil, white face paint, and the word "Frozen" painted across her forehead."

"I was going to be a princess, but I decided a dead grandma would be better. I like the whole day. I like everything about it," she said.

While all of the hearses were a sight to see, one stood out from the rest. What looked to be brains covered the top of the hearse, and bloodied feathers and faux body parts were smeared across the hood of the car. A woman dressed in what looked like a pelt covered in blood identified herself as Demonica Webber, and she explained her team was Dorris's Road Kill.

"We have a dead bunny, dead mouse, dead kid, and a dead monkey all walking alongside us in the parade today. We feel like we've got a shot at being first place winners."

Webber and her team have been participating in the hearse parade since 2004.

"We just love the thrill of it. It allows us to be ourselves," she said.

Charleen Bollig, with the stage name of Dementia Webber, stood next to Demonica. She had plastic eyeballs falling off her face, bloody makeup, mouse ears and tail.

"Talking to all the kids that ask what's on my face is the best part. I tell them it's sugar. Sometimes they ask to touch it. That's the best," Bollig said.

Once the hearses and coffins made their grand entrance, most parade-goers headed down to Chipeta Park where the Polar Plunge was about to take place.

Spectators swarmed around a small patch of icy water dug out of the snow-covered ground. An impromptu snowball fight broke out as viewers eagerly waited for participants to dive in. Finally, two men in full-body blue morph suits ran into the middle and jumped in to the freezing water. Many costumed plungers followed including Nacho Libre, Batwoman and Superwoman, and Santa's elves.

Rowan Nasty, 11, and Ashley Grewe, 11, scampered out of the water in tutus after their daring plunge screaming "It's cold! It's cold!"

Both girls said they'd do it again, no questions.

"It's cold, but it's so fun," Grewe said.

"It's not that scary. Just do it," Nasty said.

Most little girls wouldn't dream of dunking into icy water with temperatures between 30 and 40 degrees outside, but Grewe and Nasty had a secret weapon on their side.

"We're from Nederland, of course!" they said.