Gone are the days when a burglar would have to stake out your home during the holidays to see if you were away. Thanks to millions of people posting their locations, sharing photos of their Christmas gifts, and telling everyone exactly how long they'll be on vacation, many criminals are able to find easy targets.

These days, almost everyone has access to the internet right at their fingertips.

"The world is more connected now than ever so I can see how criminals could get wise to that type of thing and use it against good normal law abiding people," said Walt Hayford.

Sgt. Marc Tocheterman with the Bay County Sheriff's Department says people need to be careful about what they share on pages like Facebook and Twitter.

"The worst thing you can do is tell everybody that you're leaving town and where you're going and how long you're gonna be there, because that's just an open invitation," said Sgt. Tochterman.

It's something that many people are guilty of.

"I've done that before just posted it just because sometimes I'll put stuff on Facebook like that," said Allison Stettler.

People also need to avoid posting photos of expensive gifts.

"They're just letting everybody know what they got for Christmas and its just see what I have in my house come and get it," said Sgt. Tochterman.

Many people tell me that they never thought that simply posting a picture of their Christmas gifts on Facebook and putting in their location could be putting them at risk.

"I've just never really thought about the fact that somebody could see that and burglarize a home, its just not crossed my mind," said Stettler.

"It opens my eyes a lot more it never really occurred to me at the time hey people actually looking at this in a different light as you said like a target," said Christian Dickey.

Now many people say they're going to be more careful about what they post on social media.

"It's something that I won't do in the future because I do feel like you never know who can see your page," said Stettler.

Sergeant Tocheterman says people should also avoid leaving the boxes of expensive gifts outside their home. He encourages people to take these boxes to a dumpster.