— It was a busy year. President Lyndon B. Johnson declared “War on Poverty.” The Beatles hit U.S. shores. The World’s Fair opened in New York. Health officials made the formal connection between smoking and lung cancer.

And in 1964, on the north side of the University of South Florida campus, a set of dormitories collectively known as Andros I opened to 650 students.

College dormitories typically don’t age well, and more than five decades after they rose, the Andros dorms will face the wrecking ball and be replaced by a vibrant, live-work-play residential village with retail, restaurant and even grocery store space for 2,000 students.

“It really will be transformative,” said Judy Genshaft, president of the USF System. “We’re looking at related activities along with it — there will be coffee shops, restaurants.”

Construction is expected to begin in May 2016. The four Andros I buildings will be the first to go — the Delta, Epsilon, Eta and Zeta dorms. (The early USF dorms were named for letters of the Greek alphabet.) In their places will be a village with 1,550 semi-suite or traditional beds, a health and wellness facility, an outdoor pool and deck, dining facilities and retail spaces.

In 2018, the five Andros II buildings — the Iota, Kappa, Lambda, Mu and Theta dorms — come down, to be replaced by 575 new semi-suite or traditional beds. Phase I is slated for completion in June 2017, phase II in June 2019.

It’s becoming trendy to refer to student housing as “villages,” “residence centers” or some more upscale term. But you can go ahead and call the Andros sites “dorms.”

They are functional cinderblock bunkers, most with two beds in the sleeping area, narrow hallways, study desks that aren’t reached by natural light, tight showers and toilets.

“You have to put up a lot of posters or you feel like you’re living in a hospital,” said July Soe, a freshman from Burma who lives in the Zeta hall.

The university has dressed up entryways and spruced up old flooring in the buildings, but “they just look a little tired,” said Linda Kasper, director for residential life and education.

A new residence hall at the University of Tampa features “art boxes,” study nooks, photographic displays from around the world, plenty of windows offering a sweeping panoramic view of Tampa and rooms organized in suite or loft arrangements.

At Florida Polytechnic, a residence hall quickly rose with 200 beds, most in four bedroom, two-bath units with a kitchenette described as more apartment-style than dorm-style.

The Poly hall was constructed as a private-public partnership with Jacksonville-based Vestcor Cos. That’s the same arrangement USF is pursuing for the new village, with a developer bearing full risk for financing, building, furnishing and potentially operating the project. Details are being negotiated, and USF declined to name its two finalists or provide details of their proposals for competitive reasons.

“We’re really creating an environment where students can live, work and play, kind of like what Jeff Vinik is doing downtown, where they can stay and not leave on Friday nights to go home,” said John Long, chief operating officer and senior vice president. “They’ll have everything they need here.”

The university is seeking to shed the “commuter college” tag and earn classification as a primary residential campus under the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education. To do so, it must increase the percentage of degree-seeking undergrads living on campus to 25 percent.

USF Tampa has 5,589 on-campus residents. That’s considered 105 percent of capacity, with a few hundred students doubled up in rooms intended to be singles.

Dorm dwellers represent about 14 percent of the Tampa campus’ enrollment of 38,561. In 2009, the school mandated that all first-time-in-college freshmen live in campus housing unless they are over 21, married, or live in Hillsborough, Pinellas or Pasco counties.

The village concept coming to the north side of campus is expected to benefit off-campus students, as well.

“We’re also looking at students not just on campus, but what we call ‘resi-muters,’” said Genshaft. “There are about 15,000 students that live right around the university, so they can come across the street and to the village and be a part of the whole culture of the university.”

jstockfisch@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7834