While on a radio show in Iowa, Mike Huckabee said that President Obama deserves impeachment and that Republicans can impeach him once they have control of the Senate.

Huckabee was asked by host Steve Deace if the president has done anything worthy of being impeached. Huckabee answered — ”Absolutely. There’s no doubt that the president has done plenty of things worthy of impeachment. Now the fact is we don’t have the Senate, so if you impeached him in the House and it went to trial in the Senate, it would never even get to the Senate floor….From a governmental standpoint, you’re not going to see it accomplished with this Senate. But I think it’s an important argument to make that there are a number of things this president has done in the overuse of the executive power, his complete ignoring of the law, even his own law.”

With each day, Republicans are getting bolder. They are starting not even to try to hide their real plan if they win control of the Senate. Boehner’s lawsuit fits the plan of whipping up a high crime that they can use to impeach the president. House Republicans gave Boehner the expanded power to sue the president for anything beyond Obamacare. The Republican rhetoric has gone beyond calling for impeachment to now discussing how they will impeach Obama.

Republicans like Mike Huckabee are acting like a Republican takeover of the Senate is a done deal, when the reality is that the 2014 election is looking more like a coin flip. There is a very good possibility that Republicans don’t win control of the Senate. If Democrats keep control, there will be no impeachment.

It is interesting that according to Huckabee, President Obama has done plenty of things worthy of impeachment, but he couldn’t name anything specific outside of tired talking points about Obamacare.

In the big picture, Republicans view impeachment as their path back to the White House.

They are hoping to use impeachment to derail the looming freight train that is Hillary Clinton’s 2016 presidential candidacy. Republicans think that by impeaching Obama they will tarnish Hillary Clinton and open the door for their return to the White House. What is more likely to happen is that the attempted impeachment of Obama would backfire, and sweep Clinton and a Democratic controlled Congress into power.

Huckabee’s comments make it clear that the election this November isn’t just about Congress. What may be at stake is the future of Barack Obama’s presidency.