(Darla Cameron / The Washington Post)

I'll be honest: When I first reached out to Gallup editor in chief Frank Newport to talk about how a potential government shutdown next week might impact the American public, I was expecting to hear that a shutdown often has serious repercussions on Americans' confidence in their government.

Turns out that what the data bears out is not that simple.

When the government shut down for two weeks in October 2013 — largely over a fight about Obamacare — Americans' confidence in our legislative bodies did indeed drop, Gallup pollsters found. But it picked right back up to pre-shutdown levels a month or so later.

One could make a compelling case that basically the 2013 shutdown (and to the degree they were measured, the 1995-'96 shutdowns) didn't have many lasting repercussions on the American psyche. Heck, the party that got the lion's share of the blame, the GOP, won huge gains in Congress a year later.

But the reason why is somewhat depressing. Americans, it seems, might have shrugged off a shutdown because they expect so little from their government in the first place. And that's the real problem, Newport says.

Below is my conversation with Newport about how Americans perceived their government during the 2013 shutdown — and what that could mean for a potential shutdown come Oct. 1 (that's seven days away, for those counting at home). His answers are edited lightly for length and clarity.

FIX: Did the 2013 shutdown have any impact on whether people thought this country was on the right or wrong track?

NEWPORT: If we use the case of the 2013 shutdown, we didn't see as much of a hit of that measure as we saw on other measures. That satisfaction measure actually bottomed out historically in 2008 with the recession (and also with the political campaign, which actually brings these issues to the forefront). And then it also dropped again in 2011, which wasn't a shutdown, but which in our measures was a pretty negative time economically. Then, as we went into 2013, we saw somewhat of a drop in October, but then it picked up in November.

So, based on our data, it doesn't look like, in 2013, the big impact of the shutdown was on the measure of Americans' satisfaction with the country.

FIX: So what did you see shift during the 2013 shutdown?

NEWPORT: We saw an actually bigger hit on our economic confidence measure. When the shutdown came, that's what really plummeted.

It was short-lived to some degree, but it was significant. We measure Americans' economic confidence on a scale of 100 to -100. During the shutdown, it was still negative, but that was better than after the recession hit in 2008, when we had seen it go as low as -60.

[Editor's note: The 2013 shutdown debate was also intricately linked with a debate about whether to raise the debt ceiling to allow the U.S. Treasury to borrow more money to pay its bills. Defaulting on our debt payments would have caused economic calamity, warned many observers. This year, the debt ceiling deadline is likely to come a few months after the Sept. 30 deadline to pass a budget.]

FIX: Were other measures about how Americans view government affected by the shutdown?

NEWPORT: Yes, competence in government dropped a bit. But that was already very low. For example, we ask how members of Congress are perceived with regard to honesty and ethics, and they are at the very bottom of the list (except for car salesmen). We ask about confidence in institutions (like education, the judicial system, the medical system, Congress). Congress is dead last of all the institutions. We just measured 25 different business and industry sectors for Americans' positive or negative images. The federal government is dead last. We also have over the last several years measured favorable ratings of both parties; if you average them together, they are as low as they've ever been.

So confidence in the legislative branch is at or near as low as we've measured it ever. And other measures of that ilk simply show that Americans' trust in their government is extremely low.

FIX: Why do you think that is?

NEWPORT: I think we've always had a kind of tension with our government. Because after all, we the people are ceding to our representatives the power to do things to us. But in the past two years, it's as low as it's ever been in measurable history.

FIX: So what's the bottom line on how the shutdown impacted Americans' views of government?

NEWPORT: I don't think our data would show that the 2013 shutdown or even the 1996 shutdown is like falling off a cliff. Americans are already dissatisfied, and to some degree a shutdown may just kind of underscore what Americans already perceive in terms of competence of our government.

So I don't see a shutdown as like, everything's going swimmingly and there's a shutdown and Americans flip a switch and say, 'Oh, we hate the government.' There's already this distrust of government. And certainly a shutdown doesn't help and it probably exacerbates Americans' views to some degree.

FIX: So then, how much do Americans really care if the government shuts down?

NEWPORT: That can be hard to measure. Month after month, we ask Americans what's the most important problem facing the country. After the shutdown, they tended to say that this was due to politics rather than matters of principle. So I think Americans are like, 'Yeah, there they go again.' It's a cynical kind of outlook.

//

That's where it remains today. Ranking the government as the most important problem is at 17 percent this month, and that made it the single [biggest] problem. The good news is that's because people aren't listing the economy as much.

So to the effect Americans care about a shutdown, I think it reinforces cynicism about the government, which was already quite negative.

FIX: That doesn't sound like a good thing.

NEWPORT: To me, it's a major problem, Americans' loss of confidence in the government. But it's been a long time building, and it's not specific to right now, or didn't appear to be specific to the 2013 shutdown.

We are in a representative democracy, and there's always a tension. But when we're at this point where there's this deep-seeded cynicism, and it's a problem, that's not optimal.