Tennessee Rep. Diane Black is one of a handful of Republicans backed by an American Action Network campaign designed to bolster centrist members of the GOP majority. The center-right fights back American Action Network launches campaign backing House leaders against the right.

The center-right is putting more money into the game — and taking fresh aim at the conservatives bent on dragging the House to the right.

The deep-pocketed American Action Network, which has raised over $104 million since 2011, will put $1.8 million toward ads in 76 districts touting members who stood up to right-wing pressure and supported the House leadership on the budget and bipartisan Medicare legislation.

Story Continued Below

The digital and television ads follow the group’s leap into last month’s contentious Department of Homeland Security funding debate, in which it spent $400,000 against fellow Republicans who refused to fund the agency in protest of President Barack Obama’s immigration actions. It followed with another $350,000 for TV ads in four districts to thank GOP lawmakers who backed the long-term funding deal in early March.

AAN’s latest blitz, coming in an otherwise fallow period with no candidates on the ballot, is potentially game-changing because so few resources are used to support the political center. For years, policy debates have been defined by the richest and loudest voices in the room: hard-liners who blast the “squishy” middle whenever lawmakers are teed up to take a controversial vote.

“We believe in a center-right majority that is effective,” said Mike Shields, president of AAN. “We’ve elected a House and Senate, and we have an agenda in front of us in Congress … and our interest is to have that agenda be enacted and be effective.”

The budget and Medicare-focused TV ads will support Tennessee Reps. Diane Black and Marsha Blackburn, Michigan Reps. Bill Huizenga and Fred Upton, Indiana Rep. Todd Young, Kentucky Rep. Brett Guthrie, and Washington Reps. Dan Newhouse and Cathy McMorris Rodgers.

“They say it can’t be done, that Washington is broken, and nobody is listening. They say we’ll never balance America’s budget, that we can’t repeal Obamacare and nobody can reform Medicare to protect seniors and doctors or take on the big issues. But they aren’t talking about Congresswoman Renee Ellmers,” a narrator says in an ad set to run in Ellmers’ North Carolina district.

AAN has longstanding ties with Republican House leadership. It was co-founded in 2010 by former Minnesota Sen. Norm Coleman and Rob Collins, a former chief of staff to then-House Minority Whip Eric Cantor. Shields, for his part, was the chief of staff at the Republican National Committee and a political director for the National Republican Congressional Committee. He also worked for Washington Rep. Dave Reichert — an ally of Speaker John Boehner — for four years.

Coleman said the group isn’t following the playbook of Heritage Action or Club For Growth, with scorecards and threats of reprisals against Republicans who oppose their agendas. He said keeping DHS funded was a priority in line with core Republican principles, so the only debate was over tactics.

“It was a good conservative vote,” he said. “We all understood that Obama’s executive order was way off base, but we’ve had a history of government shutdowns that hurt [Republicans].”

Before the group opted to run the DHS-focused ads against Reps. Tim Huelskamp (R-Kan.), Jim Bridenstine (R-Okla.) and Jim Jordan (R-Ohio), the group polled Republican primary voters and found overwhelming support to keep the agency funded. That poll found that 63 percent of respondents said they would prefer to fight Obama’s immigration executive actions in the courts than by “cutting off funding for the Department of Homeland Security.”

Now, Shields said, the ads in support of members who voted to fund DHS or for the House budget will help center-right lawmakers offset the inevitable backlash from conservatives.

AAN spent close to $9 million during the 2014 midterm elections — mostly against Democrats, including Reps. Joe Garcia, Ron Barber and Pete Gallego, who all lost their seats last year. The Congressional Leadership fund — a super PAC closely related to AAN — spent another $9.76 million.

As a 501(c)(3) nonprofit, AAN does not need to disclose its donors, but OpenSecrets.org has reported, based on IRS documents, that past donors include the American Petroleum Institute, the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America and the Republican Jewish Coalition.

Brian Walsh, the group’s past president, said the decision to target conservative Republicans at odds with GOP leaders represented an “evolution” of the group’s desire to be the “reasonable voice” in Republican policy debates. The DHS ads prompted surprise and anger from conservatives at being targeted by fellow GOP-ers.

Boehner’s office criticized the ads and denied any role with AAN.

But Walsh, now at RedPrint Strategies, said that despite the criticism, the effort was clearly effective in turning the conversation from ideology to tactics over how best to stop Obama’s executive actions on immigration.

A Republican consultant said AAN could have done more to target conservative lawmakers but clearly wanted to keep focus on the DHS funding issue and not launch a negative ad war.

“The network knows how to run a negative ad, and that was not a negative ad. It was more to send a message that these are the type of ads that are going to run if [members] continue” to thwart party leaders, the consultant said. “What I found fascinating about this entire endeavor is the realization that it changed the conversation.”

But still, the ads won AAN no friends among conservatives. South Carolina Rep. Mick Mulvaney — whom AAN targeted with digital ads — said they made it harder to work within the GOP caucus.

“It does make you scratch your head when you go to a [Republican Conference] and there’s a sheet of paper there about how we’re all supposed to be team players,” Mulvaney said. “And while you’re sitting there getting the message from your colleagues about being a team player, you get a text from your office saying the American Action Network … is running ads against you in the district.”

Dan Holler, spokesperson for Heritage, said AAN is positioning itself as “a big-business group, not a center-right group.

“We work every day with folks all across the country to advance conservative policies in Congress. AAN throws around wads of cash to attack those trying to advance conservative policies,” Holler said.