LANSING, MI -- Michigan women will not have the choice to buy an individual abortion "rider" when the state's controversial insurance law takes effect later this week, but some employers may choose to provide the coverage for less than a dollar a month.

The law, initiated by a Right to Life Petition drive and approved by the Republican-led Legislature in early December, will prohibit insurance companies from selling policies that include abortion coverage as a standard feature.

Instead, they can offer the coverage through an optional policy add-on, known as a rider.

Seven insurers plan to offer riders for small and large-group employer plans, according to the Michigan Department of Insurance and Financial Regulation. The optional coverage would cost employers between a penny and 32 cents a month per employee.

No insurers are planning to offer a rider for individual policies, most of which are sold through the Affordable Care Act website. That's not new, however.

None of the "Obamacare" policies currently sold in Michigan include elective abortion coverage. The federal law includes cumbersome rules requiring insurers to separate out any taxpayer dollars to ensure they are not used for abortion coverage, so many have simply not offered it.

Michigan's new insurance law takes effect this week, but most women will not see an immediate effect, according to DIFS spokesperson Caleb Buhs.

"Essentially, what's going to happen is that anybody who renews or purchases a new policy can no longer have elected abortion included in the base plan, but it's not going to strip it out for somebody who has coverage currently," said Buhs. "Most people who have coverage through an employer typically renew in October or September. Your coverage will stay the same until then."

Nippon Life Insurance of America, Physicians Health Plan and PHP Insurance have filed paperwork seeking to offer riders for small-group plans, available to companies with 50 or fewer employees. Those insurers also plan to offer riders for large-group plans, along with All Savers Insurance, Blue Care Network, Blue Cross Blue Shield and UnitedHealthCare.

Self-funded healthcare provided by some large employers and government agencies will not be effected, and the full impact of the law remains unclear. Just 3.3 percent of abortions induced in Michigan in 2012 were covered by insurance, according to the Michigan Department of Community Health.

Right to Life spokesperson Pam Sherstad, noting that the legislation was inspired by the Affordable Care Act, pointed to nine other states that also have laws regulating private insurance offerings. The goal is not to limit a woman's health care choices, she said, but to let all residents choose whether their taxes or insurance premiums can be indirectly used to fund abortion.

"In so many regards, it's a very subtle, yet significant change in the way insurance is addressed in our state," said Sherstad. "Because it was citizen initiated, we are excited. March 14 is going to be a good day."

The legislation prompted heated and emotional debate in Lansing, where critics argued that purchasing a rider would force a woman to plan ahead for an unplanned pregnancy, including those caused by rape or incest. Without a rider in place, insurers can only cover an abortion if the life of the mother is in jeopardy.

Bob McCann, spokesperson for Senate Minority Leader Gretchen Whitmer (D-East Lansing), suggested that the availability of optional riders for employer plans does not mitigate underlying concerns with the law, which also requires employers to notify all workers if they choose to offer abortion coverage.

"First, it forces employers to have terribly personal conversations with their employees as to whether they want to buy the 'rape insurance' rider for their policy," McCann said, "but it also leaves thousands of women across Michigan who aren't lucky enough to have one of these plans without access to coverage for their reproductive care at all."

Reproductive rights organizations, citing public polls showing the measure was unpopular, considered launching a petition drive to repeal the abortion insurance but ultimately decided against the costly endeavor.

Jonathan Oosting is a Capitol reporter for MLive Media Group. Email him, find him on Google+ or follow him on Twitter.