HARRISBURG — The video from the camera attached to the officer’s stun gun shows how David Kassick died, authorities say: two bullets, four seconds apart, fired into his back as he lay face down.

Two months before a police officer was captured on video shooting a South Carolina motorist eight times in the back, Mr. Kassick, 59, was killed by a Central Pennsylvania officer from a small town in Dauphin County who is now charged with criminal homicide.

“I think it would be impossible not to see some similarities between the two, inasmuch as the manner in which both individuals are shot,” said Christopher Slusser, a lawyer working for Mr. Kassick’s family who has viewed the video.

Unlike the video in the South Carolina case, which has resulted in a murder charge, the footage recorded by Hummelstown police Officer Lisa Mearkle’s stun gun has not been released. Attorneys for the officer want to keep it that way: They asked a judge on Friday to bar the prosecution from releasing it.

A preliminary hearing is scheduled for today to determine if there is enough evidence to send the case to trial. Dauphin County District Attorney Ed Marsico said he plans to show the video if the hearing is held, though Officer Mearkle may waive it. A hearing on the defense motion to prevent the video’s release is scheduled for Tuesday.

Officer Mearkle’s lawyer, Brian Perry, describes her case as a matter of self-defense, arguing that Mr. Kassick repeatedly reached toward his waist while Officer Mearkle commanded him to show his hands. She told investigators she fired because she feared he was reaching into his jacket for a gun.

Mr. Kassick, however, was unarmed when he was shot after fleeing from the Feb. 2 traffic stop prompted by expired inspections and emissions stickers, authorities said.

The fatal encounter was recorded by the camera on the stun gun Officer Mearkle had already used in her bid to arrest Mr. Kassick. Such cameras are a popular feature on the devices.

In the South Carolina case, a witness’ cell phone captured the April 4 shooting of Walter Scott. The video shows a former North Charleston officer, Michael Slager, firing eight times as Mr. Scott ran from a traffic stop that began over a broken tail light.

Mr. Perry, who said he has not seen the video in the Kassick case, said the situation does not resemble the South Carolina shooting.

“She’s giving the guy repeated commands to stop, she’s giving him repeated commands to show his hands. She Tased him four times. They’re completely different facts than shooting a guy running away in the back,” Mr. Perry said.

Mr. Slusser, however, said the video “leaves nothing to the imagination.”

“Whether she would have been charged or not had the video not existed, I can’t answer that,” he said. “But I can tell you having that video, for me — I won’t speak for the DA — but it made it very clear the DA had very little choice not to charge her.”

Mr. Marsico said police have continued to investigate the matter and develop information about the case.

Officer Mearkle, 36, a 15-year veteran of the department, has been free on bail but is under electronic monitoring. She is suspended from the police department without pay.