Senator Ted Kennedy (D-MA) looks on during education event. Kennedy is one of three lawmakers accompanying President George W. Bush on a victory lap through the home states of three lawmakers who helped shape the most sweeping overhaul of federal education programs in 30 years. (Jeffrey MacMillan for USN&WR)

In today's bitterly partisan, deeply dysfunctional Congress, there's a tendency in both parties to speak wistfully about the Good Old Days. Those days have taken on an almost mythical quality – yes, former Democratic House Speaker Tip O'Neill worked with President Ronald Reagan to strengthen Social Security, but the two certainly had their battles as well. And yes, lawmakers used to dine (and, more notably, drink) together after work, but those relationships didn't always lead to on-time budgets or more sweeping policy initiatives.

Six years after his death from a brain tumor, it is former Massachusetts Senator Ted Kennedy, the legendary "lion of the Senate," whom both veteran Democrats and some Republicans point to as the last vestige of a Senate that worked, one that battled honestly over policy differences but ultimately came together for the good of the country. That memory, too, has been softened with time, made rosier in comparison with the often hostile environment of the deliberative body.

[READ: Jack Kemp Would Be the GOP's Savior]

Still, Kennedy surely racked up an impressive list of legislative accomplishments during his nearly 47 years in the Senate, ranging from giving 18-year-olds the vote to disability rights, housing antidiscrimination and major education reforms and funding. He did it through a painstaking process that included mastering the details of an issue, assembling a coalition outside the Senate, finding a Republican (often a very conservative one) to team up with, and using Senate rules to ultimately get his way.

In their book, Lion of the Senate, former Kennedy staffers Nick Littlefield and David Nexon examine two years of Kennedy's career – the 1995-96 session of Congress, the first term of a Republican revolution that ended 40 years of House Democratic rule. In the book, the two discuss how the diehard liberal managed to pass a minimum wage increase, a law allowing for portable health care and medical privacy and other Democratic wish-list items, despite facing a very conservative GOP-led House and Senate.

Nexon recently spoke to U.S. News about how Kennedy pulled it off and whether he could have succeeded in working with the conservatives who took over after the 2010 congressional elections. Excerpts:

You write about how Kennedy managed to contain the "Contract With America" that Republican House Speaker Newt Gingrich pledged to pass, and even got some Democratic agenda items through a very skeptical Republican Congress. Could he have done the same with the current Congress?

I think it's harder now. You do have this stronger element within the [Republican] party. A lot people who were experienced legislators, who wanted to get things done, are gone. I think the Democrats have been pretty solid in resisting what the Republicans want to do. But what they haven't done is really educate the public about what's at stake. That can be very important in the 2016 election. If the public doesn't understand that, it's going to be about personalities. It's going to be sort of the status quo.

You note some of his personal touches – arranging policy-themed dinner parties at his home, sending Nick [Littlefield, an accomplished singer,] to Senator Orrin Hatch's office to sing, charming Hatch when Kennedy wanted his support for a bill.

The senator had these wonderful personal relationships with everybody. He was kind of a charming, outgoing guy, but it's also because he recognized that it's part of being a good legislator. There are no permanent enemies and there are no permanent friends. I don't know if people do that anymore [hold bipartisan dinner parties], but they should.

[RELATED: Paul Ryan Pledges Return to Regular Order]

It's a matter of finding common ground, getting things done. I think there are still people like that in the Senate … who are sort of thinking, 'do I really want to be up here and not do anything?' But it's a matter of reaching across and finding ground on an objective you can both share.

Is it just a function of no one wanting to compromise now on the Hill?

To be successful, you really have to compromise, but that doesn't mean compromising on principles. If you don't have a common goal, there's no point in negotiating together. But if you have a common goal, there ought to be a way to work it out, where you're both giving up something. We saw that with CHIP [the Children's Health Insurance Program] and [Utah Senator Orrin] Hatch. And Hatch went to his staff and they said, 'you can't do this with Kennedy. It will damage you in Utah.' But he said, 'you don't know what [it's like] to grow up as a poor kid. We can't do it Kennedy's way, but we have to find a way.' And he did.

Kennedy certainly had some odd bedfellows in building those legislative coalitions, with Strom Thurmond even supporting Kennedy's bill allowing for the use of fetal tissue for research.

I don't know how he got the initial intelligence, or whether he just went over to talk to Strom [who was a conservative antiabortion Republican from South Carolina], [but] one of his daughters had juvenile diabetes. The [JD] association said it would help [with the research.]

Kennedy called universal health care the cause of his life. What would be different, in the handling of the Affordable Care Act, if the senator were still alive?

I think what the senator would have said is that you really need to keep talking about it in a global positive way and you also need to enlist the groups that have a positive stake in it – the hospitals, physicians, the labor unions.

[PHOTOS: The Big Picture – November 2015]

What happened is, [the Obama administration] looked at the polls and saw the bill was unpopular and they picked out a couple of small things in the bill that were popular, such as the ability to stay on your parents' policies, no preexisting conditions. But they didn't keep talking about the central thing, which is that now, almost every American really has health security, which is a right not a privilege. I think that would have made a difference because otherwise you leave the fight to Republicans, who have this kind of global attack on the ACA.

But are there legitimate complaints about the ACA?

There are some things that need to be improved. The co-pays and deductibles are awfully high and are discouraging people from getting the health care they need.

Do you think the Senate can go back to what it was – something more functional?