Reports that President Obama agrees Iran should be free to make a nuclear bomb in about 10 years put the lie to his repeated vow never to allow an Iranian nuke. The broken promise is the international twin to his domestic whopper that you “can keep your doctor.”

You can’t, but Iran can keep its enriched uranium, making this lie an even bigger bombshell. As in, bombs away.

It is impossible to overstate the potential catastrophe of the emerging deal. If the terms reported by the Associated Press, the Wall Street Journal and others become final, it would mean the United States and leading UN powers give their blessing for the world’s largest sponsor of terrorism to have the ultimate weapon, effectively rewarding Iran for decades of criminal behavior and acts of war against America, Israel and others.

The deal also would launch a new round of nuclear proliferation among Arab states, with Saudi Arabia long promising to get a bomb if Iran does. Others fearful of Iran’s dominance are sure to follow, escalating the tit-for-tat patterns in the region into a nuclear nightmare.

In addition, an unbound Iranian nuclear industry and spreading enrichment technology make it likely that one or more of the Islamic terror groups, including Hamas, Hezbollah, al Qaeda, Boko Haram and Islamic State, is likely to get the bomb. And there is no doubt they would use it.

In short, the unfolding nuclear landscape presents the whole of mankind with unprecedented peril.

The terms of the developing agreement, as explained to reporters by negotiators, vindicates concerns that Obama would surrender to Iranian demands while claiming otherwise. He caved in with a deal that envisions a decade-long phase-out of restrictions, allowing Obama to say that there will be no bomb on his watch.

In reality, that is meaningless. The American stamp of approval for a nuclear Iran instantly reshapes geopolitical strategies.

Israel faces a new era of extreme risk, simultaneously in the cross hairs of a genocidal enemy and betrayed by its longest and closest ally. The betrayal continued even yesterday, with Secretary of State John Kerry blasting critics, presumably including Benjamin Netanyahu.

“Anyone running around right now, jumping to say we don’t like the deal, or this or that, doesn’t know what the deal is,” Kerry said in Senate testimony. “There is no deal yet.”

That’s only technically accurate because Obama and Kerry are keeping the details secret. The scam recalls how the White House hid the details of ObamaCare until the bill was passed; it’s what the FCC is doing with Internet regulations.

The timing is especially suspect, with the nuclear deal moving toward finality on the eve of Netanyahu’s planned speech to Congress next week. Iran recently said the US was “desperate” for an agreement, and the reasons are obvious. Getting Iran’s signature on a document, any document, before the visit would allow Obama to take the steam out of Netanyahu’s warning by spinning the settlement as the best possible and making it seem unstoppable.

It will be — unless Congress finds a spine. The White House says Obama does not plan to send the agreement to the Senate for ratification, arguing it falls outside the definition of a treaty.

That shouldn’t fly, given the stakes to us, Israel and our Arab allies. But that all depends on whether Democrats continue to put loyalty to Obama ahead of their duty to America’s national security.

Even a handful of Dems joining with majority Republicans would be enough to reject any terms that allow Iran to get a nuke. In doing so, those senators would be enforcing the refrain that no deal is better than a bad deal.

And make no mistake — Obama has produced a very bad deal. Bad for America, and bad for the world.

Left’s got own view of police serve-us

It has been said that one is an example, two is a coincidence and three is a trend. By that standard, progressive New York pols have a police problem.

Their problem is that they have no respect for cops and feel entitled to treat them like personal servants.

Brooklyn District Attorney Kenneth Thompson is the latest to join the police crap list, with The Post reporting that he sends his security detail on family food runs and has them take out the trash.

His actions are a slight variation on those involving Scott Stringer, who got into a tiff with his security detail when he reportedly turned them into family chauffeurs.

The problem begins at the top. Mayor Bill de Blasio got elected by demonizing the NYPD, and many officers returned his insults by turning their backs on him.

Tensions have been reduced, but not because de Blasio mended his attitude. The ideological retraining of the entire force to meet Al Sharpton’s demands looks like an expensive flop, as well as an insult.

Instructions for cops to use breath mints, close their eyes in moments of stress and take deep breaths smack of faculty-lounge baby talk. The amateurish approach illustrates how little the left understands about the dangers of policing and the successful strategies that drove crime to historic lows.

What’s next — a replay of the television fantasy that cops should be able to shoot the guns out of perps’ hands?

The pattern reveals a class prejudice, with the pols revealing themselves to be snooty bigots who see cops as inferior and alien beings.

Perhaps the NYPD should file a civil-rights lawsuit for discrimination. That would be delicious turnabout.

Rudy’s aim is true

Now that Rudy Giuliani has conceded some of the language he used to criticize President Obama was over the top, it’s time to separate the wheat from the chaff.

The former mayor’s basic point was that no president in memory talked down the country the way Obama does. He was accused of both racism and McCarthyism, before the truth came out in the most unlikely of places — The New York Times.

Taking up a Giuliani challenge, two of its reporters searched Obama’s speeches and found a telling pattern: To his “most emphatic expressions of patriotism,” the president often attaches a scalding criticism of America, including when he is on foreign soil.

In other words, Giuliani was right. End of story.

Oscar ‘Snow’ job

If you were keeping score at the Oscars, you saw this coming. A film hailing Edward Snowden, a fugitive traitor to America, wins in the documentary category. “American Sniper,” the story of a real-life military hero, gets the brushoff.

Of course, “Sniper” suffered from another hurdle, too. It was widely popular with ordinary Americans, which is usually a curse among Hollywood elites.

NY, who we gonna call? Dirt buster!

Calling all prosecutors.

A Siena College poll yesterday contained a welter of sometimes confusing numbers, but one finding stands out for its absolute clarity: 92 percent of New Yorkers believe corruption remains a serious problem in Albany.

Go get ’em, Preet.