, CP Op-Ed Contributor By Matt Barber CP Op-Ed Contributor

I am no longer a Republican. John Boehner, Mitch McConnell and their Democrat-lite, RINO Republican establishment have seen to that. They have betrayed their own constituents. They have actively turned against the American people – the very voters who granted them power to do good.

Even before the gavel has sounded on the Republican-led 114th Congress, these treacherous cowards shamelessly, eagerly, it seems, squandered perhaps the one opportunity they had to stop, in his tracks, America's first cultural Marxist, anti-American, palpably evil president.

If ever there were, there can no longer be any doubt. Barack Obama is bent on turning the land of the free and the home of the brave into the land of the conquered and the home of the weak. He is an egalitarian globalist who hates America. He has repeatedly spat upon the very Constitution he was sworn to uphold.

Last month Republicans were elected by "We the people" in an unprecedented landslide – in a Democratic Party bloodbath – with clear marching orders. They were given one task and one task alone.

Stop Barack Obama.

They have failed both miserably and willfully.

What's worse is that the Republican establishment has worked in concert with this wicked man. They have aided and abetted him as he and his godless Democratic Party summarily deconstruct all that has made America great. The Republican Party is complicit in the ill-fated fall of the American Empire.

I don't know what kind of dirt Barack Obama and his NSA-KGB have on John Boehner, but within a week of the elections it became abundantly clear that the GOP would betray us. Republicans have, without batting an eye, and in the face of overwhelming bipartisan opposition from the electorate, funded executive amnesty, paid for Obamacare in all its abortion-mandating, economy-killing, freedom-trampling infamy, and otherwise approved every radical, unconstitutional and tyrannical dictate these statists have rammed down our throats.

The magnitude of this betrayal cannot be overstated.

I say again: I am no longer a Republican.

And neither should you be.

The GOP might eventually win me back, but it will take much doing. Until the Republican Party once again honors its own party platform, a platform that reflects the solid Judeo-Christian principles from which our nation once derived her fast-fading greatness, I shall remain a man without a party, a disenchanted vessel floating adrift, amid torrential seas, as Hurricane Obama threatens to sink us all.

And so the first order of business must be to immediately oust John Boehner from his leadership role as speaker of the House. He is a compromised man.

WND's Joseph Farah has launched a massive campaign to do just that. The "Dump Boehner Campaign" is already generating a tremendous response. It can happen. It must happen.

Notes WND: "[F]ollowing the 2010 election and again in 2014 victorious Republicans, under the current congressional leadership, governed like it was business as usual, betraying voters who brought them to power."

And business as usual spells the end of the great American experiment.

I owe you an apology. I must beg your forgiveness. I confess and repent. I made a mistake in 2012. In a piece I penned for The Washington Times titled, "Christians should vote for Romney," I suggested the following:

"It's no secret that I have been and remain a vocal critic of Mitt Romney. To say that his conservative bona fides are suspect is an understatement. I have tremendous respect for a number of fellow evangelical Christians who say that they will not support his presidential candidacy. I expect I will anger some of them, and may even lose a few friends. Still, in November, I am voting for Mr. Romney and suggest that any Christian – Republican, Democrat or independent – should do the same."

I was wrong. To err is human. I now recognize, and have for some months, that my suggestion that Christians vote for Romney as the lesser of two evils was a mistake. It rewarded the establishment GOP's torpedoing of better men and better candidates.

The lesser of two evils is still evil. I will never again make that same mistake. My days of perceived pragmatism over principle are done. We are no longer, "one nation under God." We are a divided nation under God's judgment. The clock is winding down, and anything short of total national repentance and widespread Christian revival spells America's demise.

Establishment Republicans are no different from Democrats; even worse, perhaps, because, at least with Democrats, what you see is what you get. Establishment Republicans are wolves in sheep's clothing. Like their Democrat kindred, they have sold their souls for mammon. Henceforth, I will only support a solid, unwavering, Bible-believing Christian for any elective office and will actively oppose and work to defeat any other candidate, whether Democrat or Republican.

If, for instance, some squishy, Karl Rove-approved RINO like Jeb Bush, Chris Christie or Mitt Romney once again finagles the GOP nomination in 2016, I will not only reject him, I will actively oppose him – even if it means President Hillary Clinton.

This is the same failed, tired, "move to the middle" and "reach out to independents" strategy that brought us Presidents Dole, McCain and Romney. It's gotta stop. What is it about the GOP that has it constantly biting the hand that feeds it, while begging for a little scratch-behind-the-ear action from the fickle fingers of "independent" indifference?

I suspect I'm not alone. If the GOP continues on its Democrat-lite trajectory, I can guarantee that the Christian-conservative base will abandon it, as it has abandoned us. Although we'd rather take the Ronald Reagan approach and reform the party from within, I can promise that we will, if that becomes a lost cause, form a new, principled, conservative "values voters" third party.

If that happens, Democrats will rule the roost indefinitely.

America is careening toward cliff's edge (if we haven't already gone over it). The next president, at a minimum, must do the following to reverse our seemingly inevitable downfall.

He must:

Immediately wipe out every single executive order Barack Obama issued during his presidency. That way, "progressives" will have a hard time grandstanding on any one executive action. Sign the repeal of, or refuse to implement, Obamacare. Fire all of Obama's political appointees and purge the entire executive branch of all known leftists, replacing them with Bible-believing conservative Christians. Every single one. Revise each and every administrative regulation, both internal and external, for each and every federal agency, to reflect the pro-family, pro-life, pro-national defense and pro-fiscal responsibility values detailed in the Republican Party Platform. Enforce existing laws that pass constitutional muster.

This list is by no means comprehensive. There is, of course, a great deal more that must be done but, as it stands, there is not a single establishment Republican with either the courage or the conviction to do even these few things.

It's time to clean house.

GOP, you're fired.

Matt Barber is founder and editor-in chief of BarbWire.com. He is an author, columnist, cultural analyst and an attorney concentrating in constitutional law. Having retired as an undefeated heavyweight professional boxer, Matt has taken his fight from the ring to the culture war. (Follow Matt on Twitter: @jmattbarber).