Beware, that Internet hookup may come with more than an evening of no-strings-attached fun.

Meeting sex partners online is quickly becoming a leading risk behavior reported by Ohioans testing positive for syphilis and HIV, according to data from the Ohio Department of Health.

“I think a lot of people have an ‘it’s not going to happen to me’ attitude,” said Betty Fisher, a nurse and disease intervention specialist at the Zanesville-Muskingum County Health Department.

The attitude is one she sees persist despite previous infection, but the good news is all sexually transmitted diseases can be treated and many cured. However, with few obvious signs of infection, many are left untreated and are spread to others. Having an STD also increases the risk of contracting HIV.

Drugs, alcohol and inconsistent condom use continue to be the most common risk behaviors reported, but those reporting meeting sex partners online has edged into the top 10 risk behaviors over the past five years.

Although surveys aren’t done with those testing positive for the most common STDs — chlamydia and gonorrhea — the results would likely be similar and are what’s fueling STD increases across rural and suburban Ohio.

Dr. Jose Bazan, an infectious disease expert at Ohio State University’s Wexner Medical Center, said the use of mobile apps and social media to find casual sex partners is very likely contributing to increases everywhere, not just in rural and suburban areas.

“Everyone has a phone ... and with the explosion of social media, meeting sex partners is much easier,” he said.

The highest rates of gonorrhea and chlamydia in Ohio continue to be found in metropolitan areas, but those rates are typically stable or have been steadily declining. However, they’re climbing in places such as Marion County where cases of gonorrhea were nearly six times higher in 2014 than 2010 and Knox County where cases of chlamydia tripled during the same five years, according to Ohio Department of Health data.

Ohio’s rate of chlamydia and gonorrhea surpassed national rates in 2013 — 461 chlamydia infections per 100,000 people compared to 447 nationally and 144 gonorrhea cases per 100,000 people versus 106 nationally.

Medicaid expansion and the Affordable Care Act may play a part in increases since more people have access to healthcare and may be getting tested. But just how much increased medical access is a factor is unknown, said Ohio Department of Health Medical Director Mary DiOrio.

The state offers guidelines on how local health departments should work to decrease STD rates, but for the most part, all 122 health departments are left to determine its community’s needs and how to best address them. Sometimes, that leaves departments weighing approaches against community perception.

For example, although the females age 15 to 24 are the highest risk, high schools are “very difficult” to get into to educate students, Fisher said. However, they do target students at the local colleges and especially the younger clients stopping into the office for free condoms.

“If they seem fairly young, we bring them back and talk to them and try to educate them,” she said, adding they also try to educate people when they come in for HIV tests.

The influx of people abusing heroin and painkillers also can contribute to increases, Bazan said. Use can lower inhibitions and lead to riskier sexual behavior including prostitution, he said.

Chillicothe is among several rural communities that have seen an uptick in prostitution in recent years. When the Ross County Health District moved into a downtown office, it was an issue they no longer could deny because they were seeing it right across the street, said Rami Yoakum, district spokesman.

No specific actions have been taken, in part due to concerns the public will view harm-reduction methods, such as providing condoms to those prostituting, as enabling or encouraging the activity, Yoakum said. Although such moves could decrease the outbreak of disease and improve public health, they have to balance efforts against public opinion due to reliance on levies passing.

As such, Yoakum said their discussions have centered more on low-key approaches.

“Our new location on East Second Street puts us in close proximity to the prostitution activities, and if we can subtly remind people that STDs are a real risk and a real danger, then maybe we can discourage some of the illegal activity,” Yoakum said.

Raising community awareness of the need for protection from STDs as well as screening and treatment options is the only way to make a dent in the numbers, Bazan said. He suggests the best approach is to use the same thing folks are using to find each other — social media.

jison@gannett.com

Twitter: @JonaIson

Fairfield County cases of sexually transmitted diseases

STD 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Chlamydia 325 332 373 373 390 Gonorrhea 52 43 39 48 72 Syphilis 5 0 7 3 10

Source: Ohio Department of Health

Read or Share this story: http://ohne.ws/1RHEpJr