Binsol (.)

LONGMONT -- Early Saturday morning, Longmont police nabbed a 33-year-old Denver man and a 15-year-old boy suspected of breaking into vehicles and stealing items while the vehicles were parked outside Oskar Blues Liquids & Solids, 1555 S. Hover St.

Longmont Police Cmdr. Jeff Satur said officers set up a "sting" after investigating a rash of car break-ins at the restaurant and brewery since August, conducting some surveillance and identifying a likely suspect.

"We identified a pattern," Satur said. "Cars left at the business overnight were being targeted by the suspect."

Police identified the adult they arrested as Kenneth Gubalane Binsol, who worked for a Denver-based bakery that made nighttime deliveries to Oskar Blues. Satur said the juvenile is a relative of Binsol's.

Longmont detective Wayne Rafferty wrote in his report that police set up the operation resulting in the arrests about 2 a.m. Saturday. At 3 a.m., they put an Alpine Stereo box in a blue Best Buy bag inside a pickup parked in front of Oskar Blues. He said the stereo is worth about $150.

At about 3:15 a.m., a bakery truck pulled into the restaurant's parking lot and two people got out. They walked toward the pickup and the taller of the two shined a flashlight inside it.

It appeared that man then opened the pickup's door and the shorter suspect walked away with the stereo package while the taller man walked into the establishment.

Both Binsol and the boy were arrested on suspicion of first-degree trespass of a motor vehicle and theft. They were taken into custody without incident, Rafferty reported.

Advertisement

Binsol, a convicted felon who has an extensive criminal history, also faces possible charges of contributing to the delinquency of a minor and being a previous offender possessing a firearm, Rafferty said, after police found a handgun, a Sig Sauer 250 .40 caliber, in the upper visor above the driver's seat of the bakery truck.

Satur said the arrests were the result of a joint operation by Longmont police's patrol and detective divisions and its gang and crime suppression unit.

John Fryar can be reached at 303-684-5211 or jfryar@times-call.com.