This is a view of one of the Civil Conservation Corps camps in Hollowell Park. The trail up Mill Creek is to the upper left. The rows of tents that were ultimately replaced by prefabricated wooden buildings. ( Courtesy of Rocky Mountain National Park )

The Civil Conservation Corps was created in 1933 to employ young men during the Great Depression and was part of the Emergency Conservation Work Act.

The men that volunteered for the CCC were sent to camps and paid a dollar a day. Of their pay, $25 per month was sent back to their families. Character building, education and job trailing were part of the benefits.

In Colorado, 170 CCC camps were established with five camps in Rocky Mountain National Park.

In Hollowell Park along Mill Creek were two camps sitting side by side. Today, the area is a large meadow with few hints of its past activity.

In 1933, a CCC camp was established in Little Horseshoe Park near the Ashton homestead site.

Nothing remains today at this 1933 CCC camp in Little Horseshoe Park. The site is located to the east of the Ashton homestead. (Courtesy of Rocky Mountain National Park)

The United States Army was in charge of structures, starting with tents following by standardized prefabricated frame buildings.

For the Hollowell Park camps, the intent was to have the young men work throughout the year. The multi-use frame structures of modular design were heated by stoves and could be erected or dismantled quickly.

The buildings were virtually identical and were defined by function rather than appearance. The most common buildings were dormitories. There was a mess hall combination kitchen. There was also a lavatory and bathhouse with one building was used as an infirmary.

Advertisement

The first camp in Hollowell Park was designated as NC-4-C and was established in 1934. The second camp, NC-11-C, sat beside the first camp and was established six years later. A water line was installed to bring Mill Creek water to the camps, and they were eventually landscaped. A partially paved service road curved around from today's parking lot through camp ending up on the hillside.

As World War II approached, it was clear that most of the young men would be drafted into the service. The United States was also coming out of the Depression.

The memorial plaque to Robert E. Fechner, director the Civil Conservation Corps form 1933 to 1939, is mounted to a small boulder at the edge of the tree line in Hollowell Park. (Kenneth Jessen / Special to the Reporter-Herald)

The first camp was closed in 1941 followed by the second camp a year later. The buildings were dismantled and removed, but the site was not completely cleared until the 1960s.

So little evidence exists today that it shows the care taken by the National Park Service to remove all debris, fill in the outhouse pits, take up concrete foundations and obliterate the paved road. Most of the material was buried.

In 1940, a plaque to Robert E. Fechner, director the Civil Conservation Corps from 1933 to 1939, was placed on top of a small boulder at the edge of the tree line.

There were numerous jobs performed by the CCC including pine beetle control in the ponderosa stands. Thousands of old stumps were removed and the CCC helped raze the buildings in Moraine Park that had been purchased by the National Park Service.

Visitors today enjoy the fruits of CCC trail improvements and new trail construction.

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years. This year his columns will focus mainly on the history of Rocky Mountain National Park.