PORTSMOUTH, N.H. — There’s just something about Dr. Ben Carson, some Republican voters here say.

They line up to buy copies of his books. They chase him down streets for photos. Sometimes, they just continue to stare with awe after he speaks.

Advertisement

“I’m just kind of overwhelmed,” said Peter Rice, a retired volunteer firefighter, his newly acquired “I’m with Ben” button in hand. “This guy is a breath of fresh air.”

There’s liking a candidate — and then there’s the particular passion that Carson seems to incite, despite the sometimes unusual statements that make him stand out among 2016’s Republican White House hopefuls.

So what is it about the 63-year-old political neophyte, who often refers to himself in the third person as “Carson” during stump speeches, advocates for tax rates based on tithing, and compares the life-or-death plight of Revolutionary figures to today’s politics?

He speaks with the aplomb of a superstar neurosurgeon and a highbrow history buff — yet also the raw candor overheard in a coffee klatch. While describing detractors’ efforts to bring him down — including a reference to a years-old paternity suit — Carson revealed to a packed town hall Tuesday that, “I knew something they didn’t know. I knew that the only woman I’d ever slept with in my life was my wife.”

Supporters gush over what they call his “compelling personal story” and “common sense.” He is the only African-American candidate – Democrat or Republican – and his resume is unlike the others. It includes his tenure as director of neurosurgery at John Hopkins University but no elected offices or previous flirtations with running for president.

Advertisement

There are pundits who say Carson’s brand of religious conservatism will not win in New Hampshire, which polls show is one of the least religious states in the country.

A recent poll by the University of New Hampshire showed Carson barely registered when voters were asked who had the best chance of winning, which candidate best represented Republicans like themselves, and who would be the strongest leader.

Still, the university poll did show Carson had a high net favorability ranking, coming in second after US Senator Marco Rubio of Florida. And according to national polls, he would make the 10-candidate cut to be onstage if the first televised national debate were held today.

So the retired doctor and his supporters aren’t worried about the naysayers.

“I’m in love with him,” said Dianne Durkin, president and founder of an employment loyalty company. “His entire thing about . . . leadership is spot on.”

Keith Bedford/Globe Staff Ben Carson greeted passersby as he campaigned in Portsmouth, N.H. earlier this week.

“So far, he hits the nerve in my body that says treat people fairly, be respectable, do the right thing, love your country,” said Doug Bates, president of the Portsmouth Chamber of Commerce.

Bates estimates he has heard eight candidates speak but only wanted his picture taken with one – Carson.

‘So far, he hits the nerve in my body that says treat people fairly, be respectable, do the right thing, love your country.’ Doug Bates, president of the Portsmouth Chamber of Commerce

In a speech Tuesday morning to about 50 business leaders at Pease International Tradeport, Carson called for “stopping all this silly divisiveness” and class, race, gender, and age “warfare” — all distractions, he said, from the “radical Islamic jihadists” targeting America.

“We are falling for garbage. We are allowing ourselves to be colluded. You can’t just go through life worried about who’s on ‘Dancing with the Stars,’ ” Carson said. “What are you willing to fight for? What are you willing to die for?”

Carson spent three days campaigning in New Hampshire, with its first-in-the-nation primary.

Last month, Carson grabbed national attention by calling out some of the other candidates who, he said, were slow to criticize the massacre at the Charleston, S.C., church as rooted in racism.

“But there are people who are claiming that they can lead this country who dare not call this tragedy an act of racism, a hate crime, for fear of offending a particular segment of the electorate,” he wrote in an op-ed piece.

It was just two years ago that Carson burst into the political arena at the National Prayer Breakfast. He used humor and his personal story of growing up in an impoverished Detroit home to give a conservative critique on the country’s state of affairs as President Obama sat nearby.

Some of his most scathing remarks focused on the Affordable Care Act, which he wants to replace with a health care system that gives people transferable health savings accounts.

Carson’s single mother was determined her two sons would rise above their station in life, he said. She refused to accept public assistance and required regular book reports when he began doing poorly in school, even though she couldn’t read them.

He would earn a scholarship to Yale University, where he met his wife, Candy, and continue to the University of Michigan’s medical school.

Echoes of that speech come through when Carson addresses a crowd from the campaign trail — but not when he engages in retail politics. As he shook hands and greeted voters one-on-one along the streets of downtown Portsmouth with his wife of 40 years, she was talkative and personable while he was awkward and reserved.

Onstage, though, he seems to capture voters. In Bedford, after one of the must-stop “Politics & Eggs” forums, a woman murmured, “Love his message. He says it just right.” At a town hall in Barrington, he concluded his speech by invoking Nathan Hale, famous for saying “I only regret that I have but one life to lose for my country.”

“The baton of freedom is in the hands of we the people,” Carson told the crowd of about 150.

It was a speech that might have earned Donna Callmeyer’s support. The 72-year-old Milford resident said she, like so many Republicans, was looking “for one of the bazillion candidates that we can support.”

Carson’s intellect “totally impressed,” her, as did “the fact that he answers questions so thoroughly,” she said.

“He wasn’t, like, in your face about it,” interjected her 14-year-old granddaughter Asia Hanson.

“I won’t walk away wondering what he thinks about immigration or the economy,” Callmeyer continued. “I felt a genuine honesty. This is the first candidate I’m excited about.”