Michael Graetz is a “be prepared” kind of guy.

A professor of tax law at Columbia University who did a stint in the George H. W. Bush Treasury, Mr. Graetz believes that someday Congress and a future president will realize that piece-by-piece changes to the individual and corporate income tax system won’t work. At that point, he predicts, the U.S. will follow every other developed economy and adopt a tax on consumption.

And when Congress and the president get to that point, Mr. Graetz is ready with a revenue-neutral tax reform plan that combines a value-added tax with an income tax that would hit only the best-off.

At a meeting of the National Tax Association last week– where Mr. Graetz was awarded the Daniel M. Holland Medal for outstanding contributions to the study and practice of public finance – he offered an updated version of a plan he detailed in a 2008 book.

He would impose a new national value-added tax and use the money, in part, to eliminate the income tax – and the filing of income tax returns – for families with incomes under $100,000. For others, there would be three marginal tax brackets (14%, 27% and, for income above $600,000, 31%.) He’d also lower the corporate tax rate to 15%, cut the payroll tax and give cash to low-income families with children. For more, see the full tax plan.

“It does not tear up the tax code and start over,” Mr. Graetz says. “It simply returns the nation to its pre-World War II tax system, where most revenue came from taxing consumption — then in an archaic way, through tariffs — and the income tax was limited to its proper function of providing tax justice through progressivity for folks at the very top. My proposal is designed to promote more economic growth without shifting the tax burden away from the top to families with less income.”

Number crunchers at the Tax Policy Center, a joint venture of the Urban Institute and Brookings Institution think tanks, say the current version of the Graetz plan would raise as much money as today’s tax code without shifting the tax burden among income groups.

The chairmen of Congress’s tax-writing committees — Rep. Dave Camp (R., Mich.) and Sen. Max Baucus (D., Mont) — are, of course, going in a different direction. They’re hoping to launch a major tax reform push by starting with corporate taxes.

Mr. Graetz doubts that’ll work. “I don’t think that Congress can get to a corporate rate low enough to solve the international tax problems we now face,” he says. “There’s a gap between those like Dave Camp, who seem to want only to tax income earned in the U.S by U.S. multinational corporations, and Max Baucus and Senate Democrats, who seem to want to tax income earned anywhere in the world by a U.S. company. That gap is simply too large to bridge without a new revenue source to get the corporate rate down to a level where that doesn’t matter much, if at all.”

“Moreover, it is impossible to do corporate tax reform without dealing with noncorporate businesses–a problem for which there is no credible solution now on the table,” he adds. (A large fraction of business income now goes to partnerships and other entities that are taxed through the individual tax code.)