Do you remember my chat about the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act (CISA)? About how we discussed the issue of safety vs. privacy? The verdict is in. Safety won over privacy.

“On Dec. 18, both houses of Congress enacted the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act, which is part of a 2,009-page $1.1 trillion omnibus spending bill. CISA will establish a process for the government to share cyberthreat information with businesses that voluntarily agree to participate in the program” (Chabrow).

The main focus and positive aspect of this bill is that it focuses on sharing of information between industry and government to improve cybersecurity. Supporters of this passing argue that this is a bonding of both teams to work together to fight cyber crime.

“The main incentive is furnishing businesses with liability protections from lawsuits when they share cyberthreat information, such as malicious code, suspected reconnaissance, security vulnerabilities and anomalous activities, and identify signatures and techniques that could pose harm to an IT system. The new law also will provide antitrust exemption for sharing threat data among businesses” (Chabrow).

While the passing of this bill is a big win for businesses it is a hard loss for privacy. Privacy advocates argue that this act is just a further infringement on American privacy. They state that our government is not doing enough for us while allowing us to keep our privacy.

A specific part of the bill addresses health care and their frequent issues of cyber security. Since health care and the government are so tightly interwoven with the passing of ObamaCare this is no surprise. With a country trying to decide between private or public healthcare we are seeing the legislature trying to follow an indecisive system.

It is frequently reiterated that the participation is voluntary. I personally question how real that is. Sometimes systems are set up in a way that while it is an option the benefits of joining are not really one you can survive without. Additionally, as we know nothing is really private anymore. Whichever side of the debate you fall on this bill does not seem to be earth changing either way. The government can still hack into your information but they say you are entitled to your privacy.