Business school students have a lot to consider before choosing the right school – cost, quality of the faculty, course topics, facilities, the school’s reputation.

How about the fanaticism of the sports fans?

In a bit of whimsy, Business Insider decided to make a list of the colleges that showed the best “team spirit” when it comes to the college’s sports teams. Business Insider partnered with Niche to analysis hundreds of colleges, using information about varsity sports, social life and school spirit, all based on Niche’s rankings of schools with the best overall student experience.

Not surprisingly, the top school was Florida State University. The football team recently won the national championship, putting the program back on top after years removed from the glory days of the 1990s. Even a cursory glance at a game on television shows you how into their Seminoles the Florida State fans can be – from flaming spears to dressing in Florida State superhero costumes.

The business school there has expanded rapidly since its founding in 1950. The Florida State College of Business is one of the 10 largest in the country, according to the school’s website, despite being one of the nation’s newest business schools.

The other schools in the Top 5, in descending order, are:

University of Georgia. Like many of the teams on this list, this school is located in the South, where football is far and away the most popular sport. Last year, 80% of the graduates from Georgia’s Terry College of Business had accepted jobs within three months of graduation.

University of Alabama. A perennial power in college football has spawned a legion of Crimson Tide fans. The university also has the Culverhouse College of Commerce, which began in 1919. Alabama’s Culverhouse School of Accounting was the first of just 13 programs across the country to have separate accreditation in accounting.

University of Texas at Austin. They are not using sign language to say “I love you” when they do the Hook ‘em Horns sign – it’s meant to conjure the image of bull steer’s horns. So it’s sort of the opposite of “I love you.” The school’s McCombs School of Business is one of the largest in the country and consistently ranked among the Top 20 best business schools by U.S. News and World Report. In 2013, it was ranked 17th overall and 5th among public schools.

Indiana University. America’s Heartland produces some of the most devoted fan bases in the country, including those who back the Hoosiers, particularly the basketball team. The university’s Kelley School of Business started in 1920 and the school, on its website, says it produces positive, hard-working graduates with the skills to excel in the real world business environments.

For the complete list, go here.

Please follow and like us:

Please Leave A Comment

comments