A wave of negative feedback through Facebook and Twitter forced Chili’s Grill & Bar to cancel a nationwide fundraising effort scheduled for April 7 that would have donated 10% of customers’ checks to the National Autism Association (NAA) – a group that opposes childhood vaccines with the belief they can trigger or make autism worse in some children.

The restaurant chain stopped the event the day before it started. The fundraising project was to be part of National Autism Awareness Month.

Chili’s received a flood of online criticism for selecting a group whose website lists vaccination as a possible cause of autism, enough to make them change their mind about hosting the event even though it had been planned and marketed.

On April 6 the company posted a statement on its website about halting the event after listening to criticism from their customers and social followers.

“We believe autism awareness continues to be an important cause to our guests and team members, and we will find another way to support this worthy effort in the future with again our sole intention being to help families affected by autism. At Chili’s, we want to make every guest feel special and we thank all of our loyal guests for your thoughtful questions and comments,” the statement says.

The National Autism Association’s views on a link between childhood vaccines and autism are controversial and have been discredited by much of the scientific community.

The NAA’s website says parents have reported a significant regression in their children’s autism immediately following a vaccination even though “mainstream science” does not support a connection between autism and vaccinations.

In a list of the group’s beliefs, the website says, “Vaccinations can trigger or exacerbate autism in some, if not many, children, especially those who are genetically predisposed to immune, autoimmune or inflammatory conditions.”

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) discounted any connection between autism and childhood vaccinations, citing a 2013 study in the online Journal of Pediatrics and a 2004 study by the Institute of Medicine. Other groups such as the Mayo Clinic also debunk any link between autism and vaccines.

The anti-vaccination movement that is supported by other groups in addition to the NAA may be partly the cause for a re-emergence in the United States of diseases such as measles and whooping cough, according to the CDC.

Chili’s said online it did not take a position on the anti-vaccination movement and based its selection of NAA on the percentage of donations that would provide financial help for families and groups that help children with autism

Please follow and like us:

Please Leave A Comment

comments