Tony Gonzalez, a 14-time Pro-Bowl tight end, will work for CBS this season, but he already has a bit of NFL analysis for everyone: The Denver Broncos will go undefeated this season, he told Newsday’s Bob Glauber. They’ll go 16-0 in the regular season, and they’ll return to the Super Bowl, where they will again face the Seahawks.

And this time, Gonzalez said, the Broncos will go home with the Lombardi Trophy in hand.

“Right now, Denver has a team built just like the New England Patriots back when they went undefeated [in the 2007 regular season],” Gonzalez told Newsday.

“In looking at Denver in the preseason and Peyton Manning’s command of that offense, he’ll pick up right where he left off last year. And defensively, they went out like good organizations do and addressed their weaknesses.”

The 2007 Patriots were the last team to go unbeaten in a 16-game season, but they lost to the Giants in the Super Bowl, thanks to David Tyree’s memorable catch (with a little help from his helmet) late in the fourth quarter that led to the winning score. The 1972 Dolphins, meanwhile, still stand as the only NFL team to finish with a perfect record (17-0).



“I think it’s going to be a Denver-Seattle rematch in the Super Bowl,” Gonzalez said. “And I would go with Denver this time. Giving Peyton two shots at it, to go against the same team, I’ll take Peyton. He didn’t have his All-Pro left tackle [Ryan Clady] against them last year [in Seattle’s 43-8 romp] and they didn’t have their right corner [Chris Harris].”

“If they can stay healthy, how do you beat this team?” Gonzalez added, acknowledging the team’s defensive acquisitions during the offseason. “They’re balanced on both sides of the ball. They can run, they can pass, they can stop the run and they can stop the pass now on a consistent basis. It’s going to be very, very tough to beat them.

“You better play mistake-free football and come up with some luck plays, just like New England got beat by a luck play against the Giants in the Super Bowl. That’s the only reason they got beat. If you don’t have that play, it’s over.”