Kathy McNames adjust the position of Alexa Gould-Kavet during a hour and a half long session held at Yoga Vermont studios in Burlington on Wednesday. “It’s so holistic and it address the mind-body connection,” said Gould-Kavet who has been a practioner of many styles of yoga since she was 11 years old. (Photo: Zach Nelson/for the Free Press)

Burlington yoga teacher Kathy McNames calls yoga "a healing modality."

She can rattle off a range of health benefits associated with the practice: better breathing, relieved back pain or depression that's a bit easier to bear.

McNames is so certain of the healing properties of yoga, in fact, that she has co-founded a organization calling for Vermont public and private health insurance plans to pay for yoga therapy.

As lawmakers continue to haggle over how to save health care costs, the Montpelier-based group has begun to argue that yoga should be part of the solution.

"It's a good time to open the conversation," McNames said.

The new group, named the Student and Teachers Yoga Association, doubles as a way for Vermont's yoga community to organize.

"Unless the Legislature and private insurers take action, lower-income Vermonters will continue to be referred for yoga therapy by their doctors with no ability to pay for the services," the group wrote in a news release last month.

Dave Sterrett, one of the leaders, is a graduate of Middlebury College. He lobbied previously in Washington, D.C., in an attempt to cover alternative care providers under the federal Affordable Care Act, he said.

Majken Tranby, owner of Moodra yoga studio in South Hero, does a hand stand at the open posture session held at the conclusion of a class taught at Yoga Vermont in Burlington on Wednesday. (Photo: Zach Nelson/for the Free Press)

More recently, he devoted his energy to pressing for a single-payer health system in Vermont, the Burlington Free Press reported last year.

One route, Sterrett said, would be to include yoga as a prevention and wellness benefit in health plans, similar to the way some plans include money toward a gym membership. The yoga group does not expect unlimited free classes for everyone.

"We'll have to make the same kind of cost arguments that everyone else does," Sterrett said. "I'm fully aware that people are reticent about increasing costs, and so am I."

Special-interest groups regularly push for health insurance coverage, said Rep. Christopher Pearson, P-Burlington, vice chairman of the House Health Care Committee.

"We would certainly need to see some clear data to suggest that this would be cost-effective," Pearson said when asked about the yoga group's goals. There's nothing to prevent private insurance plans from recognizing yoga currently, he added, but a state mandate would be a challenge.

Sterrett is optimistic about his chances in the statehouse and working with private insurers. He guesses that some legislators likely practice yoga themselves.

"I've definitely talked preliminarily to folks, and there's a strong interest," Sterrett said. "One of the reasons why Vermont's a good place for this is that yoga's pretty popular."

Just how popular? No one seems to know exactly, as Vermont lacks registration for yoga teachers. As one possible measure of popularity, Burlington International Airport opened one of the first airport yoga rooms in the country in January 2013.

In 2012, the magazine Yoga Journal reported that about 8.7 percent of adults nationwide practiced yoga. Sterrett estimates that the rate is at least as high in Vermont.

"It remains a pretty middle-class and upper-middle-class practice," Sterrett said, "and the benefits are so undeniable. My goal is to try to make it available to anyone."

Majken Tranby, a South Hero yoga studio owner who began the yoga advocacy group with McNames and Sterrett, calls yoga preventative medicine.

If yoga were recognized by health insurance, Tranby predicted, "there would be less doctor visits. I think people would make better food choices."

And yoga teachers would, naturally, reap financial benefits. But insurance recognition could also require yoga teachers to register as part of a professional group, McNames said — hand-in-hand with greater regulation.

"I'm sure that there is going to be regulation coming," McNames said, "and I feel that this is a really positive way for us to take action on what the regulation looks like and how it benefits us."

Kathy McNames adjusts the position of fellow instructor Majken Tranby during a session held at Yoga Vermont studio in Burlington on Wednesday. McNames and Tranby are part of a three-person organization hoping to get coverage for yoga in Vermont health insurance plans. (Photo: Zach Nelson/for the Free Press)

The yoga group is unlikely to present legislation at the Statehouse this year, organizers say. But other discussions continue about how health insurance plans should cover particular services.

For example, Sen. Kevin Mullin, a Republican who represents Rutland County, has introduced a bill that would boost health insurance coverage for chiropractic services.

According to the bill, health insurance plans would be required to reimburse licensed chiropractors the same amount that physicians receive for the same "clinically necessary health care services."

Pearson, the vice chair of the House Health Care Committee, said he's sympathetic to the legislation and expects a mirror bill to come through the House.

Read or Share this story: http://bfpne.ws/1D1fcRp