On Dec 9, following an ongoing investigation of regional sales of a synthetic narcotic similar to gamma-Hydroxybutyric acid, or GHB — more commonly known as the “date rape drug” — members of the Roseville Police Department’s Vice and Narcotics Enforcement Team served a search warrant at a house in Rancho Cordova.

The operation resulted in the arrests of Michael Manoff 74, Corrina Day, 42 and David Culfa, 40, each on possessing drugs for sale and other related charges. The suspects were booked at Sacramento County Jail.

“Inside the house, officers found a large quantity of a GHB substitute drug disguised as, and sold under the guise of a massage oil,” Roseville Police Spokeswoman Dee Dee Gunther said in a statement. “They also found more than $20,000 in cash, firearms, methamphetamine packaged for sale, and other evidence of illegal drug trafficking. Detectives later seized more large quantities of the drug at another related location.”

Roseville Police Lt. Josh Simon, who worked with VNET during its investigation, described the home as “a known drug house.” Simon also stated that Manoff and others arrested are familiar to other local law enforcement departments, especially in terms of alleged regional drug trafficking.

“We don’t have specific information that he was doing business in Roseville,” Simon said. “However, we did have information he was a known drug dealer in the city of Rancho Cordova and in the area.”

GHB busts are considered rare because both the drug and its symptoms are especially difficult to detect.

“Unless you’re testing specifically for it, it can be odorless, tasteless, it looks like water…most people conceal it as a small bottle of water and have it on the front seat of their car,” Simon explained. “An officer wouldn’t know any better by smelling it or looking at it, unless they specifically test that substance…also, sometimes people would get stopped for being under the influence (of GHB) driving a car and would have some of the similar signs and symptoms for being under the influence of an alcoholic beverage; but unless you specifically test the blood for the elements that are found in GHB, you wouldn’t come up with any type of result.”

Simon continued to say that officers are increasingly aware of the possibility that a DUI suspect may be under the influence of GHB, and are trained to identify further evidence of such cases. He also noted a common misconception that the dug’s moniker, the “date rape drug,” eludes to its primary use.

“I would say that’s not accurate,” Simon noted. “It’s considered a party drug. There’s many people that use this, and use it consensually. They call it the date rape drug because there have been cases, not necessarily in our jurisdiction; but there have been cases that gave it that name. Because it is odorless, because it is tasteless, because it’s clear, someone could slip a couple of drops into a person’s drink and they wouldn’t even know what their consuming.”

Roseville's Crime Suppression Unit and the U.S. Department of Homeland Security Investigations assisted Roseville's VNET with the operation.