President Obama was all laughs at his last White House correspondent’s dinner on Saturday. Among many of his finest writers zingers and rib jabs, the President found the time to take aim at Snapchat. Their response? Well, they had none. They were too busy “snapping” about tits and ass and who can blame them?

OBAMA CALLS OUT SNAPCHAT AND DROPS MIC

If you were told that one day, the future President would be taking jabs at Snapchat and dropping mics after speeches, well, you’d probably have no idea what any of that meant, but regardless, it’s a sign of the times. The hip, social media savvy president had his final correspondents dinner on Saturday and it was an emotionally charged, humor-filled political circle jerk. One particular skit involved Obama talking about life after the White House. In the video, the President records a video of himself on Snapchat, jokingly encouraging people to sign up for Obamacare. Obama preceded to put on one of the creeper lens filters around.

SOCIAL MEDIA TAKES OVER THE WHITEHOUSE

Another popular social media tool was mentioned on Saturday. Speaker of the House John Boehner brought up LinkedIn. Boehner jokingly said that Obama wouldn’t’ stop sending him LinkedIn requests. Knowing that the two don’t exactly see eye to eye at times, this joke could very well be rooted in reality. After all was said and done, the President stood before the crowd and will and confident “Obama Out”, dropped the mic harder that Run DMC ever could. Well, that’s not true, but at least it was better than Kobe.

TITS AND ASS NO LONGER CRASS

Usually, if the President mentions your name or company, a response might be in line. However, Snapchat has no intention of that. They have their hands full with various forms of tits and ass. Public relations with the President is important, but never should that reign supreme to the best tits and ass compilation on the planet. Snapchat has their priorities straight, which explains their enormous success. Whether you happen to be an ass man, a tits girl or anything in between, check out the app’s compilation they released on YouTube. Even the President would understand because we live in an age where tits and ass are no longer crass (mic drop).

Comments

comments