If the healthcare.gov website wasn’t aimed at the American public, and it didn’t have in its wake 20 or more years of political struggle, its failure would hardly be remarkable. Remove these two things from the headline story of the disastrous healthcare.gov website launch and this event is so common that it really isn’t news.

What you have left is simply the failure of a very expensive and well-intentioned software tool — an over-hyped, extremely expensive, highly anticipated business system not working at launch. Unbelievable? Sadly, and perhaps surprisingly, it’s very common.

This happens every day behind the firewalls of companies large and small. Yes shareholders, those large public companies in which you invest, pour similar amounts of money and effort down the drain, delivering non-working, underutilized and inappropriate systems inside their operations.

Furious that your tax dollars have been squandered on malfunctioning software? Your dollars have been wasted before — by the companies in your stock portfolio. Many of the reporters out there describing their outrage and disbelief over the healthcare.gov event are being a bit disingenuous because many of them wrestle daily with unworkable systems in their newsrooms — to report expenses, submit a story, or find a company policy or procedure.

As technologists and project managers are brought before committee after committee seeking to understand what went wrong, these individuals may be wondering, “What’s the big deal?” Systems rarely work as anticipated, especially ones this complex.

No one warned these coders and testers that, unlike delivering an enterprise system to a couple hundred thousand employees of a global company, the risks involved in delivering software to an anxious American public are much different.

They definitely didn’t factor politics into their system launch decisions. Behind corporate firewalls a miserable system launch can be followed by months or even years of ongoing adjustments, changes, and tweaks. The original purpose of the system may never be served. The value may never be delivered. Unfortunately Secretary Sebelius, you haven’t been afforded the conveniences so many corporate CIOs have.

When it Does Finally Work, It Still May Not Work Right

Jumping up and down about a piece of expensive software in the healthcare space that doesn’t work as expected is like starting a letter writing campaign because your doctor kept you waiting 45 minutes. In hospitals all over the country there are software systems that frustrate and confuse healthcare professionals. Ask a doctor or nurse about the systems they use, and in the best case, they will say that they are used to it. In the worst case, they’ll describe how they avoid using it altogether. Ask the technology team in these hospitals about the same systems and they will say that they are working well.

When technologists say that a system is “working,” know that for the non-technologists this may mean nothing. Inside doctors’ offices and hospitals, you will find complex and expensive systems to support everything from recording details about a patient exam, to entering an order or reviewing test results. These systems very often “work” from a technologist’s perspective — the computer code does everything that it is functionally supposed to do. From the perspective of the physicians, nurses, and office workers who are tasked with using these systems, “working” may not be how they describe it. More likely they’ll tell you that the system is crippling.

When the fixes to healthcare.gov are finally in place, unless they address human performance concerns as much as they address adherence to the healthcare law and technical performance issues, we may be in for a second wave of outrage. Where blank screens mysteriously had appeared in its first incarnation, we may have online health insurance plan shoppers sighing, “Why do they want me to… How do I…, Why can’t I…?” The technical fixes will be worth little if the system doesn’t work as its audience expects it to.

Is There Hope?

If there is any silver lining to this healthcare.gov web system mess, perhaps it will be an awakening to the fact that complex business systems are a part of our every day, and they are failing us every day. Despite the miraculous capabilities of our mobile devices and on-demand information society, there is an immense amount of waste within the business system world — healthcare.gov is just a very politically charged, very public example.

The next time you call a customer service number, know that the person on the other end of the phone, like any decent person, genuinely wants to help you. Recognize that most likely they are hobbled by the computer system they are required to use when performing their job.

When you go to work and struggle to use the reporting systems or cannot understand how the software you have been supplied is supposed to help you be more successful in your position, remember the thousands of inches of newspaper copy surrounding the healthcare.gov site launch and start to voice some outrage of your own — about a situation you have been experiencing long before Obamacare.

Harold Hambrose founded Electronic Ink in 1990 to formalize design’s role in the technology industry.