U.S. Rep. Tammy Duckworth, Sen. Mark Kirk will face off in race for Senate seat in November.

Tammy Duckworth handily defeated two rivals in the Senate Democratic primary Tuesday and now faces a showdown with Republican Sen. Mark Kirk — a contest likely to shape up as one of the most closely watched in the Nov. 8 election.

Duckworth's victory over Andrea Zopp, former head of the Chicago Urban League, and Napoleon Harris, a state senator from Harvey, came as no surprise. Neither Zopp nor Harris gained much traction against Duckworth, a veteran who lost her legs in the Iraq War and now is a U.S. representative with a national profile and fundraising muscle.

Declaring victory, Duckworth credited her success, in part, to rejecting the negative campaign tactics of Kirk, whom she said "has been running attack ads for months."

"We sent a loud message tonight that we reject the politics of fear and division that have no place in Illinois," she told supporters.

With about 84 percent of precincts reporting, Duckworth had 63.7 percent of the vote, compared with 24.5 percent for Zopp and 11.8 percent for Harris.

Sen. Mark Kirk thanks voters, discusses plan for future in Illinois Sen. Mark Kirk thanks voters, discusses plan for future in Illinois. March 15, 2016. (WGN-TV) Sen. Mark Kirk thanks voters, discusses plan for future in Illinois. March 15, 2016. (WGN-TV) See more videos

Kirk captured 70.9 percent of the vote with 84 percent of precincts counted, compared with 29.1 percent for James Marter, a little-known candidate from Oswego who struggled to raise his profile in the contest.

Less than an hour after polls closed, Kirk delivered a three-minute victory speech, taking on Duckworth on national security matters and saying the November election will be one with "bold contrasts."

"We will be addressing the issues we care about most: national security, veterans' health care and the strength of the economy," Kirk said from his campaign headquarters in the Loop.

The race against Kirk is expected to feature a heavy reliance on attack ads by both sides. Even before Tuesday, Kirk and Duckworth began sparring. In negative ads, he cast her as weak on terrorism and too welcoming of Syrian refugees. In speeches she branded him Donald Trump-like for his string of controversial gaffes.

Duckworth pledged to focus on solutions for working families and said she would not let "big-money outside groups" stop her from unseating Kirk. She said she would focus on making college affordable and would grow the economy "from the middle out, not the top down."

Zopp, a Chicagoan and former prosecutor, was making her first run for office and had an uphill climb. She criticized Duckworth for ignoring issues facing African-Americans, not trying to advance enough gun-control bills and refusing to debate before black-oriented media outlets and Downstate.

Sen. Mark Kirk easily defeated James T. Marter as the U.S. Senate's Republican nominee. Kirk, seeking a second term, will face Democratic U.S. Rep. Tammy Duckworth in the general election in November.

She forged her campaign around the theme of criminal justice reform, which she hammered away at amid the controversy surrounding the release of a video over the shooting death of black teenager Laquan McDonald by a white Chicago police officer.

Zopp carved out a career as an executive in the corporate world before heading up the Chicago Urban League. But she also had the baggage of serving on the board of the Chicago Public Schools at a time when 50 schools were closed and the school system was led by Barbara Byrd-Bennett, the former CPS CEO who pleaded guilty to a federal corruption charge stemming from a kickback scheme. Prosecutors said she steered a contract for principal training to her former employer.

As of late February, Zopp's campaign had collected $1.6 million to Duckworth's $6.3 million, campaign finance reports show.

Zopp said she was proud of her campaign and immediately threw her support behind Duckworth. "It is crucial that we send a Democrat to the Senate," Zopp said. "Congresswoman Duckworth has served this country with distinction, dignity and strength, and I intend to support her as the Democratic nominee for the U.S. Senate."

Harris, 37, a football standout at Northwestern University who went on to play in the NFL, stumbled out of the gate when he announced his candidacy and seemed ill-prepared when questioned about foreign affairs.

His endorsements included state Senate President John Cullerton. While Harris lent his campaign more than $1 million, he struggled to raise campaign funds and spent his money sparingly. His issue stances included opposition to repealing the Affordable Care Act and support for the nuclear deal with Iran. He also opposed cutting back on funding for Medicaid, Medicare and Social Security.

Duckworth: We sent a loud and clear message today Duckworth: We sent a loud and clear message today. March 15, 2016. (WGN-TV) Duckworth: We sent a loud and clear message today. March 15, 2016. (WGN-TV) See more videos

Duckworth, 48, is Asian-American. Zopp and Harris are African-American, and some suggested Harris was recruited to join the race to serve as a spoiler and split the black vote, but Harris rejected the speculation, saying he was in the race to win.

Duckworth stood out as the one candidate in the Democratic primary with experience in Congress.

She lost her first bid for a House seat in 2006 to Republican Peter Roskam, of Wheaton. Soon afterward, then-Gov. Rod Blagojevich, now in prison for public corruption, tapped her to run the Illinois Department of Veterans' Affairs.

In 2009, President Barack Obama nominated her to be an assistant secretary at the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. She resigned in 2011 and quickly launched a run for the House in a district that state Democrats had redrawn to favor their party. She won the seat in 2012 and was re-elected in 2014.

In the contest against Zopp and Harris, Duckworth won the endorsement of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee. Kirk's seat is seen by Democrats as pivotal in their party's efforts to win back a majority of seats in the Senate.

Kirk, 56, of Highland Park, has a law degree and is a former congressional staffer who first served in the U.S. House and represented the North Shore beginning in 2000. Ten years later, he was elected to the Senate.

He, like Duckworth, survived life-altering physical trauma. In 2012, early in his Senate career, he suffered a massive stroke in Illinois and spent almost a year in rehabilitation. In 2004, Duckworth was a National Guard officer in Iraq co-piloting a helicopter that was taken down by a rocket-propelled grenade. She lost both legs and nearly died but recovered after numerous surgeries.