Megan Smith, a former Google executive, speaks at a conference June 30, 2011, in Munich, Germany. Smith on Thursday was appointed the White House's new Chief Technology Officer. Sascha Baumann/Getty Images

The White House on Thursday named former Google executive Megan Smith America’s new Chief Technology Officer.

Smith, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology graduate and former vice president of Google’s experimental technology branch Google X, replaces former tech officer Todd Park, who resigned last week to serve as an Obama administration tech adviser based in Silicon Valley.

“Megan has spent her career leading talented teams and taking cutting-edge technology and innovation initiatives from concept to design to deployment,” President Barack Obama said in a statement Thursday, according to USA Today.

The CTO position was created in 2009 to advise White House officials on government tech policy, according to Vox Media’s The Verge. Smith will be the country’s third CTO in five years.

Alexander Macgillivray, a former attorney for Twitter and Google, was appointed Smith’s deputy. Smith and Macgillivray are reportedly a change of pace from CTO predecessors Park and Aneesh Chopra, whose backgrounds were heavy in health care technology, according to Bloomberg Businessweek.

But the duo strengthen White House ties to tech innovation in Silicon Valley, in conjunction with Park’s capacity as a tech and recruiting adviser who will “ensure that the administration has an on-the-ground sense of how technology is evolving,” according to the White House statement.

Macgillivray was once a front-runner in Twitter’s battle with government data collection requests, according to Politico. And Smith was the CEO of an online LGBT community before joining Google, according to the Post.

The pair will fill two of the most prominent roles in government tech policy in the aftermath of the series of technological glitches that have plagued the Obama administration’s Healthcare.gov, said Clay Johnson, CEO of nonprofit Department of Better Technology and an interviewee for the CTO job, according to CNBC’s Re/code.