Please enable Javascript to watch this video

Community members on the west side of Rock Island held an event on Saturday, September 6th, 2014 in an effort to make their streets a safer place.

The event, called "We Care for Our Communities," was meant to raise money so security cameras can be installed along the crime-ridden streets.

Willie Williamson, better known by his peers as "The Candy Man," spearheaded the event, hoping to raise $2,000 for the cause.

"Cameras will cost anywhere from 5,000 to 10,000 dollars per camera. So today may not raise enough money to buy a camera, but it's a step in the right direction," said Williamson.

However, some at the event cautioned that installing security cameras will not stop crime altogether.

"Most of the criminals themselves, if they know cameras are here [they will just] relocate to another area. If you relocate the violence, then you haven't solved the problem," said Iowa State Representative, Ako Abdul-Samad (D-35th District). "We have to be about systemic change instead of cosmetic change and I'm hoping the cameras don't just become cosmetic."

Others at the event hope the cameras will make criminals think twice before committing a crime.

"I think it's a start. I think there are people in the community that don't want to say anything because of retaliation," said Kerri Brinkley, whose son, Marcus Jones, was shot and killed in Davenport just last month.

"It puts awareness out there and it lets people know that they're being watched and that it's being recorded [so] the neighborhoods don't have to be as worried and speak out for their safety," Brinkley said.

Williams said he understands the cameras may not stop crime from ever happening, he just hopes it will be a step in the right direction.

"It's just something that needs to be fixed. And that's what the cameras are going to do, fix some of those things that need to be fixed," said Williams.

To donate to the cause, Williams has set up an account at Mississippi Valley Credit Union bank called "We Care for Our Communities" where people can deposit money at any branch in the Quad Cities.

You can also contact "The Candy Man" himself via email at djcandyman411@yahoo.com or call him at (309)-292-3839.