Ilyce Glink

Ilyce Glink is an award-winning real estate and personal finance expert, “Good Cents” contributor to WGN radio, WSB radio talk show host and best-selling author.

Glink is the author of more than a dozen books, including the best-selling “100 Questions Every First-Time Home Buyer Should Ask” and “Buy, Close, Move In!”. She frequently contributes to Yahoo! and CBS News, and is the acting publisher of ThinkGlink.com, a site dedicated to helping consumers make the best decisions with their money.

Her nationally syndicated column, “Real Estate Matters,” offers practical insights for anyone thinking about buying, selling, rehabbing or refinancing a home. Glink’s work appears in newspapers across the country, including the Chicago Tribune, Los Angeles Times and The Washington Post, as well as in magazines such as Better Homes & Gardens and Parade.

Glink is the “Good Cents” contributor to WGN radio in Chicago and hosts “The Ilyce Glink Show” on WSB radio in Atlanta every Sunday. She also is a frequent guest on National Public Radio. Glink spent eight years as an on-air reporter/producer for WGN-TV in Chicago, and is currently hosting the Ilyce Glink “Real Estate Minutes,” which can be found on her website and YouTube channel.

Glink has served as a real estate and personal finance consumer advocate for “The Oprah Winfrey Show,” NBC’s “Today,” CNBC’s “The Money Wheel,” CNN and CNN-FN. Glink’s many awards include Best Consumer Reporter from the National Association of Real Estate Editors and the First Money $mart Award. Her books “100 Questions Every First-Time Home Buyer Should Ask” and “100 Questions Every Home Seller Should Ask” received high honors from Chicago Women in Publishing. She also received the Best Consumer Magazine Article award and Best Television Report from the National Association of Real Estate Editors.

With over 20 years in the field of journalism and broadcasting, Glink founded Think Glink Media, a company that specializes in custom content, digital marketing and video production.

Visit http://www.ThinkGlink.com to learn more or follow her on Twitter @Glink.