Land bank ... or land grab? Experiment in Kent County has some raising roof

For weeks in the spring of last year, Scott Scheltema loaded his aged-but-trusty pickup with tools and drove north 20 miles from Caledonia to Grand Rapids to hammer, paint, hang drywall and demolish parts of 1334 Matilda St. NE in hopes of making a buck.



Empty of life for more than three years, the bungalow, tucked away in a neat neighborhood of starter homes, badly needed the care that Scheltema provided. A builder and contractor for more than 35 years, he and his subcontractors put in more than $30,000 of improvements by way of a new roof, small addition, new kitchen, floor and deck.



For Scheltema, it was a small project that turned a modest profit when a computer programmer bought the home.



For some government officials, free-market advocates and community activists, projects like Scheltema's may be ground zero in a statewide fight over the future of land banks.



Kent County has launched a grand experiment in using its land bank — derisively labeled by some as the "land-grab bank" — to raise home values in a neighborhood and reinvigorate commercial sites by actively acquiring foreclosed properties before they go to a tax auction.



The 39 land bank authorities operating in Michigan were created to own, assemble and dispose of public property, and many act as the boneyards of unloved properties that no one buys at tax auctions. Aside from the city of Detroit and state, all the land banks have been created through intergovernmental agreements between counties and the Michigan Land Bank.



Aside from the city of Detroit and state of Michigan, all of the land banks have been created by counties. The Michigan Land Bank is the largest, with 10,065 parcels in the city of Detroit out of its portfolio of 12,000, followed by land banks in Genesee and Saginaw counties.



How well the Kent County Land Bank succeeds at funding its own existence by acquiring and selling a mix of moneymaking and money-losing properties before they go to tax auctions is being watched closely by land bank officials who are looking for new sources of revenue as federal dollars earmarked to fight urban blight dwindle.



"We are trying to understand what's going on in Kent County because it may impact us," said Eric Schertzing, Ingham County treasurer, chairman of that county's land bank and organizer of the Mason-based Michigan Association of Land Banks.



"The Kent County treasurer and the land bank executive director have used the land bank statute fairly robustly, even doing some things beyond what I do here," Schertzing said.



KCLB Director Dave Allen said an experiment in 2012 where his land bank sold a basket of 44 properties, selected to reach a net gain, was successful and instructive.



"It doesn't make any sense to go out and try to buy hundreds of properties if we don't know that it's going to work," Allen said. "So we chose a specific set that had some really crappy properties and some really good properties to test this cross-collateralization model."



The land bank acquired 218 properties throughout 2013 to finish the year with 231 properties in its portfolio.



But that cross-collateralization model also raised the ire of a group of real estate developers and managers who have accused the KCLB "of cherry-picking properties" that they think should have been sold through tax auctions. The group of about a dozen individuals and companies in Kent County voiced its opposition at county government meetings and filed two lawsuits to halt the practice.



Gov. Rick Snyder has convened a group to study the issue, and legislation was introduced to curb the technique.



"What concerns me the most is that the KCLB takes taxpayers' money away from the general fund of the county," said Dan Hibma, a partner with Land & Co. in Wyoming and a plaintiff in two lawsuits that are on appeal after a Kent County judge dismissed the cases.



Hibma, a former township supervisor and assessor for six years and husband of Terri Lynn Land, the potential Republican candidate for the U.S. Senate, said the KCLB is stretching use of the Land Bank Fast Track Act well beyond what the Michigan Legislature intended when it passed the measure in 2003.



"What the KCLB is doing is not in the plain language of the law," he said.



Allen thinks that the act enables his land bank to acquire properties before auction to promote economic growth in communities and that the KCLB may be drawing the road map for other Michigan land banks that need to find alternatives to the federal Neighborhood Stabilization Program as it winds down. Starting in 2008, the NSP flooded communities hard hit by the mortgage meltdown with federal money to demolish or fix homes in foreclosure.



"All of the land banks that were around during the time the funds were being disbursed had to build infrastructure to manage NSP," Allen said. "Now that the NSP is gone, all of these land banks are left with big infrastructures and no idea how they're going to fund them."





"One of our priorities is to support affordable, quality housing options in urban neighborhoods," Craft said. "The land bank is helping to make that happen."



She said the land bank is trying to break cycles of abuse at tax auctions where investors buy distressed homes at well below market value and do nothing to improve them.



Distressed homes largely in Grand Rapids "were purchased as is and used as is," Craft said. "Low-income renters frequently aren't comfortable about raising concerns about the conditions of the property because of the rent they are paying, fear of eviction or other reasons."



With a $600,000 loan due at the end of this year and a $400,000 loan due in 2017, the KCLB seeks to become self-sustaining through two main revenue streams: net gains from the sale of its properties and a cut of the local property taxes paid by the new owners. State law allows a land bank to collect up to 50 percent of the local property taxes for five years from the time that it sells a property.



In 2012, the KCLB posted operating income of about $118,000 on total operating revenue of just over $1 million, according to the organization's annual report. Craft said the KCLB could have paid off its $400,000 loan early, but the foundation was more interested in having the land bank reinvest the money last year in a greater number of distressed properties.



It's too early to gauge the long-term effects that the KCLB will have on raising property values and improving the percentage of home ownership in neighborhoods, as well as on boosting revenue to local units of government through property taxes, Craft said. But the foundation is tracking those metrics as the land bank gains experience.



Auction versus land bank



Scheltema and another investor/contractor who has bought several foreclosed properties said they initially were skeptical of the land bank system but now think it fills gaps in the free market when it comes to distressed properties. Scheltema is waiting for a break in the weather and the resumption of utility service to begin work on another property he bought through the land bank.



Like the home on Matilda, the house in the Grand Rapids suburb of Walker was donated to the land bank by a commercial lender. Allen said banks donated 26 homes in 2012 — more than the land bank bought for itself. Commercial lenders take the business write-offs on properties judged to have market value so low that they don't warrant liquidation through a standard process known as real estate-owned inventory.



Scheltema — who, with his brother, has had as many as 40 rental properties in the Grand Rapids area over the past 30 years — said he hasn't bought properties through tax auctions because "it's kind of a crapshoot when you go to those things." In the majority of cases at tax auctions, prospective buyers don't have easy access to the inside of the properties, all purchases have to be made in cash, and the titles aren't clear to obtain bank financing.



Another investor, who would not be quoted by name, said the land bank system makes investors follow the rules about pulling construction permits so work can be quantified and ultimately the property reassessed at an appropriate value.



"I've purchased homes through the tax auction previously, and I was really upset about the land bank in the beginning because it raised my price — I felt like it wasn't the fair market working," he said. "The land bank was coming in and they were getting a deal — another layer of cost added to the system."



But after purchasing several properties from the land bank, the investor said he is convinced the system encourages higher investment in foreclosed properties, which in turn will raise home values and the city's tax base.



The KCLB's procedures also have critics.



Sharon Hall said that last year she asked the land bank to place the Affordable Housing Coalition in Grand Rapids on a list of nonprofits that could purchase homes at a discount, similar to the way the land bank sells properties to organizations such as Habitat for Humanity. As director of the AHC, Hall said she hopes to shelter six homeless women with a house from the land bank.



The AHC, which shares the same address with Beckett Property Management, was "formed by a group of West Michigan landlords and property owners to protect affordable housing options for West Michigan residents and to protect their fellow business owners from unreasonable government regulations," its website states. The organization was formed in August 2012 by Joshua Beckett a few weeks after the city of Grand Rapids enacted an ordinance that required landlords to register their rental properties and have them inspected.



Joshua Beckett, Michael Beckett and others sued the KCLB over the land bank's acquisition of 44 properties that year. A similar lawsuit was filed in 2013, but that suit listed Hall and the AHC as plaintiffs instead of the Becketts, who have been at the center of several local controversies regarding rental code violations and sales of unregistered investments.