Buy Photo Jack Moore. (Photo: Jamie Germano/@jgermano1/ / STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)Buy Photo Story Highlights He reiterates he will not resign.

He says he has received support from hundreds

He turned down an invitation from a city church.

A day after he presided over a Town Board meeting where a dozen furious residents voiced their displeasure with him, Henrietta supervisor Jack Moore offered no rebuttal.

"They were angry, and they had reason to be angry," Moore said Thursday. "I misspoke. I made a big mistake."

Citizens were angry over comments Moore made to two highway workers on April 10, caught on tape obtained and first reported by WHAM-TV (Channel 13). The Republican criticized the Affordable Care Act and said, "You don't know about cousins in the city? We get all kinds of them. They bus them out here, OK"?

When a town employee asked about the health care law, Moore responded, "This Obamacare, I think that's how we're going to pay for your cousins in the city."

The comments were taped by a town employee. Moore said he learned a huge lesson: That being a town supervisor carries a lot more responsibility than running Gro-Moore Farms, his Henrietta business.

"I don't think I recognized it in my own personal thoughts," he said. "There's surely a difference. I have to be a lot more in tune.

"I don't judge people by the color of their skin. I do judge them by the quality and quantity of work they do. That's my job."

Moore was elected in 2013 and is running for another two-year term in November. He reiterated that he has no plans to step down, even though local leaders such as Monroe County Republican party chairman Bill Reilich and Monroe County Executive candidate Sandra Frankel have urged him to.

Moore vows to continue.

"The people elected me," he said. "If they choose to invite me back, I'll be glad to serve another two years. If they don't, I understand. But I'm not a guy who is ever about quitting."

Jack Moore explains 'city cousins' remark Jim Mandelaro/ staff photographer

While angry residents let him have it at Wednesday night's meeting, Moore didn't believe engaging them then would have been appropriate.

"It didn't feel good to hear, but it wasn't a night where I could have responded," he said. "It wouldn't have been taken in a context I would have liked. But I can take it. As taxpayers and citizens in this town, everyone has a right to be heard."

He said he has been touched by what he said were "hundreds" of people who have reached out to him in person, via email and Facebook posts and on the phone, urging him to trudge on.

"They tell me, 'The town is much better today than before you were here. You've apologized, and hopefully the other people can accept that. But move on and do your job.' "

Of the support he says he has received, Moore says, "It's resounding. It's unbelievable."

On Thursday, the Rev. Marlowe Washington, pastor of Historic Parsells Church in Rochester, which has a mostly black congregation, said he extended an invitation to Moore to speak during Sunday services.

Washington cast the invitation as an opportunity for Moore to show his remorse and demonstrate his commitment to being more sensitive.

"What better way to show sensitivity than being with the people you've insulted?" Washington said. "We can help him through the process."

Moore said he received the invitation but would be attending his own church on Sunday.

He plans to continue his job, with a focus on completing a capital building plan that calls for a new recreation center and public library. At Wednesday's contentious meeting, the local firm Passero Associates was announced as the engineering and archicture designers for the proposed rec center.

A local law for rental registry also was passed, and a motion to allow DPW employees to work four 10-hour days in the summer was passed on to Union CWA 1170 for consideration.

Moore said he hopes to put the incident behind him "if the media lets me."

"When I'm wrong, I'm wrong," he said. "But I don't need to be hung over this. If I am, then I created my own problem."

Includes reporting from columnist David Andreatta.

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1HkZ1gi