A McClain County judge denied bond for a husband accused of shooting and killing his estranged wife inside their convenience store, Gators Deli, in Blanchard.

Larry Keeler, 65, was arrested Wednesday on a complaint of murder in the first degree. Investigators say he shot and killed 57-year-old Gaye Keeler and then turned the gun on her dog.

Blanchard police found Gaye and the dog dead inside the store, Wednesday morning.

According to the arrest warrant, Keeler admitted to killing his wife and disclosed his motive for the murder.

Keeler told investigators he used a 9mm pistol to shoot and kill Gaye and her dog, because he was upset with her alleged gambling problem.

He claimed she was losing thousands of dollars in their estate, while they were going through a divorce.

Keller also revealed his plans to end his own life. He claimed after shooting Gaye he went home to kill himself, but the gun would not work.

8/6/2014 Related Story: Man Arrested After Shooting, Killing Ex-Wife At Blanchard Convenience Store

Blanchard police arrested Keeler at the home and recovered the alleged murder weapon.

During forensic interviews, Keeler told investigators he had been thinking about doing this for months.

Court papers confirm the statements made by Keeler. In a victim's protective order the court issued in June 2013, Gaye claimed "Larry threatened to kill me"with a "bullet to the head."

The VPO expired one year later, June 2014.

Gaye also made reports of domestic violence to the Blanchard Police Department - warning officers her husband planned to kill her and himself. He allegedly wanted to carry out the crime so their children would inherit life insurance.

Court papers filed in the investigation of Gaye Keeler's murder seem to mirror many of the allegations Gaye made before her death.

Investigators said Gaye died of a gunshot wound to the head, and several handwritten notes were found in Larry Keeler's home. The notes were instructing their children on what property to sell and what they were to do with their remains.

Keeler is being held without bond. Formal charges have not been filed.

Keeler is due back in court on August 15.