The GOP 17: How to tell them apart

With 17 Republicans running for president, it’s tempting to presume they’re all the same.

In some ways, Thursday’s Fox debates will show, they are. None will likely admit belief in Darwin’s theory of evolution, and only three (Lindsey Graham, John Kasich, and George Pataki) will likely say human activity causes climate change. None favors the Dodd-Frank financial reform law or the current legal status of abortion or the Supreme Court’s recent decision on gay marriage. All would repeal Obamacare. All pledge to cut taxes, increase defense spending and reduce overall government spending.

Story Continued Below

But this conformity masks disagreement on a host of other issues, including immigration, trade, education, the minimum wage and that most sacred of Iowa’s cows, ethanol subsidies. Squint a little, and the GOP 17 start to emerge as individual people who differ not just in personality but also in their ideas about how to govern. Those differences could become magnified with a fickle GOP base that is ready for fresh blood — and looking for reasons to dismiss candidates from the unwieldy field of hopefuls.

Here’s where the candidates diverge:

Immigration

Immigration is the topic on which the candidates’ views are most fluid, reflecting unresolved tensions between the party’s pro-immigration corporate wing and its anti-immigration social-conservative wing. Scott Walker, Chris Christie, Rick Santorum, Carly Fiorina, George Pataki, and Jim Gilmore all explicitly oppose a path to citizenship for the undocumented. So, surprisingly, does Jeb Bush, generally thought to be the most pro-immigration candidate; although he favored a path to citizenship previously, he now favors “a path to legalized status” but not citizenship.

The most pro-immigration candidate is not Bush, but Graham, who’s said he would veto any immigration bill that did not contain a path to citizenship (though he wants that path to be “long” and “hard”).

“He has the longest history of really being a leader of the moderate Republican wing on this,” said Marc Rosenblum, deputy director of the nonprofit Migration Policy Institute’s U.S. Immigration Policy Program.

Mike Huckabee has spoken favorably of citizenship for undocumented children (“I would like that person to become a very generous tax-paying citizen”), and in his 2015 book, “God, Guns, Grits, and Gravy,” Huckabee pointed out that President Ronald Reagan “was responsible for the greatest immigration amnesty act in American history.” With regard to grownups, though, Huckabee opts not to be Reaganesque: “I strongly oppose amnesty and government benefits for illegal immigrants who have violated our laws,” his campaign Web site declares.

Donald Trump, to all appearances the most blatantly anti-illegal-immigration candidate, has passed up opportunities to oppose explicitly a path to citizenship. “If somebody’s been outstanding, we try and work something out,” he said last month on MSNBC. Although Trump wrote scornfully in his 2011 book, “Time to Get Tough,” about “Obama and his pro-amnesty pals,” Trump supported a path to citizenship as recently as 2012, and for all his bluster about “rapists” crossing the border, he’s said nothing lately to contradict that.

Just about all the GOP candidates have shifted their positions on immigration at one time or another, sometimes more than once. But the champion escape artist on this topic is Marco Rubio, who has expressed at least seven different positions over the course of his political career. Asked in late June if he supported a path to citizenship, he said: “I do.”

Trade

On trade, the GOP candidates face a dilemma similar to that on immigration: support legislation that the business community strongly favors or oppose it to appease conservative partisans (in this instance less ideological than reflexively opposed to granting additional powers to Obama).

The simple way to resolve this tension is to oppose fast-track trade-promotion authority but support (or at least not oppose) the Trans-Pacific Partnership. That’s the option chosen by Rand Paul (who voted against it in the Senate), Ben Carson, Rick Perry, Bobby Jindal and Huckabee. Fiorina comes close to this position, saying she opposes fast-track and feels “uncomfortable” with the TPP. Ted Cruz voted for fast-track in May but against it in June, complaining that it was now tied to a “secret deal” between Senate Democrats and Republicans on funding the Export-Import Bank, which he opposed.

The more traditionally pro-trade GOP position is to favor (or at least not oppose) fast track and the TPP. That’s where Rubio, Bush, Walker and Graham have come down. Kasich appears to be in this camp, too, though his public statements are less definite.

Then there’s the “hell no” caucus that explicitly opposes both fast track and the TPP. Donald Trump is its sole member at the moment, but Fiorina, Santorum and Cruz may end up joining him.

Education

The education issue that most divides the Republican slate is the Common Core, a set of academic standards developed by the National Governors Association and the Council of Chief State School Officers. Here the conservative impulse to impose academic rigor on schools in thrall to “whole child” progressivism is at war with the equally conservative impulse to maintain control of education policy at the state and local levels. With the Republican National Committee now officially opposed to Common Core, local control is winning.

Not surprisingly, the two strongest Common Core supporters among the GOP 17 are both governors: Bush and Kasich. But even Bush now says the federal government should exercise no influence over it, and Kasich didn’t push back recently when his state Legislature dumped one of the tests created specifically to test students on Common Core mastery.

Another governor, Jindal, initially backed Common Core but later decided he wanted nothing to do with it after the Obama administration created financial incentives for states to adopt it. “As we have seen in Obamacare,” Jindal wrote in April, “President Obama’s Washington believes it knows better than the peasants in the states. But centralized planning didn’t work in Russia, it’s not working with our health care system, and it won’t work in education.” Jindal also sued the Obama administration to butt out.

Cruz is also virulently anti-Common Core. He’s tweeted that “we need to repeal every word of Common Core,” even though there’s nothing to repeal because Congress never legislated it. Later he clarified that if elected president he would discontinue the federal incentives to participate in the program.

Trump opposes the Common Core quite fervently, too, though it’s not clear his motivation goes any deeper than a desire to bash Bush for supporting it. In a July 7 interview Trump said it was “pathetic” that Bush was “in favor of Washington educating your children.”

Minimum wage

Republican candidates are notably willing to talk this year about income inequality, a topic Mitt Romney famously relegated in 2012 to “quiet rooms.” Just about all the GOP candidates — and especially Cruz and Paul — have spoken publicly about the problem, if only to point out that it’s gotten worse under Obama.

But only two of the GOP 17 — Carson and Santorum — favor hiking the minimum wage. “I think, probably, it should be higher than now,” Carson told CNBC’s John Harwood in an interview. Carson didn’t specify how much the federal hourly minimum should be increased above the current $7.25. (Congressional Democrats have lately coalesced around $12, though a few are pushing for $15.) Santorum has said he favors a small increase.

“Frankly, I think every candidate that calls themselves conservative should be calling for an increase in the minimum wage,” said Dave Cooper, an analyst at the left-leaning Economic Policy Institute. “The polls show that a majority of Republican voters favor increasing the federal minimum wage.”

For the rest of the pack, the only question is whether the wage floor should remain where it is or be abolished altogether.

Walker and Rubio are abolitionists, though both say they wouldn’t act on that conviction.

Of Wisconsin’s state minimum, Walker said in October, “Well, I’m not going to repeal it, but I don’t think it serves a purpose because we’re debating then about what the lowest levels are at. I want people to make, like I said the other night, two or three times that.” Walker then said much the same about the federal minimum wage in a July interview with Fox News.

Similarly, Rubio said two years ago, “I don’t think a minimum wage law works,” a view he repeated in January. But in the January remarks he elaborated that “as a practical matter” he didn’t favor its repeal: “It is what it is and that’s a disruption we don’t need.”

Cruz can sound like an abolitionist when he talks about the minimum wage. “I think [it] consistently hurts the most vulnerable,” he said in January. But — somewhat uncharacteristically for a candidate who released a video showing how to cook bacon with a machine gun — he’s less emphatic than Walker and Rubio (and similarly refrains from calling for repeal). It’s possible that Cruz approaches the issue with more trepidation because his father, Rafael Cruz, generated headlines last year by saying “the average black does not” understand that boosting the minimum wage would increase black unemployment.

The most nuanced abolitionist position is to say wage floors should be set by government, but not at the federal level. “I think a minimum wage is a classic example of a policy that is best carried out in the states,” Fiorina said in April. Bush appeared to flirt with that position in March — but then, as he’s done so often, he walked back the statement. “I think state minimum wages are fine,” Bush said at a campaign stop in South Carolina. “The federal government shouldn’t be doing this.” Later he clarified that he merely opposed a federal increase.

Ethanol

No issue tests a presidential candidate’s mettle like ethanol.

On the one hand, it’s a central concern of Iowa voters, who exert clout disproportionate to their number in the primaries because of the “first in the nation” Iowa caucuses. Ethanol is derived from corn, which is derived, to a great extent, from Iowa, the top corn-producing state.

On the other hand, the environmental benefits of ethanol are judged dubious at best; a recent Web post from the Environmental Working Group argued that ethanol had an even worse effect on climate change than would the Keystone XL pipeline.

The $6 billion federal tax subsidy for corn-derived ethanol expired in 2011, but federal law requires that refiners blend into the nation’s fuel supply increasing amounts of biofuels (mostly ethanol and biodiesel, which is derived from various animal fats and agricultural oils), with a 2022 statutory target of 36 billion gallons.

Opposition to ethanol would seem a natural for conservatives, who frequently oppose environmental regulation. But the Iowa caucuses complicate that calculus, even for Republicans. Christie, who prides himself on plain speaking, suggested to Iowans in March that he’d leave the Renewable Fuel Standard be. Graham and Santorum favor the ethanol mandate, too. Carson said in Iowa in May that he favors more ethanol production, to be achieved by diverting $4 billion spent annually on oil subsidies to build ethanol stations.

Cruz stands out as the ethanol opponent who’s not afraid to say so to Iowa voters. “The answer you’d like me to give is ‘I’m for the RFS, darn it,” he said in March. “That’d be the easy thing to do. But people are pretty fed up with politicians that run around and tell one group one thing and tell another group another thing. Then they go to Washington and don’t do anything they said they would do. I’m going to tell you the truth.” The truth, in this instance, is that Cruz has already sponsored a bill phasing out the RFS over five years.

Bush, after some initial hemming and hawing, earlier this week told Iowans that he, too, would phase out the RFS. “The best way to get to energy security is by letting markets work,” he said. “RFS has had great success, but over time it has to be phased out.” Fiorina, Perry and Walker have said much the same, though Perry has softened his language since 2012.

Huckabee, meanwhile straddles the issue, the liberal Mother Jones reported gleefully in May. The magazine contrasted Huckabee’s anti-RFS language in his 2015 book (“so-called environmentalist policies hurt the poor when the supply of corn and other grains fell, causing skyrocketing food prices and shortages that led to riots”) with his response to a questioner saying, “You’ve been an unabashed supporter of the RFS.” Huckabee’s reply: “Yeah.”

The rest

Even when the GOP 17 agree, one can find differences worth noting.

On repealing Obamacare, most of the candidates have been vague about what they’d replace it with (“something terrific,” Trump said). Only Jindal offered up a truly fleshed out alternative. Jindal proposes providing states with $100 billion over a decade to devise their own health care systems with just one requirement: no discrimination against individuals with pre-existing conditions.

None of the candidates, with the possible exception of Trump, can be said to be pro-union, but Walker is the most virulently anti-union. “We took on the unions and won,” he said in his announcement speech, referring to his elimination of most collective bargaining for Wisconsin’s public employees and the state’s new right-to-work statute freeing workers from any legal obligation to pay dues to a union that bargains collectively on their behalf.

Walker is also the candidate most ardently opposed to gay marriage, favoring, along with Cruz, a constitutional amendment to reverse the Supreme Court’s recent decision to legalize it. Graham actively opposes such an effort, and most of the other candidates would just as soon avoid talking about it. Huckabee is an exception; he’s proposed something akin to the “massive resistance” campaign by segregationists after Brown v. Board of Education, in this instance directed not against school integration but gay marriage. Paul proposes that the government get out of the marriage business altogether.

CORRECTION: An earlier version of this story misstated the number of GOP presidential contenders that will likely say human activity causes climate change. Ohio Gov. John Kasich has also said so.

Adam Behsudi, Paul Demko, Toby Eckert, Alex Guillen, Jason Huffman, Brian Mahoney and Nirvi Shah contributed to this report.

CORRECTION: Corrected by: Kat Borgerding @ 08/06/2015 11:09 AM CORRECTION: An earlier version of this story misstated the number of GOP presidential contenders that will likely say human activity causes climate change. Ohio Gov. John Kasich has also said so.