One man was killed and a second man was arrested early Saturday morning after two suspects wanted in a road shooting incident tried to ram the officers, police say.

The names of the suspects have not been released.

“They were trying to ram the officers. Fortunately the two officers were not hurt,” said Jill McGranahan, Arvada police spokeswoman.

An argument between two groups of people broke out at the Hoffbrau Bar and Grill at 7699 W. 88th Ave. in Westminster at about 2 a.m., or closing time, McGranahan said.

Three men and a woman left the bar in one car and were headed west on West 80th Avenue near Pierce Street when they saw two men in a a silver Audi following them, she said.

Gunshots were fired from the Audi at the four people in the other car, McGranahan said. The victims called police and gave a description of the suspect’s car.

Police spotted the suspect car twice — once at West 66th Avenue and Iris Street and a second time at Oberon and Carr streets. The first time they did not chase the Audi because it was too dangerous. The second time Arvada police officers chased the car for about 30 blocks until the officers lost track of the Audi, McGranahan said.

“We have very specific rules of engagement,” she said. Officers repeatedly discontinued chases when it became too dangerous, she said.

At about 4 a.m., Arvada policemen spotted the Audi a third time at West 72nd Avenue and Miller Street. The suspects sped away in the car yet again, turning north on Miller Street, McGranahan said.

But Miller Street quickly dead ends there and the driver in the suspect car spun the vehicle around and sped directly towards two officers who had stopped at 72nd Avenue to block the suspect’s escape.

“They were coming head-on towards the police officers,” McGranahan said. “The two officers opened fire. Several shots were fired.”

Once again police lost track of the suspects because it was too dangerous to pursue them at the time, she said. Forty minutes later at about 4:40 a.m. police officers spotted the Audi with broken windows pulled over at West 62nd Avenue and Dover Street.

Four officers arrested the driver within further incident. The man had cuts from broken glass. The other suspect was dead in the passenger seat, McGranahan said.

“We don’t know if the officers shot the suspect or if he shot himself,” she said.

Independent investigators will review the shootings, she said.

Kirk Mitchell: 303-954-1206, denverpost.com/coldcases or twitter.com/kmitchelldp