Vaccination exemptions by school Boulder Valley Schools with highest personal exemption rate (for one or more vaccinations) Gold Hill Elementary, 82 percent BCSIS Elementary, 51 percent Jamestown Elementary, 50 percent Nederland Elementary, 31 percent Horizons, K-5 30 percent, 6-8 35 percent New Vista, 30 percent Nederland Middle, 24 percent Manhattan Middle, 21 percent Platt Middle, 18 percent Casey Middle, 15 percent District total, 12 percent St. Vrain Valley St. Vrain Community Montessori, 31 percent Lyons Elementary, 19 percent Central Elementary, 16 percent Lyons Middle, 13 percent Longmont Estates Elementary, 12 percent Niwot Elementary, 12 percent Olde Columbine High, 12 percent Westview Middle, 12 percent Hygiene Elementary, 11 percent Online Global, 10 percent District total, 7 percent Source: Boulder Valley and St. Vrain Valley school districts

The percentage of students who opted out of the state's school vaccination requirements based on parents' personal beliefs varies widely among area schools, leading health officials to warn that low vaccination rates can leave schools vulnerable to outbreaks.

In the Boulder Valley School District, exemptions for at least one of the required vaccines last school year ranged from a high of 82 percent at Gold Hill Elementary, a tiny mountain school, to 2 percent at Justice High, a charter school for at-risk students.

On the high end, two Boulder Valley elementary schools also had half their students exempted from at least one vaccine, according to district records.

In the neighboring St. Vrain Valley School District, St. Vrain Community Montessori had the highest exemption rate at 31 percent, followed by Lyons Elementary at 19 percent.

A new state law that went into effect this summer requires all licensed childcare centers and K-12 schools in Colorado to provide information on vaccination rates.

"It's a really powerful tool that helps parents become educated consumers," said Stephanie Wasserman, executive director of the Colorado Children's Immunization Coalition. "They can ensure their children are in the safest setting possible. People who don't vaccinate by choice tend to cluster. That amplifies their risk."

With the ongoing measles outbreak linked to Disneyland, local schools and districts are fielding parent calls about vaccinations.

In the first month of this year, 102 people from 14 states were reported to have measles, including one reported Colorado case in El Paso County.

Most of these cases were part of a large, ongoing outbreak linked to Disneyland in California, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The majority of the people who got measles were unvaccinated, according to the CDC.

A recent CDC report also found that Colorado kindergartners had the lowest vaccination rates for measles, mumps and rubella in the country — 81.7 percent — in the 2013-14 school year, according to federal data.

One reason is a high exemption rate, with parents claiming personal views in opposition to immunization programs. Colorado was one of 20 states in 2013 that allowed parents to opt out of shots required for school enrollment because of personal views.

Indira Gujral, communicable disease division manager at Boulder County Public Health, said low vaccination rates are concerning because it means that a population no longer has "herd" immunity. The vaccine itself isn't 100 percent effective, while children under a year and those with compromised immune systems aren't vaccinated, she said.

"It takes an immunized community to protect those who can't be vaccinated," she said. "The vaccine has become a victim of its own success. People have stopped vaccinating because they don't see the disease. What Disneyland has illustrated for us is that measles is still a threat."

She said parents considering vaccination rates in making school decisions should look for rates around 90 percent to 95 percent — 95 percent is the goal for measles, she said, because it's so contagious.

In local school districts, school health aides generally handle vaccination requirements and exemptions at schools.

In Boulder Valley, health services director Susan Rowley said health aides work with parents to who haven't turned in paperwork confirming all vaccinations and haven't signed an exemption form. In Boulder Valley, 6 percent of students fall in that "non-compliant" category.

In the 2012-13, Boulder Valley and St. Vrain Valley worked with the Boulder County Public Health to study the effectiveness of school outreach efforts in increasing rates of the DTaP vaccination for whooping cough.

School staff members contacted parents of kindergartners who were missing a shot or two in the five-dose series. As a result, the Boulder Valley kindergarten immunization rate for whooping cough increased by 11 percent.

At Horizons K-8, a Boulder charter school, health aide and principal's assistant Hope Nelson-Roohr said her job includes tracking down paperwork for parents who aren't compliant — they don't have proof that their children have received all the required shots, but they haven't signed exemption letters.

Generally, she said, those parents just haven't gotten paperwork to the school yet. For the 30 percent of elementary parents and 35 percent of middle school parents who have signed exemption letters, she said, "we just accept it and move on."

"It's not a lack of education," she said. "It's a choice that a parent makes."

Nelson-Roohr, who's been at Horizons since it opened in 1991, said she only remembers one instance some 20 years ago when a student at the school was diagnosed with measles.

In that case, she said, the school followed the direction of the health department and required unvaccinated students to stay home for a certain number of days.

At the 15-student Jamestown Elementary, health aide and principal's assistant Beth Brotherton said she encourages parents to get their kids vaccinated, handing out fact sheets in an effort to ease fears.

"I really encourage it," she said.

Though the district numbers show half of the school's students had an exemption from at least one vaccine last school year, she said she didn't think the numbers were accurate. This school year, she said, she only has one student with a personal exemption after a bad reaction to a vaccine.

"We have done a lot to educate parents," she said.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa