By of the

Despite a powerful market rise that has been going on for more than five years, some stocks have yet to reach their full potential.

Richard Lane, a Broadview Opportunity Fund portfolio manager, says he has identified one of them.

Lane has followed this stock for decades and bought it several times over a number of cycles. Now, he said, it is again time to invest.

"We're right in the sweet spot of the cycle," said Lane, who is also president of Broadview Advisors LLC, Milwaukee.

The stock Lane is referring to is MGIC Investment Corp. (MTG, $10.97). MGIC provides private mortgage insurance and related services. Borrowers who don't have a full 20% down payment buy mortgage insurance, which reimburses the lender if a homeowner defaults on a home loan.

Max Karl, MGIC's founder, invented private mortgage insurance in the 1950s, and the company has been an industry leader ever since, Lane said.

Lane said he sees three trends that MGIC should benefit from going forward.

■ A post-housing bubble. Congress is in the process of reforming Fannie Mae and other government-sponsored enterprises. As these reforms unfold over the next few years, it is clear that there will be opportunities for the mortgage insurance industry, Lane said.

One reform being discussed would involve a mandate for deeper mortgage insurance coverage, where the insurance would cover, for example, 30% of the loss in a default, rather than the 25% that is currently covered. "Obviously this would require a higher insurance premium, so it would be a big growth opportunity for the mortgage insurance industry," Lane said.

■ Even though the economy has been recovering since 2009, the housing cycle has lagged, Lane said.

Homeownership, job and wage growth and household formation, have all been slow to recover. Household formation, for example, has occurred at an annual rate of about 1.3 million over the last 15 years, Lane said. But it was so bad coming out of the 2008-'09 downturn that for many years there were only 500,000 to 600,000 formations, he said.

"But now that's changed, and the cycle for housing is finally starting to kick into gear," he said.

As job growth continues to improve, more first-time homebuyers — the biggest users of private mortgage insurance — should enter the market, he added.

■ Bad underwriting, inflated home prices and job losses that led to defaults all created a nightmare scenario for MGIC in the thick of the housing debacle. The company generated tremendous losses in the insurance it wrote between 2004 and 2008, Lane said. But the tighter lending standards that emerged from the housing crisis have provided MGIC with a high-quality book of business.

"MGIC has never had a book as bad as the old book that is running off, and never had a book as good as that new business that's been building," Lane said. "As the old book and the losses roll off, the new book will start to dominate the financial performance."

These improving credit trends have become more apparent in the last six to nine months, Lane said. Meanwhile, he says the icing on the cake is that as the positive housing cycle continues to evolve, there's a "reasonable chance" that MGIC's $2.5 billion of reserves against losses will prove to be excessive.

All of these trends have helped MGIC's shares attract more interest from institutional investors, Lane said. Another positive: The company's stock price recently moved into double digits, which will make more institutions take notice, he said.

The biggest risk here by far is the possibility of another economic downturn, Lane said. Another risk is that the industry could start to compete on price to gain market share, he said.

These shares have a 52-week range of $7.16 to $11.72, and could rise to $15 in the next 12 to 18 months, he said.

ABOUT THIS

The Journal Sentinel focuses on one Wisconsin money manager or analyst in this weekly feature, looking at a trend that helps investment pros make their decisions.