In his 11/17/13 Boulder Daily Camera Guest Commentary, Craig Shiesley, vice president of White Wave Foods, argues for mandatory, national GMO labels. Officially, this campaign is about "the right to know," but its real goals are (1) to stigmatize GM foods and thereby increase organic food sales and profits, including those of White Wave Foods, and (2) to transfer the substantial costs of labeling to taxpayers. Proposition 37, California's failed labeling proposition, would have cost every family $400/year!

During the past 15 years, the organic food industry has discovered that its incessant anti-GMO campaigns are its most effective tool for justifying the high cost of organic foods. The drive for mandatory GM food labels constitutes a logical extension of those campaigns. GMO labeling may increase the profits of Whole Foods, but would such a scheme bring any health benefits to consumers that would justify the costs associated with setting up a taxpayer-funded, massive, national labeling program?

Advertisement

During the past 20 years more than 2 billion people have consumed GM foods and not a single death has been reported. In contrast, during the past 10 years hundreds of people have died and thousands of people have been hospitalized after eating organic foods. Organic corn products have also been found to contain dangerous levels of fumonisin, a toxin known to cause spina bifida babies (google: spina bifida babies texas corn). In light of these health facts one has to wonder why GM food labeling is needed?

Anti-GMO experts like Charles Benbrook keep claiming "the science has not been done" when it comes to testing the environmental safety of GM crops and the health safety of GM foods. He clearly does not want to acknowledge the publication of 1,783 scientific studies that have addressed these questions between 2002-2012. The Italian scientists who reviewed these studies report that no significant problems were identified. The studies that claim that GM foods are dangerous are uniformly of poor quality. Nevertheless, those authors, the climate change deniers of biology, get equal time on TV. Note: The recently published French paper claiming that GM corn causes tumors in rats has been officially retracted by the journal.

Whole Foods has given itself 5 years to implement GMO labeling even though most of its suppliers are already organic producers. Why so long? Even for Whole Foods this is a complex and expensive undertaking. A mandatory, national GM food labeling program would be one hundred times more difficult to implement, considering that it would involve the tracking and segregation of all food products from all farms, big and small, all grain elevators, all food processors and producers, including all bakeries and candy makers, and all food distributors and sellers. Compounding the problem is the fact that 90 percent of our corn, sugar and soybeans are of the GM type, and wheat, and many vegetables and fruits will be added in the future. Labeling also requires tracking all derivative products such as corn oil, corn syrup, cornstarch, soy lecithin, as well as meats of corn-fed animals. Finally, how would we track products from other countries and enforce rules in developing countries?

The proposed national labeling scheme does not distinguish between crops with improved nutritional qualities such as Golden Rice or allergen-free soy products, fruits and vegetables "vaccinated" against viral diseases, corn resistant to corn borers, potatoes resistant to the Colorado potato beetle, and crops made drought or frost resistant. It also does not take into account that molecular biology techniques are evolving rapidly, and that there is no guarantee that today's laws will be relevant tomorrow.

Imagine the number of inspectors, laboratory testers, lawyers, administrators and enforcement officers needed to run a national GM food-labeling program. Will this new federal program be paid for by a national food tax? The costs of a national, mandatory GMO food program are much too high considering the lack of clearly defined health benefits. If you do not want to consume GM foods you can always buy certified organic products!

Andrew Staehelin is a professor emeritus of the Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology at UC Boulder