Buy Photo Brian Hercules (Photo: HELEN COMER/DNJ)Buy Photo

LA VERGNE — A Texas-based company will bring 120 white-collar jobs to Rutherford County, Tennessee Gov. Bill Haslam announced Tuesday morning.

“These are the types of jobs we are looking for,” said Brian Hercules, vice president of economic development, Rutherford County Chamber of Commerce.

The $2.9 million investment from Empyrean Benefit Solutions Inc. in a new customer service center in La Vergne plays perfectly into the Chamber and Destination Rutherford’s white-collar job recruitment strategy, Hercules said.

“Rutherford County is beginning to be seen as an opportunity by white-collar firms,” Hercules said, listing M-TEK and Schwan Cosmetics as recent wins for the county’s economy.

Empyrean chose La Vergne for this new facility because of its infrastructure, strength in medicine, education and attractive culture and lifestyle, said Richard Wolfe, Empyrean’s co-founder and CEO.

“The expansion allows Empyrean to provide services across multiple delivery centers and access talent to support demand for Empyrean’s technology and capabilities to manage health and benefits programs and the compliance requirements associated with ACA (Affordable Care Act) for employers, brokers, consultants and carriers,” he said.

The La Vergne facility is Empyrean’s secondary customer service center and will be used to serve new health care markets.

Destination Rutherford Chairman Bill Jones said he wasn’t surprised when the Houston-based benefits engagement technology and service company chose to locate the new jobs in La Vergne.

“We are thrilled to welcome this innovative company and congratulate them on their decision to add 120 jobs to our community,” Jones said.

No tax incentives were offered from the county to secure the new jobs, Hercules said.

“It means a great deal when a company chooses to start new operations in our state, and we look forward to building a strong partnership with Empyrean in the years ahead as we strive to make Tennessee the No. 1 location in the Southeast for high-quality jobs,” Haslam said.

The company created a client-adaptive technology platform to increase customer efficiency and reduce administrative costs. Empyrean is unique among leading benefit administration providers in assigning dedicated service teams to its clients.

The dedicated service model, which provides continuity from day one of the client relationship throughout its lifetime, fosters a close and enduring partnership and builds a deeper understanding of each client’s business objectives, plan design and operational processes.

Reach Michelle Willard at 615-278-5164, on Twitter @MichWillard or Rutherford County Business News on Facebook at facebook.com/DNJBusiness.

Read or Share this story: http://on.dnj.com/1TIBrTo