The Walter Soboleff Center has quickly taken shape on the corner of Front and Seward Streets downtown, filling in the space once known as “the Pit” with a three-story, contemporary building designed to serve as a Northwest Coast cultural center for Sealaska Heritage Institute.

Following the recent addition of 40-foot yellow cedar panels and large stretches of glass, the structure now looks fairly complete from the outside, less than 10 months after a groundbreaking ceremony was held on the empty lot where the center now stands.

Massive cedar beams above the entrances are reminiscent of the roofline of a traditional clan house, hinting at the building’s function as a Native art and culture center. And there’s much more to come, including exterior artwork that will be an unmistakable signal to visitors that the center’s purpose and contents are unique to Southeast Alaska.

Three major art pieces are planned for the building, each created by a Northwest Coast master artist (their names should be released within the month, according to SHI). Outside the building, two large carved Haida panels will flank the front entrance all the way up to the roofline. Inside, a 40-by-12-foot Tsimshian house screen will be installed in the multi-level atrium inside in the front entrance that will be visible from the street. Also inside, a contemporary Tlingit panel will anchor the building’s clan house on the first floor. These three pieces will honor the three indigenous cultures of Southeast Alaska and will represent major additions to the contemporary art on display in the capital city.

Though art and its creation is likely to be the most obvious access point for visitors, it is only one aspect of the Soboleff Center. The building will combine elements of a museum, library, performance space, art gallery, learning center, heritage center and a research facility. Each of these functions offers an opportunity for visitors to put the center’s artwork in context as part of a more complete picture of the cultures it honors and represents.

The first floor will hold a clan house, a gallery with reconfigurable walls and an expanded retail store, currently housed in the lobby of the Sealaska building, where Southeast Native artists can sell their work. During an early tour of the building Tuesday, SHI’s chief operating officer Lee Kadinger said the retail space is also a good location to help educate tourists and others about Northwest Coast art and SHI’s larger mission.

“We offer weaving classes, carving classes, skin sewing classes. Our goal is to perpetuate and enhance Northwest Coast art in addition to the culture, and it really brings our art programs full circle when we’re able to teach those classes ... and then provide a space for (artists) to sell those items,” Kadinger said. “Then those funds go back into teaching more youth and adults in the future.”

The first floor will also host an office for the center’s artist in residence, a new program SHI is excited about implementing, Kadinger said.

“They will have direct access to the collections space where they can go down and look at a clan hat or a war helmet from 200 years ago and have it inspire what they’re working on today,” he said.

Research facilities will be concentrated on the center’s lower level, where visitors will be able to study materials from the collections vault with help from the curator across the hall. SHI’s collection includes 1,000 art and ethnographic objects, a library of 2,500 books, more than 5,000 historical and contemporary audio and audiovisual recordings, and more than 60,000 historic photographs. Some of these materials are available online.

In addition, SHI’s collection of Tlingit, Haida and Tsimshian language recordings is the largest collection of its kind in the world, according to Kathy Dye, SHI’s media and publications director.Language revitalization is becoming more of a priority with so few speakers alive today. According to SHI, there are only 120 Tlingit speakers, 3 Haida and 10 Tsimshian.

Language revitalization is also one potential focus of the educational facilities on the second floor, where a large classroom space is being designed to support both on-site and distance learning through video feeds and other technology.

“We can do language classes in here and broadcast them out on the internet, maybe we could have a carving class or a skin sewing class that we broadcast out on the internet and whoever, wherever they are, they can tune in and follow along if they like,” Kadinger said.

This “living history” room will also likely be the spot for SHI’s Native lecture series, which they hope to expand from being held only in November to year-round. Like the center itself, the lecture series is designed to promote cross-cultural understanding of the indigenous cultures of Southeast Alaska.

The 30,000-square-foot building, named in honor of highly-regarded Tlingit elder Dr. Walter A. Soboleff, was designed by Juneau firm MRV Architects in conjunction with SHI and a panel of Native elders. It is being built by Dawson Construction and is projected to cost $20 million. A grand opening is scheduled for next spring.

To learn more, visit http://www.sealaskaheritagecenter.com.