The sleeping mats made up with sheets and warm blankets stretched through the gallery of the Heart of Longmont Methodist Church in four rows.

"Because of this shelter, all people who claim Longmont as their home have a safe place to sleep tonight," said Alice Sueltenfuss, program manager for HOPE, Homeless Outreach Providing Encouragement, on Christmas night.

The church opened its doors for "Room at the Inn" on Christmas Eve with a chili dinner, served breakfast, lunch and dinner on Christmas Day and provided a place to sleep again on Christmas night.

HOPE, Agape Family Services and Heart of Longmont Church, as well as volunteers and donors from across the community, put together the "Room at the Inn" program so that homeless people in a city without its own shelter would have a place to stay over the Christmas holiday.

David Hansen, left, and Tina McCraven, have Christmas dinner with her twin boys, Ben, left, and Nick Shier, 10, at a community meal served by Bridge House's Community Table Kitchen at the Lazy Dog Sports Bar and Grill on Pearl Street in Boulder. (David R. Jennings / Staff Photographer)

During the day, Hopelight Medical clinic provided wellness checks, while massage therapists and hairdressers offered their services to homeless guests.

"We wanted to give back together," said Diane Lovato, who, with her sister Audrey Lovato, spent two hours cutting hair at the church on Christmas. "It's no different than working with other clients. It's just talking to people, helping them feel comfortable and giving them what they want."

Don Tracy said he was grateful for the place to stay and for the Christmas fellowship.

"These people have been wonderful to put us up," he said over a plate of ham, potatoes and fixings. "This has been very nice. I went to a church service last night. My family is spread out all over the country, and I can't afford to travel to be with them."

Advertisement

Snow fell hard on Christmas night after a cold day.

"Other people wish for a white Christmas, but not us," said one homeless man stepping outside for a cigarette.

Reuben Ehiguese said he was glad to be inside.

"I'm happy here," he said. "Tomorrow, I don't know where I'll be."

Seagate Technologies donated $8,000 worth of coats, jeans and thermal underwear for the guests at Room at the Inn, while volunteers from St. John the Baptist and St. Francis of Assisi Catholic churches gave out gloves, hygiene items, laundry vouchers, hand warmers and gift cards.

Patricia Duran eats Christmas breakfast at Heart of Longmont Methodist Church. Duran was one of the roughly 50 people who enjoyed breakfast at the church as part of "Room at the Inn," which provided meals and shelter from Christmas Eve through Saturday morning. (Photos by David R. Jennings / Staff Photographer)

"People from all over Longmont called and offered to help," Sueltenfuss said.

In Boulder, roughly 300 people had a Christmas dinner prepared by participants in Bridge House's Ready to Work culinary arts training program, Community Table Kitchen.

"To me, it feels good to do something to help other people since I have been homeless myself," said Jose Salas, formerly of Longmont, in the bustling kitchen of the Lazy Dog Sports Bar and Grill on Pearl Street in Boulder. "Last year, I slept outside. I've been where I stand in line to be served. It feels good to be on this side."

Christmas used to find Salas huddled under a bridge or calling his adult children for money.

This year, he served platters of tri-tip beef, green beans, mashed potatoes and yams to others in need.

And with the earnings from his job as a trainee with the Community Table Kitchen program, Salas, who now lives in Bridge House's transitional housing facility in south Boulder, was able to send Christmas presents to his children and grandchildren.

Ready to Work provides job training, support for sobriety and life skills counseling to help people move out of homelessness and toward self-sufficiency.

The Christmas dinner was open to anyone in need.

"We expect to serve between 250 and 300 people," said Isabel McDevitt, executive director of the Bridge House. "It's a mix of regular clients, families and new people. It's an open community meal."

McDevitt said preparing a gourmet plated meal for such a large number of people is also good experience for the trainees.

Some trainees chose not to work the dinner in order to be with their families, McDevitt said, while others specifically wanted to work.

"People take a lot of pride in preparing good food for people in need," she said.

Guests lined up outside the Lazy Dog received a stocking as they entered, a warm boot sock filled with toiletries, hand warmers and, of course, the other sock to the pair.

The guests represented the diverse backgrounds and experiences of homeless people.

Dio Degraw, who has been a traveler for the last 10 years, said spending Christmas outside was "overwhelming" the first few years.

"After a while, it's just the passage of the seasons," he said. "In winter, you wear more clothes. In summer, you wear fewer clothes."

While Christmas is now "just another day" to him, he said he still appreciates a good meal in a warm place.

"I'm really grateful," he said. "It's really cool that they do this."

Tina McCraven's twin 10-year-old boys, Ben and Nick Shier, bounced in their seats and talked in sing-song voices about Christmas as they ate green beans and mashed potatoes. McCraven was evicted, and her family is living in a van as she tries to save up money for the deposit on a new apartment.

Christmas is hard, she said. In summer, the boys can play outside, but now it's cold, and keeping the van warm eats into her meager savings.

McCraven said she wanted to get a motel room for the boys for Christmas, but an ATM ate her card, and the bank isn't open.

"It's probably better not to get the room because we're trying to save for the deposit," she said.

McCraven and her husband, Dave Hansen, said it was a relief to come to the Christmas dinner both for the food and to relax a little inside. Though worry lined their parents' faces, the boys seemed immune to the setbacks.

"She cries all the time, but they think we're on a camping trip," Hansen said. "They don't need to have these worries in their heads."