Topics: Game of Thrones, hannibal, Mad Men, Masters of Sex, review, Rick And Morty, sherlock, The 100, The Good Wife, transparent, year in tv 2014, Entertainment News

Putting together a year-end list of the best shows of the year is both a critic’s rite of passage and a perennially nerve-racking experience. It’s thrilling to go back over the year and pick out the best moments to share with readers. But how do you narrow it down to just 10 shows? How do you compare a comedy like “Bob’s Burgers” with a drama like “Person of Interest”? And worst of all: What if you’ve missed something?

I did make a top-10 list, which you can see at the HitFix critics’ poll — a list I’ve been sketching out and expounding upon with more nuance for the Year in TV series. But while looking at shows as a whole is a fascinating process, one of the unique and frustrating elements of episodic television is that some half-hours are better than others. An outstanding episode can mean something more than a whole show, sometimes because it’s framed like a short film, and sometimes because it takes what the show does to a level the other episodes can’t attain. It’s the episode you recommend when you tell a friend, “You need to watch this show.”

In that spirit, I asked nine other critics to tell me a little bit about one of their favorite episodes of the year. Their answers come from Emmy-winning shows and from cult hits on late-night television, from 22-minute sitcoms to 90-minute miniseries installments. But they are all episodes to be remembered—and here’s why.



“Rick and Morty,” “Rixty Minutes”

The entire first season of Rick and Morty impressed me, but it was “Rixty Minutes” that blew me away and cemented the series as one of my new favorites. The centerpiece of “Rixty Minutes” isn’t the actual plot — there isn’t much of one — or the brilliance of using mindless channel surfing as a way to show the infinite number of alternate universes, the different twists and turns various members of the family could have taken. Instead, it’s a sweet but disturbing conversation between Morty and his sister, who just found out that in many of these alternate universes she doesn’t even exist. Morty reveals his own grave and “comforts” her by saying, “Nobody belongs anywhere. Everybody’s gonna die. Come watch TV.”

It’s a line that sneaks up and catches you off guard with its dark humor and brutal honesty — there is no better form of escapism than television, even when it gets a little too real — but it’s also representative of what made “Rick and Morty” one of the most unique series on television this year. — Pilot Viruet, Flavorwire

“The Good Wife,” “A Few Words”

Coming in the middle of its most flooring season to date, there was still something that felt almost impossible about “A Few Words.” “The Good Wife’s” strength has always been its narrative plate-spinning: somehow keeping half a dozen ongoing plots in motion each episode while dealing with a case of the week. “A Few Words” outdid even that by slowing everything down to focus on protagonist Alicia Florrick — both her personal evolution over five seasons and her tricky symbolism as a feminist role model — when she’s asked to deliver a keynote on her status as a mom who “opted out” of work before returning to the law.

“The Good Wife” grapples with bigger issues without sacrificing the dimensions of its characters better than any other show — we’re never lectured to. “A Few Words” arrives at its themes organically: Alicia realizing how beholden she is to the men in her life, wrestling with her privilege, and slowly awakening to the realization that she wants to control her fate. “A Few Words” serves as the crucial locus point between Alicia’s self-doubt and the more self-reliant path she had already embarked on, and it did that while being an incredibly compelling episode of dramatic television. — David Sims, the Atlantic





“Hannibal,” “Mizumono”

My God, this is an emotionally devastating episode of television. You might not think it possibly could be, considering it’s about a cannibal serial killer and the criminal profiler who loves/loathes him engaging in an elaborate game of cat and mouse, and you’ve seen that before. But there’s a point around the halfway mark of this episode where showrunner Bryan Fuller’s masterful design for his entire season snaps into place, and the show goes not just for broke, but for astonishing. Yes, the episode is remarkably plotted, leaving a surprisingly large number of cast members bleeding out on the floor of Hannibal’s posh mansion and packing one final surprise into a scene that comes after the closing credits. But as mentioned, “Mizumono” works so well because it’s a payoff to two seasons worth of buildup, the moment when the show’s emotionally rococo view of the universe fully flowers. Hannibal is, at its most basic level, about what it means for two men to have a deeply intimate friendship, where they know everything about each other. And that means that “Mizumono,” in which one of the two betrays the other, must necessarily be about the deep scars of heartbreak. Fuller and company make sure you feel every one of them. — Todd VanDerWerff, Vox

“Sherlock,” “His Last Vow”

“Holmes is as inhuman as a Babbage’s Calculating Machine, and just about as likely to fall in love,” Arthur Conan Doyle wrote in 1892, establishing the intentional omission of romantic desire in his detective’s personality profile. In 2014, “Sherlock’s” Holmes referred to love as an easily exploitable human error.

But in dismissing this inherently human emotion, Sherlock created a blind spot into which stepped a woman – John Watson’s new wife, Mary, played by Martin Freeman’s partner Amanda Abbington. In one thrilling scene, everything that occurred between “The Empty Hearse” and that heart-stopping moment in “His Final Vow” became mere distractions as sweet Mary’s unveiling invited viewers to reevaluate their own powers of deduction. Holmes’ initial appraisal told us, among other things, that she was a size 12 clever romantic who bakes her own bread, loves cats … and is a liar.

What else did we notice along the way? We saw what was genuine: her strength, quick intellect, and admiration for Sherlock matched her adoration of his best friend. Mary fit into Sherlock’s puzzle so beautifully that he didn’t let her go, even when a blackmailer shattered her genteel veneer. The “liar” designation became an afterthought until the writers made us realize it was everything. Knowing what the real mystery was made an encore viewing of Season 3’s episodes a differently satisfying experience. “His Final Vow” proved that the detective did love, in his way; so great is Sherlock’s affection for Watson that he was ready to sacrifice his freedom to protect Mary. — Melanie McFarland, IMDb





“Transparent,” “Symbolic Exemplar”

The ostensible theme of “Transparent” is transformation, and all season long, we watched the evolution of genders and individuals within one family. But what “The Symbolic Exemplar” examines with awe-inspiring focus is another of the show’s themes: expectations. Ali’s expectations for her date with a new man are so overwhelming that they affect what she perceives. Maura wants to be truly seen in her big moment in the talent show, but she’s terrified of making a fool of herself. Her children want to not be embarrassed by who Maura is in that moment, and they also want credit for merely showing up. What’s fantastic about the episode — and what’s heartbreaking about Maura’s kids giggling then slinking away during the performance of “Somebody That I Used to Know” — is the rigorous excavation of why every single person let everyone else down. Maura hasn’t been truthful about her identity for so long that deception is a reflexive habit for all the Pfeffermans. Confusion, pain and anger get in the way of each character’s expectations, and creator Jill Soloway depicts all these messy emotions without bitterness or an overdose of melodrama. The episode, which is anchored so beautifully by Jeffery Tambor’s depiction of Maura’s bravery, serves as the emotional heart of a series that brilliantly examines the cost of expectations and the painful necessity of evolution. — Mo Ryan, the Huffington Post