Omaha's busiest intersection is buzzing as the city’s first digital library is about to open its doors at 72nd and Dodge.

[Video: Do Space to be open to the public soon]

The DO Space will open to the public in November.

Like most libraries, the DO Space is nearly silent upon entry, but instead of books, Omaha's newest library is filled with all types of technology.

"Our goal is really to serve everyone in the community, whether they're beginners or advanced," Rebecca Stavick, DO Space Executive Director said.

There's one piece of the digital library Stavick said is unlike anything offered in the metro.

"This is a laser cutter, so this machine helps cut acrylic, glass, wood, metal," Stavick said, describing one of the DO Space’s 3D printers.

The 3D printing lab is set up to be easy to use. The public can submit an idea to the staff or choose from one of hundreds of pre-designed options. The only cost is the price of the materials used in printing. Stavick showed KETV NewsWatch 7 varying levels of 3D printers, from retail models to much more advanced machines.

After the printing process, the final step is soaking to remove support materials around the design. The staff will wear 3D printed jewelry at the DO Space opening in November.

Outside the 3D lab, the DO Space is filled with computers, tablets, e-readers and a wide range of computer programming and design tools. The space will also feature educational opportunities for a wide range of ages and needs.

The DO Space is funded all from private donations. Susan Morris with Heritage Services, which helped make the project possible, said the cost of remodeling the building alone was more than $5 million.

The project is funded for the next four years.

“A flexible four year operational plan is being designed, allowing time to explore community interests, adapt resources and services to new trends, and evolve based on ongoing evaluation,” Morris said.

Another focus of the project -- providing access to technology to everyone in the city.

"While its emphasis will be on the new and emerging digital world, this community offering will promote learning, reading and creativity to its large and diverse audience."

As for Stavick, the space is all about giving people a chance to ‘do’ something great.

"The question was how do we get more access to technology and tech education into the community?" Stavick asked. "Something like this really helps boost economic development … Do Space is about opportunity, and I just can't wait to see what Omaha's going to do with this space."

The grand opening will take place November 7th, with a ribbon cutting at 9 a.m., and activities for the families throughout the day.