Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg will be one of five to receive the Roosevelt Institute's Four Freedoms Award. View Full Caption Getty Images/Pablo Martinez Monsivais

UPPER EAST SIDE — The public will get the chance to see Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg as she's honored by the Roosevelt Institute at its Four Freedoms Awards ceremony later this month.

Ginsburg will be one of five people — alongside New York City Ballet's first African American male dancer, Arthur Mitchell, leading oncologist Dr. Olufunmilayo Olapade, civil rights activist Rev. Dr. William Barber and Katrina vanden Heuvel for The Nation, a progressive magazine — to receive an award from the institute at the St. James Church on Madison Avenue on Sept. 29.

Those who attend the open event could have a chance to meet the honorees, who will all be there in person to accept their awards, according to Chris Linsmayer, a spokesman for the institute.

Ginsburg, the second woman to be appointed to the U.S. Supreme Court, will be awarded the institute's Freedom Medal for championing fairness and equality for all, according to the institute.

Since 1980, the justice has had a role in deciding monumental cases like in Obergefell v. Hodges that made same-sex marriage legal in all 50 states, and King v. Burwell, which upheld a component of Affordable Care Act, among many others. Before she became justice, she served as the director of the Women's Rights Project of the American Civil Liberties Union in the 1970s.

The Freedom Awards are given to those who show a commitment to the principals that former President Franklin D. Roosevelt proclaimed in his speech to Congress in 1941: the freedom of speech and expression, the freedom of worship, freedom from want and freedom from fear.

The Roosevelt Institute, is a think tank centered on driving the economy and social debate. In the past, it has awarded leaders like Hilary Clinton, former President Harry S. Truman, Coretta Scott King and former South African President Nelson Mandela.

The ceremony will begin at 5:30 p.m. at St. James Church at 865 Madison Ave.

Those interested in attending should RSVP online.