Just when you thought he was dead, General Zod might be alive after all. Although it seemed Zod, played by Michael Shannon, was killed at the hands of Superman at the end of Man of Steel, Shannon recently shared some details that make it sound like his character will be revived in the upcoming film, Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice.

In the first trailer for Batman v Superman, in which Shannon reprises his former role, the general is briefly shown inside a body bag. While many expected this short appearance Zod’s only showing in the film, Shannon recently discussed a funny port-a-potty incident that indicates his role will go beyond a short, body bag cameo.

“I was in my costume, and I couldn’t use my fingers because in the sequel I have flippers instead of hands,” Shannon explained in an interview with Vulture. “So I had these wax flippers on my fingers, and I couldn’t open the door, and I could hear Zack [Snyder] being like, ‘Where’s Shannon? Where the [expletive] is he?’ and the whole crew was standing around. I was like, knocking on the door with my flippers, ‘Let me out of here!'”

The flippers are the really intriguing part of the tale. Is it possible Lex Luthor is experimenting on Zod’s body in order to create some sort of creature? While that is certainly a possibility, especially if Luthor plans to incorporate Zod in his Doomsday creation to finally kill off Superman, Shannon could just be referring to a special hand cover for some CGI.

Whatever the case may be, it is clear that Shannon’s role in the film is more than just lying around in a body bag.

Meanwhile, as production for Batman v Superman continues, it is clear Warner Bros. is putting a lot on the line in one film. In fact, according to Forbes, the success of Batman v Superman, which is scheduled to be released in 2016, will determine the future of many other projects Warner Bros. has slated to work on in the coming years.

That being said, Batman v Superman is not likely to be a bust in the box office, and, coupled with the release of the new Harry Potter prequel, Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them, Warner Bros. should be able to recover from a mediocre showing in 2015.

[Image courtesy of Warner Bros.]