Gov. Bill Haslam and Sen. Lamar Alexander (R-Tenn.) joined Marco Rubio at his rally in Knoxville Monday, both advocating on the Florida senator’s behalf before the presidential preference primary vote today.

"This is an election that we can and should win, but we only win if we nominate the right person," Haslam said Monday, according to Associated Press reporter Eric Schelzig.

Before this, Haslam filmed a campaign ad featuring his support for Rubio. Watch it here.

A Rubio campaign news release from Sunday held the following quote from Alexander:

Marco Rubio is the conservative candidate who can inspire us, win the election and lead our country. The stakes are high. If our nominee does not win, Hillary Clinton’s justices will control the Supreme Court for 30 years and we’ll be stuck with Obamacare forever. I have watched Marco up close. I have seen him take the lead in passing new laws to impose tough new sanctions on Hezbollah terrorists, and to get rid of incompetent managers who weren’t doing their jobs to help veterans. He has proposed good new ideas for giving students more options for college. I am convinced he would be a strong and effective president of the United States.

Sen. Bob Corker (R-Tenn.), however, chose not to voice his particular support of any Republican candidate before the Tuesday vote. The following statement was sent via email:

What you see happening around the country is the dissatisfaction voters have on both sides of the aisle with the fact that Republicans and Democrats have not stepped up to deal with the big issues facing our country. This election will be a wake-up call to both parties that we must finally take action to address the fiscal, economic and security challenges before us. While I am not endorsing a candidate at this time, I certainly plan to support the Republican nominee and believe the American voters will choose who they think is the best person to lead our country.

Rep. Scott DesJarlais (R-Tenn.) on Monday said he would be supporting Donald J. Trump for president. He was the first of Tennessee’s congressional delegation to do so.

Nooga.com reached out to other elected officials who represent Chattanooga on the national, state and local levels to see whom they are supporting. Below are the responses we received.

An official in Rep. Chuck Fleischmann’s (R-Tenn.) office released the following statement:

At this time, Congressman Fleischmann believes that there are strong candidates in the race and looks forward to supporting the Republican nominee.

Rep. Gerald McCormick (R-Chattanooga), House majority leader, said he was supporting Rubio:

I chose to endorse Marco Rubio because he has a proven track record of conservative leadership. Winning this election is crucial to preserve the future of our country and I feel that he has the best chance to defeat Hillary Clinton in November.

Councilman Moses Freeman emailed the following statement:

I am supporting Hillary Clinton. [She] is the only really qualified candidate in either party with experience and a real understanding of what the presidency is all about—the only grown-up in the race. I believe she is the only one who understands what is at stake and how best to approach the issues and the tasks at hand, both foreign and domestic. She is well-prepared to govern and manage and work with Congress to move our country in the right direction. She will be a levelheaded person and continue us on the path of greatness and unity; she is a force of light and not of gloom and darkness represented by all the others.

Councilman Chris Anderson released the following statement:

[On Tuesday], Tennessee Democrats face a major decision: Who should be our nominee for president of the United States? With demagogues like Donald Trump and Ted Cruz leading in the Republican name-calling contest, the stakes in November couldn’t be higher. For that reason and many others, I am endorsing Hillary Clinton for president and encourage everyone to vote for her on March 1 and again on Nov. 8. Secretary Clinton has worked for decades to support the working class, increase access to affordable medical care and keep our country safe from those who would do us harm. While several candidates this year have correctly identified the problems we as a nation face, I believe she is the best choice to actually offer workable solutions to them.

Spokespeople for Mayors Andy Berke and Jim Coppinger said neither made a public endorsement.