Mayor de Blasio admitted his Iowa presidential forum collapsed because no one wanted to go — but said his forays into national politics are far from over.

“It didn’t work because we reached out to the candidates, and they weren’t willing to participate,” de Blasio said Wednesday, a day after the Progressive Agenda Committee, the group he founded, canceled the candidate forum planned for December.

Democratic and Republican contenders were invited, but no candidate had committed publicly to attend.

De Blasio had looked to the forum as a way to gauge candidates’ commitment to fighting income inequality, but ended up endorsing Hillary Clinton before it happened amid disagreement within his own camp on whether he had waited too long.

De Blasio rejected criticism that his dabbling in national politics had backfired.

“I think people who say that are not exactly looking at the big picture,” he told reporters after marching in the Veterans Day parade, noting the political conversation has changed to focus much more on inequality over the last year.

“Democrats all over the country were not talking about income inequality. They were not willing to talk about taxing the wealthy. They were not willing to talk about Obamacare even — they tried to disassociate themselves from their own President and their own party,” he said. “A lot of us believed that had to change. I believe an amazing thing has happened in this last year.”

De Blasio said he and his progressive brethren had much more in store to fight for — federal policies to tax the rich and raise wages and benefits — though he did not specify what those events would be.

“We’ve got to change the debate, change political reality so we can get real changes in Washington that will benefit 8.5 million people here. And I’m going to keep doing that. The forum was one of many ideas,” he said.

“Fasten your seatbelts. Get ready for the long haul,” the mayor added.

“A lot of us — and I mean my fellow mayors, I mean members of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, I mean labor union leaders, faith leaders — we’re going to be working in every corner of this country to change this nation and to address income inequality. We are in this for the long haul,” he said.