Cost To Reach State's Uninsured: $156 Million

That's how much it's expected to cost to get the new federally mandated exchange, Access Health CT, up and fully running. The exchange began enrolling people Oct. 1, but the "build" of the system continues through this year as bugs are fixed and functionality is added.

An early start. A detailed plan. A staff and contractors who know what they're doing. Lots of public outreach.

What does it take to build a health insurance exchange that works?

Connecticut, like 15 other states and the District of Columbia, is building its own locally based exchange – the marketplace where the uninsured must enroll for coverage under the Affordable Care Act.

Multiply Connecticut's costs nationally, and you get an idea of how enormous the undertaking is.

The bill is being footed entirely by federal grants over 2012, 2013 and 2014. The exchange has to be completely self-sustaining – that is, free of reliance on the federal grants – by Jan. 1, 2015.

After that, AHCT's ongoing operations – estimated to be $35 million annually – will be funded by an assessment against all the health and dental plans written in Connecticut. AHCT will begin building reserves in 2014 with a 1.35 percent assessment to be paid by the insurance carriers.

Most of the grant money – roughly $138 million – is going to contractors who are developing the computer system at the heart of the exchange and marketing it to Connecticut consumers. Another $14 million is being spent on salaries and benefits. All of the expenses are for the three years of the federally-funded "build."

AHCT currently has the equivalent of 88 full-time employees. The highest paid - at $225,000 a year - is CEO Kevin Counihan, according to documents.

Supporters of health care reform acknowledge that $156.3 million is a lot of money – about $460 for each of the 337,337 uninsured Connecticut residents that the new system is designed to cover. But no one has ever tried to create a system like this and startup costs are naturally high, they say. Constant changes in federal rules and requirements also drove costs up.

The goal is quality health care that costs less and is accessible to all, said State Sen. Terry Gerratana, D-New Britain, co-chair of the General Assembly's Public Health Committee. It's a long road, and the exchange is only one step in it, she said.

This step, she said, is about making sure everyone is covered. "This is not health care reform. This is insurance reform," she said. "This is an evolution."

Ellen Andrews, executive director of the Connecticut Health Policy Project, has doubts. "It is a great deal of money – maybe too much money," she said. She worries that the exchange will become a burden on health and dental insurance providers when the federal grants end. That, she noted, could result in higher premiums for everyone.

State Sen. Kevin C. Kelly, R-Stratford, ranking Republican on the General Assembly's Insurance and Real Estate Committee, questions AHCT's priorities. The marketing money includes more than $75,000 for three community murals commissioned by AHCT to raise awareness about the new law and health care choices.