Health care law compliance complex for employers

Employer mandate • Starting Jan. 1, employers with more than 100 full-time equivalent workers will face penalties if they do not offer affordable coverage to employees who work at least 30 hours per week. Part-time employees working less than 30 hours per week do not have to be covered, but their hours are used in calculating the total number of full-time employees. • The annual penalty is $2,000 per full-time equivalent, or FTE, if any employee qualifies for a federal premium subsidy from HealthCare.gov. • Employers must provide “minimum value” insurance (covering at least 60 percent of costs) and the insurance must be affordable, defined as being no more than 9.5 percent of an employee's income. If those thresholds are not met, the employer pays a $3,000 penalty per FTE that receives a federal subsidy. • Employers with 50-99 full time equivalent employees will be subject to the penalty in 2016. Related Stories • Underestimated income to cost insured workers • GAO warns of health site weaknesses Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Karen Bolden has questions about Obamacare. Deciding whether to keep health insurance for her company's employees isn't one of them.

“We think it's important for our team members to have health care,” said Bolden, who oversees human resources at the Eat'n Park Hospitality Group.

Whether to offer insurance isn't the biggest issue for many large employers as they prepare for the health care law's employer mandate. Beginning Jan. 1, companies that employ at least 100 full-timers must provide health insurance or pay a penalty of $2,000 per employee.

Most large companies already offer coverage as a benefit to attract the best workers — and say they will continue. For some, the cost of providing coverage is an added burden. But what's vexing for many are the requirements for ensuring that they comply with the law.

“The record keeping is a bit of a nightmare,” said Greg Maras, vice president of human resources at Meadville Medical Center, a hospital in Crawford County that employs 1,400 full- and part-time employees.

Burdensome calculations

The requirement that companies with more than 100 full-time workers provide insurance coverage isn't simple.

Companies must count the hours of seasonal and part-time workers to see how the law applies to them. For example, a company with 90 full-timers will have to offer coverage to those workers if the number of hours worked by part-timers is the equivalent of 10 full-time employees. Separate companies, no matter how small, would have to offer coverage if they have shared ownership and their combined staffs add up to the equivalent of more than 100 full-time employees.

Many see the calculations as burdensome — especially industries that rely on part-timers and seasonal workers. They will have to “look back” and report their staffing and employee hours each year to the Internal Revenue Service, which enforces the mandate that large employers provide coverage or pay a penalty.

“Especially in a retail setting, it's going to be a huge task,” said Diane McClune, vice president of operations for Pittsburgh Business Group on Health, based in Ambridge.

“It's an unbelievably complicated formula.”

Companies say health benefits are important to recruiting and retaining staff. A majority of companies in a survey by the International Foundation of Employee Benefits Plans — 94 percent — said they would “very likely” continue their health benefits plans when the mandate takes effect. Fewer than 1 percent said they would drop coverage.

Preemptive action

But some companies have taken preemptive steps because of concerns about the cost of complying with the law.

Wal-Mart, for example, is dropping coverage for part-time employees and raising premiums. The law doesn't require companies to provide coverage for part-timers — those who work less than 30 hours a week — but individuals who don't have coverage would have to pay a penalty. Because of the penalty, Wal-Mart saw a surge in its uninsured workers signing up for company coverage.

To avoid responsibility for providing health insurance coverage or to curtail costs, other employers are reducing employee hours to less than 30, shifting low-wage workers to Medicaid or holding open vacant positions to keep their full-time workforce below 100.

Mad Mex restaurant chain, which has seven locations in Pittsburgh, is one of the companies that has clamped down on employee hours. It has asked workers to decide whether they want to work full-time or part-time hours.

“We've really pushed people to go one way or the other,” said Bill Fuller, corporate chef for Mad Mex. Figuring out who is full time and who is part time is part of “an ongoing conversation,” he added.

Mandate delayed

The time that benefits managers have spent understanding the law has been immense, said Marisa Warford, director of human resources consulting for Sagewell Partners, a North Shore benefits consulting firm. Companies say they will be ready come January, but the hard work won't be finished.

The mandate was originally scheduled for this year, but employer concerns over meeting the reporting standards led the Obama administration to push the deadline back to 2015. Mid-sized companies with 50 to 100 full-time workers have until 2016, but must still track the hours and level of coverage for eligible employees before then.

MarcUSA, an advertising agency in Station Square, didn't have to change its plan to meet the law's requirements, said C.J. Kealey, vice president and director of benefits. But she has spent a lot of time preparing for the paperwork involved.

“My remaining concerns are just the reporting issues and what we need to do to get that infrastructure in place,” Kealey said.

No one expects reporting systems to be completely smooth when January comes, said Warford, of Sagewell Partners.

“Even though there's some uncertainty around the reporting, it's do the best you can,” Warford said.

Cadillac tax

Companies have relied on insurance brokers or benefits consultants to help them prepare. The biggest concern for Maras, at Meadville Medical Center, is three years away.

Meadville offers health insurance that is considered “too rich” by the law's standards. That means the hospital will have to pay an excise tax, commonly known as the “Cadillac tax,” in 2018.

The tax is imposed on the value of health insurance benefits exceeding a certain threshold — estimated at $10,200 for individuals and $27,500 for family coverage.

Meadville's insurance, which has no deductible, would be considered a Cadillac plan, subjecting the hospital to a tax of more than $1 million on top of the $16 million it spends annually on health insurance, Maras said.

“The bottom line is that we're being penalized,” Maras said. “We've been able to keep our costs down. And it's because we're doing everything right, and now we're going to be penalized.”

There's a lot that could change before 2018, especially with a presidential election in 2016. But smart companies are preparing.

“You can't put your head in the sand,” Warford said. “You have to plan for it.”

Chris Fleisher is a Trib Total Media staff writer. Reach him at 412-320-7854 or cfleisher@tribweb.com.