Under the Radar Blog Archives Select Date… April, 2016 March, 2016 February, 2016 January, 2016 December, 2015 November, 2015 October, 2015 September, 2015 August, 2015 July, 2015 June, 2015 May, 2015

Appeals court voids gag order in coal executive’s trial

A federal appeals court Thursday overturned a judge's order gagging participants in the trial of a former coal mining executive facing criminal charges in connection with a 2010 mine disaster that killed 29 people in West Virginia.

The judge was acting at the request of five media organizations.

The 4th Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals said the order issued by U.S. District Court Judge Irene Berger in connection with the prosecution of former Massey Coal CEO Donald Blankenship ran afoul of constitutional guarantees of public access to criminal proceedings.

"Although we commend the district court’s sincere and forthright proactive effort to ensure to the maximum extent possible that Blankenship’s right to a fair trial before an impartial jury will be protected, we are constrained to conclude that the order entered here cannot be sustained," a three-judge appeals court panel said in an order issued Thursday morning (and posted here).

The initial version of Berger's order barred access to virtually all court filings in connection with the case. After news organizations objected, she modified it slightly to allow access to docket entries but not the underlying filings. She left in place the ban on public comments by the parties.

The 4th Circuit panel order was issued by judges Roger Gregory and James Wynn, as well as Senior Judge Andre Davis. None took authorship of the court's brief ruling.

Berger indicated that the unusual secrecy measures were needed to make sure a fair jury could be selected in the small city of Beckley, W. Va. where the trial is set to take place.

Blankenship's lawyers have asked for a change of venue and had urged the appeals court to put off a ruling until that issue was decided.

Federal prosecutors told the appeals court the order was not necessary to ensure a fair trial in the case.

Berger, Wynn and Davis are appointees of President Barack Obama. Gregory was appointed to the 4th Circuit on an interim basis by former president Bill Clinton and re-appointed by former president George W. Bush.

The Wall Street Journal, the Associated Press, the Charleston Gazette, National Public Radio, and West Virginia Public Broadcasting filed the legal challenge to the judge's order. A slew of other news organizations signed-on to an amicus brief urging the appeals court to step in.

Josh Gerstein is a senior reporter for POLITICO.