Three takeaways the morning after the Nuggets’ 110-101 loss to Cleveland at the Pepsi Center on Friday night.

1. Point guard depth. After the game, Nuggets coach Brian Shaw said the concern level at his backup point guard depth is “high” on days when starter Ty Lawson can’t play, like on Friday night against Cleveland. But he in fact ought to be encouraged by the play he got from the players at the position. Led by Randy Foye’s 28 points and nine assists, Nuggets point guards scored 48 points and dished out 15 assists against the Cavaliers. The trio of Foye, Nate Robinson and Erick Green shot 19-of-36 from the field (52.7 percent) and 7-of-17 from the 3-point line (41.1 percent). They were the lead players in what was by far the Nuggets’ best shooting game of the season as a team — and had just four turnovers. The Nuggets’ offensive execution had its best day of the season. There hasn’t been a more calming game as it relates to what the Nuggets are doing behind Ty Lawson, in fact, than this one.

2. Chandler through a whole game. The last two games have been Wilson Chandler’s best of the season — 13 points and two assists in the loss at Sacramento on Wednesday, and his first double-double of the season of 14 points and 10 rebounds on Friday against Cleveland. After struggling in the first few games, Chandler has bounced back to gain a foothold in getting his shooting back on track. The next thing for him is to put two full halves together. Of his 14 points and 10 rebounds against Cleveland, he had 10 points and nine rebounds in the first half, but just four points and one rebound in the second. Chandler shot 4-of-5 from the field and 2-of-3 from the 3-point line in the first half, but just 1-of-5 from the field and 0-of-4 from 3-point line in the second. On Wednesday, he had all of his 13 points and two rebounds in the first half, and went 0-for-3 from the field in the second. So while Chandler is headed in the right direction, he still has more room to grow.

3. Defending without fouling. This has easily become the most alarming part of the Nuggets early season. Cleveland shot 33 free throws on Friday night, and had that team — which led the NBA in free throw percentage coming into the contest — not uncharacteristically missed a good number of them for much of the game, the Nuggets would have paid for it even more than the 24 the Cavs made.

But think about this: During this four-game losing streak, the Nuggets have been outscored by a hefty 47 points from the free throw line. They’ve lost these four games by a total of 47 points. Their opponents have taken 161 total free throws in this span, an average of 40.3 per game. Looking for the biggest reason for the Nuggets’ 1-4 start? This is it.

Christopher Dempsey: @dempseypost or cdempsey@denverpost.com