Managers and employees spend dozens of precious hours each year completing performance reviews.

Yet this uncomfortable annual dance often brings few results other than some employees feeling stepped on, critics say.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

The feeling of dread doesn't stop at the cubicles, either. A Society for Human Resource Management survey found that only 5 percent of employees were satisfied with reviews, and a report by Sibson Consulting found that 58 percent of human resources managers disliked their own systems.

"Conventional reviews just don't work," Tulsa human resources consultant Kevin Kennemer said. "Most of them are broken."

"You need buy-in," said Harvard Law School lecturer Douglas Stone. "If people are getting upset, the process probably is not working well."

"You don't need 30 pages of paper to do an effective review," author Sheila Heen added.

Annual reviews date back to the 1930s when large companies such as Western Electric sought to boost productivity. The federal government got into the act in 1950, using once-a-year assessments to determine raises and bonuses.

For decades afterward, reviews didn't change much. Typically, supervisors would complete forms filled with boxes to be checked. Ratings were given generally focusing on whether a worker "met standards" or not.

This process often resulted in the employee being given a number between 0 and 4 or 5 that was supposed to reflect his or her performance for the year. A cursory talk with a manager, who usually read the report to the worker, ended the ordeal.

Recently, though, annual reviews have been changing. Some companies have tossed their yellowing templates for a new system that combines coaching and mentoring and puts the emphasis on building better teams rather than turning employees into a number.

For one thing, reviews don't always come at year-end and aren't strictly annual.

"A lot of companies are moving reviews to the first quarter or summer," Kennemer said. "Some are doing them every three months."

Whatever the case, the goal now is to encourage managers and subordinates to talk every day, with the annual or quarterly sessions reserved for spotting trends, generating ideas and looking at the big picture.

If supervisors are coaching their teams every day, "there shouldn't be anything surprising in the reviews," said Heen, co-author with Stone of "Thanks for the Feedback" (Viking, $27.95).

"Really, the idea is that there's a shared responsibility between the manager and the worker to improve," she said.

Kennemer, founder of the Tulsa-based People Group HR consulting firm, agreed.

"The old way of management was top-down, telling the employee what to do," he said. "The new way involves more teamwork and giving employees feedback on how they are doing their job day-to-day and how they can improve."

The modern review system

Heen said a modern review system should focus on three topics: evaluation, coaching and appreciation.

"You should fit everything you need to put in writing on one sheet of paper," said Heen, who also is a Harvard lecturer.

Managers should bring the review document with a copy for the employee, along with any other applicable records such as feedback given during the year and any notes from customers or awards.

Kennemer suggested that some good questions would include:

How do you feel you are doing in your job?

What do you need from the company?

What were your major accomplishments during the year?

What are your goals in the coming quarter?

What tasks do you think you do well?

In what areas would you like additional training and coaching?

As far as evaluation, employees should be given one or two goals to work on, Heen said. Some coaching can be done in evaluations, but this should actually be an ongoing process.

Appreciation should be given for anything the employee truly is doing well. Companies tend to skimp on thanking employees, though.

"Managers should not be afraid to do this," Heen said. "What a good employee wants to hear are things like, 'You matter around here' and 'We appreciate you.' "

The supervisor-employee talk should take place in a conference room or another "neutral" location outside the manager's office. Allow at least an hour so the conversation isn't rushed. Don't permit interruptions.

Stone dislikes the idea of using a numbering system to sum up an employee's performance during the year. With different supervisors doing the rankings, it can be hard to compare workers effectively.

The Harvard educator also opposes tying bonuses to annual reviews.

"This can increase employee frustration," he said. "If you are going to give an employee an extra $1,000, make it a permanent part of his or her annual pay. Don't just tack it on as a bonus based on a formula."

Some companies have used a bell curve for appraisals. General Electric, under management guru Jack Welch, was famous for its system where the top 20 percent of employees were rewarded, the middle 70 percent were coached on how to get better in key areas and the bottom 10 percent were fired.

Problems with that system, critics say, were that management is assuming it has 10 percent deficient employees and only a slightly larger percentage that are good enough for financial recognition.

Heen said she's not a fan of numbers, either.

"As an employee, you can go though the whole review process and come out focused on the number you've been labeled with, not your feedback," she said,

"If a staffer gets a 3.2, for example, he or she is just going to go to her friends and say, 'What did you get? A 3.6? A 3.8?' "

And often where raises are tied to numbers, the difference between a 3.2 and 3.8 may not be substantial.

Review process evolving

Some companies that didn't give raises for a few years after the Great Recession of 2009 also dispensed with performance reviews. The notion was that the review process, without the carrot of a salary increase at the end, wasn't worth the considerable effort involved for both supervisors and employees.

Any business that did this made a big mistake, Heen said.

"They really penalized employees twice," she said. "First, there was no raise. And, second, the employees likely would have benefited from an extended talk with their supervisors."

Some companies, raises or not, have abandoned annual evaluations. Software giant Adobe has given up the hated checklists. The key, observers say, is that they have replaced formal reviews with more frequent one-on-one coaching.

"We abolished our annual performance review in favor of lighter-weight check-in conversations that center on ongoing feedback," Donna Morris, Adobe senior vice president, wrote in a blog post last year. "We don't have labels, a formal tool or prescriptive time of year it all has to happen 혰 we just ask people to have conversations."

Other companies are switching to what seems to be evolving as the modern style of evaluation 혰 a brief written document, followed by a one-on-one talk, done preferably more than once a year.

Also gaining in popularity is the 360-degree review, where a manager is reviewed by his or her boss, assesses staff members who also provide feedback and, in addition, does a self-evaluation.

No matter what the strategy, the key to success is to get managers and employees working closely as a team, with daily coaching in between formal reviews.

"The main thing is to encourage quality conversations," Heen said.

Performance reviews by the numbers

93: Percent of companies who use annual performance reviews

6: Percentage of those who would consider dropping them

98: Percent of staffers who think formal assessments are unnecessary

5: Percent of employees who are usually satisfied with reviews

Sources: Society for Human Resource Management, Sibson Consulting, HR magazine, Globoforce/SHRM; Psychological Bulletin.

Companies: Review your evaluation system

Businesses may want to apply the same process to their annual review system that they do to employees themselves. Is what they have working? Can it be improved? Here are some questions to aid in the effort.

1. How long has it been since the review system was evaluated and/or updated? Current thinking about the evaluation process is substantially different than just a few years ago. HR managers may even want to bring in a consultant to get new ideas and an independent look at the system.

2. Is the written part of the process concise? One page is enough.

3. Is the process designed for the key portion to be a one-on-one conversation between the manager and employee? Most of the good of the review will come from this section, experts say.

4. Are supervisors encouraged to coach employees on a daily basis year-round? If there are areas a worker can improve on, managers should not wait months to bring them up.

5. Are managers encouraged to praise and thank workers? Such positive feedback can be as effective as criticism and motivate employees to even higher levels of productivity.

Sources: Douglas Stone, Sheila Heen, Kevin Kennemer, MIT Human Resources

How to receive feedback

No method of helping employees improve will succeed if the individuals do not accept that feedback well, a national researcher says.

Douglas Stone, co-author with Sheila Heen of the new book "Thanks for the Feedback," said attitude makes a big difference.

"Employees need to look at feedback as a gift," he said in a telephone interview. "It's something that hopefully their managers are giving them every day."

The subtitle of his book is, "The Science and Art of Receiving Feedback Well, Even if it Is Unfair, Poorly Delivered, and Frankly, You're Not in the Mood."

Some managers avoid giving constructive feedback because employees never seem to be in the right mood, but Stone said nothing is gained this way.

"Supervisors need to be straight with workers 혰 not harsh or angry," he said. "But they need to be clear and forceful about their feedback and not pull any punches."

Workers, at the same time, need to be open to hearing how they can do better, even if it is hard on the ego.

First, Stone said, individuals need to recognize that different people receive the same feedback differently.

"At the biological level, we're all wired differently," he said.

Some people take negative feedback well; others can be defensive or dismissive. Understanding your personality type can help you get the most from coaching, he said.

Second, all individuals should realize they have blind spots. There may be weaknesses or behaviors noted by a supervisor that the person just can't see. In this case, Stone said, it can be helpful to talk to a few friends or peers to get other opinions.

Third, individuals may want to record a routine meeting they participate in to see how their behavior and tone of voice really sounds. Is if often negative or defensive? The results may surprise them, the author said.

"The bold-faced benefits of receiving feedback well are clear: Our relationships are richer, our self-esteem more secure, and, of course, we learn 혰 we get better at things and feel good about that," Stone and Heen write in their book.

"And, perhaps most important to some of us, when we get good at receiving feedback, even our toughest interactions come to feel a little less threatening."