Out of the loop today? We've got what you missed. (Photo: Jack Gruber, USA TODAY)

We won't know the fate of Obamacare for months, but we got a glimpse of its future today

The opinions of Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Anthony Kennedy will likely decide the fate of Obamacare. Today at the Supreme Court there were tense, heated arguments over the Affordable Care Act. The packed room watched anxiously for clues about how the justices were leaning, and those in attendance were able to get a read on everyone but poker-faced Roberts and hard-to-pin-down Kennedy. The case is the most serious obstacle to the Affordable Care Act since 2012 — more serious than its occasionally balky website, wavering public opinion ratings or Republican opposition in Congress. Today's case is narrow (unlike the one argued three years ago) and boils down to a fight over four words in the law: "established by the state." It could affect the tax credits used by millions of Americans to pay insurance premiums — more on that here. Here's a look at the case by the numbers. We'll likely learn the court's decision by the end of June.

What else is in #TheShortList:

• 'It was him:' Dramatic opening in Boston bombing trial

• No charges for ex-Ferguson cop Darren Wilson

• Battleship, found! Billionaire says he's solved a WWII mystery

• A-Rod takes the field to a round of applause

Tsarnaev's lawyer admits he carried out Boston bombing

The court of public opinion pretty much convicted him in 2013. Today, even his lawyer bluntly said, "It was him." The question for jurors seems to be, should Dzhokhar Tsarnaev live or die? The 21 year old went on trial today in Boston, which is still aching from the attack on its beloved Boston Marathon. The trial is expected to take several months and is the most-watched terror case since the Oklahoma City bombing trial nearly 20 years ago. Dzhokhar is accused of carrying out the attacks with his older brother, Tamerlan, who died in a shootout with police days after the bombings. Dzhokhar's attorney argued Dzhokhar fell under Tamerlan's evil influence, but prosecutors say he was an equal participant who acted of his own free will. Boston wants closure. The victims — three people were killed, and more than 260 were hurt — want justice. (Many of them were in the courtroom today, choking back tears.) And America is #BostonStrong.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Here are the facts in the case against Boston Marathon Bombing suspect Dzhokhar Tsarnaev.

It's official: Justice Department won't charge ex-Ferguson cop Darren Wilson

The Justice Department won't bring criminal charges against former Ferguson, Mo., police officer Darren Wilson, who fatally shot black teenager Michael Brown in August. The decision, outlined in a 86-page memorandum made public today, says Wilson, who is white, acted in self-defense. Officials had signaled weeks ago that prosecution was not likely. But its separate examination of overall police operations found rampant evidence of racial bias in a department that long ago lost the public trust of its African-American residents. Among the most serious findings: In nearly 90% of cases in which use of force was documented, those actions were used against blacks. Here's a look at what could happen next in Ferguson.

Darren Wilson during his medical examination after he fatally shot Michael Brown, in Ferguson, Mo. (Photo: AP)

Microsoft co-founder: I found sunken Japanese battleship

There's one less mystery of the deep. The Musashi was considered one of the world's largest and most technologically advanced warships when it sank off the Philippines during World War II. Nearly half the crew of 2,399 Japanese sailors lost their lives when the ship went down under a barrage of 19 torpedoes and 17 bombs from the Americans on Oct. 24, 1944. It's been missing ever since — until now. A research team led by Microsoft co-founder and philanthropist Paul Allen found it, according to the expedition's website. Using an underwater vehicle, the team found the Musashi on Sunday in the Sibuyan Sea. Allen said he respects the area as a war grave and plans to work with the Japanese government "to ensure the site is treated respectfully and in accordance with Japanese traditions."

This picture taken on Oct. 24. 1944, shows Japanese battleship Musashi, which sank in the Sibuyan Sea in the Philippines after coming under blistering U.S. air raids. (Photo: Jiji Press, AFP/Getty Images)

Fallen Yankees star Alex Rodriguez back in the game after 505 long days

Alex Rodriguez last saw a pitch from an opponent in 2013. Since then, he's had a tumultuous journey through the Biogenesis scandal. There's been personal and legal strife between player and team. A-Rod and the Yankees need each other, and today, when the fallen star stepped up to the plate at George M. Steinbrenner Field in Tampa, fans gave him a hearty cheer. A hit, a single, not to mention the generally positive reception from the crowd, will certainly make A-Rod feel good after being gone from the game for so long. But it indicates nothing meaningful beyond that he's still healthy enough to swing a bat and jog to first base. By game's end, he grounded out and walked before leaving in the sixth inning.

What else is on our reading list today:

• China is easing its infamous 'one-child' policy

• Prospective GOP candidate Ben Carson says being gay is a choice, citing prisons

• Storm to dump snow from Texas to Northeast and airlines cancel hundreds of flights

Extra Bites:

This photo made us do a double-take. More of today's top shots in the Day in Pictures.

A member of the Sotheby's auction house gallery team poses with "Table Sculpture" by Allen Jones (estimated sale price $610,000 to $920,000), one of the items on display ahead of the " Bear Witness" sale at Sotheby's in London on March 4, 2015. Hundreds of pieces of modern art acquired by a single anonymous collector over many decades will be auctioned March 10-12. (Photo: Leon Neal, AFP/Getty Images)

Live long and prosper: Canada's central bank is urging citizens to stop drawing on their $5 notes as a tribute to Leonard Nimoy.

There, I just Spocked up my fiver. LLAP, people. #SpockingFives#Spocking#LLAP#Canadapic.twitter.com/Ini9KSq0ot — Christine Estima (@christineestima) March 4, 2015

"Don't run into our car!" A buffalo did just that at Yellowstone National Park.

All aboard for a good Putin Photoshop! Our favorite #weaselwoodpecker memes. And of course, no celeb is safe from the fun.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share John Travolta, Miley Cyrus and Madonna are just a few of the celebrities that fell victim to the #weaselpecker memes, after an amateur photographer captured a rare photo of a weasel riding a woodpecker Sierra Oshrin

These 11 profitable companies didn't pay any U.S. taxes. Wait, what?

You need to download Vince Vaughn's silly new stock photos. Or you can just swipe through them, below.

Curt Schilling on vile tweets to daughter: 'This wasn't a mistake. This is a crime.'

Stories you're clicking on today:

Supreme Court closely divided on Obamacare's future

Stocks fall for second day in a row

Chip Kelly's next bold move could be for Marcus Mariota

World's oldest person celebrates 117th birthday

More than 200 skeletons found below Paris store

Are you as ready for spring as we are? Add YOSPRING on the Yo app, and we'll count down to March 20 together.

Want The Short List in your inbox each day? Sign up here.

This is a compilation of stories from across USA TODAY.

Contributing: Richard Wolf, Brad Heath, Kevin Johnson, Yamiche Alcindor, Doug Stanglin, USA TODAY; Ted Berg, Paul White, USA TODAY Sports; G. Jeffrey MacDonald, Special for USA TODAY; Associated Press

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1BISYUt