“I think that you can’t start to pick apart anything out of the Bill of Rights without thinking that it’s all going to become undone. If you take one out or change one law, then why wouldn’t they take all your rights away from you?” — Bruce Willis

— Audit the Fed: Sen. Rand Paul (R-KY) is out with a new, short video explaining the need to cut through the “veil of secrecy” surrounding the Federal Reserve. “[W]hen trillions of dollars change hands, wouldn’t you want to know who got the money and did anyone enrich themselves in the process?” asks Paul. “This is money that is being doled out in secret by our central bank.” Paul has introduced legislation — Federal Reserve Transparency Act, also known as “Audit the Fed” — that would expose the central bank’s transaction to much-needed oversight. To this point, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (R-NV) has refused to bring it for a vote.

— Greg Brannon leads Kay Hagan: Rasmussen released a new poll out of North Carolina yesterday showing House Speaker Thom Tillis, a Republican, leading Sen. Kay Hagan (D-NC) by 7 points. But Dr. Greg Brannon, a Rand Paul-backed Republican candidate, also holds a lead over the vulnerable Democrat, though by a slightly slimmer margin, at 43/39.

— NSA surveillance a bipartisan issue on the campaign trail: Politico notes that congressional candidates from both parties are placing emphasis on the NSA’s domestic surveillance programs in races across the country. “Many of these candidates are unlikely to knock off well-financed incumbents,” wrote Manu Raju. “But for Republicans, the debate highlights the growing divide within the party over whether to move sharply away from the national-security hawk mindset that has prevailed since President Ronald Reagan.”

— Yeah, about that Republican “hawk mindset”: A small group of “Bush-era Republicans” fired off a letter to RNC Chairman Reince Priebus to express their disagreement with the anti-NSA resolution passed on Friday, which was another example of the GOP’s shift away from authoritarianism, as Jack Hunter put it. You can read the letter in full here. But the TL;DR version is, basically, this.

— NSA endangers multi-billion dollar tech industry: A new policy study from the R Street Institute takes a look at how the NSA’s domestic surveillance apparatus could hit tech firms hard and offers several solutions that would restore confidence in this burgeoning industry.

— Majority support for medical marijuana in Georgia: A new poll out of the Peach State shows that 54% of voters support medical marijuana, an issue that is gaining traction in the state’s legislature. Just 30% oppose allowing the use of marijuana for medical purposes.

— There shall be earmarks: In a series of tweets on January 16, House Speaker John Boehner (R-OH) bragged that Republicans had followed through on their pledge to eliminate earmarks. “#Republicans are putting an end to business as usual in Washington. No more earmarks,” he wrote in one tweet, pointing to this link showing earmarks in 2009 compared to 2014. Later in the day, Boehner tweeted, “When #Republicans pledged to ban earmarks, we meant it. The omnibus bill is proof.” Cool story, bro. If only it were true. The Wall Street Journal noted yesterday that earmarks and pet projects for lawmakers have survived in Congress, pointing specifically to the $1+ trillion omnibus spending bill.

— Medicaid’s culture of waste: Lack of competitive bidding inside the Medicaid system left taxpayers on the hook for $62 million in overpayments for diapers and other disposable incontinence supplies, reports Lachlan Markay. “States nationwide implemented cost control mechanisms…but Medicaid could have saved about $62 million if competitive bidding processes were adopted nationwide,” wrote Markey. “Those savings would amount to 23 percent of the Medicaid bill for disposable incontinence supplies, which include nine categories of diapers and liners, including products for adults and children.”

— Bipartisanship on school choice in Texas: Here’s something you don’t see everyday. Reason TV brings us footage from a school choice rally in Houston, where Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX) and Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee (D-TX), one of the most conservative and liberal members of Congress, fired up a crowd hoping to expand educational freedom in the Lone Star State.

— Coalition urges repeal of insurance bailout provision: A coalition of 33 national groups and healthcare experts delivered a letter to Sen. Marco Rubio (R-FL) and Rep. Tim Griffin (R-AR) in support of their efforts to repeal Obamacare’s risk corridors provision, which is, ostensibly, a bailout for insurance companies. “Private insurance companies are colluding with government to privatize the profits of the health insurance industry, while socializing the risk,” said FreedomWorks Vice President of Public Policy Dean Clancy. “Taxpayers will already be subsidizing insurance companies to the tune of over a trillion dollars over the next decade. These ‘risk corridors,’ designed as a bailout for insurance companies, could cost taxpayers tens of billions of dollars more pending a collapse of the ObamaCare exchanges. Where will it end?”

— P.J. O’Rourke on the Baby Boom: The American political satirist recently spoke about his book, The Baby Boom: How It Got That Way (And It Wasn’t My Fault) (And I’ll Never Do It Again). Check out O’Rourke’s humorous, though serious discussion about the Baby Boom generation.

— Have we established that Daniel Hannan is awesome?: Because if we haven’t done that already, the fact that he recently quoted Frédéric Bastiat on the floor of the European Parliament should pretty much end that debate. If there ever was a debate.

— Cato Policy Forum: On Tuesday, February 11, the Cato Institute will host a policy forum, Understanding the Continuing Violence in Iraq. The forum will feature comments from Douglas Ollivant of the New America Foundation, author Harith Hasan, and Christopher Preble of the Cato Institute. The forum will begin at noon and will be followed by a luncheon. If you can’t make it, the event will be streamed online.

— FEE Summer Seminars: The Foundation for Economic Education (FEE) has begun accepting applications from high school and college students to its summer seminars, which cover topics ranging from economic to politics to leadership. Check out the details — including seminar locations, topics, how to apply — by clicking here.

— Birthday wishes: Happy birthday to Jacob Hornberger, president of the Future of Freedom Foundation.

— From a reader: One of our faithful readers, a conservative teacher, sent in this cartoon, based on President Obama’s “pen and phone” comments, which was a threat that he would continue to carry out his agenda via executive and administrative fiat.

If you work for a liberty-minded organization, think tank, or candidate, please send tips, news, or event information to jason-at-unitedliberty(dot)org.