Analysis: debate over Affordable Care Act's employer mandate will be high on the agenda now that tax credit availability is settled, could reshape the employer-sponsored insurance market

The next bit of scrutiny on SCOTUScare — to borrow a new name for the federal health reform act coined by U.S. Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia — in health care is all about the workplace now that health insurance tax credits are securely in place. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

The next bit of scrutiny on SCOTUScare — to borrow a new name for the federal health reform act coined by U.S. Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia — in health care is all about the workplace now that health insurance tax credits are securely in place.

The jeopardy of tax credits overshadowed that employers have big changes ahead under the employer mandate of the Affordable Care Act. The Supreme Court affirmed in King vs. Burwell Thursday the federal government's position that tax credits, which help many people afford monthly insurance premiums, are available on both federally and state-run exchanges.

"What this decision did is say, 'Next. Next,'" said Paul Keckley, managing director and leader of Navigant Center for Healthcare Research and Policy Analysis.

The podium is open for what will be a lively, to say the least, discussion that could reshape the world of employer-sponsored health insurance.

"(A ruling for the government) allows what matters most to employers to be addressed," said Austin Madison, vice president at The Crichton Group. "Subsidies are not a big deal for employers. It's a big deal to our country. It's a big deal or detriment to our industry."

Atop the agenda:

•the Cadillac tax — a contentious tax on plush employer-sponsored health insurance plans;

•the confusion around employer wellness programs and incentives; and

•the burdensome reporting requirements for businesses to the U.S. Internal Revenue Service.

And then there's the expected rise of the private insurance exchange, which is increasingly a way for employers to offer health insurance. If a company offers a private exchange, employees are able to buy plans with a monthly contribution from the employer.

"How the private exchanges play out versus public exchanges is a big story," Keckley said.

For employers who have moved to health savings accounts and high-deductible plans, an exchange could be the next logical step, said Alex Tolbert of Bernard Health, because it lets the business pinpoint how much it spends on health benefits.

The employer-sponsored health insurance future is populated with guidelines, requirements and debate.

Foremost on the minds of businesses is compliance with the IRS reporting by Jan. 31.

"We are buckled down and working really, really hard to prepare for the some of the upcoming changes for employers," Tolbert said. "Many don't understand just how administratively complex it's all going to get."

Opponents of the Affordable Care Act were gunning for a plaintiff ruling, in part, to get the opportunity for widespread reform. Gov. Bill Haslam said he was disappointed the country would not get the chance to "fix some things in the law that were broken."

The employer mandate was in the crosshairs before the decision, but conversations were aspirational in nature as opponents dreamed of repeal.

Conversations about potential reforms — some, including to the Cadillac tax, have broad support — will likely shift.

"The big deal about this for employers is that no legislator was going to attempt any type of reform on the Affordable Care Act until this ruling was finalized," said Madison.

The American Benefits Council cautioned that the U.S. Congress taking a "business as usual" approach after the King ruling "would be a mistake."

Shannon Goff Kukulka, partner at Waller Lansden Dortch & Davis, described the immediate time after the King ruling — when many, if not most, in the health care industry sighed in relief — as a "respite from the storm."

The debate over the transition to a value-based health care system will resume its rage and employers will grapple with how to comply with its regulations.

In short, as U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services Sylvia Burwell said on a media call following the Supreme Court's ruling on Thursday, "there is much more work to do."

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 or on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1Nq3ouL