The married couple considering DIVORCE to save hundreds of dollars a month on Obamacare costs

Couple who married to qualify for healthcare coverage now might divorce because of it

If divorced, couple could save hundred of dollars a month on healthcare costs under Obamacare

'I guarantee you that in six months I will either be divorced or I will have a full-time job' wife says

Nona Willis-Aronowitz, 29 and Aaron Cassara, 32 got married in 2009 because Aaron needed health insurance. Four years later they might divorce because of Obamacare.

The Brooklyn couple, recently featured on a CBS News segment, would not qualify for subsidies under the Affordable Care Act because they make a combined income of more than $62,0000.Those costs include monthly premium and out-of-pocket costs for things like copays, deductibles and out-of-pocket medical expenses.



Together as only a family of two, Nona Willis-Aronowitz and Aaron Cassara make more than the $62,000 level to qualify for subsidies under Obamacare. But if they lived together, unmarried as individuals, they qualify for the subsidies and potentially could save hundreds of dollars a month. Now the couple is considering divorce.

But if the couple were to divorce, Nona and Aaron could save hundreds of dollars each month on healthcare related costs. That's because if they divorce and live together they could earn over $90,000 and still qualify for Obamacare subsidies.



Both Nona and her husband currently work on a freelance basis and do not have employee-based healthcare coverage.

Married couple Nona Willis-Aronowitz and Aaron Cassara do not have employee-based healthcare coverage. Under Obamacare they do not qualify for subsidies. But if they divorced and lived together, unmarried as individuals they would qualify and save.

According to an article in The Atlantic, Nona was laid off from her full-time editorial position that included an healthcare, which covered herself and her husband, Aaron. After that, Nona joined a pricey COBRA plan. That plan comes to an end this January.

Aaron is also a freelancer. He works in the film industry. At one point in their four-year marriage, Nona was covered under a healthcare plan he had as a full-time employee. But now that Aaron is working on a freelance basis and it would be 'too expensive' to cover him under Nona's COBRA plan, he is currently uninsured.

Married couple Nona Willis-Aronowitz and Aaron Cassara celebrate Halloween. The couple has been married since 2009. They are currently considering divorce due to Obamacare costs.

According to Kaiser Family Foundation 15.4 per cent of married couples were uninsured in 2012. Adults who are not married but living together have a 33.4 per cent chance of being uninsured.



The number of uninsured single adult Americans living together is much higher because as a married couple you have two gateways to health insurance as opposed to one.

The family of two, Nona Willis-Aronowitz and Aaron Cassara are both freelancers struggling to make enough to live in New York City. If they were to divorce and live together as single people, they could save hundred every month.

Nona tells CBS News that she does not take divorce 'lightly' but is 'not really the marrying type.'

'In our case, it would be worth it,' Aronowitz said. 'In other people’s cases, where marriage is really, really important to them and they had this big wedding and it was this sacred experience, I think it would be a really tough decision for them.'

While the couple is thinking about divorce, they have yet to file. Nona is currently looking for a full-time job in the hopes of re-establishing an employee-based healthcare plan that will also cover Aaron.