Section 1557 of the ACA is intended to advance prevention and wellness, reduce health disparities and improve access to health care services. In 2008, the American Medical Association adopted a resolution to end discrimination in health insurance coverage for transgender individuals. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) ruled for the first time that transgender people are entitled to surgical benefits provided under Medicare Advantage insurers, including gender affirming.

"Now it's time for our regulatory authorities and officials to expand the definitions of health insurance coverage and critical care to include gender confirmation/reassignment and transgender-inclusive medical care," said Flippen. "Doing this would allow smaller cities, like Wilton Manors, the ability to obtain sustainable transgender-inclusive healthcare which is currently available in other states and regions of our country."

The City of Wilton, a longtime leader in advocating for LGBT equal rights, will also advocate for other governmental and quasi-governmental agencies to support the advocacy efforts outlined in Resolution 2016-039. A certified copy of the Resolution will be transmitted to the National League of Cities, Broward League of Cities, the Florida League of Cities, the Broward County Legislative Delegation, and the U.S. Congressional Delegation for Florida.

"As a City, we advocate for positive change that eliminates barriers and creates a more equal society for all," said Flippen. "We have made great progress, but there is still more to be done."

On May 24, 2016 at 6:15 p.m., City officials will permanently raise the pride flag at Jaycee Park, located across from City Hall at the corner of Wilton Drive and NE 21 Court. Then on June 18, 2016 the City of Wilton Manors will host the 17th Annual Stonewall Street Festival and Parade. This highly anticipated festival, commemorating the 1969 Stonewall Riots, will kick off with family friendly activities including bounce houses and face painting at 11 a.m., followed by a street festival beginning at 3 p.m. with dozens of vendors, including bars and restaurants, the famous Stonewall parade at 6 p.m. and live entertainment on multiple stages. To learn more visit www.stonewallwiltonmanors.com.

As a result of the 2010 US Census, the City of Wilton Manors was named the "Second Gayest City" in the United States. With a large percentage of the population identifying as gay, lesbian, bisexual or transgender, Wilton Manors has been recognized nationally and internationally as one of the most progressive places to live, work and play for many years.

To connect with the City of Wilton Manors visit www.wiltonmanors.com.

ABOUT THE CITY OF WILTON MANORS

Wilton Manors was laid out in 1925 by Edward John "Ned" Willingham, a land developer from Georgia, as an upscale residential community. It was recognized as a Village in 1947 and incorporated as a City in 1953. Today, the City of Wilton Manors offers all the benefits of a big city from shopping, to hip restaurants and bars, a burgeoning arts community and tons of community events, yet still maintains a cozy, community-feeling offering miles of natural waterways perfect for kayaking, paddle boarding and other outdoor activities. Recently named the "Second Gayest City" in the United States, the City of Wilton Manors celebrates a diverse population of approximately 12,000 residents. To learn more about the live, work and play opportunities in Wilton Manors call (954) 390-2100 or visit www.wiltonmanors.com.

CONTACT: Laurie Menekou, (954) 732-0754 (or) lmenekou@conceptual-communications.com

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/city-of-wilton-manors-urges-all-members-of-the-federal-and-florida-governments-to-make-transgender-related-healthcare-more-accessible-300269495.html

SOURCE City of Wilton Manors

Related Links

http://www.wiltonmanors.com