For clues about ways to fight the current up-and-down market, take a look at the investment strategy of mutual funds that have outperformed over the long haul.

The $8 billion American Century Ultra Fund (TWCUX) beat 66% of its large-cap growth rivals tracked by Morningstar Inc. over the past 52 weeks going into Friday. Over the past three years, the fund’s 11.38% average annual gain topped 80% of its peers, which averaged 9.48%, while the S&P 500 averaged 10.41%.

The fund seeks highly profitable companies that look poised to keep growing. It aims for large, industry-leading companies that have sustainable accelerating earnings growth and positive price momentum.

Where does the fund expect the best odds of finding such companies? A look at the fund’s portfolio weightings offers a clue: As of March 31, managers Keith Lee, Michael Li and Jeff Bourke had their key overweights in the information technology and health care sectors. In tech, the fund was finding opportunities in Internet software and services, IT services and communications equipment.

The fund’s top 10 holdings reflect that tilt toward tech and health care. Apple (AAPL), Alphabet (GOOGL), Amazon (AMZN) and Facebook (FB) were the top four as of Feb. 29. The top 10 also included health care names UnitedHealth Group (UNH), Gilead Sciences (GILD) and Celgene (CELG).

Social networking giant Facebook is still in a buy range from a 117.09 buy point after gapping up April 28 on strong earnings.

Its recent action in the stock market is not perfect. Its IBD Accumulation/Distribution Rating has improved to a C- from a worst-possible E, but the weak rating is still a sign of more recent selling than buying by mutual funds over the past 13 weeks.

But earnings-per-share growth has sped up, going from 16% four quarters ago to 33%, 46% and 83% in the past three frames, respectively.

And the stock’s IBD Composite Rating is a solid 99. The Composite Rating combines IBD’s five performance ratings, including EPS and Relative Strength ratings, with 99 being the highest.

Managed health-care services provider UnitedHealth’s EPS rebounded to 17% growth in the most recent stanza after falling 15% in the previous quarter.

Shares are up 13% over the past 52 weeks, even after falling nearly 1% on Thursday as a federal judge ruled that the Obama administration is unconstitutionally spending federal money to fund ObamaCare.

Shares of many key health care stocks went down after the decision. U.S. District Judge Rosemary Collyer’s ruling was a win for House Republicans who brought the legal challenge. The government was slated to pay $175 billion over 10 years to health insurers, lowering copayments for lower-income people.

Robotic surgical system developer Intuitive Surgical (ISRG) is a health care name that was unharmed by the ObamaCare ruling. Shares rose nearly 1% on Thursday. They’re up more than 28% over the past 52 weeks.

The stock’s EPS grew a respective 34%, 20% and 24% over the past three quarters.

Bank of America/Merrill Lynch recently said Intuitive was one of 16 S&P 500 stocks that could soon start paying a dividend. It cited the company’s low debt compared with its industry, at least 2% of its market cap coming from cash, a stable earnings trend and EPS growth the prior fiscal year, as well as growth expected in the current year.