Mike Moore was killed in January of 2011, but since that day, his family and friends have tried to share some brightness from their tragedy. His family holds the Mike D. Moore Memorial Community Day and trail ride in his honor every year. It's a different atmosphere than most "Stop the Violence" rallies, but Moore's mother says organizers want everyone who comes out to enjoy this experience while they learn.

"It's a celebration," Connie Moore says. "And we come out to celebrate Mike D and memorize him, but we also come out to bring awareness to domestic violence."

Moore loved horses, so the outsiders Riding Club holds a trail ride for visitors. But tents were also set up to bring awareness to domestic violence and organ donation. Tiffany Miller's tent is called "I'm That Girl." because of the violence she's experienced firsthand. She says over a short span of time her best friend was murdered and her ex-husband killed his girlfriend. She wants to stand up for the victims.

"I'm a voice for those that have been murdered," Miller says. "I'm a voice for those that are scared to speak up. So I'm using my voice to say hey, I was blessed to get out."

Another tent promotes organ donation. Mike D was an organ donor, and his donation helped many others.

"He saved multiple lives at this time of death, and the Moore family turned something tragic into something with a little bit of glimmer and a little bit of hope for people out there who need organ transplants," Chuck Stinson of the Miss. Organ Recovery Agency says.

Moore's mother was surprised when one his organ recipients made the trip from Jacksonville, Florida to pay her respects at the memorial.

"She is a recipient of Mike D," Moore exclaims. "She has Mike D with her."

Phadra Pinckney was in need of two organs: a kidney and a pancreas. She says his donation changed her life.

"To choose to donate his organs so that I could have a better life and continue to live, I was just very proud and happy to know that someone wasn't selfish within their heart to give me a chance to live longer," Pickney says.

His family hopes to spread what they've learned through Mike D's death through his memorial.