Health insurance enrollment through the federal exchange in Alabama could reach 200,000 by the end of this month – a substantial increase from last year – according to Kevin Counihan, CEO of Healthcare.gov.

At the end of open enrollment last year, about 170,000 Alabamians purchased health insurance through the exchange. Counihan said Alabama hit that number at the end of December 2015, one month before open enrollment ends.

More young people are also purchasing health insurance through the exchange this year, Counihan said. An infusion of young customers may encourage insurance companies to enter or stay on the exchange, he said.

"I think the best thing we can do is grow the customer base and create a vibrant market with a good mix of risk," Counihan said.

Enrollment has exceeded expectations this year. Many experts and officials expected growth to slow substantially this year because many of the older and sicker customers who needed insurance coverage had already enrolled.

Counihan said more customers are enrolling to avoid tax penalties of at least $695. Those penalties don't apply to customers who earn too much to qualify for Medicaid, but too little for subsidized insurance on the exchange. Open enrollments ends on Jan. 31.

Healthcare.gov also introduced several new features this year to make the site more user-friendly, including tools that allow users to estimate out-of-pocket expenses and search plans by doctor or hospital.

"Buying health insurance is not easy and simple, but our job is to make it easier and simpler," he said.

But the enrollment period hasn't been completely uneventful. Demand overwhelmed the system on Dec. 15 – the deadline to purchase insurance that would start on Jan. 1 – and officials extended the deadline by two days.

"You build these waiting rooms to accommodate big surges," Counihan said. "What we saw was a strong, stable system that withstood the pressure."

In Alabama, navigators, brokers and others raised concerns about competition on the exchange. Three health insurance companies offer plans in the state, but one has said it could leave the exchange next year. Counihan also said they discussed outreach efforts in communities with limited access to the internet.

Counihan visited Birmingham on Wednesday, following stops in Louisiana and Mississippi earlier this week. He met at Princeton Baptist Medical Center with officials from Enroll Alabama, Birmingham Health Care and the Dannon Project, groups that promote health insurance enrollment.

His visit happened on the same day that Republicans in the U.S. House of Representatives promised to deliver a bill to President Barack Obama that would repeal much of the Affordable Care Act. Counihan declined to comment on the bill.

"I got hired to keep the trains running on time," he said. "The politics of it are above my pay grade."