Topics: AlterNet, Foreign policy, GOP, isis, Marco Rubio, Republicans, Elections News, News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

As the GOP’s 2016 cast of men who would be president grows, so too do its ranks of chicken hawks—candidates who have never served in the military but are eager send American men and women into wars overseas. While it’s no surprise that these Republicans are feeding off each other in a feedback loop of one-upmanship, this latest round of boasting is not occurring in a vacuum. The U.S., as the world’s largest military force, faces many major challenges in the coming years —not just ISIS in the Middle East, but also China enlarging its maritime borders.

What follows are profiles of five candidates who are chicken hawks. None have served in the military but they all – unlike Obama – are willing to deploy ground troops overseas to fight ISIS in Syria and Iraq. Other Republicans running similarly have puffed out their warmongering chests, such as Scott Walker saying that he would take on ISIS like he bullied Wisconsin’s public employee unions and Jeb Bush endorsing W’s invasion of Iraq. Lindsey Graham also is calling for 10,000 ground troops, but he served in the military. These five haven’t:

1. Marco Rubio

On CNN’s The Lead last September, Rubio made it clear ground troops would “likely be needed” to “finish the job” on ISIS. He said, “The chances of local forces alone being able to defeat ISIL, or any group for that matter on the ground is dubious at best… It’s important for the President to be honest with the American people that at some point in the future, this might require some element of U.S. ground power in order to finish the job.”

The Florida Senator quickly earned the respect of the hawkish wing of the foreign policy establishment, especially the neocons that got us into Iraq for spouting the right bellicose talking points. Unfortunately, he doesn’t seem to know that Iran – despite being a favorite punching bag of this same neocon set – is a mortal enemy of ISIS, not in alliance with it. As Think Progress noted:

Speaking before the Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC) in Maryland, Rubio told radio and TV host Sean Hannity that “if we wanted to defeat [ISIS] militarily,we could do it. [Obama] doesn’t want to upset Iran…” There’s just one problem: Iran has been fighting ISIS just like the United States and has publicly urged America to take a larger role in the operation. Obama has even sent a letter to Iran’s Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei suggesting anti-ISIS cooperation.

What’s scary is that for many foreign policy experts, he’s considered the intelligent one in Republican circles. Meanwhile, what he did during his Military age years (18-35)? Like the others on this list, Rubio spent his military-age years, well, running for President. He attended law school, interned for Florida U.S. Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, worked on the Dole-Kemp campaign and eventually got elected to the Florida House of Representatives in 2000, and rose to become Speaker of the Florida House.

The wars Rubio decided not to fight in include: Gulf War, Bosnian War, Kosovo War, War in Afghanistan and Iraq War. The American troops killed in those conflicts totaled 7,041.

2. Rick Santorum

The former Pennsylvania U.S. Senator, Christian evangelical, and winner of the 2012 Iowa Caucuses wants to send the troops back to Iraq: Santorum is straddling the fence between the GOP’s “small government” Tea Party and the “Muslims are coming for us all” tension at the heart of the current GOP foreign policy orthodoxy. He’s called for Obama to “double” the amount of “advisers” to Iraq to look tough without offending libertarians who are weary of war. According to Bloomberg News:

Santorum, speaking on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe” show, said he’s “not talking about a massive invasion force” just about doubling the 3,000 now on the ground in Iraq. “I’m not talking about front line troops here,” he said. “If we don’t start winning the war against ISIS my fear is we are going to see casualties here in the United States.”

So 3,000 more “advisors”, to Santorum, is the existential difference between attacks on the homeland and containing the enemy overseas. Santorum also believes that the U.S. should use more military muscle in the Ukraine to push back Russia.

During his military-service age years, he also focused on building a career as a lawyer and politician, skipping the Gulf War.

3. Ted Cruz

Texas Senator Ted Cruz is trying to thread the same needle as Santorum. He’s a Tea Party favorite, where 86% think ISIS can launch a “major attack” on U.S. soil. His solution: set the table for ground troops in Iraq and Syria “if need be” to “accomplish the mission.” He told ABC News:

“The mission should be defeating ISIS before they succeed in carrying out more horrific acts of terror, before they succeed in murdering Americans. If need be, we should go that step,” Cruz told “This Week” anchor George Stephanopoulos when asked whether U.S. troops on the ground should be considered.