A conservative group based in Virginia is not letting up on state Sen. Nancy Detert.

Americans for Prosperity launched yet another campaign mailer targeting the Venice Republican for votes they say are bad for Floridians. It is the fourth different mailer in three weeks blasting Detert for her votes in the Florida Senate. The group has also been funding television commercials and putting ads on social media going after Detert.

The latest attack centers on her vote for expanding Medicaid in Florida. Detert joined with almost every Florida Senator in backing a plan to expand Medicaid to cover 1 million people who have family incomes below $27,000 a year. Under the Senate’s plan, Florida would have taken the $51 billion from the federal government to write it’s own plan rather than being stuck with the federal government-designed plan.

The measure passed the Senate on a 38-1 vote, but did not pass the Florida House.

“Senator Nancy Detert Supported Obamacare’s Medicaid Expansion,” the mailer from Americans for Prosperity states.

But Detert said once again Americans for Prosperity is misleading people. Detert said her vote was to expand Medicaid but using a Florida-designed plan, not the Obamacare model.

“I don’t want it to be confused with a vote for ObamaCare,” Detert said. “It wasn’t.”

Florida Gov. Rick Scott, a Republican, also supported the Legislature accepting the federal funding to expand Medicaid.

Slade O’Brien, director of the Florida chapter of Americans for Prosperity, said in a previous interview that his group is going after Detert and two other state senators to send a message to other Republicans in the Florida Legislature that they need to need to support the AFP agenda or face consequences.

AFP, based in Virginia, was started in 2004 partly by the Koch Brothers, the billionaire industrialists who have become key financial backers of the Tea Party movement nationwide. Currently, David Koch is the chairman of the AFP Foundation's board.

In a previous interview O'Brien would not say how much his group is spending against Detert, but Detert estimated it to be about $100,000.

O’Brien could not be reached for comment today.

That attacks are not going over well with local Republican leaders who say O’Brien needs to be going after Democrats and not attacking Republicans. The Sarasota Republican Party Executive Committee passed a resolution last month re-affirming their support for Detert despite the attack pieces.

In the earlier interview, O’Brien said his group is not trying to defeat Detert in a primary. He said he only is fighting to get a legislative agenda passed, and Detert is among some Republicans who have stood in the way.

The Medicaid attacks follows one put out a week earlier that went after Detert for opposing a proposal to turn failing schools over to charter school companies to run. Detert opposed the effort because she said taxpayer funded schools would have been handed over to private, for-profit companies without taxpayers collecting any rent to help pay back unpaid school bonds.Besides Detert, the group is also targeting state Sen. Charles Dean, a Citrus County Republican, and Sen. Greg Evers, a Republican from the Florida Panhandle.