Columbine. It’s a word that has haunted me and countless others of my generation since its savage moment in history came to define the waning days of our childhoods.

Nearly 15 years after the horrific mass school shooting, many of us are now raising our own children. Unfortunately, we do so amid a fervent religiosity of anti-violence and anti-bullying measures that will forever be Columbine’s legacy. To question such efforts is simply unthinkable in most circles. But it’s time to start asking the tough questions.

There’s no denying that when it comes to senseless school violence, even the best educators across America are in a tough spot. Indeed, there is no tougher spot to be than Littleton, where two high schools mere miles apart now share the distinction of having suffered a deadly rampage at the hands of one their own. First, Columbine in 1999. Twelve dead at the hands of two classmates. Fast forward to December, where a single gunman — a student — shot a young girl before turning the gun on himself.

For a moment, it’s important to push the debate about gun control to the back burner. The impact of Columbine, Aurora, Arapahoe, Sandy Hook, Virginia Tech and every other school attack extends far beyond guns. Thanks to zero-tolerance policies, our schools have become draconian in their discipline for offenses that may have absolutely nothing to do with allegations of violence.

As an attorney, I often find myself going to bat for kids in trouble. Most recently, there was the 13-year-old criminally charged after a verbal spat with another kid; a kindergartner investigated for “sexual misconduct”; and a rising music star whose expulsion from high school choir was overturned only after his persistent mother protested. His offense: poking another kid with a pencil during a performance. The pencil made a mark.

One gifted student was expelled and faced a future of therapy and mandatory supervision after police took him in for felony sexual assault. School officials described the offense classification as a technical error. Rather, as we were told, the student, 13, was expelled over a single incident of disruptive behavior involving a “pelvic thrust” to the air and conflicting accounts alleging that he touched a female classmate’s breast.

A few days of suspension should have been enough for this first offense. Instead, the school insisted, there was simply no alternative to expulsion and thus, one bad decision was enough to flush an otherwise strong academic performance down the drain. Although he was never criminally charged, statistically this 13-year-old has little chance of academic recovery.

These students are part of a trend that is coming dangerously close to criminalizing fairly innocuous childhood behaviors for good. So how did we get here?

The lasting legacy of those early days of post-Columbine changes is aggressive anti-bullying campaigns. Kids won’t kill, the argument went, if only we prevent classmates from bullying each other off the cliff. Led by educational experts armed with government grants, we learned that all allegations of hugging, hitting, taunting or disagreement required swift, unapologetic and uniform responses. In sum, we needed to take back control.

Still, the killers continued to kill. So we then surmised that mental illness was the real culprit. The free thinkers and reformed troublemakers shuddered. Just who, exactly, got to define the line between sane and insane? And what turns that loner kid in the corner into a suspect of an act he has yet to commit? What were his other symptoms? Sugar drinks? Autism? Being from a “broken” family?

Our schools now act as if we have no other choice than to see all students as would-be suspects.

After charges were filed against a Brighton student (one of my clients), 9News reporter Will Ripley’s own analysis of the town’s police records indicated that the school in question called the cops on more than one in 11 children during the first half of the last school year. Two other local schools were even more aggressive with outsourcing discipline, averaging a 911 call for one in six students. While my client and his fellow offender both saw their municipal violations of “disorderly conduct” tossed, they were forced to miss school to unnecessarily navigate a complex legal system over the course of no less than three appearances before a judge.

The school’s principal told Ripley the 911 obsession has evolved from a commitment to “err on the side of caution.” Egging the principal on has been Brighton’s own crime analysts. “If ever there was a time not to worry about burdening us” with cases of kids facing criminal charges, analyst John Bradley said, “it would be with our children.” Burdening us? By outsourcing discipline and its associated liabilities, it is the judicial system — including judges, prosecutors, probation officers and defense attorneys — who pick up the slack.

When it comes to a school’s obligations to protect the rights of a suspect student under state law, I become even more concerned. Colorado law simply does not allow any sun to shine in through the proceedings. Each child gets his or her own “hearing, ” attended by a hearing officer employed by the school district. Officials from the school, district and police are also invited to attend. Afterward, a school superintendent almost always rubber stamps whatever the hearing officer decides. It is at this point that an expelled student is branded with a Scarlet “E” to mark the rest of his educational journey. Scholarships will be lost. Teachers will be biased. Classmates will mock and belittle — all regardless of whether the punishment is just.

A critical opportunity exists to reform the system. Students deserve an outside, independent review of allegations. Hearing rules need reform. Expulsion standards need to be altered to address the incredibly diverse and complex aspects of discipline in today’s fear-filled world.

Ultimately, “zero tolerance” has brought us zero progress. Districts would be wise to follow the lead of Denver, Baltimore and Chicago, which are taking a stand against the criminalization of youth.

“Rather than push children out of school, districts like Broward [County in Florida] are now doing the opposite: choosing to keep law-breaking students in school, away from trouble on the streets, and offering them counseling and other assistance aimed at changing behavior,” The New York Times reported in December.

The Denver-based Padres y Jovenes Unidos (Parents and Youth United) cites a more integrated disciplinary approach as the variable behind the city’s massive drop in juvenile crime since the mid-1990s. Per Ripley’s analysis, Denver case filings involving kids dropped from 13,000 filings in 1996 to 4,000 in 2012.

The changes are drawing Washington’s attention. To start out 2014, President Obama issued 35 pages of new guidelines encouraging the use of law enforcement only as a last resort for student discipline. At most, these voluntary standards reflect an important symbolic step toward demanding cultural change across the nation’s school districts. The question now: How will states — especially hard-hit Colorado — respond?

According to federal and state statistics, our children’s schools unequivocally remain the safest place in their young lives. By tossing zero-tolerance policies to the curb, we wouldn’t be giving up on their safety. We would be reinstating their freedom. Or, we can presume every kid is a suspect and turn our schools into prisons.

I won’t raise my kids this way, and you shouldn’t either.

To honor all of the innocent lives lost to school violence, let’s do something the victims will never be able to do again: Let our kids be kids.