ADVERTISEMENT

NEW YORK (MainStreet) — A recently completed study of 20 years of research on cannabis use confirmed at least one of the claims of marijuana legalization advocates but dismantled many of arguments pot proponents use to bolster their cause.

Published online this month by the reputable journal Addiction of the Society for the Study of Addiction, the monograph by Wayne Hall, a professor at the University of Queensland Centre for Youth Substance Abuse Research in Australia, indicates that there are some real dangers in using marijuana including psychosocial problems and mental health issues in adulthood, as well as other adverse effects.

The research was funded by the Australian government’s prestigious National Health and Medical Research Council. The salient conclusions are that while acute cannabis use does not produce fatal overdoses, there are many other hazards.

For example, the report says that deleterious outcomes of acute pot use are:

Driving while cannabis-intoxicated doubles the risk of a car crash; this risk increases substantially if users are also alcohol-intoxicated.



Cannabis use during pregnancy slightly reduces birth weight of the baby.

Regular cannabis users can develop a dependence syndrome, the risks of which are around one in ten of all cannabis users and one in six among those who start in adolescence.





Regular cannabis users double their risks of experiencing psychotic symptoms and disorders, especially if they have a personal or family history of psychotic disorders, and if they start using cannabis in their mid-teens.





Regular adolescent cannabis users have lower educational attainment than non-using peers, but we don’t know whether the link is causal.





Regular adolescent cannabis users are more likely to use other illicit drugs, but we don’t know whether the link is causal.





Regular cannabis use that begins in adolescence and continues throughout young adulthood appears to produce intellectual impairment, but the mechanism and reversibility of the impairment is unclear.





Regular cannabis use in adolescence approximately doubles the risk of being diagnosed with schizophrenia or reporting psychotic symptoms in adulthood.





Regular cannabis smokers have a higher risk of developing chronic bronchitis.

It also states that among the detrimental effects of chronic marijuana use are:

“There remains no compelling evidence that using marijuana causes the mental health and social problems discussed in the report," said Mason Tvert, director of communications of the Marijuana Policy Project in Denver. responded. "It simply shows that teens who are prone to developing these problems are the ones most likely to break the law and try marijuana. It’s a case of correlation, not causation.”