Before Sept. 11, 2001, there was Nov. 22, 1963, a day when anyone born before 1952 or so remembers the details of where he was, what he was doing, when he first heard the news: President Kennedy has been shot. And, later: The president is dead.

Beyond the images of the hour were those that soon followed: Lyndon Johnson’s gaunt face swearing to uphold the Constitution as he stood sandwiched between Lady Bird Johnson and Jacqueline Kennedy in the back of an airplane on the tarmac in Dallas; families huddled in front of a television the next Monday watching John-John, on his third birthday, salute his father’s casket coming from the cathedral; a horse named Black Jack prancing and skittering, saddle empty, boots hung backwards, reluctant to accompany the caisson carrying our fallen leader through the silent streets of Washington, while overhead the heavens wept alongside us.

For the seniors in fourth- year Latin class at Thomas Jefferson Junior-Senior High School in Denver on that last Friday before Thanksgiving, the word had come from behind a metallic box that covered a speaker high on the wall next to the clock. We stared at it as if we could see the dour face of the principal, Milton Rebell, peering at us through the tiny holes as he delivered the news. And after that, our teacher, Allerton Barnes, suggesting in vain that we carry on translating Cicero, and a girl named Suzie announcing she was glad the president had been shot, that she was for Nixon.

Who among us knew that the rest of our lives had begun on that bright day in November, or realized that the cocoon of naïveté had been shredded, the illusion of safety separating childhood from the world shattered, all in an instant?

We speak of remembering where we were, what we were doing, the moment we heard. But memory is another facet of imagination, constantly redrawing the past in the light of events that follow. We had no inkling then of what was around the next corner: more violent resistance to civil rights; more marches; flirtations with revolutionary rhetoric in opposition to war in Vietnam; more assassinations; the ever-present temptation to wander into the melancholy world of What If.

Did we remember then, or did we remember later by looking them up, the words of a confident new president, standing without an overcoat on a cold day in January 1961, declaring from his inauguration stand: “Now the trumpet summons us again … the torch has been passed to a new generation of Americans … pay any price, bear any burden … let us begin anew … explore the stars, conquer the deserts, eradicate disease, tap the ocean depths … light our country … truly light the world … ask not what your country can do for you … “?

He was our elixir, a call to dedicate our lives to something greater than ourselves. We did not know then, or much care when we found out, about Addison’s disease, back pain, medications. Glamour meant First Lady Jacqueline Bouvier, the Vassar girl who spoke French and had studied at the Sorbonne, the definition of elegance and sophistication. Yet to come were tales of assignations and unhappiness.

Ghosts in the balcony

Half a century later, only ghosts walk the hallway behind the auditorium’s balcony in Thomas Jefferson High School, no longer called the Senior Lounge, where teenagers in shock absorbed the news that shaped lifetimes. There are no Latin classes now, although there is Lakota; robotics has replaced metal shop and home economics. The student newspaper is a daily video now, available on the Internet.

An old man whose yesterdays outnumber his tomorrows retraces his steps one last time to test his memory of a half-century ago. What he thought he remembered as a round speaker cover is square, still next to the clock. Stare at it hard enough and it’s not the principal’s voice that echoes, but rather the trumpet’s call, a voice of a man whose Rs sometimes played hookey from the ends of his words, those magic words: “Ask what you can do for your country.”

A small flame lit by the passing torch flickers still at the end of a wick burned short, a reflection of that other flame burning in Arlington National Cemetery. The president, our president, lives still, half a century on.

James Outman is a writer living in Boulder.