The Krewe d’Etat parade plied the streets of Uptown on Friday night (Feb. 28), displaying its usual blend of political correctness, bipartisanship, gender sensitivity and general open-heartedness. D’Etat’s floats equaled or, even bested, the exquisite Hermes floats that preceded them in design and decoration. The chomping skull float at the start of the parade is among the best in all of Carnival.

Last night’s theme was “DUI: D’Etat Under the Influence,” but the theme was only a skeleton upon which to hang the krewe’s brand of searing social sarcasm. The management of Orleans Parish Prison came in for ridicule, as did the wanton sex trade along Tulane Avenue. The city’s new EvacuSpot stick figure sculptures, meant as gathering spots for hurricane evacuation, were brilliantly depicted holding Hurricane cocktails aloft. On the national front, Hillary Clinton and Miley Cyrus were bashed and the Affordable Health Care Act was repeatedly demonized. The only shred of sentimentality was reserved for bygone Crescent City bar rooms.

If you agree with d’Etat’s collective point of view or not, the gloves-off Carnival catharsis the parade embodies is thrilling. D’Etat is a somewhat haughtier more empowered version of the downtown, rag tag Krewe du Vieux. D’Etat doesn’t have a king, it has a dictator. The dictator could benefit from just a whisper of humorous self-deprecation, but otherwise he is the supreme commander of Carnival satire.

Favorite float: The float bearing the smoke-gushing sculpture of crack-smoking Toronto mayor Rob Ford was an absolute masterpiece.

Favorite marching group: The dancing troupe that choreographically imitated Saints defensive coordinator Rob Ryan was outstanding – and I don’t just mean their faux Falstaffian bellies.

On first writing, I forgot about the Fifty Shades of Gray female marching group. Tights plus loose men's shirts plus gray wigs plus dance abandon equals a new Carnival comic highlight.



Favorite band: Once again this year, I’m not listing a favorite band, because my favorite band is the one that randomly performs right in front of me. Truth is, I’m a sucker for Mardi Gras bands. In the words of Stephen Stills, I tend to love the one I’m with.

Favorite throw: None really. I challenge Krewe d’Etat to become politically proactive in the burgeoning quest to produce a locally produced throw industry.

The rating: Doug MacCash rates select 2014 Mardi Gras parades. From best to worst, the ratings are: Ruler of the Route, Rolling in the Right Direction and Lost its Way. In 2014 D’Etat is, without doubt, a Ruler of the Route.