DALLAS, Feb. 12, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Texas native Monica Simmons has taken up the war cry of 25 House Republicans with a message for Congressman Alcee Hastings (D-FL) who called the Lone Star State "a crazy state" at last week's meeting of the House Rules Committee.

These and countless other Texans won't "Let It Go" and won't "Shake It Off." Hastings said "hell would freeze over" before he apologizes for blasting the state's failure to participate in the Affordable Care Act.

Ms. Simmons' North Texas neighbor Dr. Michael Burgess (R-TX) took strong exception to the disparaging remarks, and Rep. Pete Sessions, Dallas Republican and House Rules Committee Chair, launched into a floor speech on "Don't Mess with Texas."

But advertising executive Simmons is taking the high road to remedying the besmirching of her great state. "I'm shouting 'Smile. You're in Texas!' to the world," she declared. "From Austin, to Dallas, to Houston, to El Paso—this campaign is about reminding each other how fortunate we are to be in this great state."

Simmons wasted no time trademarking her big-hearted slogan. "I want it to put a smile on everyone's face across the state of Texas," she said. And that's not all. She believes it's a fine companion to "Don't Mess with Texas," created more than 25 years ago as an anti-litter campaign slogan. She's in good company. Even eclectic singer Lyle Lovett sings, "That's right, you're not from Texas but Texas loves you anyway."

What's next for the "Smile" movement? Simmons has just launched a new website, www.smileyoureintexas.com, where she's encouraging supporters of the Lone Star State to share their Texas stories and pictures. They'll also have the opportunity to browse from a selection of items featuring the motto to help spread the word and the smiles.

For more information visit www.smileyoureintexas.com or call 972.691.3276.

CUTLINE: Monica Simmons, Smile. You're In Texas!

CONTACT: Amy Rumpler

Midnight Media

972.550.1880

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150212/175305

SOURCE Monica Simmons