Father-of-three hailed a 'hero' on ITV's Daybreak is a 'former prisoner, drug taker and neighbour from hell'

Andy Erskine, 41, was rewarded on ITV's Daybreak's Secret Santa segment

Jailed for driving while disqualified and arrested for cannabis possession

Neighbours in King's Lynn, Norfolk, said he was an 'awful human being'

They claim he constantly screams at his wife who 'cries all the time'



A father-of-three who was hailed as a 'hero' on TV for being an outstanding husband and family man has been revealed as a prisoner, a drug taker and 'neighbour from hell'.

Andy Erskine, 41, who was praised for on ITV's Daybreak for his 'incredible support' and care, was jailed for driving while disqualified and was arrested for possession of cannabis.

His neighbours also claimed that he had vicious rows with his wife, Lisa, prompting police to be called to his address in King's Lynn, Norfolk, to break up the disputes on a number of occasions.



Criminal past: Andy Erskine, 41, (right) was surprised on ITV's Daybreak after giving 'outstanding care' to his cancer-stricken wife, Lisa (left)

One resident who lived nearby told The Sun Erskine was an 'awful human being' and questioned why he was being given the plaudits by the breakfast show.



Another described how he did nothing but scream at his wife, who was 'always crying', and claimed children who lived in the area were 'petrified' of him.



Former Westlife member Brian McFadden surprised Erskine at his new home in Newmarket, Suffolk, last week as part of the Secret Santa segment on the morning programme, which celebrates deserving people.



Viewers were warned of his 'colourful language' before the pop star approached the door, which Erskine answered wearing a tiger 'onesie'.



Shocked: Former Westlife star Brian McFadden (left) went to his home in Newmarket, Suffolk, to show the father-of-three a video tribute his family had prepared Reward: Former Liverpool footballer Ian Rush congratulated Erskine for the work he had done with his family and gave him a shirt signed by current players at the club

During the clip, viewers were told how he gave up his job to care for his wife when she was diagnosed with ovarian cancer.

Erskine's wife, who is now in remission, then describes how he was her 'best friend' and 'soul mate'.



She added: 'He deserves to feel as special as the way he makes me feel.'



The Liverpool fan was then shown a video of ex-footballer Ian Rush congratulating him for his 'incredible' care.

He was then given him a signed shirt and a chance to watch his favourite team from the director's box, as a result of his care.



One viewer commented on the video: 'People who know him know he deserves nothing.'



When asked about his criminal past, he told the newspaper he had been jailed when he was 'young and stupid' and said he was told to 'cool off' after police were called to deal with rows between him and his wife.



Norfolk Constabulary confirmed officers had been to Erskine's address to deal with a number of domestic incidents.



A spokesman for Daybreak said: 'Secret Santa was a Daybreak item running this week where viewers had the chance to thank someone close to them.