Last Friday was the 50th anniversary of John F. Kennedy‘s assassination. Along with that milestone came a day full of media retrospectives, think-pieces on JFK’s long-lasting legacy, and obnoxious debates about whether Camelot would be a conservative if he were alive today. On that last one: Stop it. Just stop it.

It seems like every time America looks back at its deceased political heroes, there is the inevitable assertion that he or she would undoubtedly be a liberal or a conservative in today’s world. According to the right, Lincoln would be a proud Republican, Jefferson and Washington would be marching with tea partiers, and JFK would be disgusted by Obamacare. The left says no, Jefferson would be a proud Obama supporter; Lincoln and Kennedy would absolutely be appalled by the GOP. And so on, so forth.

With that in mind, Mediaite hosted its first-ever Dead Presidents Draft*, so that a bunch of political ideologies may claim their deceased icons once and for all. (Shout-out to Dave Chappelle.) According to the rules, JFK is off the table because everyone wants a piece of that guy. Everyone else is fair game.

Enjoy below:

You are seeing this message because you have javascript disabled. To use our slideshows you need to enable javascript. There's no cross domain hackery or tracking voodoo, it's just some sweet jQuery animations. Please, think of the animations. In the meantime, enjoy the html version below. I guess. If that's your thing.

Conservatives: Abraham Lincoln Abraham Lincoln (largely as part of "outreach"), but the "tea party" faction demanded Ronald Reagan. To the "establishment" gang, Reagan will always be the shining beacon of conservatism, thus there being no need to claim him in the draft. Ultimately, the tea partiers split from the group and were given a later draft pick with confidence that they could claim Reagan for themselves.



Selecting Lincoln, conservative delegate Mitch McConnell announced: "Lincoln was the father of the GOP, and as a proud believer in the God-given rights of man, he would undoubtedly be a conservative today." Boos erupted from the hall; and on MSNBC, Chris Matthews and his live desk colleagues went bonkers with outrage. Conservatives began the draft with behind-the-scenes turmoil. The "establishment" wing wanted to claim(largely as part of "outreach"), but the "tea party" faction demanded. To the "establishment" gang, Reagan will always be the shining beacon of conservatism, thus there being no need to claim him in the draft. Ultimately, the tea partiers split from the group and were given a later draft pick with confidence that they could claim Reagan for themselves.Selecting Lincoln, conservative delegateannounced: "Lincoln was the father of the GOP, and as a proud believer in the God-given rights of man, he would undoubtedly be a conservative today." Boos erupted from the hall; and on MSNBC,and his live desk colleagues went bonkers with outrage. Liberals: Thomas Jefferson Although the liberal faction split up a bit before the draft began (a civil libertarian group of progressives left after being called "emo-progs"), the ideology was surprisingly united when it came draft time.



Selecting Thomas Jefferson as a response to the conservatives' trolling, liberal delegate Barack Obama said: "As a member of the Democratic-Republican Party, Jefferson believed the simple farmer was a better American ideal than those wealthy, unregulated corporations. He would definitely be a liberal today." Libertarians: Grover Cleveland Grover Cleveland, but only after delegate Gary Johnson gave a 25-minute speech on "



Settling upon Cleveland, Johnson announced: "Our 22nd and 24th president vetoed hundreds of spending bills, promoted a free economy, and warned that America should 'never get caught up in conflict with any foreign state unless attacked or otherwise provoked.' If Grover Cleveland were alive today, he would be a libertarian." The libertarian faction picked, but only after delegategave a 25-minute speech on " why the worst get on top " and how selecting dead "statists" to represent an ideology is child's play. The group also reportedly deliberated for hours on whether to select Cleveland or simply submit a " None of the Above " protest vote.Settling upon Cleveland, Johnson announced: "Our 22nd and 24th president vetoed hundreds of spending bills, promoted a free economy, and warned that America should 'never get caught up in conflict with any foreign state unless attacked or otherwise provoked.' If Grover Cleveland were alive today, he would be a libertarian." Socialists: Franklin D. Roosevelt (traded) Franklin D. Roosevelt, noting his New Deal support for the vast expansion of social welfare and wealth redistribution programs.



Sensing a chance to gain influence among mainstream liberals, however, delegate Sen. Bernie Sanders and his colleagues decided to trade FDR to the liberals in exchange for a promise to



"Fat chance," the liberal faction giggled backstage after accepting the trade with fingers crossed behind their backs. The socialist faction selected, noting his New Deal support for the vast expansion of social welfare and wealth redistribution programs.Sensing a chance to gain influence among mainstream liberals, however, delegate Sen.and his colleagues decided to trade FDR to the liberals in exchange for a promise to rally behind Bernie Sanders in the 2016 Democratic primaries and bring back the push for "single-payer.""Fat chance," the liberal faction giggled backstage after accepting the trade with fingers crossed behind their backs. Neoconservatives: Woodrow Wilson Bill Kristol announced the selection of Woodrow Wilson, the father of modern American military adventurism.



"While we consider ourselves 'hard' Wilsonians, we admire the 28th president nonetheless," Kristol announced. "He was a man of ideals who believed in using America's military might to make the world safer for democracy. And unlike his successors, Wilson knew that Yes, the neoconservatives split from the "establishment" conservative gang long before the draft. Sensing a creeping anti-interventionism among Obama-era conservatives, the neocons decided to go their own way. With the fifth pick overall, delegateannounced the selection of, the father of modern American military adventurism."While we consider ourselves 'hard' Wilsonians, we admire the 28th president nonetheless," Kristol announced. "He was a man of ideals who believed in using America's military might to make the world safer for democracy. And unlike his successors, Wilson knew that dissent during wartime could not be tolerated , as it would only serve to undermine the effort to protect all Americans. If Wilson were alive today, he would definitely be proud of what the Bush administration accomplished, and he would most certainly subscribe to The Weekly Standard." Pro-Immigration: Ronald Reagan This coalition of pro-immigration forces shocked everyone by swooping in to select Ronald Reagan. Tea party leaders cried foul, but the selection went along without a hitch.



La Raza CEO Janet Murguía announced the pick: "Under Reagan, more immigrants came legally into America than under any president since Teddy Roosevelt. He understood that illegal immigrants were not criminals, but human beings striving to make a better life for themselves in our great country. If Reagan were alive today, he would most certainly be on the side of immigration reform." NO SHAMNESTY: John Adams Next up was another single-issue group, cleverly calling themselves "NO SHAMNESTY," in all caps. They stunned analysts with the sleeper pick of America's second president, John Adams, citing his passing of the Naturalization Act and the Alien and Sedition Acts.



In a written statement, faction leaders Rep. Steve King (R-IA) and Breitbart reporter Matt Boyle said: "If he were alive today, Adams would be disgusted by today's SURRENDER CAUCUS efforts to legalize millions of CRIMINALS who are INVADING our great country ILLEGALLY. Adams understood that the illegals were ALIENS and was not afraid to use such politically-incorrect words to describe them." Emo-Progs: Dwight Eisenhower With their pick delayed til later in the draft, the so-called "emo-progs" went with Dwight Eisenhower. "As the first president to recognize America's sick dependence on the military-industrial complex, Eisenhower would undoubtedly be standing arm-in-arm with others opposed to our government's disgusting violation of civil liberties domestically and around the world," delegate Jeremy Scahill announced. "He would also find troubling the use of drone strikes abroad as part of America's unmitigated expansion of imperialism. We believe Eisenhower would also stand tall with modern anti-warfare state heroes like Edward Snowden and Chelsea Manning." Tea Party: George Washington George Washington. Reports indicate that the group spent hours deciding between Washington, Madison, and Calvin Coolidge. Ultimately, they decided, Washington was the best fit, powdered wig and all.



"Even though all of the founders are our favorite founders," delegate Sarah Palin announced, "we've selected Washington because he was the consummate statesman, and he was happy to return America to the people. Just like I'd be happy to return to Wasilla after restoring America's greatness, Washington returned to Mount Vernon to gaze at the landscape and admire the beauty that is America the beautiful. If George were alive today, he would be standing right next to myself and Ted Cruz in the fight against the tyranny of Obamacare and the modern slavery that is the national debt." Having missed out on Reagan, the tea party group emerged with the selection of #1 himself,. Reports indicate that the group spent hours deciding between Washington, Madison, and Calvin Coolidge. Ultimately, they decided, Washington was the best fit, powdered wig and all."Even though all of the founders are our favorite founders," delegateannounced, "we've selected Washington because he was the consummate statesman, and he was happy to return America to the people. Just like I'd be happy to return to Wasilla after restoring America's greatness, Washington returned to Mount Vernon to gaze at the landscape and admire the beauty that is America the beautiful. If George were alive today, he would be standing right next to myself andin the fight against the tyranny of Obamacare and the modern slavery that is the national debt."

*Purely fictional.

— —

>> Follow Andrew Kirell (@AndrewKirell) on Twitter