Win regulatory approval for your drug, and your stock drops?

Shutterstock

That’s the tortured journey Keryx Biopharmaceuticals Inc.’s /quotes/zigman/83561/delayed /quotes/zigman/83561/lastsale KERX shares have taken the past couple of days as the market is scratching its head over the U.S. Food and Drug Administration’s OK for Keryx’s treatment for those with renal disease.

Everything was all fine and good prior to Friday, when shares were hovering near 52-week highs. The FDA was expected on Friday to announce the company’s treatment, known as ferric citrate, would be approved for treating kidney patients with painfully high phosphorous levels.

Then it did, and that’s when the trouble began.

In its press release, Keryx noted what the FDA planned to include in its labeling information, and what many in the market believed to be a caveat: Since the medication was iron-based, doctors may have to re-evaluate intravenous iron therapy for their patients. These iron boosters often are necessary for those on dialysis with chronic kidney ailments.

Keryx was hoping the iron-based characteristics of its medication — a distinguishing characteristic of the drug — would be seen as a positive, since it could help patients cut down on IV iron boosters. Instead, it left investors confused and — as Friday’s and Monday’s action indicated — downtrodden.

Shares were halted Friday as the company awaited word from the FDA, then spiked downward more than 12%. They ended the day off nearly 6%. Shares fell by as much as 12% again Monday and were down more than 11% in recent action to $15.10.

“I think it’s grossly misunderstood and misinterpreted,” Keryx Chief Executive Ronald Bentsur said in an interview with MarketWatch. Bentsur says the warning label tells doctors to monitor iron intake, but ultimately could help patients eliminate IV iron therapy altogether. IV iron use was cut by 85% in test patients, he said.

Still, Wall Street apparently is as confused as investors. FBR Capital Markets analyst Dr. Andrew Berens downgraded shares to underperform from market perform, saying the labeling information would exclude a group of patients from being able to use it, and create uncertainty among others.

“Accordingly, we have adjusted our peak ferric citrate U.S. dialysis revenues down from $951 million to $476 million,” Berens said in a note to clients.

Other analysts, though, say the iron element is a plus for the treatment.

“There is a clear economic benefit to dialysis centers for at least the next 10 years to advocate the use of ferric citrate and save themselves from having to spend more on [iron treatments],” Brean Capital’s Jonathan Aschoff said in his note.

Follow @russbrittmktw

Follow @MWHealthBlog

More must-read health coverage from MarketWatch:

Average Obamacare premiums will inch downward for 2015

Recession’s over, so look for health spending to accelerate again

Obamacare lifts hospitals’ fortunes, reduces charity-care costs