Dr. Ben Carson has operated on 15,000 patients throughout his medical career.

Although he had different plans in mind after retiring, like golfing more and studying other languages, Carson’s life eventually led him to the speaking circuit. And, on Friday, to Lubbock as part of the Covenant Health and the Lubbock Methodist Hospital System Board’s Michael E. DeBakey, M.D. Distinguished Lectureship Series.

About 300 people packed the Lubbock Country Club during the sold-out event Friday evening as they listened to Carson speak on the topic “America the Beautiful: Rediscovering What Made This Nation Great.”

Carson is a world-renowned pediatric neurosurgeon known for the first separation of conjoined twins joined at the back of the head in 1987, according to a news release.

“What a wonderful country that we’re privileged to live in and we’re doubly privileged, those of us in the medical profession, because people turn over to us the most important thing they have, their lives,” Carson said in an interview prior to Friday’s event. “We get to intervene in that and give them longevity and quality of life, and there’s few things that compare to the satisfaction that comes out of that.”

The DeBakey Distinguished Lecture Series was initiated in 2004 by Covenant Chief Medical Officer Emeritus Dr. Robert Salem, who had studied and trained under DeBakey, according to a news relase.

“DeBakey was the inaugural speaker for the series,” the release states. “The series has brought to West Texas nearly a dozen well-known names in heart and cardiac medicine. This year the series broadens its subject matter by hosting Carson.”

Richard Parks, chief executive officer of Covenant, recalled how Salem, was able to get Carson to speak at this year’s event.

“Bob came to me a few months ago and told me, ‘I think we need to have Dr. Carson come,’” Parks said. “I said, ‘Sure, if you have the time to pursue that you go right ahead, thinking the chances that were slim to none.’”

But, as he remembered learning when he first move to town — never underestimate Salem’s perserverance and connections.

Parks said he was pleased to welcome Carson to Lubbock.

“We have our own renowned group of neurosurgeons here and everytime we get a chance to recruit ... I just want to say we have a medical staff application here we’d like to you to fill out,” Parks joked.

As Salem talked about Carson being awared the Presidential Medal of Freedom — the highest civilian honor in the U.S — he went on to say Carson has accomplished so much, he couldn’t possibly list them all during his introduction.

“As of late, he has become recognized as a highly acclaimed New York Times best-selling author of six books, well-regarded syndicated columist for the Washington Post and I dare say, the hottest comodity in the speaking circuit in America,” Salem said.

Carson received a standing ovation as he took the podium Friday night, talking about how he began his career in medicine. He also talked about the future of healthcare in the U.S.

“There is nothing that a person possesses that even comes close to their value and their health,” he said. “That’s one of the reasons why I and other people have been fighting so hard against the Affordable Care Act. We want health care for everybody that’s really affordable.”

sarah.rafique@lubbockonline.com

● 766-2159

Follow Sarah on Twitter

@SarahRafique