In Tuesday’s elections, several Colorado communities — Broomfield, Fort Collins, Lafayette and Boulder — voted on initiatives proposing a moratorium or ban on hydraulic fracturing. Here is a safe bet: The results won’t resolve the issue or put it to rest. In other words, we are now positioned to shift the discussion of oil and gas production in Colorado from a shouting match to a thoughtful and civil conversation.

This cheerful statement will strike many as a classically airheaded-academic, improbable, borderline-batty statement. Indeed, many readers have, at this point, taken pencil or computer keyboard in hand to draft proclamations of scorn for my unrealistic naiveté.

Ardent critics, hold your fire for a moment. In making this statement, I have some notable allies who carry a lot more credibility than I do. One has written that the issue of hydraulic fracturing comes with many complications, making “it difficult for someone who knows how complex [the issue] is to take a firm, absolute stance on it. The more you learn, the more you realize how little you know.”

This wise remark appeared in a stack of student-written course papers. Required to attend a public lecture in the Center of the American West’s FrackingSENSE series, my students are assigned to listen to the talk and, afterward, to speak with members of the public seated near them. Many of the papers were charged with the students’ hope that their elders will cut back on the shouting and take part in a civil discussion shaped by the consideration of evidence rather than the denunciation of opponents. How would we pursue this improved conversation? Here are three ideas:

1. We could talk about providing better aim to the concerns, worries, anxieties and fears raised by hydraulic fracturing. Many opponents of the process are preoccupied with the risk of groundwater contamination from compounds in the fracturing fluid that, under high pressure, shatters the shale in which natural gas or oil is “trapped.” This preoccupation is an understandable legacy of the years in which many oil and gas companies refused to disclose the contents of fracturing fluid, a practice that could not have been better designed to foster and maintain public distrust. Fortunately, a shift — produced by regulation and by voluntary action in companies — toward the disclosure of fracturing fluid contents is already well underway.

Moreover, my colleague Joe Ryan, a University of Colorado environmental engineering professor, has laid out a valuable way to appraise the contents of fracturing fluid. Of the nearly 1,000 compounds that have been included in the inventories and lists, Ryan has pointed out, only a limited number have the capability of harming human beings. To pose a danger, these compounds must be hazardous to human health, mobile enough to get to humans, and persistent enough to avoid breaking down to something less hazardous while traveling toward the humans. Identifying compounds with these qualities generates a much shorter set of targets for our wariness.

With more efficient ways to worry, we can direct greater attention to the construction and maintenance of wells, casings, cement, surface storage containers, and mechanisms and equipment on the surface. It is time to think more about the risks posed by leaks and spills on or near the surface, while downsizing worries over the fracturing process that occurs thousands of feet beneath these areas of risk.

Risk = hazard + outrage

2. Our public conversation should attend carefully to the genuine distress triggered by the arrival of oil and gas development in a setting of homes and schools. Consider the insightful formula offered by expert Peter Sandman: “Risk = hazard + outrage.” While the scientists and engineers can help us by collecting data and assessing the physical dimensions and qualities of a hazard, a sense of powerlessness — of being subjected to an un-chosen, involuntary ordeal — is a major driver of worry, stress and fear. The noise, lights, traffic and disruption that come with drilling and production make a dissonant and disorienting addition to life in a town or suburb. Here I propose a simple trade-off for improved conversation: I ask people in the industry to recognize more legitimacy in the concerns of their residential neighbors, and I ask worried residents of the towns and suburbs affected by natural gas production to speak more openly about their communities’ dependence on natural gas for heating and petroleum for transportation.

3. We would all benefit from more modest expectations of the likelihood that scientific findings will, on their own, chart the route to sound decisions and policies. Especially in studies of public health, rather than giving us confident and certain predictions, experts must convey their results in probabilities of risk. The scientists’ mental world involves calculating and estimating the probability of an undesirable thing happening. The public’s mental world accents an entirely different question: “If there is a chance of risk, will I or my family members prove to be the ones injured by that risk?” The scientists are trying to speak in statistical terms about broad populations; a member of the public is asking, “Am I in danger?” In a calm conversation, we can conjure up ways to connect and reconcile these two very different ways of thinking.

Preconceived notions

In Colorado’s ongoing real-life seminar on hydraulic fracturing, taking up these three topics could open the door to a dramatically more worthwhile discussion. I arrive at this conviction after spending the last year as a participant in a big project funded by the National Science Foundation’s Sustainability Research Network. This project brings together teams of researchers to find ways to maximize the benefits and minimize the risks of natural gas production. The science and engineering teams are immersed in collecting data. (It will be awhile before their findings are completed and published.) Thus, I write here not as an official reporter of the teams’ research findings, but as a citizen who has had the good fortune to spend time in the company of specialists studying this subject with rigor.

And yet I also write as a proud teacher reporting the insights of impressive students. One young man summed up the hope shared by many: “If people could somehow dampen their preconceived notions on the topic, they could make better decisions about which side they support.”

My students listened with open minds to both supporters and opponents of hydraulic fracturing, as well as many people who said they were still making up their minds. “They really are looking out for the future of their families,” one student reported of her conversation with two activists, “and that’s something I find honorable.”

Ask a friend to try an experiment. Then start shouting loudly and angrily at your friend about, for instance, the difference between completely reliable predictions and carefully calculated probabilities. After a minute or two of this, you will both be in the mood for a change in style of communication.

I happen to have at hand a list of youthful and honorable discussion-moderators to recommend, with writing samples to accompany my nominations. We’re talking about their future, after all.

To read a longer version of the ideas expressed here, go to centerwest.org.

Patty Limerick is faculty director and chair of the Center of the American West at the University of Colorado.