"When it comes to how we oversee the parity provision in the [Affordable Care Act] we've got to let the insurance carriers know that we're serious." -- President Obama announcing a new Mental Health Parity and Substance Use Disorder Task Force.

"If you don't change very much, then you shouldn't expect very much." -- Harold Miller, president and CEO of the Center for Healthcare Quality and Payment Reform (CHQPR) in Pittsburgh, on why some accountable care organizations fail.

"Medically unexplained symptoms such as chronic joint pain and fatigue need to be more of a priority in terms of research in this country." -- Gary P. Wormser, MD, of New York Medical College in Valhalla, N.Y., on the continued focus on antibiotics for Lyme disease, after another study found long-term antimicrobial treatment ineffective.

"Open surgery may no longer be justified for most patients in this setting." -- Diana Mannschreck, Johns Hopkins, commenting on her study of trends in surgery for early-stage endometrial cancer.

"That would be a large database, and it would take a long time." -- Judy Hannah, MD, of the National Institute on Aging, on mining EHRs to collect data on hormone replacement therapy use in menopausal women.

"We like to say it's pretty hard not to be touched by an ASCO member." -- Clifford Hudis, MD, just named as the next CEO of the American Society of Clinical Oncology.

"Wait, really? Now I'm answering insurance questions and explaining the risks of someone else's procedure, because they're too busy?" -- Fred Pelzman, MD, of Weill Cornell Medical, fuming about a patient's ophthalmologist who wouldn't answer questions about an upcoming cataract surgery.

"I can't call the pharmacy up and say 'Tell me the price for this patient of these five cholesterol-lowering medications.'" -- Thomas Tape, MD, of the University of Nebraska and an ACP board member, on the persistent lack of transparency in drug pricing.

"It's fair to say that environmental issues are increasingly on the minds of obstetricians and air pollution is one of those issues that should be on their minds." -- Leonard Trasande, MD, of NYU School of Medicine, on data linking air pollution to increased rates of preterm birth.