Women's rights

Brooklyn: I’d like Voicers Andrea Miller and Diane Rossi to explain to me why oral contraceptives must be available without co-pay under the Affordable Care Act while lifesaving medications such as insulin and anti-hypertensives are not. I pay hundreds of dollars in co-pays every year for medications that help keep me alive and out of lengthy, expensive hospital stays — but they aren’t deemed significant enough for the attention of this administration. I don’t mind paying my share, but I expect everyone else to do the same. Maybe the reason you don’t hear complaints about insurance paying for Viagra or Cialis is because most plans don’t cover them. Louise Quinlan

Male enhancements

Brooklyn: Memo to Voicer Fred Schoeneborn, who regards women demanding insurance coverage for contraceptives as “delusional nuts”: I do not recall any irate letters from you complaining about Medicare coverage for penis pumps. Martin Brahms

Cuomo’s fuzzy math

Middle Village: So Gov. Cuomo doubles the tolls on bridges and tunnels, enacts a $30 ConEd surcharge, refuses to give MTA managers a raise for the last six years, refuses to settle open MTA contracts but has an “extra” $300 million for a new pre-K (baby-sitting) program. Had enough of him? Robert Leavy

Late again

Bayside: Once again, Mayor de Blasio was late, this time to address a Brooklyn group concerning paid sick leave. Not five minutes late, but 45 minutes! That’s outrageous — and he didn’t even offer an apology. This is a sign of arrogance on his part. Constance Dowd

Bottom line

Rockaway Park: To Voicer Joie Anderson: It never seems to stop amazing me how people such as you continue to believe that Rev. Al Sharpton, Councilman Jumaane Williams and others of like minds are advocates for lawlessness in New York, when all they are asking for is equal treatment for people of color under the law. This can be achieved while keeping the city safe at the same time. This is something you either don’t understand or don’t care about. Anthony L. Johnson

The real jerks

Staten Island: The Daily News ran a front-page photo of a man holding a sign which related to his right to have a gun (“No, you jerk, they kill,” April 2). Your response was to call him a nasty name. Then you have an article about paternity leave for fathers. Several people took the position that they felt it was not necessary. Your response again was to call them names (“Time to lower Boomer on pompous Pope,” column, April 4). It appears that anyone who voices opposition to your established positions are idiots, and people in agreement with you are sages. You demean anyone who exercises their freedom of speech. How arrogant. Perhaps it is your editorial staff who are the jerks. Martin T. Reda

What dummies

Bronx: Can there be two women anywhere on the planet more embarrassed about their husbands than the wives of Boomer Esiason and Mike Francesca? Not only were their comments ignorant and offensive, they reflected aNeanderthal mentality that modern society has for the most part discarded. Daniel Murphy should be commended for spending time with his wife during the birth of their child. By criticizing him for taking paternity leave, Esiason and Francesca exposed themselves as shallow-minded loudmouths whose priorities are terribly misplaced. Jim Theobald

Two-faced sports pope

Wantagh, L.I.: So Mike Francesca is against a baseball player taking a paternity leave. I guess it’s only okay when the holy one takes off the whole summer to go play with his horses in Saratoga. Richard Banks

Green all around

Mahwah, N.J.: Now that Michael Vick is part of Gang Green, how about passing on some of the $5 million he will earn to Best Friends Animal Society in Kanab, Utah? Carol Brodyn

Unacceptable

Broad Channel: The Jets have sunk to a level that I did not even know existed. How dare they sign an animal abuser and killer to the team? I have been a Jet fan for as long as I can remember but can now say in all honesty, no more. I am done. I urge all Jet fans as well as animal lovers to send a very clear message to this team that we will not support them after this slap in the face. Michael Vick should have been sent to jail for a very long time and banned from ever playing professional football again. He is a disgusting example of a human being. Patricia Doyle

Charter fail

Staten Island: Like many parents, I had hoped that Mayor de Blasio was going to be different when it comes to our children. Eva Moskowitz must have a lot of clout or know somebody bigger than him. The charter schools are not schools. They are a business — and our schools are not businesses and our children are not commodities. Mr. Mayor, bring back our public schools so all children have the same opportunity there. And if charter schools are so wonderful, how come there are parents are taking their children out of them? Phyllis Levy

Charter hype

Bronx: I’ve watched ad after ad lamenting the unfair plight of the Harlem Success Academy students. The money spent on these prime time spots probably could’ve paid for a new school building several times over. Glenn O’Sullivan

Types of sadness

Schenectady, N.Y.: What a sad month for the fashion industry. First the untimely death of the great designer L’Wren Scott. Then Kim and Kanye make the April Vogue cover. Oh, dear me. June Bublak

Bad puns are best

Bronx: Has anyone noticed that as you drive downtown in Manhattan at night, the street lights get brighter? The reason is you are getting closer to the Battery. Michael J. Rowman

Lessons learned

Manhattan: To Voicer Andrea Malone-Polydor: Apparently your children were raised right and taught not to shoot at the police, who protect and serve us. Good job, Andrea. You should be proud. Michael Cantwell

So much for riches

Brooklyn: Bernie Madoff’s crew had wonderful positions in his company, making salaries the average person can only dream of. Yet they followed his greedy path to achieve ever more riches and “live the good life.” That has come to a stop. As the song goes, “When it comes to selling out, reconsider.” Margaret D. Mirailh

Watches and doers

Breezy Point: As if wasn’t hard enough to read about the vicious and senseless beating of Carnegie Deli Manager Jose Robles by a lowlife (“ People took videos, but no one helped,” April 2), it was disgusting to read that no one came to his aid as he begged for help. Not only that, the bottom-feeding onlookers took out their cell phones and filmed it. Thank God the subject was arrested, and will certainly go to jail. As for the idiots who filmed the attack, you know what they say about karma. I hope for a speedy and complete recovery for Robles. As horrible as it was to read that story, it was just as nice to read the same day about Kwasi Enin, the young man from Shirley, L.I., who was accepted by all eight Ivy League schools (“Lovin Elite 8,” April 2). The sky’s the limit for him, and I wish him all the luck in the world. John Carberry

Urban angels

Belle Harbor: On behalf of my mother, I would like to thank the three girls who were going to buy macaroons on Macaroon Day NYC (March 20). These angels saw a car hit my mother on 15 St. and 5 Ave. Not only did they comfort my mother, whose ankle was shattered and bleeding profusely, they also tied a scarf around her leg to stop the bleeding. And they waited withher until my sister arrived at the scene. From the bottom of my heart, thank you girls. Elizabeth Marconi