Los Angeles — Rockies trainer Keith Dugger was a very busy man Sunday morning before the Rockies played the Dodgers.

He’s trying to got Troy Tulowitzki, Jorge De La Rosa and Corey Dickerson back on the field. And trying to get right-hander Jordan Lyles ready for his start on Monday against the Phillies.

Of all the injuries, Dickerson’s is the most worrisome right now.

He aggravated the plantar fasciitis in his left foot while running in the outfield Saturday night. When he made a sudden stop on the warning track, the conditioned flared up. A trip to the 15-day disabled list is a possibility, though Dickerson said he doesn’t think it would help.

“I don’t know if that time would help,” he said. “To heal it, it will take a lot of time, or tearing (the tissue in his foot), to get better. So I don’t know.”

Dickerson is frustrated by the injury, especially because his foot was feeling better on Saturday before he aggravated it.

“Yesterday was the best it has ever felt, and I was running well,” Dickerson said.

Manager Walt Weiss said he’s concerned about Dickerson’s injury. Asked if putting Dickerson on the disabled list was a possibility, Weiss said: “Yeah, but not today, not right now. We will see how it plays out for a couple of days. But it is concerning, because we do know the nature of that injury. It doesn’t go away. He’s been dealing with it. ‘Doogie’ and the staff have been doing a great job with it. But he’s sore today.”

Tulowitzki was out of that starting lineup for the second straight game after experiencing tightness in his left quad in the third inning of Friday night’s game. Tulo went through agility drills Sunday morning and did well. According to manager Walt Weiss, the shortstop would be available to pinch hit “if we have a chance to win the game.”

However, it’s still not clear when Tulo will be back in the starting lineup.

De La Rosa, who was sensational in beating the Dodgers Saturday night — allowing no runs on just two hits with no walks and three strikeouts in 7 1.3 innings — did some light jogging Sunday morning. He re-injured the left groin that cost him the first two weeks of the regular season.

“I hope I can make my next start,” he said. “It’s not as bad as it was early in the season. We have to test it out.”

Lyles, who suffered a nasty contusion on his right hand when the Angels’ Albert Pujols hit a wicked comebacker at him last week, is still scheduled to start on Monday.

“There’s still some swelling,” Weiss said. “But it’s a lot better than I thought it would be.”