Florida is last in the nation. After more than a decade of legislative bantering, Florida is the only state in the nation to withhold Drug Enforcement Administration licensure, or full prescriptive authority, from advanced registered nurse practitioners (ARNPs). ARNPs are highly educated, nationally certified registered nurses who have completed advanced clinical training and education — minimally at a master’s level. ARNPs serve as healthcare providers in hospitals, nursing homes, primary and specialty clinics, and other locations. They diagnose and treat patients’ acute and chronic illness every day in Florida.

Patients in Florida are upset. Florida ARNPs are serving as primary care providers. Florida ARNPs can prescribe all classes of medication, except controlled substances. Everywhere else in the United States, an ARNP can prescribe controlled substances.

This means that in Florida, patients may have a delay in treatment, or incur additional co-pays if controlled substances are necessary.

ARNPs in Florida are frustrated as well. Without full prescriptive authority, ARNPs cannot prescribe a cough medication with codeine, treat attention deficit-hyperactivity disorders successively, give sleeping medication, or control patients’ pain effectively. Due to state laws, Florida ARNPs are limited in choices that would be a more appropriate to prescribe to a patient. The statutes also frustrate physicians, as they are called on to prescribe controlled substances in patients with whom they have not had a face-to-face encounter.

2016 is proving politics as usual. The legislative battle for full prescription authority for Florida ARNPs is not new. Bills have moved through the Florida House and Senate for decades and, at times, votes have been very close to granting full prescriptive authority to Florida ARNPs.

Various issues have caused the bills to die in committee or the legislative session times out before its passage. The 2016 Florida Legislative Session holds promise once again with bills running through both the House and Senate that would grant additional or full prescriptive authority to Florida ARNPs.

ARNPs in Florida provide safe, affordable medical care. ARNPs across the nation prescribe medications, including controlled substances, judiciously and safely. If granted the ability to obtain full prescriptive authority in Florida to meet the needs of patients, ARNPs would prescribe controlled medications under the Florida Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act and the Prescription Drug Monitoring program, exactly the same as physician colleagues.

This law, passed in response to the Florida “pill mill” problem, has proven effective in decreasing misuse of prescription drugs by patients and excessive prescribing by physicians.

Evidence collected in 49 other states where ARNPs have full prescribing authority negate the argument that ARNPs would participate in excessive prescribing of controlled substances.

I urge readers to contact their Florida senators and representatives to encourage them to let go of antiquated notions and support the passage of bills granting ARNPs full prescriptive authority so that they can fully care for patients in Florida as they do in the rest of the nation.

— Stephanie Panday has been a registered nurse for 18 years. She has nursing degrees from the College of Central Florida, the University of Florida and University of Central Florida and is a board certified family nurse practitioner. She is currently pursuing a doctorate in nursing practice at UCF. She lives in Ocala.