The Tea Party began promising to “take our country back” as early as 2009. According to an on line article titled – appropriately enough – “Take Our Country Back,” a disgruntled American named Chris Cassone was watching Glenn Beck on TV when he was inspired to pick up his guitar and compose a song. And that’s how Cassone’s song, “Take Our Country Back,” was born. Readers are left wondering how many other composers have been similarly inspired by Glenn Beck.

“Little did he know how far that song would take him,” the article rhapsodizes. Cassone debuted “Take Our Country Back” at a Tea Party rally on March 21, 2009. The lyrics warn listeners that our nation is “under attack” (by whom?) and admonishes all concerned parties to “draw a line in the sand so they (who, specifically?) all understand.” The demand that our nation be taken back became both a rallying cry` as well as a demand among Tea Party activists. Outraged by Obamacare, Michele Bachmann proclaimed, “That’s why I am so absolutely confident in 2012” that “Americans have made the decision that we’re going to take our country back.”

Donald Trump has repeatedly assured audiences on the campaign trail that he will take our country back. The Donald believes the United States needs to be taken back from immigrants, particularly those who aren’t Christians. The Republican Tea Party obsession with our nation being overrun with “foreigners” is nothing new. Native-born American bigots founded the Know-Nothing movement in the 1840s because they were horrified by the waves of immigrants entering the United States. These immigrants weren’t the Latin-Americans and Muslims so reviled by Trump, however. They were German and Irish Catholics. Members of the Know Nothing movement were convinced that these Catholics would never make good Americans and were entering the United States for the sole purpose of undermining our republic. Simply substitute “Republican Tea Party” for Know Nothing movement and “Muslims” for Catholics and one has Trump and his xenophobic supporters.

Does the Republican Tea Party want to take our country back to an era when women lacked reproductive freedom of choice? The PoliticusUSA column “Proof of the GOP War on Women,” states “Republican legislators have introduced a wide array of laws designed to either outlaw abortion outright or to discourage it by making ridiculous and sometimes humiliating requirements of women who might consider having a pregnancy terminated.” Should unmarried women even have access to birth control? Some Republican Tea Party members think not. Perhaps these zealots yearn to take us back to a time when shelters for abused women didn’t exist and wives were expected to remain in abusive relationships, even at the risk of their lives.

Does the Republican Tea Party want to take our country back to an era when unions were weak and workers had few rights? If that’s the case, then we can conclude these extremists are succeeding magnificently. West Virginia’s GOP-dominated legislature just overrode the Democratic governor’s veto of a right to work bill. Over half of our states have now enacted this anti-union measure. Never mind that numerous studies have shown that the decline of unions parallels the decline of the American middle class. We mustn’t inconvenience corporate CEO’s, a/k/a “job creators,” by empowering their workers through unionization.

We can safely conclude that the mysterious “they” who are supposedly menacing our country are immigrants, non-Christians, uppity women who don’t know their place and working people who have the audacity to stand up to their employers. Civil rights supporters are also seen as a threat. Indeed, the web site of Tea Party Crusaders has an entire archive category titled “Race-Baiters.” This columnist thinks that the Republican Tea Party’s promise to take our country back can more accurately be construed as a threat to drag our country down.

John J. Dunphy of Godfrey is a writer and poet. He is the author of “Abolitionism and the Civil War in Southwestern Illinois” and owns the Second Reading Book Shop in Alton.

By John J. Dunphy Contributing columnist

http://thetelegraph.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/web1_Dunphy-3.jpg

John J. Dunphy of Godfrey is a writer and poet. He is the author of “Abolitionism and the Civil War in Southwestern Illinois” and owns the Second Reading Book Shop in Alton.

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus