Sports legends streaked around Pole Position Raceway in Jersey City Thursday night in a pre-Super Bowl event in which two of the five teams racing were captained by former football players, Ickey Woods and Super Bowl XXV MVP O.J. Anderson.

“Hell no, I wouldn’t fit in one of those things. I’d look like Fred Flintstone,” said gigantic former New York Giants defensive end Gary Jeter, 59, who wasn’t participating in the go-cart races, but was one of the football legends on hand for the event.

Asked if he thought racing on the track was better or worse than driving around the area, Jeter said, “Driving around town is probably worse than this. Driving around town you don’t know what to expect.”

About the Super Bowl, Jeter said, “I hope it’s a good game. It’s going to be a cold venue. New York and New Jersey have put their best foot forward.”

But Jeter, who is now manager of business development at Motivated Security Services in Somerville, added: “I’m really disappointed that the epicenter seems to be in New York and not New Jersey.”

The defensive end who also played for the Rams said there should have been more high-profile events in New Jersey in the run-up to tomorrow’s big game at MetLife Stadium in East Rutherford.

The roster of racers on the teams included athletes and special guests from the media and entertainment and local personalities. The event benefited health and wellness initiatives of the NY/NJ Chapter of the NFL Alumni Association.

Wayne Mogel, founder of Sports Legends Classics, said the event was originally to be a reception with lavish VIP treatment for guests that included legendary athletes.

“But with New York and New Jersey being the backdrop this year, we felt it was necessary to present a slightly different format that would showcase the region a little differently than the norm for a hospitality event, while helping the charity,” said Mogel in a statement.

Woods, 47, played for the Bengals and played in his team’s 20-16 loss to the San Francisco 49ers in Super Bowl XXIII. Anderson, 57, led the Giants to a victory over the Buffalo Bills in Super Bowl XXV, which is most remembered for Buffalo kicker Scott Norwood’s last-second missed field goal.