Retired pharmaceutical executive Cynthia Hogan has been named the newest member of the St. John’s Medical Center board of trustees.

Members of the board voted unanimously Thursday to appoint Hogan to replace departing trustee Zach Hall.

Hospital leaders touted Hogan’s experience in the health care industry, both as a professional and as someone who has helped people through serious medical conditions.

“Cynthia has been motivated to volunteer for this position by her long personal experience with family members with chronic illnesses,” board chairman Michael Tennican said.

Hogan, 58, spent more than three decades in the pharmaceutical industry, working in a dozen different positions. She retired to Wilson in 2013.

“I’m thrilled,” she said of the appointment. “I’ve served on a number of nonprofit boards in New Jersey, and I gave them up because we moved out to Wyoming. The hospital is something I’m passionate about. I’ve spent my entire career in health care.”

She has also helped her parents and an aunt through severe medical conditions, including Alzheimer’s and cancer.

“I really learned a lot about cancer, about mental health, about taking care of people with dignity and listening to them and helping them really live out their lives as they choose to live it out,” Hogan said.

During her time with the pharmaceutical company Novartis, Hogan helped with strategic planning to prepare the corporation for changes brought on by the Affordable Care Act. Trustees likely valued that experience on her resume, she said.

On the application Hogan submitted to the board, she wrote that she was a part-time Jackson Hole resident, but she and her husband plan to put their New Jersey home on the market in April and to live here full time, she said.

Trustees picked Hogan from a field of seven, a choice they said was difficult. The field included two outspoken hospital critics: former patient Susan Crosser and former employee Vickie Memmer. Other candidates included medical professionals, valley residents and some second homeowners who recently moved here full time.