Neighborhood activist Kip Kendrick on Wednesday became the first candidate for the 45th District House seat being vacated by veteran state Rep. Chris Kelly and began the race by announcing Kelly's endorsement.

Kendrick, 32, has been president of the Benton-Stephens Neighborhood Association since 2007. He works for Boone County Family Resources and lives with his wife, Sarah Kendrick, on Windsor Street. He will be seeking the Democratic nomination in a heavily Democratic district and said he expects primary opposition.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

That's one reason for the early start, he said. "I want to start knocking on doors in the next couple of weeks, and I intend to knock on 10,000 doors."

Filing opens Feb. 24 for legislative seats and all other offices on the Aug. 5, 2014, primary ballot.

Kelly, 67, is not seeking re-election because he would have to move from his current home into the district. Residency was not a requirement in 2012 because the district was newly drawn to reflect population shifts in the 2010 census. Kelly is eligible for one more term as a House member under term-limit restrictions.

Kendrick will make a good candidate and a good legislator, Kelly said, explaining his endorsement. "He has shown a lot of interest in the issues," Kelly said. "He has shown he knows how to conduct a race and has the skills and personality to be a good state representative. There is some value in trying to avoid a primary, and I like his commitment to the community."

No other potential candidates have contacted him, Kelly said. "I am not trying to tell anyone what they should think," he said. "I think this guy would be good."

The 45th District includes downtown, most of the University of Missouri campus and both major hospitals. The southern boundary is Stadium Boulevard between Providence Road and Old 63, and the northern boundary is near Prathersville. North of Interstate 70, the western boundary is Creasy Springs Road.

No Republican has represented the area since 1982.

The top issues for the district are health care and education funding, Kendrick said. He coordinates services for children with developmental disabilities in his position at Boone County Family Resources and said he will make the issues facing those families a priority.

"I am choosing to do this now because I feel these systems are being threatened," Kendrick said.

He will advocate for expanding Medicaid for low-income adults through the Affordable Care Act, Kendrick said, a move opposed by Republicans who control the General Assembly. "It makes a lot of economic sense," he said.

As he campaigns, Kendrick said, he hopes to convince voters that the skills he has learned as leader of the neighborhood association will help him in the Missouri House. "I have stood up for my neighborhood in the past, and I want to stand up for the district."