Company says wells near Union Reservoir will not violate fracking ban

Synergy, a Platteville-based oil and gas company, wants to cross Longmont land to get to its drilling sites southeast of Union Reservoir.

The well sites are in Firestone, on the town's Union annexation north of Colo. Highway 119. State authorities are allowing 10 wells on the property, but Synergy vice president of operations Craig Rasmuson said only six will be drilled and fracked -- and those not as far as they could be -- to avoid violating Longmont's ban on hydraulic fracturing.

"We're going to respect the fracking ban," Rasmuson said.

The 60-foot-wide access road would run 430 feet south from Weld County Road 26. That's an area that Longmont eventually hopes to build a finished road on anyway, running Fairview Street north toward the county road.

Firestone's town board issued its own local permits in February 2012. At that time, Mayor Chad Auer urged Rasmuson to assert his company's mineral rights for all the well sites, but Rasmuson responded that challenging the fracking ban would mean a court fight he wasn't ready for.

The state allows Synergy six horizontal wells and four directional wells in the area. A horizontal well uses an L-shaped route to get at oil and gas deposits, with a shaft that goes down and then horizontally across the area. A directional well is more like a narrow "S" or "Z," going straight down and then bending at an angle before going down again to reach a specific "bottom hole."

Of the four directional wells, three have a bottom hole in Longmont. That presented a problem for Synergy because of Longmont's charter amendment that forbids hydraulic fracturing -- the use of high-pressure sand, water and chemicals to crack open oil and gas deposits. According to the Colorado Oil and Gas Association, a state industry group, about 95 percent of new wells in Colorado are fracked.

As a result, Rasmuson said, Synergy decided not to pursue any of the directional wells until a COGA lawsuit over that ban is resolved. In addition, he said, the company would not frack the final stages of the horizontal wells, the parts that would carry into Longmont property.

"We'd plan on 20 to 26 stages for each well, so we'll lose the last six stages," he said. A stage is about 150 feet long, with a new frack occurring at each stage.

Rasmuson estimated the restriction would reduce the royalties on the drilling site by 20 to 25 percent.

Longmont had a similar access road agreement with TOP Operating, the city's main drilling company, before the fracking ban went in place.

The Longmont City Council will vote on the Synergy request at Tuesday's meeting. If the council rejects the move, Synergy will instead arrange to cross private land to reach the site, something it's been doing since late December.

Rasmuson said each well would take about two weeks to drill, so it will take about three months to drill all six.