In Illinois hospitals, insurers and health care associations applauded the U.S. Supreme Court's decision today to uphold subsidies that consumers use to buy plans on the health insurance exchanges.

But many also caution that the battle to preserve pieces of federal health care reform, commonly referred to as Obamacare, isn't over.

“Because of these subsidies, more than 230,000 low- and moderate-income Illinoisans are able to afford health insurance, ensuring that they have access to the health care they need when they need it,” the Illinois Hospital Association, an influential lobbying group based in Naperville, said in a statement. “These Illinoisans now receive more than $49 million a month in subsidies (nearly $600 million on an annualized basis)."

(Read the U.S. Supreme Court opinion below.)

“We are pleased that the hundreds of thousands of Illinois residents who have been able to obtain health coverage through Get Covered Illinois under the Affordable Care Act will continue to receive financial help to pay for their coverage,” Get Covered Illinois Executive Director Karin Zosel said in a statement.

“We remain focused on providing an array of affordable products and services to our members and the market,” Mike Deering, a spokesman for Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois, the state's largest insurer, said in a statement. “We also will continue to lead on patient-centered health care delivery reforms that promote innovation, value, and improve the quality of care for our members.”

Said the Metropolitan Chicago Healthcare Council, a hospital trade group, in a statement: “This ruling tremendously benefits the patients and communities our members serve, and we believe this momentous decision creates a healthier Illinois."

The council sponsored Land of Lincoln Health, a new type of insurer made possible under the Affordable Care Act that offers plans on the Illinois health insurance exchange.

Related: Ailing Obamacare co-op has an improved diagnosis

“The ruling is a critical triumph that reinforces the early and most important success of the ACA: broader health care coverage for Americans,” Dr. John Jay Shannon, CEO of the Cook County Health and Hospitals System, said in a statement.

Cook County Health, one of the largest public health systems in the nation, launched CountyCare under the ACA. Now one of the largest Medicaid managed care plans in the Chicago area, CountyCare had nearly 180,000 members as of May, according to the Illinois Department of Healthcare and Family Services, which oversees Medicaid.

“We are delighted that this issue is resolved and coverage is protected for those we serve who put their faith in a system that truly works,” Sandra Bruce, CEO of Chicago-based Presence Health, the largest Catholic hospital network in Illinois, said in a statement. “We hope that the focus now turns to enhancing coverage and care, rather than leaving those in need without an alternative.”

REFORM BATTLE FAR FROM OVER

Avalere Health, a Washington, D.C.-based consultancy that analyzes the Affordable Care Act, said that while the ruling preserves tax credits, the battle over federal health care reform is far from over. In fact, it's likely to “reignite” as part of the 2016 presidential race, Elizabeth Carpenter, director of Avalere, said in a statement.

“Congress is still likely to consider repeal of the medical device tax and the Independent Payment Advisory Board, as well as changes to the employer mandate and the Cadillac Tax," Carpenter said in the statement.

The public exchanges need to focus on boosting enrollment and attracting younger, healthier enrollees to ensure a variety of affordable plans, Avalere Senior Vice President Caroline Pearson said in the statement.

SCOTUS Ruling