The intensity of the ad wars is a testament to the importance that both parties are placing on a victory in this tight race. Even if the bragging rights outweigh the tangible impacts of one congressional race, the two sides see the contest as a potential harbinger, particularly on the health care law. The stakes are particularly high for Democrats, who are on the defensive nationwide over the issue, and who put forward a strong candidate in Ms. Sink, an early favorite in this race.

The district, which includes Clearwater and most of St. Petersburg, is 87 percent white and has a high proportion of older voters.

Dodging the blizzard of political messages is no longer an option. One moment, a flier pillories Ms. Sink as “not one of us” and a narrator on television calls her a lackey for President Obama and his health care law, which will lead to “canceled health plans, higher premiums, Medicare cuts,” according to an ad from the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.

The next moment, an ad from a Democratic political action committee shows an office in Washington, where “David Jolly lobbied for a special interest that wanted to privatize Social Security,” and adds that he “still says privatization should be on the table.”

Neither position is wholly accurate. Ms. Sink, 65, supports the Affordable Care Act but has said she would work to fix it rather than repeal it. And Mr. Jolly, 41, said that while he and his firm, Three Bridges Advisors, lobbied in 2009 for Free Enterprise Nation, a group dedicated to controlling “unsustainable” government spending, he did not lobby on that issue.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The group’s chief executive, James MacDougald, a businessman, is a strong advocate for privatizing Social Security and co-chairman of Mr. Jolly’s finance team. Mr. Jolly said the program should remain untouched for workers who have paid in at least 10 years but must be re-evaluated for the rest, with all options on the table, including allowing private accounts.

Photo

So far, conservative groups have outspent liberals in an attempt to blunt Ms. Sink’s considerable fund-raising advantage, spending $5 million on ads that oppose her, compared with $3,7 million by liberal groups, according to the Center for Responsive Politics. In the past six weeks, Ms. Sink has raised $1.3 million, a prodigious sum for a special election and double the amount raised by Mr. Jolly.

Mr. Jolly’s lackluster fund-raising and at times uncertain campaign — he was not the first choice of party leaders looking for a candidate to take on Ms. Sink — have left some Republicans nervous about his chances. Still, polls show that the race has tightened. Ms. Sink, a former bank executive, was narrowly ahead, but Republicans usually turn out in higher numbers for special elections, something that Ms. Sink has tried to diminish with an intense absentee and early-voting effort.

Ms. Sink, who lost the governor’s race in 2010 to Gov. Rick Scott by one percentage point, is well known throughout the state. And while her moderate stances and business background are a boon in the district, her low-key nature does not tend to rev up a room. Still, many see her as genuine, and she has made efforts to reach out to older voters.

“She has the brains and the integrity,” said Helen Emrick, 89, part of a group that gathered to support Ms. Sink at the Palms of Largo, an independent- and assisted-living center. “Jolly has the charisma and the good looks,” Ms. Emrick added, but “he’s a politician. She’s a real person.”

As Ms. Sink mingled with residents at the center, complimenting one woman’s jacket and thanking another for her support, she emphasized her traditional upbringing on a farm in North Carolina. Then, with her twang, she homed in on Social Security.

“Social Security is not an entitlement program,” Ms. Sink told the senior citizens, a group she is assiduously wooing. “We earned it. We paid into it.”

Not too far away, on Madeira Beach, Mr. Jolly squinted into the sun on a dock with charter fishermen looking on and argued for less fisheries regulation. “This is about protecting the quality of life in Pinellas and growing our economy,” he said.

Photo

Mr. Jolly, who had been a senior aide to Mr. Young, is campaigning heavily as Mr. Young’s natural successor. His smooth style and grasp of the issues have helped bolster his standing in the polls.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“He’s articulate, he’s smart and runs a great campaign,” said Fred Piccolo Jr., a Republican political consultant who grew up in the district. “His Achilles’ heel is that he was lobbying for as long as he was.”

But Mr. Jolly has shifted to the right on some issues, a potential problem in this moderate district, political analysts said. During one debate, he said he would advocate the repeal of Roe v. Wade. Questioned about Syria, he responded that Mr. Obama should have intervened, a contentious position in an area with so many veterans.

“It surprised a lot of people how conservative Jolly went in the debates, and it gave Sink an opening,” Mr. Piccolo said.

For the most part, though, Mr. Jolly and Republicans have focused on the Affordable Care Act, with few other issues gaining as much traction against Ms. Sink, Mr. Piccolo said. Mr. Jolly’s depiction of Ms. Sink as a carpetbagger may have done some damage, too; Ms. Sink moved to Pinellas from a neighboring county several months ago. Questions have also been raised about the depth of Mr. Jolly’s ties to the district.

Although not nearly as visible, Mr. Overby, 27, the Libertarian candidate, may pose problems for both Ms. Sink and Mr. Jolly. A commercial diving supervisor, he could lure enough discontented voters away to make a difference.

“He a candidate of the future for young people,” said Susan MacManus, a professor of political science at the University of South Florida. “We just don’t know how much he is going to drain off.”

No matter who wins, there will be little time to celebrate. The next election is eight months away.

“This is the warm-up,” said David Beattie, a Democratic pollster. “Whoever wins is going right back in, whether it’s the same opponent or not.”