Listen:

Media Player Error

Update your browser or Flash plugin

State and federal income taxes are due a few days later than normal this year thanks to a government holiday in D.C.

For those have yet to complete their 2015 taxes, Internal Revenue Service spokesman Bill Brunson gave some last minute reminders.

On filing an extension:

"You still can request an extension to file up through midnight, and you can do so electronically at the IRS website," he said. "This will give you an additional six months to submit your 2015 tax return."

"But your extension to file is not an extension to pay." Any owed taxes are still due on April 18.

On new health insurance-related forms:

"This year folks may seeing additional forms sent to them because of the Affordable Care Act. That would be the form 1095-B and 1095-C," Brunson said. Most people will not need to take any information off that form. They will check a box that shows they had health insurance in 2015.

"If you did take benefit of the premium tax credit [from ACA], you should have received a form 1095-A. You would need to take information off that and report it on your return."

Brian Watson, a spokesman for the IRS' criminal investigation arm, said because tax season is over does not mean tax fraud is done.

This year's most common scam:

"The biggest scam we've seen the last few years is something we call the IRS impersonation scam," Watson said. That involves unsolicited telephone calls from individuals claiming to represent the IRS. They ask for money to be sent to them to avoid legal repercussions, loss of a driver's license or deportation.

"Now they're also claiming to be from the IRS and asking to verify your tax information so that your refund can be processed." It is actually a ploy to get information that may help them steal your identity.

The bottom line: the IRS will not make first contact on the phone and demand money or information. "If we need to get in touch with you, we're going to send you a letter to let you know what's going on," he said.

Tax return fraud:

Some may prepare their taxes, only to have the agency tell them they have already filed. "If you get an indication that a return has already been filed, most likely what has happened is you're the victim of identity theft," he said. Steps to report tax return fraud are available at IRS.gov.

"You will get your refund if you were owed one by the IRS," Watson said. "But it will take 3-6 months to get it cleared up."

Where to mail:

Most post offices are not altering their schedules, according to US Postal Service spokesman Peter Hass. Hass said walk-up counters at Tucson's main postal facility on Cherrybell Stravenue will be open until 7 p.m., and final pick up at the facility's mailboxes will be at 10 p.m.

Last-minute help: