Buy Photo Indiana Gov. Mike Pence talks Jan. 27, 2015, with Shirley Hale, 57, Indianapolis, after announcing expansion of his Healthy Indiana Plan to offer insurance to an additional 350,000 Indiana residents who currently lack insurance. Pence made the announcement at St. Vincent Health. (Photo: Mike Fender / The Star)Buy Photo

Kudos to Gov. Mike Pence for bringing the Affordable Care Act's Medicaid expansion to Indiana. Hundreds of thousands of uninsured Hoosiers will now have access to health-care coverage.

Kudos as well to the governor for trying to ensure that the costs of the expansion are manageable. As comparisons with other countries indicate, we spend too much money on medical care and get too little bang for our buck. We need to find better ways to finance our health-care system.

But key cost-saving features of the Healthy Indiana Plan 2.0 may do more to perpetuate unfortunate stereotypes than to make Medicaid operate more efficiently. Moreover, these cost-containing provisions may be counterproductive when it comes to promoting the health of the poor.

In drafting the Affordable Care Act, Congress included a fix for a serious defect in Medicaid policy that dated to the program's original passage in 1965. While Medicaid was adopted to meet the health-care needs of the poor, it never met the needs of all poor people. The program covered children, pregnant women, single caretakers of children, and disabled persons — people whose age, medical conditions or responsibilities in the home meant that they could not fairly be held accountable for their inability to afford health-care insurance. Only these "deserving" poor were viewed as worthy of assistance. More than half of America's poor were left to fend for themselves.

The ACA was designed to ensure health-care coverage for all Americans. Instead of covering only the "deserving poor," the ACA covers all persons up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level. One no longer needs to be a child, disabled, pregnant or a caretaker of a child to be eligible for Medicaid; it is sufficient simply to be poor. Under ACA, everyone deserves good access to health care.

But HIP 2.0's Medicaid expansion includes its own distinctions among the poor. To encourage participants to be more responsible about their use of the health-care system, HIP 2.0 requires its recipients to share in the cost of their health care — they must have their own "skin in the game." Some recipients have to pay part of their health insurance premiums, others face co-payments for their care, and all will be billed if they use the emergency department without authorization in non-emergencies. While these requirements may encourage cost consciousness, they also make sure that the expansion population "deserves" its Medicaid benefits. Rather than gaining access to HIP 2.0 because they are not at fault for their poverty, the newly insured will gain access by earning it through their sharing of the costs of their care.

It is unfortunate to see HIP 2.0 perpetuate distinctions among the poor in terms of their health care deserts. If indigent families are uninsured, it does not mean that they lack initiative or a willingness to pursue gainful employment. Among the pre-ACA uninsured, 63 percent lived in families with one or more full-time workers, and another 16 percent lived in families with part-time workers. Working hard and playing by the rules does not guarantee that someone will have health-care coverage in America. Poor people typically are uninsured not because they are lazy, but because health care is so expensive.

The cost-sharing features of HIP 2.0 are troubling for a second important reason: They may undermine the Medicaid expansion's goal of better health for the poor. Researchers have examined the impact of increases in cost sharing, and the data indicate that higher premiums, deductibles and co-payments can discourage the indigent from filling prescriptions or obtaining other care that can prevent hospitalizations, admissions to nursing homes, or death. There are many ways to reduce health-care spending without compromising people's health, and that is where our cost-cutting efforts should focus.

HIP 2.0 is a big step forward for health care in Indiana. With further refinement — to HIP 3.0 — we could have a Medicaid expansion that more effectively promotes the dignity and health of the poor.

Orentlicher, a former Democratic state representative, is a physician, attorney and professor of law and medicine at Indiana University. Follow him on Twitter: @orentlicher.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1EuhfMq