Teachers College and its office employees came to a contract agreement that preserved workers' health care benefits and pension plans after over 3 months of negotiations on Wednesday evening.

The TC employees, all of whom belong to the United Auto Workers Local 2110 union, ratified the three-year contract at a meeting on Thursday with overwhelming support, according to Maida Rosenstein, the president of the union. Rosenstein said about 80 percent of the roughly 100 employees the union represents were present at the vote.

“We are very pleased to have reached a mutually satisfactory agreement with UAW Local 2110 on a three-year contract with our 2110 employees,” a spokesperson for Teachers College said.

The contract agreement comes after employees' authorization of a strike last week, which demonstrated that they were willing to go on strike if they could not reach an agreement with TC on a contract.

According to Rosenstein, the TC administration changed its proposal to cut health care and pensions in the last bargaining session, and also agreed to minimal wage increases of 3% each year.

“They wanted to eliminate the pension plan altogether so that people didn't have pension plans, they wanted to take people out of the health plan that covers union members, which is fully paid for by the college, and they wanted to put people in a much much lesser health plan, in which people would have to pay a lot more for health benefits,” Rosenstein said of TC's former position. “So they moved on all of these items—they moved on health care, they moved on pensions, they moved on wages.”

For health care, the contract includes 5 percent reductions in individual and family premiums, as well as a date set for a discussion on the effect of the Affordable Care Act on premiums in 2016. Pensions are slightly lower, with a 1.75 multiplier rate down from 1.85 in the previous 2012-2015 contract.

Chrissandra Taylor, a secretary in the counseling and clinical psychology department who has negotiated with the school on behalf of the employees, said she and other office employees are pleased with the contract.

“Everybody was extremely happy,” Taylor said. “I feel really good about the contract, I feel like it's a fair contract. I feel like what we fought for and what we wanted, we got. Because we didn't lose on the health care, we didn't lose on the pensions, and they're going to give wage increases.”

Taylor said the final bargaining session Wednesday was not as difficult as she and the 7 others bargaining on behalf of the employees thought it would be. After making little progress in previous sessions, the two parties had agreed on a prominent labor-management mediator, Martin Scheinman, who was present at the meeting, to facilitate negotiations.

“The last bargaining session was not what I expected. We came prepared, dressed and ready with changes of clothes, food, and everything, because we were going to stay up all night and do whatever it took to avert the strike. And we wound up getting out of there before 11 that night,” Taylor said. “When they came back to the room, there was no argument. We weren't arguing, we weren't struggling.”

Taylor and Rosenstein said union mobilization efforts helped to move TC administration. After the rally last month and strike authorization last week, the union held a town hall to discuss the contract and possibility of strike with graduate students and faculty at TC, and received support from 6 elected officials in a letter to TC president Susan Fuhrman that was posted on Facebook.

“The TC membership really stuck together, and I think that made a big difference. They really supported each other,” Rosenstein said. “By doing that, they were able to move the College administration. They didn't give up.”

emma.kolchin-miller@columbiaspectator.com | @EmmaKolchin