Topics: Apocalypse, California, David Shafer, Dystopia, Edan Lepucki, Editor's Picks, Pop Culture, smartphones, The Future, The Internet, Whiskey Tango Foxtrot, Innovation News, Technology News, Entertainment News, News

Even in a post-apocalyptic dystopia, when the Internet is broken and electricity scarcer than unicorns, the smartphone survives — albeit only as an unusable brick. Such is the conceit of Edan Lepucki’s “California,” a novel set roughly 40 years from now in an irredeemably bleak future. But protagonist Frida Ellis doesn’t call the machine that she stows away with her other precious belongings a “smartphone” and it bears no identifying brand. She refers to it only as the “Device,” an act of naming that reeks of ritual incantation. The Devices in “California” no longer help Frida and the rest of struggling humanity communicate, but they still provide a link to what came before.

The non-functionality of the Device serves in sharp distinction to the role played by a similar smartphone doppelgänger — dubbed the “Node” — in another recent dark tale of the near future, David Shafer’s “Whiskey Tango Foxtrot.” In “WTF,” the Node is the delivery vehicle for a different kind of apocalypse, a means by which a dread cabal of industrialists, software tycoons, security contractors and spies aim to achieve total information control over society. The Node is a really killer iPhone. You literally cannot live without it.

Take your pick: smartphone as relic, like the shinbone of some Dark Ages saint, or smartphone as shackle. But either way, there’s no escape. The science fiction writer William Gibson told me many years ago that his cyberpunk dystopias should always be read as commentaries on the present. No wonder this summer’s wild tales of doom can’t let the smartphone go. If the present cannot be conceived without the smartphone than neither can the future.

But why such gloom? Dystopian visions have always been a science fiction staple, but the current foul harvest is hard to square with, say, the enthusiasm sure to greet the iPhone 6 or the ebullience that pours out of Silicon Valley every day, burbling like an uncapped fire hydrant. Presumably, the smartphone has achieved near-ubiquitous adoption because it is useful and makes our lives better — or at least more convenient. Depending on their degree of libertarian utopianism, today’s tech moguls, from Jeff Bezos to Sergey Brin to Mark Zuckerberg, profess profound faith that our new networked technologies will help us fix a broken world, and liberate us all from oppression.

And yet, here is “California,” a future where everything is broken. And here is “Whiskey Tango Foxtrot,” a future where the smartphone is the final instrument of totalitarian oppression. The two strains of dysfunction are quite different. In “California” nothing works. In “WTF” everything works too well. But both books speak to a deep unease about the present moment, a sense that despite all our amazing technological progress, something is wrong.

So what’s the problem?

* * *

Age of wonders: "Surgeons implanted 3D-printed vertebra replacement in a young boy with bone cancer." http://t.co/ywcNvZJ08j ht @david_sheff — Marc Andreessen (@pmarca) August 23, 2014

While reading “California” and “Whiskey Tango Foxtrot” back to back last week, I amused myself by imagining the anger and frustration the books would inspire in Marc Andreessen, the venture capitalist who has become one of the most forceful rhetoricians of Silicon Valley triumphalism. It wouldn’t be long, I reckoned, before Andreeseen was hurling “California” at the wall. (WARNING: Do not try this with a Kindle!)

Edan Lepucki’s California doesn’t look anything at all like Marc Andreessen’s California. Even worse, there’s no real explanation of why society collapses in the book. Some combination of climate change-induced weather disasters, horrific earthquakes, peak-oil fossil-fuel depletion, and increasing polarization between the haves and have-nots conspires to mess everything up. In “California,” the pristine Silver Lake Reservoir in Los Angeles is now a dump.

[T]he homeless, rising in number, often used it a a toilet, and people said corpses were buried under all that trash: the rusted-out carts and car parts, the gutted desktop computers, and the hundreds of plastic bags, porous with holes, swollen with brown rainwater, hanging from orphaned tree branches.

Lepucki’s multiple-disaster scenario doesn’t jibe well with Andreessen’s “age of wonders” gospel. It’s a vision of the future in which technology does not get us through the bottleneck of overpopulation and constrained resources, a vision that negates the “progress” made by the globe since the Industrial Revolution, progress that, as far as Silicon Valley is concerned, is now accelerating at light speed.