After Bonnaroo takes place each year in Manchester, a small festival of sorts takes place deep in the woods of Rutherford County. The location... Hippie Hill. The event is called "AfterRoo."

WGNS' Scott Walker was at the hill on last year where he met campers, artist, band members and travelers. Some guest on the hill last year were from as far away as Alaska...

Press Release from Hippie Hill (June 15, 2015):

Afteroo on Hippie Hill !! Hi, Now in it's 13th year, Hippie's Birthday Party was always the original reason for staging the after party called Afteroo. That & many could not afford to attend the big festival, Bonaroo, as much as they wanted to. So, the intention was to bring high class bands to our county at an affordable rate Keeping it's roots in Rutherford County Tn.

Local favorites headline on Fri the 19th, The Corbitt Brothers & keeping in the tradition of bigger & better each year, Hippie Hill will host the hugely popular Rumpke Mtn. Boys on Sat the 20th !! Formed when the big show was still called Itchy Coo.

Afteroo has been adopted by the local Mid Tn home to the after party & what a show this year. June 15th til the 21st $50 , includes camping !! Where can you find to camp fr that , let alone listen to top quality music entertainment nightly!!

Afteroo, which starts the day after Billy Joel on Monday June 15th, is 16 miles from the Big stage on the tri-corner of 3 counties in Rutherford county. Directions can be found on their website, www.hippiehilltnhhk.org .

Starting festivities this year are Ukulele funk band The WhiskeyHickon Boys from Wissahickon, Pa. Sure to make you dance thru the night. The folks at the hill told WGNS, "We are still awaiting a very hopeful special guest to announce for Monday evening."

On Tuesday Aubryn, Nashville's fastest rising star, fresh off of appearances at the Kerrville Folk Fest, & SXSW & before tours to Cali & the Badlands of SD for bike week, will run a Songwriter's night. She runs a highly successful show in Nash & will bring the best of Nashville's newest & best young writers for a variety of fun for the night.

On Wednesday they will be bringing in Rockin bands including local faves All or Nothin & the dynamic Stelle Amor. Surrounding the appearance of Grammy Winner Nick Kane, formerly of The Mavericks & The Legendary Shack Shakers.

On Thursday the star power amps up!! Pepsi Southern Original artist Rachel Lipsky makes an appearance with her band. http://www.rachellipsky.com/. In just the past two years, Rachel Lipsky has been named the newest Pepsi Southern Original, named the IMEA Country Female Vocalist of the Year award, invited by Armed Forces Entertainment to perform for the troops overseas & hired by Charlotte Speedway and the Professional Bull Riders to perform the national anthem at a number of their events. She will be opening for National artists , Angel Mary & the Tn. Werewolves. Antoine Wolf (bass) & his 2 kids Angel Mary (lead vocals/rhythm guitar) & Christian (drums) form a power trio that is taking the states by storm & are located here in Mid Tn. http://www.tennesseewerewolves.com

Thursday also starts the exhibition of the artistry of Elizabeth Jankewicz of Pocket Vinyl. Auctioning a piece of art created Live on stage, Thurs. Fri. & Sat. Ruby Culpepper will also be in attendance & playing bass for opening Thurs band Stink Bamboo.

Thurs. night will end with crowd favorites Runaway Home. Very well recognised in the Mid Tn area for their spot on harmonies & getting the crowd involved. What a great Thurs !!

Friday starts with popular Chattanooga Hip Hop band, Natural Habitz. Opening for another Chattanooga native, Husky Burnette!! Hailing from the legacy of the Burnette trio. Husky is building his own legacy with his hard driving Dirty Southern Blues. Drawing large crowds wherever he goes, Husky performs for the 3rd time, opening for his good friends, The Corbitt Brothers!! Isaac & Newsome started their dream here in the Boro area. They always remember their roots & the support that Hippie Hill has always done for them & return to their reserved parking area, for the 8th straight year. Isaac was able to realize the #1 thing on his bucket list this past year... to play on stage , Live with John Popper. They have upcoming tour dates with Umphrey's Magee. They have opened on stage for Willie, Kris & John Prine & are the set act for Lynyrd Skynyrd's venue, Freebird Live for NYE !! They will be sure to bring plenty of guests on stage to play with them & their drummer Brandon Buck. The AMAZING Joey Fletcher sure to be among them.

Friends of the Corbitt Brothers, Ghost Gypsy Caravan , will end the evening with appearances of Jacob Green & other artists in between sets. Saturday will be off the chain & a fitting end to an outstanding week of Live music & camping. Evansville Ind. band Osiella starts the day. Touring the nation in support of their album, Cynthia Murray & her accompanist Theophilus Akai are leading their band towards their being realized dream. Of making music their life & good friends along the way - - Followed by Pulse favorites Sugar Lime Blue. Ashley Beth fronts the largely popular Mid Tn band to their 5th appearance at the after party. With a new album soon to be released. They have recently been honored close the wknd musical Labor Day events in Eaton Oh. which features Buddy Guy.

Then Mike Lawson & Travis Stinson lead JGB cover band Hooteroll to the Hippie Hill stage. Mike is a former Grateful Garcia Gathering host & performer, as well as a list of credits, Including becoming the Editor at Choral Director Magazine , Editor at School Band & Orchestra Magazine and Executive Director at Technology for Music Education (TI:ME) Travis is a Grand Ole Opry regular & MC at the Bluegrass Underground at Cumberland Caverns. All leading up to the Mid-Tn appearance of THE RUMPKE MOUNTAIN BOYS !!! Hailing from Cincinnati Oh. the Boys combine signature vocals, a unique command of string instruments (acoustic guitar, mandolin, upright bass and banjo) and dynamic special effects into a singular musical experience. 2014 was outstanding for the string quartet. The Boys played festivals from coast to coast to ever growing audiences including Suwannee Springfest, Northwest String Summit, Phases Of the Moon, Dark Star Jubilee, John Hartford Memorial Fest, and Jammaica. They finished up the year with two stellar highlights, their own Snuggleween and the Rumpke Mountain Boys New Years Eve Ball in their hometown of Cincinnati. The night ends with Clinch Mountain Mojo. Thruout the week, you will see fire spinners & other performance arts.

Artists will be presenting their work & other handcrafted items & the community will share the good karma of Hippie Hill with you. The people who take the time to go there & seek the positive vibrations, are the recipients of the best shows you will see here in Rutherford County. Get your tickets now & be sure not to miss this fun week!! - From Hippie Hill

Last year (2014):

Thanks to Greenhouse Ministries in Murfreesboro and New Vision Baptist Church Vacation Bible School students, WGNS was able to pass out about 70 care packages made by local children. Greenhouse Ministries also donated two boxes of canned food items.

Speaking of food, we spoke to one woman who told us she travels across the country to feed those in need...

A Florida band called "Gators in the Sawgrass" drove an old Blue Bird School bus that was converted into a camper to Hippie Hill.

We also spoke to band members from "Strung like a Horse."

A string band was also at Hippie Hill...

One of the artist Walker spoke to makes paintings with spray paint.

A glass blower named Lucky was also at Hippie Hill.

Walker even met someone from Ohio who had an 8-legged kitten with them. The kitten was deceased and in a jar of what appeared to be formaldehyde...