The Eye

Tahiry Jose BLASTS 'Love and Hip Hop New York' Co-Star Peter Gunz For Messy Behavior, Reality Star Says Peter 'Needs to Get His Life' [WATCH]

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Facebook/Love & Hip Hop) Is Tahiry thinking about writing a tell-all book?

Many viewers of "Love and Hip Hop New York" were pretty disgusted by Peter Gunz's behavior throughout season four of the show. The way he handled the love triangle he created between himself and his wife Amina Buddafly and baby mother Tara Wallace was considered messy but fans were mostly wondering why he would agree to do reality TV when he knew full well he was living a double life, which would potentially be seen on the show?



While many don't quiet get Peter's decision, his cast mate Tahiry Jose says she understands Peter's choice to do a reality show when he had so much against him, which she recently discussed with VladTV.



"He put it out there he was stripped for cash he figured this would be a great way to get out there, branching everybody from his artist to his, you know, baby's mom, Tara, who I love to death. They have two kids, and she's into acting, he's a rapper and it all makes sense until he realized that there was so much more s**t down there," Tahiry said.



However, Tahiry doesn't think for one second Peter's desire to help make ends meet makes up for the all the hurt he caused throughout the show.



"It's just all the way wrong. It's like, how old are you? When are you gonna get it together? Are you ever gonna get it together?" Tahiry asked. "When do [females] come into situations like this with so much history and he has a pattern behind it, when do females like Amina or maybe anybody behind Amina feel like they gone change a man? When is this gonna stop? Like it's just repetitive."



"It's sad because even with me knowing Tara and loving her it's kinda sad because we have to watch a strong female give up her whole... Her dreams and everything else and have these kids and want this family and [for] it to go down that way. It's sad for a girl like Amina who believes a man who says he's gonna eventually leave or whatever. It's sad for Peter who doesn't even see how much harm he's causing the whole family. You know, with these kids being born, just him as a man himself."



Regardless to how people feel about Peter's situation with Amina and Tara, Tahiry says she's not one to throw stones and doesn't believe people should speculate Peter's decisions with judgement either.



"Everybody's life is their own world and like I said I don't judge. It's a f**ked up situation to be in," she said. "Sometimes you have to look in the mirror, sometimes you have to look at the s**t play out, watch yourself play out in order to realize that you get better. You need help, you need to clean your act up. I watched myself last season and even in me reacting certain things I wasn't proud of. So I'm just hoping that they're all able to watch this season and get better with whatever that situation is and just think about them kids because I mean this is TV. It ain't like your kids are coming home and feeling like they're sensing an unhappy home. This is something that years from now your kids will be able to go and watch."



"Peter just needs to get his life, get his mind right get his act right."



Tahiry definitely knows a thing or two about learning from the mistakes people can make on reality TV. The model had to watch her own relationship with longtime boyfriend, Joe Budden, come to an end as a result of reality TV.



As we previously reported, the star recently opened up on how social media and reality TV affected her relationship with Joe , and implicated that things could have been much different for them had they kept their relationship out of the camera's eye.



"When it comes to reality TV shows, we must be the a** backwards couple because it brought us back together," Tahiry said in an interview with VladTV. "However, if Joey and I were to keep it private...I don't...I've never thought about if Joey and I was to keep it private, would it have worked because Joey is not a private person. Knowing the person I was with for a long time, being on reality TV shows with him and watching his every move and actually learning some of these moves from him, because I do give him that: I've learned a lot when it comes to social media networks through him."



Check out Tahiry's full interview with Vlad TV below!







SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.