Monday, March 14, 2016 - by Eric Youngblood

As misfortune would have it, I was in a Wal-Mart. At Christmastime. Discovering first hand why prices could be so low. No one actually works there! Or so it seemed that day.



The ratio of Wal-mart employees to haggard shoppers was infinitesimally small. And you could read the despair in the lumbering gaits of those pushing packed buggies, the light in their eyes dimmed to the lowest setting on the dimmer switch.



I just needed to ask a question. One measly question. But I couldn’t ask it online. I needed to speak to a fellow human, whether male or female, lithe or large, hairy or bald, teenager or senior citizen, I didn’t care at all. I just needed to find someone wearing an undersized navy vest with a name tag.



And at last I found that someone. At the gun counter. In the sporting goods section.



It was my lucky day.



A Bungled Gun-Buying Attempt



The gentleman in front of me, on the verge of being no longer gentle, was apparently puzzled. Some snafu in the background checking process, if such things even happen, was detaining him from an immediate firearm purchase. He was frustrated and the young fellow attending to him wasn’t privy to the information to satisfy the man’s interrogations.



“I don’t know sir. They don’t tell us why.”



The sale was briskly halted. There was no explanation. The Wal-Mart salesman, polite as he could be, and even sympathetic, could manufacture no reason when there wasn’t one to be crafted. All he could offer was a nervous shrug.



The gun-buyer, also bewildered, without hesitation, uttered a hilarious retort in response to his agitation. As he reluctantly walked away from the gun counter, gunless and no less confused about the matter than when he began, he groused the undeniably real reason for the bungled attempt to become more fully armed:



“Lord, I just hope this ain’t got somethin’ to do with Obamacare!”



Now, I’m confident that befuddled gentleman had quite a sense of humor, and I appreciated it. And still do.



But, in that unguarded moment, he articulated, whether seriously or not, an archetype for the difficulty of so many of the moments we are presently enduring politically and socially in these increasingly Divided States of America.



For the most part he was being funny. But he was clearly agitated. And in that agitation, there was what we might call conflation. All the irritation of life was collapsed and funneled in that one moment down to one primal cause, President Barack Obama.



How President Obama’s push for universal health care hindered our hunter’s ability to purchase a new rifle as seamlessly as a new pack of Trident gum is a mystery.



Except that it is not really a mystery at all.



Distinguishing Between Things that Differ



It happens all the time. We fail to distinguish between things that differ. We lump. We bundle. We package different things, disparate ideas, and complicated notions all in one large bucket in the face of the swath of our irritations.



And it appears the default way of thinking about a goodly number of issues just now.



This is a poisonous side effect of ideological thinking, especially of a sort that suggests a whopping TWO options for how to size up advanced economic, political, national security, health-care, social and educational issues.



CS Lewis once opined that “the devil sends error in pairs of polar opposites.” A sort of sinister signature move is to polarize parties on opposite ends of a spectrum. Each notices clearly the error of the other and backs unsuspectingly into their own. And of course, at the same time, the truth remains obscured from everyone.



So big-spending, “greed-is-good,” Wall Street, Gordon Gekko and penny-pinching, gold-hugging Ebenezer Scrooge can each guard their own opposite ends of the spectrum of greed, wagging fingers at the obvious money sickness of the other, while neither has the faintest notion of his detrimental strain of this ailment. One sickness with two differing presentations.



It’s a dynamic that works equally well with husbands and wives as on Republicans and Democrats.



Jesus, of course, warned about this sort of dynamic in a silly episode about fault-finding in others which comes as easy to us as squinting on a sunny day. The defects of others, he suggests, should seem teeny-tiny, while the errors residing in our own ocular perception ought to appear like a telephone pole gouging our eye.



It’s a ridiculous image. It’s supposed to be. To keep us from being ridiculous.



Abstaining from Ridiculousness



But we are not succeeding in abstaining from ridiculousness. Much of this failure surely has to do with being duped into thinking we must always choose a side, supposing as William Hull suggests, that “victory is more important than clarity” in the complicated issues of our time.



I have to hate Lowe’s to shop at Home Depot. And I must detest George W. Bush if I am to fondly assess any feature of President Obama’s presidency. If I am to entertain the science of climate change, I must denigrate those religious wackadoos. And if I am one of those religious wackadoos, I must demolish any godlessly scientific insinuations about moving temperatures on the globe.



Because of this, Christians, at least, and hopefully, any thoughtful people out there, should find themselves profoundly estranged at this moment from the options on the left and the right, suspecting it possible that both divisive poles are, at the extreme, slowly boiling in their own furious errors, while they scream snark at their apparent enemies on the other side.



After all, what political party, as Tim Keller might say, should people belonging to Christ embrace when they are bidden to practice a profound generosity and compassionate regard for the “quartet of the vulnerable”, the widow, orphan, immigrant, and poor, while at the very same same time, being equally radically committed to a sterling stinginess of body, giving away our bodies sexually only to our spouses as the Scripture enjoins?



What political affiliation advocates Jesus’ narrow-but-beautiful morality of sexuality within Creator intentioned norms of marriage and broadly magnanimous, open-hearted social concern?



“Condemnation by Category the Lowest Form of Hatred”



A merely ideological monocle will lead to a primary commitment of not being like those lame-stream media lovin’ Democrats. Or not becoming those Fox-News-angry Republicans. But Christianity fits, especially at the moment, with both of these parties about like I, who am now built like an NFL offensive tackle, do in a pair of skinny jeans. There is far more leg than jean.



So for Christians any way, let us pause. Make sure we are prayerfully considering problems and people, and not merely narrow paradigms. Let us make sure, above all else, that we are not discounting and despising whole swaths of folks, because they have a different political slant, regional accent, or color code on the state in which they dwell when it’s depicted on CNN’s info-board. As people of faith, let us be suspicious of spoutin’ awful rhetoric of “taking back” when we are a people called to give away.



Wendell Berry reminds us, prophetically, as a people called to burden-bearing love:



“Condemnation by category is the lowest form of hatred, for it is cold-hearted and abstract, lacking the heat and even the courage of a personal hatred. Categorical condemnation is the hatred of the mob, which makes cowards brave. And there is nothing more fearful than a religious mob overflowing with righteousness, as there was at the crucifixion and has been before and since. This mob violence can happen only after we have made a categorical refusal of kindness to heretics, foreigners, enemies, or any other group different from ourselves.”



To be engulfed in ideological divisiveness is to run the risk of exactly this kind of cowardly hate which often makes us feel brave instead of ashamed.



During this contentious Lenten season, it’s surely worth a passing consideration and perhaps more than that, of the Savior who once hung suspended, naked and exposed, like a truth as glaring as the gashes ripped in his flesh, refusing to refuse kindness to a mob who’d lost their heads and hearts. Hoisted by hate, and pinned by spikes in that lonely place on a cross, he gave up, rather than fighting “to take back” his life, absorbing the condemnation the “heretics, foreigners, and enemies” on opposite ends of every erroneous spectrum of history have ever deserved.



Perhaps if we are willing to stand, like him, in the lonely place between the warring factions polluting the air with atmospheric condemnation, we may be able, as recovering “heretics and enemies of God” ourselves, to point the way toward a condemnation-killing kindness such as Christ has shown to us.



-----



Eric Youngblood is the senior pastor at Rock Creek Fellowship (PCA) on Lookout Mountain. Please feel free to contact him at eric@rockcreekfellowship.org.