AUSTIN — Texas should join nine other states in banning surprise medical bills in emergency situations, consumer advocates said Wednesday.

Emergency room visits by privately insured patients should not be free, but nor should Texans be slammed after they go home with large bills from out-of-network doctors, labs and X-ray providers, Trey Berndt of AARP-Texas told a Senate panel.

“It’s really not fair to ask consumers to shop around in an emergency,” he said.

In a Consumers Union online survey last year, about one-third of 2,200 U.S. adults with private coverage said they received a “balance billing” surprise in which their health insurer paid less than they expected or not at all.

For years, the Texas Legislature has heard from constituents angry because after they took pains to go to an “in network” hospital, they learned later that doctors and technicians there did not join their insurer’s provider roster – and thus didn’t agree to discount their prices, as insurers insist on.

Surprise bills have cost such people hundreds, even thousands of dollars.

Some experts say balance billing is becoming more common as consumers, to lower their premiums, increasingly choose health plans with narrow networks of participating providers.

It’s a type of coverage that is more and more common in Texas on the Obamacare state health insurance marketplace. There, 1.3 million Texans have enrolled, including nearly 383,000 people in the Dallas-Fort Worth area.

Berndt of AARP, which represents 2.3 million aging Texans, told the Senate Business and Commerce Committee that his group wants a tougher law.

It will try to pass one in next year’s session, he said.

AARP is working toward that goal with patient groups such as the National Multiple Sclerosis Society, American Cancer Society-Cancer Action Network and American Heart Association, as well as the center-left think tank the Center for Public Policy Priorities, he said.

In March, Florida’s Republican-controlled Legislature passed and GOP Gov. Rick Scott signed a law that banned balance bills for emergency room visits, whether at a hospital or a freestanding one, Berndt noted.

In Texas, there are about 220 freestanding emergency clinics. One reason for their rapid proliferation, he said, is they can resist joining insurers’ networks and then hit unsuspecting patients with big bills.

“Texas has kind of left the consumer holding the bag … because if you don’t understand what a balance bill is, you’re probably going to pay it,” Berndt said.

AARP favors an approach taken by Florida that lets insurers and providers battle it out in “dispute resolution” as to what’s a fair price for an out-of-network treatment or service. Eight other states have passed something similar. (See p. 5 of Berndt’s testimony for the list.)

Since 2009, Texas has had a mediation process. But the patient has to trigger it. Mediation only covers six types of doctors who practice in hospitals. It doesn’t apply to out-of-network facilities, whether hospitals or freestanding ERs.

Top health insurer lobbyist Jamie Dudensing, who heads the Texas Association of Health Plans, said it could live with a ban on surprise bills for emergency care.

“We don’t oppose it. We support getting the consumer out of it,” she said in an email.

Beaumont anesthesiologist Ray Callas, representing the Texas Medical Assciation, told senators the state’s main doctor’s group favors expanding mediation for surprise bills from all hospital-based doctors and care provided at freestanding ERs.

Florida’s state medical society supported the recently passed ban there, though subspecialty groups of radiologists and anesthesiologists fought it unsuccessfully.

For several years, we’ve reported her on how a top insurance regulator named by former Gov. Rick Perry rescinded rules that would have helped consumers avoid the pitfall of big bills for out-of-network care.

The rules were meant to give more than 4 million Texans covered by preferred provider organization health plans, or PPOs, more information about whether they’d pay the higher out-of-network costs if they were hospitalized and seen by a specialist.

Though the Department of Insurance eventually put into effect a weaker version, a 2014 report by the Center for Public Policy Priorities found many gaps remained in the state’s protection of consumers. As I reported here, the adequacy of many carriers’ networks of providers remained suspect.

For instance, 56 percent of Texas hospitals that contracted with Humana had no in-network emergency room physicians, the center’s report said.

Last year, the Legislature passed a bill to expand mediation on surprise medical bills. The law lowered to $500, from $1,000, the size of a bill that triggers patients’ ability to enlist the Texas Department of Insurance’s help.

In such instances, the department sets up a phone call between the patient, his insurer and the doctor’s practice group to negotiate a lower amount. If the call yields no agreement, the state’s chief administrative law judge must name an impartial mediator to try to resolve the impasse. The insurer and doctor bear the costs. If that fails, which is rare, the case can go to an administrative law judge.