Clinton suggests she’s open to different ways of achieving the health law’s goals. Clinton: ACA too important to go back

Hillary Clinton showed more signs of flexibility Wednesday on how Obamacare is implemented, but she insisted the law is too important to “turn the clock back.”

In a question-and-answer session following a lecture at UCLA, Clinton suggested she’s open to different ways of achieving the health law’s goals. She praised Arkansas — the state where she and her husband rose to political fame — for carrying out a new approach to expanding Medicaid coverage, by using the federal money to buy private health insurance for more than 100,000 low-income residents.

Story Continued Below

Clinton called the move, spearheaded by Democratic Gov. Mike Beebe and a Republican-led Legislature, a “brilliant approach” that allowed the state to increase health coverage despite GOP concerns about adding more people to the traditional Medicaid program. The Arkansas House approved the plan’s renewal Tuesday.

( Also on POLITICO: Obamacare's subtle sales push)

But the main goal, Clinton said, should be to keep moving ahead with the law. And in a subtle swipe at the Obama administration, she suggested that the law’s supporters haven’t done the best job explaining what Americans stand to gain from it.

“We have to get through this election, and we have to do a better job than has been done, quite frankly, in explaining the benefits,” Clinton said

Among those that already are making a difference, Clinton cited the provisions that let young adults stay on their parents’ plans, give most Americans with private coverage access to preventive care and encourage research into what medical treatments are more effective than others.

( Also on POLITICO: Obama's under-the-radar sales push)

“I think it’s important for people to realize what’s been accomplished. There’s been an enormous amount of, frankly, misinformation and disinformation,” Clinton said.

She also used a line of defense that other Democrats have encouraged: Obamacare will help end “job lock,” in which people hang on to a job they don’t like because they’re afraid their health problems will prevent them from getting insurance again if they move.

“I have said many times that if we were starting from scratch, we wouldn’t have built an employer-based system,” Clinton said. But since that’s the system we have, she said, it’s important to make it work.

( POLITICO's full Obamacare coverage)

“The Affordable Care Act will liberate people,” Clinton said. “You will not have to keep a job that you don’t want because of a pre-existing condition. … You will now have more opportunities to take care of yourself and your family.”

Clinton has already suggested she’s open to changes in the law, particularly for small-business owners who are worried about the impact of the law and for people whose work hours are being reduced so their employers don’t have to offer them health coverage.

But on Wednesday, she put most of her emphasis on defending the law, saying the attacks are coming from ideological opponents as well as people who believe that “if President Obama did it, it has to be undone.”

( WATCH: Ted Cruz: No shelf life for Obamacare slams)

“There are some people who really want to go back to the era when we had no public support for health care. They didn’t support Medicare, they didn’t support Medicaid, and now they don’t support the Affordable Care Act,” Clinton said.

In addition, Clinton said, the law is “threatening to certain vested interests.” Insurers are more willing to move forward now that they’re benefiting from the new customers, but other parts of the health care industry — which she didn’t name — want to “turn it back for their own pecuniary interests,” she said.

“We need to keep working on this,” Clinton said.

Authors: