Topics: Earth Island Journal, microbeads, plastic, recycling, Sustainability News, Life News

This originally appeared on Earth Island Journal

For decades, the producers of disposable packaging and products have tried to say it’s our fault that their toxic throwaway junk litters our landscapes, fouls our waters, and kills fish and wildlife. Their most ingenious and insidious effort was the iconic “Crying Indian” ad, which showed a supposedly Native American man (actually, an Italian-American actor) paddling a canoe through a trash-strewn river. As he walks along the shore, a passenger in a passing car throws a bag of trash out the window. A single tear rolls down his cheek as the narrator intones: “People start pollution. People can stop it.”

The ad first aired in 1971 and had a huge impact on a generation awakening to the environmental crisis. We watched it over and over, shared the faux-Indian’s grief, and vowed to make changes in our individual lives to stop pollution. That was exactly what the ad’s creators wanted, since the ad was produced by the garbage-makers themselves.

The ad was part of a strategic effort to brand waste as a problem that should be solved not by stricter regulations, but exclusively by getting individuals to feel responsible and focus on changing their day-to-day habits. The pro-plastics PR guys are still at it. At a recent event in San Francisco, I heard Keith Christman of the American Chemistry Council propose a solution to plastic pollution of the oceans: Just put more recycling bins on beaches. My jaw dropped, but he was right on message: Don’t blame us for making this crap. The problem is the slobs who don’t dispose of it properly.

It’s a lie that has served plastic makers all too well – until now. There’s a new plastic threat that isn’t caused by slobs throwing plastic in the river. In fact, there’s startling evidence that some plastics are actually designed to be washed down the drain right into our waters. Like the guy in The Graduate who gives Dustin Hoffman career advice, I have one word for you: Microbeads.

My friend Stiv Wilson works for a fantastic organization called 5 Gyres that sails to remote parts of the seas to document plastic debris circulating in ocean currents. The group has found that plastic accumulates in all five major subtropical oceanic gyres in the North and South Pacific, North and South Atlantic, and Indian Ocean. Sea life can mistake plastic bags for jellyfish and get strangled by them; marine mammals can die of starvation with stomachs full of plastic. And of course what gets into sea creatures can end up on our dinner plates.