Vermont becomes the first state to announce state-sponsored use of health information technology PatientPing, taking historic action in remedying the trillion-dollar deficit caused partly by the fragmentation of the American healthcare system, according to a press release from PatientPing. PatientPing Founder and CEO Jay Desai, state officials and health care representatives announced the adoption of PatientPing across in-state health care providers at Vermont Blueprint for Health 2016. PatientPing aims to enhance medical information transparency between once disconnected health care providers by implementing an information sharing system that will cut across silos to improve patient care, the release noted. "Our state has come together in this partnership to launch a progressive initiative dedicated to improving the way Vermonters receive care," said Lawrence Miller, Senior Advisor, chief of health care reform at the Office of the Governor, state of Vermont. "We are leveraging our successful work to date to support clinicians in transforming how they deliver care. This new and innovative information sharing system will help support clinicians' efforts to more effectively and efficiently deliver care." The changing incentives of the Affordable Care Act and state policy have compelled providers to work with one another when sharing patients. These groundbreaking collaborations are bringing together historically disparate health care facilities in regional provider communities to more efficiently deliver high quality care wherever patients go. PatientPing is fueling this transition by providing a critical missing link for providers operating in this new environment: the ability to be notified instantly when a patient is receiving care anywhere, inside or outside of their facility or health system, and the ability to collaborate with providers across the full continuum of care to ensure the best health outcomes for patients, according to the press release. "The average elderly patient sees seven different care providers per year, and those with chronic conditions can see more than 25. We've all dealt with how frustrating it can be when information is not passing between those providers and they aren't working well together to serve us and our loved ones," said Desai. "When providers ping each other as their patients travel through the health care continuum - emergency room to hospital to rehab to home care - it's a radically simple way to stitch together disparate providers onto one team. Seeing a whole state's providers come together on one platform is magical, and we're proud to support Vermont's journey to improve the quality of care for all its residents." Upon joining PatientPing, providers receive "Pings," real-time notifications whenever their patients receive care at any facility that is a part of the national PatientPing community. At the facility where patients are getting care, providers receive care instructions that include contact information for others on the patient's care team, as well as patient visit histories. By sharing this information in real time, providers can seamlessly coordinate their patient's care. The robust program is supported by hospital admission, discharge, and transfer data from Vermont Information Technology Leaders (VITL), which manages the state's health information exchange. "We are thrilled to partner with PatientPing and the State of Vermont to improve health care for Vermont residents. Building on the capabilities of the statewide Vermont Health Information Exchange, we are making health care encounter information available so that any clinician can be notified when their patient receives care from another provider," said John K. Evans MHA, FACHE, president and CEO of VITL. The release noted PatientPing's nationwide community includes more than 12,000 providers and has a presence in Massachusetts, Connecticut, Michigan, Pennsylvania and now Vermont. PatientPing recently received $9.6M in funding from Google Ventures, F-Prime Capital (the VC funds of FMR LLC, the parent company of Fidelity), with participation from First Round Capital and SV Angel. PatientPing is rapidly accelerating its nationwide expansion so that any two or more providers that share patients anywhere in the country can simply coordinate with one another.