GRAND RAPIDS, MI – Since Cherry Street Health Services set up shop with a single clinic in Southeast Grand Rapids in 1988, it has expanded into an operation that serves 60,000 people in four West Michigan counties.

It’s come a long way from Cherry Street.

That’s why the organization has changed its name to Cherry Health, reflecting its roots as well as its reach, it said in an announcement Monday, Nov. 10.

“It’s a system of care. It’s no longer a neighborhood health care place,” said Chris Shea, the chief executive officer. “We still want to maintain that neighborhood connection, but emphasize that we have a full array of services that people can benefit from.”

Cherry Health is the largest federally qualified health center in Michigan, serving uninsured and underinsured individuals who have a hard time find medical care. It has seen steady growth over the past two decades, opening a new site every two years, on average. It now operates in 23 locations with a $60 million budget.

Its sites include the Heart of the City Health Center that opened in 2011 at 100 Cherry St. SE.

Its most recent addition is the Barry Community Health Center in Hastings, which opened in 2013.

The growth is driven by Cherry Street’s mission, Shea said.

“Every once in a while, I meet people who are in desperate need of health care and can’t get it from any source,” he said. “They’re on the outside.”

The center’s goal is to serve not only the patients who come to the center, but those who can’t come there – through clinics that reach other parts of the community.

The agency provides primary health care, dental and vision care, pharmacy services, and counseling and behavioral health care. It also operates four school-based health centers in Grand Rapids.

It has applied for funds to open a clinic at the Cedar Springs Public Schools campus, Shea said. It is contemplating a new clinic in Charlotte in Eaton County. And it is doing research in six West Michigan counties to see if there is need for new clinics to serve low-income, underserved residents.

Cherry Street serves as the lead navigator for the region for the Affordable Care Act’s Health Insurance Marketplace. Staff members helped more than 20,000 people with information or direct assistance with online enrollment in the past year, and they are planning to provide help again when the second year of enrollment begins Nov. 15.

Staff has also helped residents enroll in Healthy Michigan, the state’s expanded Medicaid program.

The effect of the Affordable Care Act is evident in the patients who seek care at Cherry Health’s Clinics, Shea said.

Many of the new enrollees in Medicaid and Healthy Michigan are seeking care through Cherry Health. And the center is seeing far fewer uninsured patients. About 15 percent more patients have Medicaid coverage than in the past.

“I think the bias of many people is that people who have Medicaid overuse services. It’s simply not true. I think they tend to be very sparing about services they use.

“However, people who are newly enfranchised with Healthy Michigan and who were uninsured before are very much seeing that they can now afford to use the services they need too.”

The biggest numbers of increase are in dental and medical services. But on a percentage basis, vision care has also increased significantly, Shea said.

Going forward, Shea said Cherry Street will provide more comprehensive care to more patients. In the past, patients often would come for a single service. Now, the clinics are concentrating on providing the full range of medical services to patients.

“We want this to be their health care home,” Shea said.

Cherry Street has benefited from grants made under the Affordable Care Act for federally qualified health centers, but funding remains a concern, Shea said. The bulk of the agency’s funds come from Medicaid reimbursements for care.

“One of the things that’s difficult about the business model in a community health center is if it was so profitable to provide the kinds of services that we have, someone would have done it a long time ago,” he said. “Each time we serve more people, we have to find some new way of coming up with resources.”



Workforce development also is a challenge, Shea said. In the past, the center could rely on those willing to take a salary cut to serve the mission of providing care to those in need.

“We’ve kind of used up that 10 percent,” he said. “We need to be more competitive in the marketplace.”

The name change represents a milestone in the 26-year history of the organization, Shea said.

“It emphasizes the fact that we are a system of care and that for our patients we can do more than just one thing,” he said. “We want to emphasize health instead of sickness.”



Sue Thoms covers health care for MLive/The Grand Rapids Press. Email her at sthoms1@mlive.com or follow her on Twitter, Facebook or Google+.