PUTNAM, Conn. (AP) - Behind the peeling paint, buckled floors and crumbling bricks Tim Sheldon sees the cornerstone of a vibrant future for Putnam.

Sheldon is the director of development for the Cargill Falls Mill project and for the first time, the years-long project to revitalize the mill is on the cusp of happening. The project recently received $5 million under the Competitive Housing Assistance for Multifamily Properties initiative and is awaiting word on $2.5 million of Urban Act money.

“I need 13 months to complete this project once we start the renovations,” Sheldon said. “I’d like to start construction around March 1 of 2015.”

The property is owned by Leanne Parker and Greg Renshaw. The owners hired developer Sheldon two years ago. He has successfully revitalized more than 5 million-square-feet of mill space in New England. The Lofts at Cargill Falls Mill, which is the project’s name, is a planned multiple use development where a mix of market-rate and affordable residential apartment units will exist in a community setting adjacent to compatible clusters of office, retail, service and restaurant workplaces.

When done, The Lofts will offer 82 residential living units along with 29,954-square-feet of mixed-use commercial workspace at Route 44 and Kennedy Drive.

As he walks through the maze of buildings, Sheldon can point out the apartments with phenomenal views of Cargill Falls and the Quinebaug River. He can lay out each individual space. Units will range from studios of about 650 square feet to two-bedrooms with as much as 1,300 square feet. Sheldon said market studies show a young professional, such as nurse working just minutes up Route 44 at Day Kimball can afford a $1,150 apartment. The market study shows 23 percent of renter-occupied units in Putnam pay a rent from $1,000 to more than $1,500 per month, utilities excluded.

“There’s already a waiting list for the residential units,” he said.

Economic and Community Development Director Delpha Very said housing is such an important part of the project. Putnam’s zoning laws do not allow residential properties downtown. But the town has the Industrial Heritage Overlay District, which allows mixed uses in the town’s mills.

“People don’t want to live in vinyl boxes anymore,” Very said. “People can live in our mills and walk to work or walk to restaurants or shops. People are changing the way they want to live.”

Town Administrator Douglas Cutler said The Lofts fits in naturally with the other projects coming on line in town and the blossoming downtown. The new housing will be attractive to businesses looking at the new Quinebaug Regional Technical Park and the YMCA will provide an amenity for both projects, Cutler said.

“This is a true enhancement of what we’ve already been building in Putnam,” Cutler said.

Sheldon sees The Lofts as a missing link for Putnam, providing two things the town needed: lower utility rates and modern housing in downtown and near the technical park. Sheldon said The Lofts guarantees below-market electricity rates thanks to its inclusion of its own hydro-electric generator. The project will be Connecticut’s first fully-sustainable mill redevelopment. Residential and commercial users will get all their power from the generator.

“That is one of our major marketing engines,” Sheldon said.

The hydro-electric generator is just one example of all the work that has gone on behind the scenes to prepare Cargill Falls Mills for its future.

Renshaw purchased the Cargill Falls Mill in 2002 and converted the ownership entity to Historic Cargill Falls Mill LLC in 2005 when the planning to redevelop the mill complex began. The site has been fully remediated under the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection’s Voluntary Remediation Program. Building-specific environmental remediation of lead, asbestos and PCB wastes are underway through a $500,000 Municipal Pilot Brownfield grant administered by the state Department of Economic and Community Development. The grant will also pay to demolish four structurally unsound buildings, which will create a central courtyard.

The licensing necessary through the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission for the hydro-electric generation is complete and the financing has been approved by the Connecticut Energy Finance and Investment Authority through the C-PACE financing initiative.

The property has been given national historical significance by the National Park Service and the State Historic Preservation Office and is on the National Register of Historic Places.

Sheldon said the mill can be considered the oldest in the country because the foundation of one building dates to the 1730s. It is the oldest cotton mill still standing in Connecticut and the only mill in the country that exhibits every style of architecture ever used in cotton mills.

“This will be a completely modern facility with all the modern amenities in a historic skin,” he said..