Chickasaw heritage, customs and unconquerable spirit will come to life as people from across the globe gather in Chickasaw Country for the 2014 Chickasaw Nation Annual Meeting and Festival, September 26 - October 4.

“Honor, Tradition, Courage – Our People” is the theme for this year’s 54th Annual Meeting of the Chickasaw Nation and 26th Chickasaw Festival.

“Honor, tradition and courage are all important aspects of our Chickasaw culture and heritage,” Governor Bill Anoatubby said. “As Chickasaws, we share a sense of pride in our heritage and look forward to the Chickasaw Annual Meeting and Festival as a special time to celebrate the culture that binds us together as a people.”

Activities and events celebrating Chickasaw heritage, history and customs will be featured at different venues throughout the Chickasaw Nation, including the cities of Tishomingo and Ada and the Chickasaw Cultural Center in Sulphur.

Activities begin Friday, September 26, and culminate Saturday, October 4.

Annual Meeting

The 54th Annual Meeting of the Chickasaw Nation is highlighted by Gov. Anoatubby’s State of the Nation Address. Annual Meeting begins at 9 a.m., Saturday, Oct. 4, at Fletcher Auditorium on the campus of Murray State College in Tishomingo, Oklahoma.

A live video and audio stream of the Annual Meeting and State of the Nation address by Gov. Anoatubby will be available on the Chickasaw Nation website and KCNP Radio. Live broadcast on KCNP Radio and the Chickasaw Nation website will begin at 8:30 a.m.

A live webcast can be accessed by logging on to www.chickasaw.net/annualmeeting on any mobile device and clicking on the State of the Nation web stream link. An audio broadcast can be accessed at www.kcnpradio.org, or on KCNP 89.5 FM in the Ada, Oklahoma area.

Other Events

Numerous traditional events, including the Chickasaw Princess Pageant, Cultural Evening, the Festival parade, traditional meal, fellowship and children’s activities and more are planned for the weeklong homecoming that celebrates Chickasaw heritage, culture, spirit and traditions.

New activities have been added this year, including a fry bread making class, a Chickasaw history challenge bowl, stickball and fishing tournaments, living history vignettes, a movie night and much more.

A complete listing of events, locations and schedules is available online at www.chickasaw.net/annualmeeting. For more information, call (580) 371-2040 or 1 (800) 593-3356 or visit the Chickasaw Nation Facebook or Twitter page.