File (Photo: IRS)

Filing a federal tax return is about to get more complicated for millions of families because of President Barack Obama's health law. But they shouldn't expect much help from the Internal Revenue Service.

Got a question for the IRS? Good luck reaching someone by phone. The tax agency says only half of the 100 million people expected to call this year will be able to reach a person.

Callers who do get through may have to wait on hold for 30 minutes or more to talk to someone who will answer only the simplest questions.

"I sat on hold for one hour today for a five-minute phone call," said Bryana Martin, an accountant and enrolled agent with Tax Management Services Inc. in Green Bay. "And the busy period hasn't even started."

IRS Commissioner John Koskinen says budget cuts are forcing the agency to reduce taxpayer services and other functions. The number of audits will decline, technology upgrades will be delayed, and the agency might be forced to shut down and furlough workers for two days later this year, Koskinen said.

"Taxpayers who need help are not getting it, and tax compliance is likely to suffer over the longer term if these problems are not quickly and decisively addressed," said a report Wednesday by agency watchdog Nina E. Olson.

The IRS will no longer help low-income taxpayers fill out their returns, and tax refunds could be delayed for people who file paper returns.

For the first time, tax filers will have to report information about their health insurance during the previous year. For most people who get health coverage through work or through government programs like Medicaid, it will mean simply checking a box.

Others who got insurance through state and federal marketplaces will have to file a new form, while people who received subsidies will have to provide more detailed information. People who didn't have health insurance last year face fines unless they qualify for a waiver, which requires more paperwork.

"We are going to see higher fees for preparing these taxes. It's going to take longer meeting with them," Martin said.

Taxpayers who received a subsidy or advanced credit will receive form 1095A, which could be sufficient if they had no other changes.

"If they switched plans or made other changes ... there can be up to three additional forms," Martin said.

People who did not have insurance are subject to penalties, but Martin said there are up to 14 specific hardship cases that would eliminate the penalty.

The best advice is start early and get help.

"They need to make sure they have a record of their health insurance for the year and get that information ready ahead of time," she said.

Koskinen said the IRS increased efforts to educate tax preparers and the public about the tax implications of the health law, devoting a section of the agency's website to answering questions. That page is www.irs.gov/Affordable-Care-Act.

Subsidies were based on projected incomes, so families will need to report if actual incomes were higher or lower. If higher, they might have to pay back some of the subsidy, either through a smaller tax refund or a payment. If their incomes were lower, they might qualify for a larger tax refund.

Taxpayers who get subsidies are supposed to notify the health exchanges during the year if their incomes change or if they have some other life event that changes their eligibility, said Kathy Pickering, executive director of the Tax Institute at H&R Block.

"If somebody got married or divorced, had a baby, got a job, lost a job, anything that changes their income, those consumers needed to go back to the marketplace and update their information," Pickering said. "Most people didn't know to do that or didn't think to do it."

Service problems at the IRS will make it harder for well-intentioned taxpayers to comply with the law, said Olson, who is the National Taxpayer Advocate, an independent office within the IRS.

"Without adequate support, many taxpayers will be frustrated, some will make potentially costly mistakes, others will incur higher compliance costs when forced to seek information and assistance from tax professionals," she said.

"Still others," Olson said, "will simply give up and not file."

FreeFile available

Free federal tax preparation and e-filing software areavailable to taxpayers with 2015 adjusted gross income of $60,000 or less.

The software is available through www.IRS.gov/FreeFile.

FreeFile is updated to include tax changes related to the Affordable Care act.

The Internal Revenue Service estimates 70 percent of Americans can use Free File.

Beginning Tuesday, Free File will offer its basic federal e-filing services to everyone, with no income limitations. It allows taxpayers who are familiar with tax law and need no preparation assistance to complete and file their federal income tax electronically.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1IRXAHq