The All-Herald Girls Swim Team features some of the best swimmers in the region, and as was the case last year, this year’s list features some familiar names with a few new ones as well.

One thing, however, remains a constant. Each swimmer on this team has come up big for their schools, capturing a CCC title in one event or another along the way.

Although only a sophomore, Southington’s Olivia Fournier continues to show why she is one of the best swimmers in the state as she already holds four school records — three individual and one relay team — and set the Southington record in the 100 free and the 200 free this season (a record since 1987) alone, while helping the 400 free relay team break another.

Having earned all-conference again this season in the 50 free, 100 free and 400 free relay and finishing in the top 12 in Class LL in two events, Fournier has positioned herself for an even bigger season in the years to follow.

Her teammate, Allison Schroeder, also had a tremendous season. Finishing her career as a four-time varsity letter winner, the Blue Knight took the CCC title in both the 200 individual medley and the 100 backstroke and was part of the 400 free relay team that took the CCC title and set the school record.

Schroeder also became a state finalist in the 200 IM and the 100 backstroke after taking the conference titles. She is about to sign a letter of intent to continue her swimming career.

Berlin’s Olivia DeGroff is another mainstay on the All-Herald team with this being her fourth selection. A three-time All-State selection — this year in the 200 IM — and four-time all-conference swimmer, the Redcoats’ captain earned 423 points for her team this season, earning herself all-conference in the IM and 100 breaststroke.

A four-time scholar athlete to go along with her numerous accomplishments in the pool, DeGroff will continue her swim career at the Division I level at the University of Delaware next fall.

Plainville rounds out this year’s All-Herald team with the most swimmers on the list, with three, in Sydney McGough, Audrey Gediman and Lydia Weinberg.

This is McGough’s third appearance on the All-Herald team, and like DeGroff, is a four-time all-conference member. One of the Blue Devils’ captains this season, the Plainville senior earned All-CCC in the 100 freestyle and was part of the Plainville 200 medley relay team that also earned all-conference honors.

Gediman garnered All-CCC in the 500 freestyle this season, making it her second time making it on the all-conference list in as many years. She also swam her way into the state meets in her three years of swimming for the Blue Devils.

With a year still to go, Gediman could be poised for another big year in her final season.

Rounding out our list is Weinberg.

Despite being a freshman, Weinberg proved to be a major contributor to the Plainville girls swim team.

Part of the 200 medley relay team along with McGough, she earned individual conference honors for her performance in the 50 free this year. It would be safe to expect big things to come from Weinberg in her final three years in high school.

Both in and out of the pool, this year’s area swimmers have had great seasons to help their teams place well in the conference and in states.

David Glovach can be reached at (860) 801-5085 or

dglovach@newbritainherald.com

On Twitter: @DavidGlovach