On the recent Avalanche road trip that included three games in the New York area — two in New York boroughs, Manhattan and Brooklyn; and one in Newark, N.J. — a laugh-inducing moment came when the attendance was announced at the Colorado- New Jersey game.

The official count at the Prudential Center was 14,019, considerably short of capacity.

There couldn’t have been more than 9,000 in the building.

The crowd was so sparse, the blocks of empty seats so glaring, it all looked like one of the gatherings visiting NHL beat writers love to poke fun at, but only if it’s in the easy-target, nontraditional league markets. (I believe it’s a Professional Hockey Writers Association rule: Thou shalt tweet shot of sparse crowd in Florida, Carolina or Arizona by the 5:00 mark of the first period.)

But, hey, when it happens in the New York area, or in other “Original Six” markets such as Boston or Chicago in not-so-long ago slow periods, or even in Edmonton and Calgary when the Canadian economy had lost an edge, that’s overlooked.

I’ve long been on the record: I don’t make value judgments about consumers’ entertainment dollar expenditures. There is nothing “wrong” with markets that don’t fill seats and line the coffers of franchise owners and leagues.

But in no other sport are the double standards so blatant and accepted.

The Devils’ average home crowd of 13,905, or 78.9 percent of capacity, ranked 26th in the 30-team league going into Friday’s games. That’s especially interesting to me, and perhaps to all others who attended the initial news conference at the Meadowlands and heard politicians and owners insist that the New Jersey franchise — still officially unnamed after confirmation of its sale and move from Denver the day before — never would have an unsold ticket.

After nearly 30 years in East Rutherford, with only moderate box-office success, the Devils’ relocation to downtown Newark and the new Prudential Center has done little, if anything, to help at the gate.

It’s a nice building, accessible from other spots in New Jersey, just two blocks from Newark’s Penn Station and only a $5.25 train ride from Manhattan. New Jersey has been on balance, one of the more consistent and well-run franchises in the league, but if one of the “nontraditional” markets drew Devils home crowds for good teams, it would be cited as additional proof that they don’t belong in the NHL in the first place.

On the same trip, the Avalanche played the Islanders for the first time at the Barclays Center in Brooklyn after the franchise’s switch from Uniondale, about 20 miles to the east.

The failure to get a new and adequate arena off the drawing board to replace the Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum led to the move, and the Barclays Center is a terrific building — for basketball and a lot of other things, but certainly not for hockey. The Islanders went from a bad arena with few amenities and great sight lines to a nice arena with all the bells and whistles, but with horrible sight lines for hockey, especially in one end.

Again, it’s an easy subway ride from Manhattan to the Barclays site, across the street from the Atlantic Terminal. That’s the area where the domed-stadium replacement for Ebbets Field was supposed to be built before New York Building Commissioner Robert Moses refused to go along, helping trigger the Dodgers’ move to Los Angeles.

Announced attendance for the Islanders-Avalanche game was 11,585.

Two nights later, the first Rangers-Islanders game in Brooklyn drew a sellout of 15,795. And then it was back to normalcy.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or @TFrei

Spotlight on …

Patrick Kane, LW, Blackhawks

When: The Avalanche plays at Chicago on Tuesday to conclude a three-game road trip against the defending Stanley Cup champion at the United Center.

What’s up: Kane will take a 25-game points streak — 16 goals and 23 assists — into Sunday’s game against visiting Vancouver, and if he produces a point, he will surpass Pittsburgh’s Sidney Crosby for the longest streak since the 1992-93 season, when Mats Sundin had points in 30 consecutive games for the Quebec Nordiques. Crosby’s 25-game streak was in 2010-11.

Background: Kane, 27, is a magician with the puck, but off-ice issues hit this summer when he was accused of raping a woman at his Buffalo-area home. In November, no charges were brought because of a lack of evidence. Now, the 27-year-old can stay focused on what so far is a career-best season.

Chambers’ take: Kane is hockey’s best offensive small forward at 5-foot-11 and 177 pounds, and what he’s doing in this low-scoring era is remarkable.

Mike Chambers, The Denver Post