James Harrison (Photo: Don Wright, AP)

Pittsburgh Steelers linebacker James Harrison recently posted on Instagram that he was returning two participation trophies given to his sons, ages 6 and 8, because they weren’t "real." Letters to the editor:

Columnist Nancy Armour and other “no trophies for participation” proponents address only half the issue and thus have it all wrong (“Armour: James Harrison is right, you shouldn't get a prize for showing up”).

Armour fails to consider the harm it might do to kids when trophies are only awarded to the “best” players or winningest teams. Kids who try their best but aren’t as good as other 6-year-olds who succeed simply based on their natural ability may lose interest and give up. And just as important, the natural may rest on his/her laurels, not try their best and be devastated when they fall behind.

The goal of any sports program for young kids should simply be to create a safe place where they can have fun and learn. I would prefer that leagues didn’t give out trophies. However, if they are going to give them out, they should be awarded to all.

Bob Bernstein; Nashville

I am not a big fan of James Harrison, but he is right about pretend trophies. In competition, some people win, and some people lose. That’s why we compete in sports. It teaches all of us the meaning of effort, teamwork, intelligence and physical attributes. Not successful? Work harder. Still not successful? Try something else. Success in something is out there for those who are willing to make the sacrifices to achieve it.

Louis Lagrave; Cave Creek, Ariz.

“I’m not about to raise two boys to be men by making them believe that they are entitled to something just because they tried their best.” James Harrison

Comments from Facebook are edited for clarity and grammar:

I agree wholeheartedly with James Harrison. Sports teaches that winning and losing come with effort. Sometimes, your best efforts result in a loss. But you at least made the effort to win. Why teach kids that winning is just “participating” when it is not?

— Ross Murphy

We are talking about 6-year-olds, not teenagers. I am a parent of kids this age, and the effort it takes to get them to show up, let alone compete, is tremendous.

We reward the effort because many of these leagues do not keep score. Rewarding the effort makes them want to try harder and become better at the sport.

Telling them that they are not good enough at such a young age pushes kids out early from youth sports.

— Sean Thomas

When very young, my son always wanted a trophy for the effort he put in to something. I accepted it but told him that is not what you play for.

I told him you will forget the trophy but remember the great wins and tough losses, how hard you tried, the lessons you learned and the people you played with. In the end, that is all that matters.

— Bill Drescher

Participation trophies should end the same time grades start in school.

You don’t get an A in school because you sit near someone who gets an A. You have to study hard and earn that A.

— Anthony Fuda

I’m sure that along with returning these trophies, Harrison also has a general parenting style that allows his kids to fail and learn how to respond to failure in all aspects of life.

Participation trophies aren’t the biggest problem; it’s just the most tangible aspect of a parenting philosophy that has started to become the norm. Kids today are growing up without a work ethic. They get what they want, and they don’t have to work for it.

— Justin Garver

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1EdPQmT