Dentist Jose Zermeno checks the teeth of a patient at a health fair held Sunday at the Mexican Consulate in downtown San Bernardino.

SAN BERNARDINO >> About 60 organizations, offering everything from eye care to dentistry and zumba, participated Sunday in the kickoff of Binational Health Week at the Mexican Consulate here.

About 1,000 attended the event, held both inside and outside of the Consulate’s offices downtown at 293 N. D St.

“The rain kept many away,” said Tammy Garcia Chiang, community affairs coordinator for the consulate.

Last year’s event drew more, 1,500, on a sunny hot day, she said.

Events similar to this were held at consulate offices around the United States this weekend, she said.

Monterey, Mexico-born Anna Ceballos, 20, of San Bernardino decided to have her teeth cleaned — without charge — at the event, courtesy of Gabriel Martinez’s dental group, which has offices in Pomona, Corona and Yucaipa.

The group is planning to open an office in San Bernardino soon, he said.

Covered California was at the health fair to sign up non-citizens with green cards for Obamacare under the state exchange system.

In 2016, undocumented non-citizens will be allowed to purchase insurance plans participating in the state’s insurance pool, which is part of the historic Affordable Care Act, said Luis Zubiate, a certified insurance agent for Covered California.

Mexico-based Devlyn Optical did eye screenings and in some cases gave vouchers for free eyeglasses to health fair attendees. In addition to Mexico, the firm has locations in Guatemala, El Salvador and two states in the U.S. — California and Texas, said Gerry Quebrado, Southern California supervisor.

Its California locations include sites in Chino, Palmdale, Panorama City, and Huntington Park, Quebrado said.

“This health fair really goes deep,” said Dominick Sturz, an associate professor of public health at Cal Baptist University in Riverside.

Women could meet with doctors on health issues and there was a free mobile mammogram service available as well, said Sturz, who became involved in the planning process for the event while a Ph.D. candidate at Loma Linda University.

Chairman of the health fair was Dr. Joan Sabate, a physician and researcher at Loma Linda University’s School of Public Health.

Many area schools participated in various health screenings at the day-long event, including Loma Linda University and West Coast University’s Ontario campus.