Lt. Col. John Mosley loved telling the story, and he told it to me a few years ago at his Aurora home with both pride and anger.

In 1940, the Colorado A&M Aggies — later the Colorado State Rams — were in Salt Lake City to face Utah in football. The night before the game, coach Harry Hughes took the Aggies to a movie theater.

An usher told Mosley he would have to sit in the balcony.

Records from the program’s startup days in the 1890s and early 1900s were murky, but Mosley, in 1940 a sophomore from Denver’s Manual High, was considered the Aggies’ first African-American player in the modern-rules era … and the first in the Mountain States Conference, which also included the University of Colorado.

“As the team went in,” Mosley told me, “Coach Hughes asked the players, ‘Hey, where’s Mosley?’ Somebody said, ‘They sent him upstairs.’ He told the assistant coach, ‘You go in there and make this announcement: All Aggies, get the hell out of this damn theater!’ The team came out and they were asking, ‘What’s wrong?’ And Coach Hughes said, ‘We’re not going to that damn theater because they wouldn’t let Mosley sit downstairs.’ “

The Aggies left. Although having a black teammate didn’t sit well with some of them at first, Mosley had won most of them over. The Aggies’ opponents were another story.

“Naturally, there was name-calling and that type of thing,” Mosley told me. “I had no problem in my responses, because I didn’t respond. It was my teammates, Dude Dent and Woody Fries, who were quite vocal in ensuring that those voices didn’t get out too much. The way I responded was through my ability to tackle and to run the ball hard.”

At CSU, Mosley was an undersized — even for that day — guard and fullback, and a star wrestler, plus vice president of his class as a junior and senior. I interviewed him several times over the years. I always was enthralled.

Mosley died Friday. He was 93.

Monday, we’re honoring those killed in service to our country. That includes one of the teammates Mosley mentioned as being especially supportive. Lewis “Dude” Dent, from Craig, was killed in action against the Germans near Troyes, France, in 1944.

But I believe I can speak for those in my generation and perhaps beyond in saying this: As the years pass, as those who served in World War II leave us, Memorial Day honors them too.

Mosley’s story highlights that as noble as the causes were in World War II, our nation was — as it still is — imperfect. He had taken civilian pilot lessons and was angry when after graduation he was assigned to a segregated field artillery unit at Fort Sill, rather than to the 99th Fighter Squadron at Tuskegee.

He lobbied the Army, even writing to the White House, essentially demanding to serve as a fighter pilot with the Tuskegee Airmen. Eventually his request was granted. As the war ended, he hadn’t been sent overseas, but also was one of the first black pilots to also be trained in a B-25 bomber and likely would have been deployed soon to the Pacific if the Japanese hadn’t surrendered.

Mosley experienced segregated lunch counters in Denver and saw signs in windows of Fort Collins restaurants that in crude terms made it clear he couldn’t eat there. Stateside in uniform while training, he faced more shameful treatment.

Mosley could get mad talking about it. But embittered? No. That amazed me. He served in the Air Force reserves through much of the Vietnam War, including as an operations officer. In civilian life, he worked in the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, and then the regional office of Health and Human Services before retiring.

In addition to Dent, many other Mosley teammates served, including Walter “Bus” Bergman and Perry Blach. Bergman, from Denver’s North High, was awarded the Bronze Star as a Marine for his valor in the Battle of Sugar Loaf Hill. He was an iconic coach at Mesa College in Grand Junction, and he died in 2010. Blach served in combat from Utah Beach, through the Battle of the Bulge, and through the German surrender. He became a well-known Yuma rancher and cattleman. He died in 2011.

To them all.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei