The Larimer County Sheriff's Office has used iris scanning technology for about a decade

Larimer County Sheriff's deputy Kathy Messick, right, and public information officer John Schulz demonstrate how the department's iris scanner works on Friday, Jan. 10, 2014 at the department's administrative office in Fort Collins. ( Steve Stoner )

The eyes, they say, are the windows to the soul.

But they're also a clear view of a person's identity, and in the Larimer County Sheriff's Office, iris scanning technology is a quick and accurate way to make sure a person is who they claim to be.

"It's the modern-day equivalent of the fingerprint," sheriff's office spokesman John Schulz said.

The tool received attention recently when Larimer County Sheriff Justin Smith posted information about an arrest that had been assisted by the technology. On Jan. 4, deputies responded to a car that had crashed on Interstate 25 in Fort Collins and found the suspect was intoxicated. Schulz said the suspect had no identification on him, and as is typical in such situations, deputies told him to write down his name and date of birth.

A computer monitor displays an iris scan after a demonstration of the scanning device Friday at the Larimer County Sheriff's administrative office in Fort Collins. ( Steve Stoner )

While being booked into the Larimer County Jail on a DUI charge, Schulz said the suspect continued to maintain the identity. Following a booking photo, however, he was asked to look into a mirror while an officer on the other side focused in on each eye with the handheld iris scanner.

Within seconds, 38-year-old Salvador Corral had revealed himself through the iris scanner, which instantaneously pulled up a match to the previous offender. The search also revealed that the Fort Collins man was wanted on a warrant.

Because of the identity Corral had reportedly provided initially, he now faces a felony criminal impersonation charge in addition to the DUI, DUI per se and careless driving charges.

Advertisement

According to Schulz, the situation is one that happens regularly.

"We discover identities through the iris and sometimes we do discover other things about them," Schulz said.

With apps now available on smartphones, iris scanners may seem futuristic, but the sheriff's office has used the technology for nearly a decade. It was first implemented at the jail and is now part of the standard booking procedure.

"The database is made up of everyone booked in the Larimer County Jail since we started using the technology," Schulz said.

In contrast to fingerprints, the database for iris scans is limited to those who have been through the Larimer County system. Other law enforcement agencies around the country use the technology, but there is no national standard for sharing the information.

Inmates have their eyes scanned when they leave the jail, too, so that there's 100 percent assurance that the right person is being released. Officers also use the technology inside the jail for cases where inmates attempt to swap identities.

An iris scan is commonly confused with a retinal scan, which deputy Kathy Messick said is an invasive procedure that maps the blood vessels in the back of one's eye. The iris scan essentially takes a photograph of the iris, or colored portion of the eye, which has patterns that are unique to every person and cannot be changed.

When the picture of the iris is captured, the linked in computer immediately lets the user know if the iris is in the database. If it is, identifying information is included.

The sheriff's office has two scanners -- one is kept at the jail and the other at the administrative offices. Several years ago, a device was added for the administrative office, where registered sex offenders must appear. In that case, Schulz said the scanner is a way to ensure there are no attempts for offenders to use a stand-in.

Jessica Maher can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 516, or maherj@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @JessicaMaherRH.