Buy Photo Phil Reisman (Photo: The Journal News)Buy Photo

Earlier this year a group of affluent African-American parents and their children attended a workshop held in the Rye home of two black bankers.

Led by an African-American judge and two detectives, the purpose was to teach black teenagers how to interact with security guards and police officers in mostly white communities. A lot of useful advice was given. This was after the Trayvon Martin case.

One of the fathers in attendance was Lawrence Otis Graham, a Harvard-trained attorney and author who lives with his wife and kids in Chappaqua and is perhaps best known locally as a political commentator on Cablevision's News 12.

Graham recalled the blasé reaction to the workshop tips in an online piece he wrote for the Washington Post.

"Some of the parents and most of the kids sat smugly, passing around platters of vegetables and smoked salmon—while it helped to have the lessons reinforced by police officers, we had all heard it many times before," he wrote.

"My kids and I had it all figured out. Or so we thought."

Graham and his wife believed that their success and economic wellbeing would provide sufficient "social armor" for his sons and daughter, effectively sheltering them from the racism that they themselves had experienced as children.

He recalled the difficulties his parents had in 1967 when they looked for a house in an all-white neighborhood. Brokers wouldn't show them some houses and when they finally picked out a house to buy, the owner upped the price 25 percent which they eventually paid. Even then, a small group of neighbors toyed with the idea of buying the house out from under them.

As a child, Graham often felt that he was followed around in local stores and stopped on the street because of the color of his skin.

Graham wondered if his parents might have been better equipped to shield him from such humiliating experiences "had they been rich, famous or powerful—or if they had been better acquainted with the white world in which they immersed us."

That was the operating theory Graham and his wife adopted in raising their own kids. Unfortunately, it was a naïve notion that was dashed one day when Graham got a call from his 15-year-old son who was attending a summer program at an expensive New England boarding school.

His son told him that he as he was walking across campus, a couple of men in a beatup car pulled along side him. One of them leaned out the window and called him the n-word and then, with sadistic gusto, repeated it with added emphasis.

The teen had never been hit with the slur before. He was stunned.

Graham discusses the incident in his article, which was posted in November under the heading, "I taught my black kids that their elite upbringing would protect them from discrimination. I was wrong."

Reaching him on the phone Friday, Graham told me that for a week his story got the most "hits" on the PostEverything website. To say it started a conversation would be an understatement. It got 1,819 comments and probably would've gotten a lot more, except the comments section was closed. The reaction ran the gamut—from sympathetic to condescending.

Predictably, a few remarks were racist. Of course, like members of the Ku Klux Klan, the authors hid behind a veil of anonymity.

But one reader summed up Graham's story in a single, simple sentence: "Everyone who thinks we are 'post-racial' (if anyone still does) should read this."

Graham told me that he wanted to make the point that bigotry is a viral fact of life that isn't confined to urban settings, and that good clothes and polite manners in the face of it have only limited inoculative powers.

"The presumption is I will be stopped by police approximately once a month while driving," he said. "That's just part of the routine. The question is where it's going to happen, when it's going to happen. I never get a ticket. It's just these random stops."

A few months ago, he was driving home on the Sprain Brook Parkway with his 12-year-old daughter when he was followed for no apparent reason by a plainclothes cop in an unmarked car. The officer had trailed him for seven or eight minutes before pulling him over.

Once he realized who Graham was, the cop apologized. "But the thing about it," Graham said, "is that my daughter was crying at that point because she was scared."

Another time, he and his wife were stopped while on their way to a favorite restaurant in Mount Kisco. Graham doesn't drink, but the cop asked him if he was drunk. Then he insultingly asked his wife the same question.

Graham said any white man would've complained that the question was irrelevant.

"But I can't say that," he said. "I know I can't say that."

Reach Phil Reisman at preisman@lohud.com. Twitter: @philreisman.

Read or Share this story: http://lohud.us/1CT4sXc