BOULDER — Now it gets interesting for the Colorado Buffaloes and fans wondering if the program is turning the corner after years of futility.

They lost a game they should have won at Hawaii to open the season. They manhandled Massachusetts in their home opener. They came from behind to beat rival Colorado State last week in overtime, and Saturday they destroyed an FCS opponent that hasn’t won in almost two years.

Nelson Spruce became CU’s all-time leader in pass receiving yardage and the Buffs beat Nicholls State 48-0 to forge their first three-game winning streak since 2008 and their first shutout since 2009. Now Pac-12 play looms with games against conference foes on nine consecutive weekends, beginning with 13th-ranked Oregon here next Saturday night in a nationally televised game.

All the suspense was gone by halftime, including Spruce’s pursuit of Michael Westbrook’s record for receiving yardage. Spruce passed Scotty McKnight (2,521), Rae Carruth (2,540) and then Westbrook (2,548) with an 11-yard reception in the second quarter, finishing the game with five catches for 80 yards. He now stands at 2,570 for his career.

“We played physical in this football game, we played hard, we were able to put it away so we could rest some of those guys in the second half,” said coach Mike MacIntyre, already fielding questions about next week. “Oregon has a lot of speed. We’re going to have to be able to tackle the speed.”

The Buffs cruised to a 24-0 halftime lead despite several high throws by quarterback Sefo Liufau, who separated his right shoulder last week in the Rocky Mountain Showdown. Liufau reluctantly conceded he threw Saturday with pain.

“Pretty frustrating,” said Liufau, who has not thrown an interception since the first quarter of the Hawaii game. “I left a lot of throws out there. I don’t want to make any excuses. If you’re out there playing, you need to make the plays. I think fundamentals was what it comes down to, and trying to compensate for (the shoulder).”

MacIntyre said Liufau wasn’t able to throw in practice for most of the week, and his long passes were sailing early.

“Then he figured it out and started throwing them a little bit lower and doing better,” MacIntyre said. “He was out of rhythm just a little bit, but he did a lot of excellent things and he’ll feel much better next week.”

Phillip Lindsay rushed for 133 yards on 17 carries and scored twice. He, too, was playing with pain after injuring a rib in the CSU game.

“I got my rib banged up pretty bad,” Lindsay said.

So, about that Oregon game, coach.

“Let’s just enjoy this one right now,” MacIntyre said. “Speed, speed, speed worries you about Oregon. They’ve got a lot of speed, all over the field. They’ve been the class of the Pac-12 for a while, them and Stanford. They’re a really good football team.”

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or @johnmeyer

Game balls

Phillip Lindsay, RB, CU: Rushed for 113 yards and two touchdowns on 17 carries.

Donovan Lee, RB, CU: A former wide receiver, Lee ran over three Nicholls State defensive players and scored on a 59-yard run in the third quarter.

Jered Bell, S, CU: Made a nice interception in the second quarter and picked off a bad overthrow in the fourth quarter.