Topics: Earth Island Journal, Environment, GMO, GMO regulation, Hawaii, Kauai, News, Politics News

This originally appeared on Earth Island Journal

Lawmakers in Kauai today will decide the fate of a hotly debated bill that would require agri-biotech companies to disclose details about the pesticides they are using as well as the genetically modified crops they are growing on the Hawai‘ian island.

There has been increasing concern among Kauai residents about the health and environmental impact of the pesticides used in GMO trail plots and on the seed-corn fields.

Following the recent demise of Washington State’s GMO labeling initiative, Bill 2491 has turned Kauai into the latest battleground in the fight over genetically modified crops.

The bill has had a rocky, emotionally charged ride so far. The Kauai County Council approved it on October 16 by an overwhelming six to one vote after a tortuous 19-hour-long hearing that went past 3 a.m. The hearing had been preceded by months of protests and debates on genetically modified crops and pesticides that set tempers flaring on the usually laid-back island. Then, 10 days after the council vote, much to the dismay of the bill’s supporters, Mayor Bernard Carvahlo, who had been skeptical about the bill from the start, vetoed it.

The councilmembers will vote on the bill again today, this time to override the mayor’s veto. The council needs five votes to override the mayor’s veto. It could be a closer margin this time round, since Councilwoman Nadine Nakamura, who voted in favor of the bill last time, has stepped down and taken a job as the mayor’s managing director.

Bill 2491 requires agricultural companies and farms to disclose the type and volume of pesticides they are spraying, as well as the location of the fields being sprayed. It also requires them to set up buffer zones between fields growing GM crops and public spaces like schools, hospitals, and parks. Companies have to notify the public before spraying pesticides.

“At the end of the day all we are asking for is disclosure of pesticides used and locations of GMO fields, not trade secrets or a total ban on GMOs,” says Councilman Gary Hooser, who co-introduced the bill in June. “All we are trying to do is to protect the health of our community. Frankly, the mayor hasn’t taken the time to understand the issue and he’s surrounded by industry, who are some of the largest employers in the island.”

The proposed legislation mostly affects the four big biotech companies — Dow, Syngenta, BASF, and DuPont-Pioneer — that have operations in Kauai and are heavy users of restricted-use pesticides. Together the companies occupy about 15,000 acres of Kauai‘s agricultural land. Some of this land is leased from the state and the rest from private owners. (The one local company that would be affected is Kauai Coffee Co.)

The biotech companies mainly grow seed corn on the island, which is Kauai’s number one crop. But they also have trail plots where they test genetically modified seeds for pesticide resistance. Hawaii’s warm climate allows for three corn crop harvests in a year, which makes it a perfect place to experiment with seeds.

Bill 2491 is the product of increasing concern among islanders about the health and environmental impact of the pesticides used at these trail plots and on the seed-corn fields. There has been special concern about the health impact of pesticides on children.

For example, students and teachers at Waimea Canyon Middle School, which is near a Syngenta field, complained of noxious odors on several occasions between 2006 and 2008. On one occasion, according to locals, the school had to be evacuated and some chidlren were sent to the hospital.

The volume of protests and demonstrations against pesticide use in Kauai has been on the rise.

Some doctors say the region seems to have unusually high rates of asthma, cancer and birth defects. But so far there have been few studies investigating these allegations.

In 2011, residents of the west Kauai town of Waimea filed a suit against Pioneer Hi-Bred International, a DuPont affiliate, citing multiple violations of law in pesticide and land management of Pioneer’s test corn fields upwind of residential homes and schools.