Samuel Bompane, 22, of Brooklyn, New York, faces several drug-related charges after a verbal argument that escalated into a pursuit and crash that injured another driver. Authorities say he had more than $100,000 worth of drugs in the Nissan Altima he was driving. (Photo: COURTESY OF NEW JERSEY STATE POLICE)

A verbal dispute escalated into a pursuit up the Garden State Parkway, a car crash and a drug arrest for a Brooklyn, New York man Tuesday afternoon, New Jersey State Police said.

Samuel Bompane, 22, faces drug and vehicular assault charges after a series of incidents that unfolded Tuesday, including a car crash that landed an Essex County woman in the hospital, according to a statement on the New Jersey State Police Facebook page. Troopers said they later found eight different drugs in his car, valued at more than $100,000.

Troopers responded to a report of a verbal dispute Tuesday afternoon on the side of the road in Cape May County, police said. Bompane allegedly drove away in his Nissan Altima and was later seen by authorities speeding near mile marker 83 of the Parkway in Ocean County.

They pursued the Altima, trying to stop it, but stopped as they neared a construction zone in Brick Township, police said. The car continued northward for 25 miles until it collided with another vehicle at mile marker 115 in Monmouth County. Bompane allegedly tried to pass other cars when his Altima struck the vehicle, causing it to turn over.

The driver, identified as a 42-year-old Bloomfield woman, suffered a broken arm in the crash, according to police. She was taken to Jersey Shore University Medical Center in Neptune.

The trooper who arrived at the scene recognized the Altima from earlier radio descriptions and arrested Bompane.

After arriving at the Holmdel State Police Station, Bompane complained of leg pain from the crash, police said. He was taken to Bayshore Community Hospital in Holmdel for treatment.

They later determined Bompane was under the influence of drugs at the time of the crash, police said.

Authorities searched the car, which was registered in Florida, and found “a plethora of different drugs,” police stated, including more than 10 pounds of marijuana, 80 pounds of marijuana candy, hashish oil and prescription drugs—more than $100,000 worth of drugs.

They also say they found scales, currency counters, plastic bags and smoking pipes, as well as $35,000 in the car, according to the statement.

Bompane was charged with driving while intoxicated, aggravated assault with a vehicle, possession of MDMA, possession with intent to distribute for multiple drugs including marijuana, cocaine psilocybin (also known as mushrooms), hashish and drug paraphernelia, police said. He also faces several motor vehicle summonses.

After his release from the hospital, Bompane was sent to the Monmouth County Correctional Institution on $725,000 full-cash bail.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1GsPQfO