Photo

LEVERKUSEN, Germany — Markus Rehm, a long jumper, rocked forward and back and then took 18 strides down the track before he planted and took off, his body soaring some 25 feet through the air and landing with a splash of sand.

That last step before takeoff is always crucial, and it is even more critical for Rehm than other jumpers. After all, Rehm does not shove off the track with his right foot; rather, he pushes with a carbon-fiber prosthetic blade.

Rehm, 25, had his right leg amputated below the knee after a boating accident when he was 14. He has emerged as a world-class athlete anyway, winning Germany’s national championships last month. His situation is inspiring and somewhat unusual, yet at the same time altogether familiar.

With uncomfortable echoes from the case of Oscar Pistorius, the double-amputee sprinter from South Africa who forced sports officials to consider how to draw the line between able-bodied and disabled athletes, Rehm now finds himself in the same arena of confusion.

Using the same brand of prosthesis as Pistorius, Rehm beat 13 able-bodied athletes in the long jump competition at nationals. It was a dream, he said, but even while soaking in the moment atop the medal stand, he also knew that “a big conversation was about to start.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

It did. A few days later, the governing body for German track and field announced that it would not nominate Rehm to its roster for the European championships — an honor that was historically all but guaranteed to the national champion.

Despite approving Rehm’s participation in the first place, officials said they could not be sure Rehm’s prosthetic leg did not give him an advantage. Without conclusive data, they opted to leave Rehm out of Europe’s showcase event, which ended Sunday in Zurich.

“It’s really a shame they weren’t brave enough to nominate me,” Rehm said in an interview last week at his sports club, TSV Bayer 04 Leverkusen.

“Years ago, people were just smiling about our sports, saying things like, ‘Oh, it’s nice that they can move a bit,’ ” he added. “Now, it has all changed. We can win. And there ought to be a solution. We ought to be able to work together. I don’t know why it has to be so hard.”

It was 2007 when Pistorius first fought to compete in the Olympics, and he ended up in court to earn the right. Yet even now the issue continues to be among the most vexing in sports.

“The governing bodies of sport in general didn’t deal with Pistorius very well, and they still haven’t figured out how to deal with it,” said Peter G. Weyand, a professor of physiology and biomechanics at Southern Methodist University who has extensively researched athlete performance and worked on testing connected to Pistorius’s case.

“There’s clearly a need,” Weyand said. “This is an issue that isn’t going away.”

Rehm still may try to compete in the 2016 Summer Olympics. His winning jump at the national meet — 8.24 meters, or just over 27 feet — surpassed an Olympic standard that was set for long jumpers trying to qualify for the 2012 Games and would have won the silver medal at the European championships. Weyand noted that the Brazilian amputee sprinter Alan Oliveira, who beat Pistorius in the 200 meters at the London Paralympics, is also close to meeting an Olympic qualifying standard in the sprint events.

Yet at this point, track’s governing bodies — including its international organization, the I.A.A.F. — have shown little interest in attempting to proactively define what sort of prosthetic devices might be unfair.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In response to questions about Rehm’s circumstance, as well as the larger concerns of disabled athletes who want to compete against able-bodied athletes, an I.A.A.F. spokesman provided only a generic statement that reaffirmed the organization’s stance to handle situations on a case-by-case basis.

“The likelihood is that para-athletes will remain a small representative group in able-bodied athletics at international-level competition for which the I.A.A.F. is responsible,” the statement said.

That approach is frustrating for athletes like Rehm, in part because other organizations — including the German federation, known as the D.L.V. — have followed suit. Rehm’s coach, Steffi Nerius, said the federation was made aware of Rehm’s interest in competing at nationals as far back as last summer, when Rehm set a para-athletics record in the long jump at a competition in Lyon, France. Rehm’s jump there was 7.95 meters, a mark that easily passed the able-bodied nationals qualifying standard of 7.55 meters.

“It was clear he was capable,” Nerius said.

Despite the lead time, Rehm said his camp heard little from the D.L.V. until just weeks before the nationals. Rehm said he was informed then that there was no time to conduct any testing before the event, “which made no sense because there had been a whole year.”

Photo

Clemens Prokop, the president of the D.L.V., said that the federation had been interested in doing a thorough analysis of Rehm’s prosthesis earlier in the year but that “the costs for this were so high that they were not economically affordable.”