Obamacare goes to Supreme Court yet again

Posted: 6 am ET

While the case is unlikely to be a repeat of the existential nail-biter that occurred in 2012, the portion of Obamacare that pits birth control against religious rights is headed back to the U.S. Supreme Court next spring.

On Friday, the court agreed to hear a challenge by faith-based groups to the Obama administration's court-approved clause that makes birth control a standard benefit of health insurance. The court will hear arguments in late March and rule on the matter by the end of June.

It will be the 4th time that the court has heard challenges to Obamacare since it became law in 2010.

New case involving contraceptive mandate

At issue is the Obamacare requirement that contraceptive coverage be included in health plans for employees and students.

Last year, the Supreme Court ruled that closely-held companies can refuse to offer free birth control coverage to their workers on religious grounds. The upcoming challenge will attempt to extend the same right to refuse birth control coverage to religious nonprofit organizations.

Under the current law, Obamacare gives religious nonprofits two options: They can shift the responsibility to their insurer, which would then provide birth control coverage via a "self-certification" form; or they can notify the government of their objection and forward discussion to their insurer. Either way, the outcome is the same: The feds reimburse the insurer directly for the cost of contraceptive coverage, dealing the objecting organization out of the mix.

But the 7 religious nonprofits challenging the contraceptive clause this time argue that the administration's workaround doesn't go far enough in respecting their freedom of religion under the U.S. Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993. The appellants argue that they shouldn't have to play any role in the Obamacare birth control program.

Nuns say law makes them complicit

"Many religious ministries are being forced to choose between violating their sincere religious beliefs or violating federal law," argues the Little Sisters of the Poor, an order of Catholic nuns and one of the groups challenging the health reform law this time. Last year, the Supreme Court stepped in to grant the Little Sisters a reprieve from the religious workaround, saying they only needed to notify federal officials in writing of their objection to the contraceptives requirement.

Among the other appellants are the anti-abortion advocacy group Priests for Life; Geneva College in Beaver Falls, Pennsylvania; Bishop David Zubik of Pittsburgh; East Texas Baptist University in Marshall, Texas; Southern Nazarene University in Bethany, Oklahoma; and the Archdiocese of Washington, D.C.

If the court sides with the appellants, the case could affect thousands of universities, hospitals and religious orders, many of which have filed their own lawsuits against the requirement.

But unlike with last year's challenge to Obamacare's contraceptive rules, most of the federal appeals court rulings on these challenges have sided with the administration, saying it is adequately protecting religious rights.

Follow me on Twitter.

Subscribe to Bankrate newsletters today!