St. Vrain Valley favorites We asked readers to vote on what they love most about living in the St. Vrain Valley. Given 10 choices, readers could select five. Here are the percentages of the total vote that each received. The view: 22.71% The weather: 18.23% Outdoor recreation: 16.48% Local restaurants/breweries: 10.04% The water: 8.3% Community events: 7.86% Schools: 6% Generous people: 4.26% Job opportunities: 3.06% Local shops: 3.06%

Editor's note: The Times-Call asked readers recently what they love about living in the St. Vrain Valley. This week, the T-C will feature the top five choices, counting down from No. 5. Today's subject: water.

Somewhere in the Rocky Mountains, a drop of water rolls down the Western Slope into a stream snaking its way into the Colorado River, where it will be stored in a lake and then pumped via tunnel under the Front Range.

Eventually the drop might end up in a glass of Left Hand Brewery's pale ale or in a steaming cup of Ziggi's coffee or it might just come falling out of the tap in a Longmont home.

The Times-Call asked readers what they loved about living in the St. Vrain Valley, and 76 people gave one of their five votes to the water.

Water in Longmont, and the water Longmont provides to the town of Lyons, comes from one of two sources, both of which flow from mountain snowmelt.

Bob Allen, the operations manager for Longmont Public Works, said the city's source for water was a big part of why people say it tastes so good and comes out of the tap so cold.

"The water comes from wildland areas and not industrial areas, so we have a pretty good fresh source to start off with," Allen said. "It's not exposed to industry or commercial area and it doesn't run through big rivers that tend to warm up over time, so the water stays fresh and cold."

During the winter, Longmont residents can count on water coming out of the tap at an average of 45 degrees F.

During the winter, when Longmont uses only about 8 million gallons of water per day, the city gets the water from the St. Vrain. In the summer months, however, when residents water and irrigate their lawns, the water use can jump up to 30 million gallons a day. When that happens, the city draws on water rights it has in the Colorado Big Thompson Project, which pumps water via tunnel from the Western Slope to municipalities on the Front Range.

It takes 21 miles of pipes to bring the raw water to Longmont's water plants, and there are storage tanks in the city that can store 25 million gallons of water, Allen said.

The water is run through six filters at the treatment plants, and then chlorine and fluoride are added.

Not only is the water cold and free of many contaminants seen in cities that pump water from the ground, but it's also plentiful, Allen said.

"Longmont and its raw water supply is a leader in Colorado because we have solid water rights in areas with good water quality," Allen said. "We're unique in that Longmont has had a plan for water supply for a long time and continues to modify that plan."

One industry that depends on good water in a large supply is the beer industry, and both Longmont and Lyons have its share of brewers to show for it.

Joe Schiraldi, the vice president of brewing operations for Left Hand Brewery, said that traditionally, breweries have been located next to good water sources and Left Hand's Longmont address is no accident.

"The two founders of the brewery located it here in Longmont because of the water quality and the water quantity," Schiraldi said. "Honestly, with any brewer here on the Front Range, it would be inaccurate if they try to put forth that the water is not a factor in the location."

Water is the largest ingredient in beer. Besides running the water through a process to remove the chlorine, Schiraldi said, Left Hand uses it straight from its Longmont taps.

"Water influences (the beer's) mineral content and how the raw materials in the beer interact with one another. It influences hop efficiencies and all different kinds of things that can occur in the brewing process," Schiraldi said.

Schiraldi said one of the best brewing qualities in Longmont water is what's not in it. In the brewing world, there's a widely held belief that the mineral content of a geographic area's water supply contributed to the different styles of beer found around the world. Because Longmont water is such a blank slate, chemically, Left Hand can add different minerals to it to get a beer that tastes like it's made from German water, or British water or Irish water.

"It's easier to add than to take away," Schiraldi said.

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci