COLUMBUS, Ohio – John Kasich got what he wanted Tuesday.

By making easy work of Ed FitzGerald, the Republican scored the kind of sweeping landslide that Ohio voters haven't awarded a sitting governor in 20 years.

With 99.67 percent of precincts counted, Kasich had 64 percent of the vote, compared with 33 percent for Ed FitzGerald, the Cuyahoga County executive whose campaign began with towering promise and ended in ruins. Green Party activist Anita Rios of Toledo had 3 percent.

"The new Republican Party!" Kasich cheered as he took the stage at the Renaissance Downtown Columbus Hotel.

"This is just not another election, another political campaign," Kasich told his supporters. "This is a movement to restore the hope in our state, and maybe it can even become contagious with hope being restored all across the United States of America."

The Associated Press called the race for Kasich as polls closed in Ohio at 7:30 p.m.

"I truly, truly wish him well and the state well in the next four years," FitzGerald said of Kasich in his concession speech.

Now the political winds shift toward 2016. Cleveland is on deck to host the Republican National Convention, staking Ohio to an even stronger claim as the most prized of presidential battlegrounds. And Kasich has some decisions to make.

Will he claim a mandate to push state government down a centrist path that includes Medicaid expansion, anti-poverty programs and peace with organized labor? Or will a governor who audaciously targeted public-employee unions after winning his first term by a mere 77,000 votes be emboldened to re-engage such conservative battles?

Kasich also will wrestle in the coming weeks – yes, weeks – with whether he wants to be the candidate Republicans nominate for president in Cleveland two summers from now. Running for re-election has put Kasich behind other GOP prospects who already have taken preliminary steps and made visits to early caucus and primary states.

"That decision is up to him and his family," Ohio GOP Chairman Matt Borges said of a presidential run, something Kasich attempted without success 15 years ago. "Should he decide to move ahead, he would have an excellent case to make."

Democrats have some tough choices ahead, too. Having now been swept at the statewide level in two consecutive gubernatorial cycles and in five of the last six, their party is at perhaps its lowest point in two decades. Ohio Democratic Party Chairman Chris Redfern revealed late Tuesday that he will step aside. Any lingering discord could have national consequences come the presidential election.

Kasich's comeback

Few would have predicted such a thoroughly decisive victory for Kasich and the Republicans three Novembers ago when voters rejected Senate Bill 5, a GOP effort to strip public employees of their collective bargaining power.

It was a huge political loss for Kasich, who in 2010 squeaked into office on the Tea Party's coattails and announced his presence with right-wing bluster.

"It's clear the people have spoken," Kasich said at a Statehouse news conference on the night SB 5 went down. "I heard their voices. I understand their decision."

What followed was a quick change worthy of a motor oil garage. The angry Kasich gave way to the optimistic Kasich. And when he introduced his next state budget in 2013, the erstwhile Tea Party warrior was eager to use federal dollars to expand Medicaid coverage under a key provision of President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act.

Kasich's stance upset many conservatives. Not that he cared.

"You know, I have a right to lead, too," Kasich said in January. "I have a right to shape what conservative philosophy means. You know, I have a right to move forward with programs that I think maybe in the short term may not be that popular but in the long term may yield an awful lot of good. Why not? Why would I not do that?"

The second term

But what Kasich will Ohioans get in his second term?

FitzGerald and Democrats had warned that a re-elected Kasich would be eager to reestablish his conservative cred in time for a presidential run and, thus, more likely to back union-busting legislation. Kasich has not unequivocally ruled out right to work, but he also has downplayed any expectations conservatives might have.

"In this state, as long as I'm governor, I do not anticipate a need for that, period," Kasich told Northeast Ohio Media Group editors and reporters last month.

The best hint at how Kasich will govern in his second term comes from his campaign messaging. His stump speeches four years ago foreshadowed the stormy first year that sent Kasich's poll numbers tumbling. Lately he has talked about wanting to help "those in the shadows" and has asked voters to empower him to achieve such goals.

"Ladies and gentlemen, as we've gotten stronger, as we've gotten more job growth, as our finances have improved, I am so excited about the fact that we have been able to reach out to many people who have been forgotten," Kasich said Tuesday night in his victory speech.

Another hint for Kasich's future comes from how aggressively he campaigned, even after polls showed him opening a comfortable double-digit lead over FitzGerald in September. The governor remained a visible presence on the trail and on TV.

Kasich's ads in the final month suggested he was reaching out to constituencies that typically favor Democrats, namely women and minorities. And for his closing ad, his campaign plunked down $25,000 – pocket change for Kasich, but an amount that would have taken weeks for FitzGerald to raise – to rent Ohio Stadium and film Kasich on the 50-yard line.

He or Lt. Gov. Mary Taylor attended nearly 80 campaign events after Sept. 1.

"This could very well be his last campaign," campaign manager Matt Carle said Sunday before a rally with U.S. House Speaker John Boehner. "If that's the case, you want to end on a high note. You don't want to sit there and say on Election Day, 'Wow, if we would have just done this one other event, if we would have just gone to this place.'"

But Kasich's desire to run up the score was in many ways about his desire to have a policy mandate at the Statehouse. And anyone who doubts White House ambition was a factor need only consider how vigorously Kasich attempted to clarify a recent Associated Press story that muddled his message on Medicaid expansion.

The governor, who supports expansion but not the overarching Obamacare program, called multiple national news organizations to make that distinction. Back at home, he tightened up and did few interviews in the campaign's closing days.

The FitzGerald collapse

Yet for all of Kasich's political finesse and discipline, there is no question that FitzGerald's stumbles provided the opening for this landslide.

More-seasoned Democrats opted against a run for governor, but FitzGerald figured to be a stronger candidate than he ultimately was. A former FBI agent, he had been lauded for cleaning up a notoriously corrupt county government. Party leaders, including Redfern, the state chairman, were drawn by his vote-getting ability in Ohio's most populous county.

FitzGerald, through, struggled early on to translate regional appeal into the big bucks needed to take on a sitting governor who spent years in Congress and at a Wall Street investment banking behemoth. And he botched his first major decision.

Like FitzGerald, State Sen. Eric Kearney looked good on paper – at least the paper FitzGerald looked at before picking Kearney as his running mate. The campaign had few answers for reporters who quickly discovered Kearney's mountain of tax debts.

FitzGerald and Kearney eventually parted ways, but not before repeated questions emerged about the former FBI agent's proficiency in basic background checks.

FitzGerald had hoped to run a substantive campaign around kitchen-table issues and more-targeted base issues such as abortion and women's health. But character issues surfaced in August that essentially ended his viability as a candidate.

After reports that police once found him parked after hours with a woman not his wife and that he lacked a driver's license for a decade, FitzGerald lost key campaign aides. He also lost any hope of having enough money to make his case in television ads.

FitzGerald and his second running mate, Dayton-area lawyer and women's rights advocate Sharen Neuhardt, spent the remaining weeks of the campaign arguing that FitzGerald's personal mistakes shouldn't overshadow real policy issues.

But Kasich ignored FitzGerald. He refused to debate, never once uttered FitzGerald's name in public and went to great lengths to avoid direct engagement with him during a joint endorsement meeting last month with the Northeast Ohio Media Group.

FitzGerald's woes trickled down the ballot and now leave Democrats with an uncertain future in Ohio. Obama won here twice. But Kasich and U.S. Sen. Rob Portman of the Cincinnati area are emerging as national Republican figures heading into a cycle where the Republicans will nominate a president and vice president in Cleveland.

"We need to understand that 2016 is going to be a challenging, difficult electoral year," said Borges, the Ohio GOP chief. "I've said many times that I never want to live through another experience like we did in 2012, and now I'm in a position to make sure we never do."

Meanwhile, the Ohio Democratic Party will be looking to replace Redfern. U.S. Sen. Sherrod Brown, the state's top elected Democrat, will be key to those talks.

"Success has many fathers but defeat is an orphan," Redfern, perhaps bracing for the worst, told the Cincinnati Enquirer last week. "I readily accept that."