LITTLE ROCK — Former U.S. Attorney Conner Eldridge said Wednesday he will seek the Democratic nomination for the U.S. Senate seat currently held by Republican John Boozman.

“Washington is broken. I’m running for the Senate because I’m committed to doing everything I can to fix it for Arkansas and for our country,” Eldridge said in a news release.

Eldridge served for nearly five years as U.S. attorney for the Western District of Arkansas before resigning Aug. 21. Before becoming U.S. attorney, he worked for Summit Bank and Summit Bancorp in Arkadelphia, where at various times he held the positions of vice president and assistant general counsel, president of the Arkadelphia region and CEO.

He also has worked for former U.S. Rep. Marion Berry and former U.S. Sen. Blanche Lincoln. He focused on agricultural issues, including legislation before the House and Senate Agriculture committees.

In an interview Wednesday, Eldridge said his goals include creating jobs, improving education, strengthening communities and addressing threats to public safety. He said that as a U.S. attorney he worked in a bipartisan way to fight crime and that as a senator he would “bring a new perspective that really transcends party lines.”

On the Affordable Care Act, Eldridge said he does not support repealing it but does believe there are problems with it.

“I would work in a bipartisan way to change those, and among those are the medical-device tax and the cost that’s being borne by businesses that could be improved by an expanded tax credit,” he said.

Eldridge said he would work to ensure Arkansas continues to have the flexibility to implement health-care innovations like the private option, the state’s alternative to the Medicaid expansion envisioned under the health-care law.

“The private option has extended coverage to over 200,000 people that are now … not going into the emergency room with the highest cost of care to be treated,” he said. “I think that’s an indicator of what Arkansans want, and that is a bipartisan solution that puts Arkansas common sense in the mix in trying to figure out how to solve a problem.”

State Democratic Party Chairman Vince Insalaco said in a statement Wednesday, “As Arkansans and Democrats, we welcome Conner Eldridge to the race for the U.S. Senate. Conner’s bold leadership as U.S. attorney is proof of his experience and ability to serve the people of Arkansas in the U.S. Senate.”

State Republican Party Chairman Doyle Webb said in a statement, “Arkansans made it clear over the past three election cycles that the destructive, liberal policies of Barack Obama are not welcome here. Conner Eldridge has likened himself to Obama, which is not surprising, given Obama’s appointing him U.S. attorney.”

Andrea Bozek, spokeswoman for the National Republican Senatorial Committee, said in a statement, “Conner Eldridge might want to remove the line about working for President Obama on his resume, because his ties to the unpopular president make him unelectable in Arkansas. Unlike Conner Eldridge, John Boozman has spent his life caring for Arkansas families and fighting Obama’s reckless policies that have put our country at risk.”

Eldridge said the jabs were “just flat wrong.”

“I worked as U.S. attorney for the people of Arkansas. I took that duty and that oath very seriously, and those are the same people that I’m running in this race to go to bat for in Washington,” he said.

Born in Fayetteville in 1977, Eldridge spent the first 12 years of his life in Augusta. His family then moved to Lonoke, where he worked on the family farm and graduated from high school. He obtained a bachelor’s degree from Davidson College and a law degree from the University of Arkansas.

During law school, Eldridge worked as a law clerk for several law firms in Arkansas and the Washington County prosecutor’s office. After law school, he served as a law clerk for U.S. District Judge G. Thomas Eisele of the Eastern District of Arkansas from 2003-2004.

He and his wife, Mary Elizabeth, moved from Arkadelphia to Fort Smith and later to Fayetteville after he became U.S. attorney. They have three sons, Will, 8; Henry, 4; and Tull, 3.