PEORIA — An all-gender logo above the restroom door of the new Planned Parenthood office along Knoxville Avenue draws attention immediately.

Male. Female. Transgender. The universal symbols make a statement about the best- and least-known aspects of the reproductive health care agency.

Planned Parenthood is best known for female reproductive health care, mainly comprehensive birth control services and testing for sexually-transmitted infections (STIs).

Men make up about nine percent of patients at the Peoria health center. Men can go to Planned Parenthood for HIV and STI testing, pills to prevent HIV, screenings for testicular cancer, erectile dysfunction, or simply to buy condoms. Some Planned Parenthood agencies, though not Peoria’s, perform vasectomies.

Judging from national reports, the national organization is always on the defensive about what it does and what it doesn’t do — at least what it doesn’t do much.

When Planned Parenthood isn’t fending off political, legal, or violent attacks such as the November shootings in Colorado Springs, it’s defending Roe v. Wade, the landmark Supreme Court decision that legalized abortion 43 years ago this week.

But Planned Parenthood of Illinois is forging through the controversies, steadily expanding services and moving ahead with ambitious makeovers of the organization’s 17 health centers in Illinois. The national organization will celebrate its 100th anniversary this year.

Carole Brite sums up the situation with a saying familiar to Planned Parenthood staff and supporters:

“These doors stay open.”

Not only are the doors open, the agency is considering opening new offices near Chicago and in southern Illinois. The Peoria health center just moved from its longtime location along Jefferson Street to a renovated medical office at 2709 N. Knoxville. In the past three years, the agency has spent more than $3.6 million to update Planned Parenthood clinics throughout the state. Brite’s plans include renovations at all 17 Planned Parenthood sites in Illinois.

The new Peoria clinic is centrally located with more parking, and more exam rooms, says Tammy Garrott, regional director of clinical operations who oversees seven Planned Parenthood centers in downstate Illinois, including Peoria.

The office offers free wi-fi and charging stations for telephones and tablets. “We know how connected people are to their phones,” Garrott says.

Planned Parenthood also uses a phone service that can translate 36 different languages for non-English speaking clients.

One employee is trained to help people sign up for health insurance through the Affordable Care Act, which will play a role in whether or not the agency decides to offer limited primary care services in the future.

Brite gives part of the credit for Planned Parenthood’s progressive plans to the state’s political climate.

“Here in Illinois, we’re somewhat of an oasis,” she explains. “There aren’t a lot of laws restricting access to health care. At the same time, we can use the opportunity to serve women, teens and men where services are needed most.”

Pam Adams can be reached at 686-3245 or padams@pjstar.com.

___

Planned Parenthood of Illinois — Peoria facts, 2015

Total patients: 3,138 Total patient visits: 6,132 Visits for contraceptives: 4,146 Testing for sexually-transmitted infections: 2,001 Pregnancy tests: 1,220 Cancer screenings (including breast exams): 440 Planned Parenthood of Illinois — Peoria patient demographics

Age:

18 or younger: 13 percent 19 to 29: 60 percent 30 and older: 27 percent Race:

White: 60 percent Black: 35 percent Hispanic or Latino: 5 percent ___

Carole Brite, president and CEO of Planned Parenthood of Illinois on:

• The videotapes released by Center for Medical Progress that purported to show Planned Parenthood officials involved in the illegal sale of baby parts:

“This was a smear campaign over the summer. Our supporters know that.”

(Planned Parenthood has filed a federal lawsuit against the activists who produced the videos.)

• Efforts to defund Planned Parenthood:

“When they were talking about defunding Planned Parenthood, mostly they’re singling out Title X and in some cases taking away Medicaid. . .They’re really attacking the most vulnerable populations, the ones that don’t have access to health care.”

(Title X is federal funding for comprehensive family planning for women who don’t qualify for Medicaid, such as undocumented immigrants.)

• On abortion, which makes up less than 10 percent of services at Planned Parenthood:

“It’s important to know our main service is not abortion. Our main service is providing well-woman exams and birth control, all FDA approved, and STI and HIV screenings. Really, only a small portion of our services are abortion services.”

“We’re probably the organization working hardest to make sure women don’t have unintended pregnancies so they don’t need abortions.”

(Abortions are not available at the Peoria clinic. The agency is considering offering medical abortions, or the abortion pill, to end early-stage pregnancies.)

• On the shooting that left three dead at a Planned Parenthood in Colorado Springs:

“A lot of people don’t know it but Planned Parenthood staff in Colorado Springs saved many lives that day. They were able to get patients and guests away from the shooter in a very timely fashion.

“Staff at all Planned Parenthoods have the same training . . . I have to give a shout-out to our staff. The Monday after Colorado Springs, all of our staff showed up to work in Peoria and throughout the state.”

• On why she’s involved with Planned Parenthood:

“I’m personally committed to this work. I come to work everyday because I have a 14-year-old daughter. I don’t want her to lose any of the rights we currently have. Really, I do the work for her and future generations.”