Omnibus edition: Dems block riders

With help from Marianne LeVine and Adam Behsudi

BREAKING OVERNIGHT: $1.1 Trillion omnibus bill released … View it here.

Story Continued Below

— Labor-HHS summary from Senate Republicans: http://bit.ly/1RRb264

— General summary from House Democrats: http://bit.ly/1YjvpJ5

DEMS BLOCK RIDERS: The proposed $1.1 trillion omnibus spending bill released early Wednesday morning by congressional Republicans lacks several contemplated riders targeting President Obama’s workplace agenda. Most notably, Democrats were able to beat back riders blocking enforcement of the Labor Department’s fiduciary rule and the NLRB’s more expansive new joint employer standard. The joint employer rider was thought to stand a strong chance of inclusion because it had some Democratic support, particularly in the House.

The joint employer rider’s absence is a big loss for business lobbyists because it leaves them few other avenues to thwart it. Now the scene shifts to New York City, where on Jan. 11 the NLRB resumes proceedings against McDonald’s over whether the company is jointly liable for franchisees’ alleged retaliation against fast food protesters in 2012. (The board is also investigating joint employer-based allegations at Papa John’s and Panera, but so far no complaints have been filed).

Slow Cadillac: Unions and manufacturers won a two-year delay of the so-called Cadillac Tax, the Affordable Care Act’s 40 percent excise tax on expensive health plans. The big question now: will the Cadillac Tax ever be enacted? After all, “a piece of legislation once delayed can certainly be delayed again,” POLITICO’s Nancy Cook writes. “It may never see the light of day - especially since both the Democratic and Republican candidates running for the White House have all proposed scrapping the Cadillac tax - though the Republicans want to get rid of the rest of Obamacare too.”

"Whoever is in the White House next, from our perspective, has a better view on the tax," one union official told POLITICO. More here: http://politico.pro/1O4X22O

LABOR AGENCIES AVOID CUTS IN FY2016:

Appropriations to ...

- Labor Department: $12.2 billion; a $215 million increase above fiscal year 2015.

- DOL's Bureau of Labor Statistics: $544 million; a $17 million increase above

fiscal year 2015.

- OSHA: $552.7 million; same as 2015.

- MSHA: $375.8 million, same as 2015.

- NLRB: $274.2 million; same as 2015.

- DOL’S Wage & Hour: $227.5 million; same as 2015.

GOOD MORNING! It's Wednesday, Dec. 16 and this is Morning Shift, POLITICO's daily tipsheet on labor and employment policy. Send tips, corrections and exclusives to bmahoney@politico.com, tnoah@politico.com, and mlevine@politico.com. Follow us on Twitter at @ politicomahoney , @ TimothyNoah1 , and @ marianne_levine

FED LIKELY TO RAISE INTEREST RATES TODAY: Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen is expected to announce a modest interest rate hike this afternoon after the Federal Open Markets Committee meets. Unions oppose the raise because they fear it will slow job and wage growth. AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka on Tuesday urged the Fed not to act, saying “too many working people are not feeling the economic recovery because of stagnant wages.”

Arguing against a rate increase in Vox, Matt Yglesias underscores its potential impact on marginalized workers like African Americans, whose unemployment rate is twice the rate for white Americans. “If white unemployment goes from 10 percent to 5 percent,” Yglesias writes, “the Fed has achieved a 5 percentage point reduction. At the same time, we would expect black unemployment to fall from 20 percent to 10 percent — a much larger 10 percentage point reduction. With the United States currently enjoying a lowish 5 percent unemployment rate, it's easy for relatively privileged people to neglect the benefits of further small reductions. But for an African-American population that will enjoy a double-scale version of any drop in the unemployment rate, the stakes remain quite high.” http://bit.ly/225snN7

For the economy more generally, some economists say a small raise won’t do too much damage. “With recent assurances from Yellen that the central bank will exercise extreme care, growing numbers of Wall Street analysts now believe that a gentle hike of just a quarter of a percentage point will not be necessarily bad news for markets, and could even provide a short-term stimulus if businesses are inspired to invest in new equipment now rather than wait for higher rates in the future,” POLITICO’s Jon Prior and Ben White report. “For traders, a rate hike is assumed. The Fed failing to move would likely cause a much bigger reaction on Wall Street.” http://politico.pro/1TOC1xO

TODAY: MORE ON PORTABLE BENEFITS: Labor Secretary Tom Perez and Sen. Mark Warner, (D-Va.), discuss “portable benefits for independent workers” at the Aspen Institute this afternoon. The discussion comes weeks after a group of tech CEOs, liberal groups and some labor leaders called for legislation establishing traveling benefits for temporary and independent contract workers. http://bit.ly/1YfDNPa

AFL-CIO WILL SUE OVER ILLINOIS RIGHT-TO-WORK ZONE: The Illinois AFL-CIO Tuesday vowed to sue the Chicago suburb of Lincolnshire after the town’s council voted this week to institute a “right-to-work” zone within its confines. Lincolnshire is the first Illinois town to implement such an ordinance in the state, following through on a call from Republican state Gov. Bruce Rauner. “The city of Lincolnshire was notified that the vote was illegal, they moved forward with adopting the ordinance anyway, so we'll move forward to take legal action," Illinois AFL-CIO President Michael Carrigan told the AP’s Ivan Moreno. http://bit.ly/1I7RLeT

TRUMP CHALLENGES UNION VOTE AT VEGAS HOTEL: The Trump International Hotel Las Vegas is challenging a union election of employees who last week voted to join the UNITE Here affiliated Culinary Workers Union Local 226 and Bartenders Union Local 165. The company filed objections to the election on Monday, according to the case’s NLRB docket . "We are not surprised that Trump Las Vegas management have filed objections to the outcome of a free and fair union representation election won by their workers who want a union," Geoconda Arguello-Kline, Secretary-Treasurer of the Culinary Union, said in a statement . "Trump Hotel Las Vegas managers have been accused by the federal government of violating labor laws. They want to avoid hearing Donald Trump utter his trademark 'You're fired'."

The union must still bargain with the union despite its objections to the election, according to UNITE Here.

BOEING SEIZES ON MACHINISTS’ BOTCHED DELTA CAMPAIGN: Last April the International Association of Machinists pulled out of a representation bid at Delta after disclosing that many union authorization cards collected from company workers bore questionable signatures. Now, as the union tries to organize Boeing’s North Charleston, S.C. plant, Boeing is mailing a 20-page brochure suggesting the union committed fraud at Delta.

“The story of the IAM’s recent campaign to unionize the Delta Air Lines flight attendants is a cautionary tale of how a union can misuse your personal information for its own gain,” the company told workers on its Facebook page. “We believe that our teammates and their families deserve to know the facts about the Machinists Union that is actively campaigning to represent them.”

“No fraud charges were filed and the National Mediation Board, a federal agency that governs labor relations at airlines, has not cited the IAM for any improper behavior,” the Post and Courier’s David Wren reports . “The union has said it plans to continue recruiting Delta flight attendants and file for another election in 2016.”

MCCONNELL: TPP TIMING IN OBAMA’S HAND: It’s still up in the air whether Congress will vote on the Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement next year, but neither McConnell nor House Speaker Paul Ryan ruled out that possibility during separate interviews at a Politico Playbook Breakfast event on Tuesday.

McConnell seemed to dial back comments he made last week to the Washington Post, when he cast doubt on whether the deal could pass in 2016. But he suggested Obama would be taking a gamble if he submits TPP to Congress before the election, since all of the Democratic candidates for president and many of the Republican candidates oppose the agreement.

"If the president wants to succeed, he ought to take into account the reality of the political situation," McConnell said. "It's up to him to decide whether to initiate the process."

COFFEE BREAK

— "SEIU Endorses Duckworth," from Alton Daily News: http://bit.ly/1O407A0

— Where did the OUR Walmart campaign go wrong?, from In These Times: http://bit.ly/1JamSBl

— “Uber Seeks Halt Of Drivers' Class Action To Await Appeal,” from Law360: http://bit.ly/225uII1

— Workers strike at Mexican border factory, from Fronteras Desk: http://bit.ly/1Qnz0XJ

— Nexteer workers vote on second contract, from Detroit Free-Press: http://detne.ws/1ZblSGf

— Bangor improves minimum wage hike, from Portland Press-Herald: http://bit.ly/1NSdiIJ

— 10th Circ. rules for immigrant ranch worker in FLSA case, from Law360: http://bit.ly/1NSdtno [Full decision here: http://1.usa.gov/1NvTSWu ]

— Dems ask DOL to investigate El Super, from the Hill: http://bit.ly/1O7zrET

THAT’S ALL FOR MORNING SHIFT.