Senior became school's only QB to throw for 4,000 yards in a season

Colorado State Garrett Grayson (18) throws against Utah during the Las Vegas Bowl at Sam Boyd Stadium on Saturday. Grayson became the first quarterback in school history to throw for 4,000 yards in a season. ( Ethan Miller / Getty Images )

LAS VEGAS — Garrett Grayson's eyes were watering as he walked off the field, and they were still red when he met with the media after the game.

He was also still in his jersey, saying he wasn't quite ready to take it off.

Saturday's 45-10 loss in the Las Vegas Bowl was not what anybody in the Colorado State program expected, and it wasn't the way Grayson wanted the day to go when he hit a special milestone.

Grayson threw for 227 yards in the game (hitting 20-of-34 passes against a relentless rush), giving him 4,006 on the season, the first Ram quarterback to reach that figure.

Not that he cared.

"To be honest, I could care less about it," he said. "We lost the game, that's all I care about."

Grayson was sacked three times and forced to sidestep and avoid trouble throughout the game. He was also hampered by some dropped passes, a few from top target Rashard Higgins, who still caught 10 balls for 110 yards. It was the 10th time this season Higgins finished with at least 100 yards receiving , but like most of his teammates, he looked back on the plays he didn't make, adding he felt like he let the coaching staff down.

"I feel like I let them down. I feel like I did some uncharacteristic things," he said. "I kind of let myself down at the end of the day."

Grayson did catch his first touchdown pass on a throwback from Charles Lovett. It was the third touchdown pass in Lovett's career, but the first in two years. He tossed a pair in 2011, one to Crockett Gillmore, the other to Matt Yemm. The one to Grayson was his longest.

Goodbye — Interim coach Dave Baldwin said in the postgame press conference the current staff had been issued termination papers by the university, thanking the school for its generosity. The move does not mean necessarily he is no longer being considered for the job, or that a new coach could not retain anybody currently on staff.

What it does allow is some guarantees for the staff.

"Reality hits at some point at any time, and it hit us," Baldwin said.c"Each guy got a termination paper; that was given, and that was outstanding because that gave us dates and times and what to expect and all the things the university has done. They've stepped up. Regardless of what they do, they stepped up and they did a great job."

Interim athletic director John Morris said after the game the university hopes to name a new coach by the start of the holidays.

Bowl notes — The attendance of 33,067 was the 10th largest in the game's 23-year history. ... Utah is still the winningest team in Las Vegas Bowl history, pushing its mark to 3-1. The program is now 14-4 all-time in bowl games, while Colorado State slipped to 6-8, ending a streak of two bowl wins, as well as a three-game run against schools from the Power Five. ... The 35-point margin of victory was the second largest in game history.

Training room — Wide receiver Elroy Masters Jr., did not play due to a practice injury this week. The team was also without safety Jake Schlager, who has missed most of the season with an ankle injury. The team hopes to get him a redshirt season. No injuries were reported from the game.

Mike Brohard: 970-669-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/mbrohard