Gary Kubiak and the Broncos’ coaching staff went home Monday night still facing difficult decisions and having little time to make them. Earlier that morning, they had trimmed their training camp roster of 90 men to 78, waiving nine, cutting one, trading another and placing a rookie on the injured reserve.

When they returned Tuesday, just hours before the 2 p.m. deadline to reduce the list to 75, Kubiak and Co. revealed the final three cuts.

Nathan Palmer’s work at Dove Valley is done. The third-year receiver who spent most of last season on the practice squad was waived. Following Tuesday’s practice, rookie linebacker Danny Mason and tight end Dan Light, a recent waiver claim, were let go as well.

The three joined cornerback Tevrin Brandon, safety Ross Madison, guard Andre Davis, tight end/fullback Joe Don Duncan, quarterback Zac Dysert, punter Spencer Lanning, tight end Jake Murphy, running back Jeremy Stewart and linebacker Chase Vaughn among the first wave of cuts this week.

WATCH: Trending Now: Broncos cut three more players

Chris Clark, a veteran right tackle, was traded to Houston for a seventh-round pick in the 2016 draft. Inside linebacker Reggie Walker was released. And Jeff Heuerman, the Broncos’ third-round pick who tore his anterior cruciate ligament in minicamp, was, as expected, placed on the injured reserve.

While the moves abruptly ended the work of some, they secured that of others.

James Casey is the Broncos’ sole fullback with Duncan gone.

Britton Colquitt is still their punter after agreeing to a reduced salary and beating out Karl Schmitz and Lanning.

Trevor Siemian, a seventh-round pick out of Northwestern, is their third-string quarterback, should they decide to keep as many.

And Michael Schofield, a second-year offensive lineman, is now a swing tackle in the wake of the Clark trade.

The Broncos play their final preseason game Thursday, against the Cardinals, giving 22 other players who survived the first round one last audition before the final group of 53 is selected by 2 p.m. Saturday. Ten of those may find their exit isn’t permanent; the team must select 10 players to its practice squad by 11 a.m. Sunday.

A week later, the decision-making and workload for Kubiak only gets larger. On Sept. 13, the Broncos begin their regular season against his former team, the Baltimore Ravens, at Sports Authority Field at Mile High.

Nicki Jhabvala: njhabvala@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickijhabvala