FORT COLLINS — A gorgeous Colorado afternoon offered no hint of the blizzard that would batter the Front Range mere hours later. The temperature was near 70 degrees in Georgia Gould’s bucolic backyard on the northwestern fringe of town Tuesday as the mountain-biking Olympic medalist, an avid beekeeper, showed off her hives.

“I’m such a geek about it,” Gould said with amusement.

Four chickens roamed nearby while Gould described the life cycle of the bee — a sad story for the male of the species because they mate and then die — and explained how bees convert the nectar of flowers into honey. One year, Gould got three gallons out of just one hive. It’s a good hobby for an athlete who travels the world because bees can take care of themselves while she is away.

“I’m like a glorified landlord,” Gould said. “I provide you a box, and you give me delicious honey.”

She developed an interest in bees out of concern for America’s decreasing bee population after seeing a TV documentary about “colony collapse disorder.” Last Monday she watched a new adult bee tearing the wax seal on the honeycomb cell where it developed from an egg and was overjoyed “like a parent at a birth,” capturing the event on video and posting it on In stagram.

With the monster snowstorm due to strike overnight, a visitor wondered how her bees would weather it.

“Tonight, they’ll cluster inside (their hives),” said Gould, 36. “The honey is there for them to get through the winter, but also if it’s cold or raining — they just stay inside and eat honey, which is what all of us want to do when it’s cold.”

Finding a niche

Originally from Baltimore, Gould got a psychology degree from the University of Montana in 2003. A former smoker, she quit the habit and began a running-based fitness program before discovering she had ability in mountain biking. In 2006 she turned pro, won the first of her four U.S. titles and moved to Colorado from Sun Valley, Idaho, preferring to train in a place with a more temperate climate. First she went to Boulder, a city brimming with elite endurance athletes.

“I just wasn’t cool enough to live in Boulder,” Gould joked. “I lived there for a few months and I was like, ‘I’m too dorky to live here.’ Fort Collins is a little bit more my style.”

She dominated U.S. mountain biking, finishing eighth at the 2008 Beijing Olympics, capturing bronze at the 2012 London Games and taking bronze again at the world championships three weeks later.

Two difficult years followed. In February 2013, the cyclo-cross world championships would be held in the U.S. for the first time, and she really wanted to be on that team, so she didn’t give herself enough of a break to recover from the rigors of 2012.

At cyclo-cross worlds, she was knocked down in a chain-reaction crash and finished 17th. She left there physically and mentally drained and took three weeks off, thinking that would be enough of a break. It wasn’t. In mountain-biking World Cups that spring, she failed to crack the top 20.

“I was like, ‘I thought I had cemented my place at the top, what’s going on?’ ” Gould said. “Everything was going well in training, I’d get to the race and it would be so hard. I didn’t know what was wrong. Like, ‘Did it always feel this hard? Am I just not as tough as I used to be?’ “

She finished sixth in the U.S. championships that July and 27th at the world championships in August. Wondering if a physical problem was causing her struggles, she had blood work done.

“They were like, ‘Bad news, you’re totally healthy.’ “

Another tough season followed in 2014. After a race early that season, she decided to quit the sport, tired of being passed by women she thought she should be beating.

“Aside from physically giving up the race, I totally gave up,” Gould said. “I came back to the team area and I just said, ‘I’m done. I’ve worked too hard for this to be this miserable. I’m doing worse than ever, I’m trying harder than ever, I’m done.’ “

Her brother talked her out of retirement. “Suck it up,” he said, “you’re a professional.”

Taking the sting out of “should”

Turns out bees can teach athletes lessons.

“People say you should re-queen your hives every year, (or) you should feed them,” Gould said. “Haven’t they been doing this a long time without us? I found this one website, one of the tabs in his menu was, ‘Lazy beekeeping.’ That is me — just chill out, they know what they’re doing. It does sort of resonate with me because that is kind of what I wasn’t doing (in cycling). I was so trying to manage myself that I didn’t relax, focus on doing my job. Go with it, trust your instincts.”

Gould realized she had to stop clinging to expectations.

“That’s what I was doing: ‘I’m Georgia Gould, I’m the top American, I should be winning.’ The should is the thing that gets you every time. I came away feeling lucky that I get to go and toe the line, recognizing that in every race, you have to re-prove yourself.”

In a better frame of mind now, Gould is one of eight American women who will be vying for four spots on the Olympic team this spring. Her bees, meanwhile, will be busy making her honey.

“When you’re harvesting, each one of those frames (in the hive) will be completely covered in capped honey,” Gould said. “You take this electric knife, it’s hot, you scrape off the caps. Then you put that frame in an extractor, which is this big drum. You turn the crank and it spins so the centrifugal force pulls the honey out of the comb and it drips down the side and out the bottom.”

If only results came that easily in mountain biking.

“I just found out two teaspoons of honey would power a bee to go all the way around the world,” Gould said. “So next time you’re drowning something in honey, imagine what a bee could have done with that.”

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or @johnmeyer