Topics: blackface, brownface, chris lilley, diversity, HBO, jonah from tonga, Racism, Entertainment News

Despite protests, HBO is moving ahead with a show by controversial Australian comedian Chris Lilley, who, at 39, is the unlikely star of a mockumentary about a troubled 14-year-old boy from the Kingdom of Tonga named Jonah. The show, “Jonah From Tonga,” which debuted several months ago in Australia, presents Lilley — a white man — in brownface as a Tongan boy with behavioral problems, a penchant for dick jokes, and a massive crush on his cousin Melody. (I believe you can already see what the issues with this show are.)

Lilley’s fans are already familiar with Jonah Takalua, first seen in critically acclaimed mockumentary “Summer Heights High,” picked up by HBO from Australian TV in 2008 (another character spinoff, starring haughty teen girl Ja’mie, aired on HBO in 2013). His comedies have been influential in Australia and beyond, injecting slang like “Puck you, miss,” “quiche” and “ranga” into Australian lexicon. But even in “Summer Heights High,” the character of Jonah perpetuated stereotypes: writer Morgan Godfery, who has criticized “Jonah” as minstrelsy, recalled in the Guardian that after the popularity of “Summer Heights High,” “Suddenly, it was acceptable for white Kiwi kids to start fetishising Polynesians.”

So what, exactly, is “Jonah From Tonga,” supposedly a satire, trying to say? HBO’s press release says that the show takes “a humorous and brutally honest look at life in an average Australian public school,” but it’s clear both from the title and the show that race is a core part of this “humorous and brutally honest look.” The social circles in Jonah’s high school are defined by race; Jonah describes the various female cliques as “Chick fobs, Chick wogs, chick filos, chick curries, chick africans, chick rangos, and … ching-chongs.” And some portion of Jonah’s antics stem from feeling discriminated against: “Teachers at this school are so racist,” he declares in the season opener, and in a later episode, tells one of the rich white students, “Just cause you’ve got different colored hair than us doesn’t mean you own us.” Another teacher characterizes Pacific Islanders as “tricky kids” who are “hard to control,” confirming Jonah’s own feelings.

Almost universally, no one likes Jonah: He is described by his peers, his family and his teachers as “a fucking idiot,” “a very bully person,” who “thinks he’s 21, thinks he’s a gangster” who is “virtually illiterate.” His only friends are the so-called Fobba-liscious crew, a group of Tongan teenagers who enjoy singing, dancing and defying authority. Whatever meaningful observations on race this is meant to convey are lost when you remember (and it’s hard to forget) that we’re experiencing this not through the lens of a Tongan, but of a white guy pretending to be marginalized. And, if one can somehow detach the racism from “Jonah From Tonga” (one cannot), there is still the other glaring issue with the six-episode season: The incessant stream of dick jokes and exclamations of “homo!” are about as funny as watching a guy run into a wall repeatedly for 37 minutes. After about 10 minutes, you wonder why you’re still watching. (The show was a flop in Australia).

In an interview with Splitsider promoting “Jonah” this week, Lilley (who declined an interview with Salon) showed remarkably little insight into the racial boundaries he supposedly wants to push: “A lot of Pacific Islander kids are in prison in Australia for some reason, I don’t know why, but it’s a problem so I thought it would be cool to explore that idea that he was probably going to end up going to jail. And it seems extreme, the mentality, but it’s how it is in a lot of prisons in Australia with a lot of Pacific Islanders.”

Lilley doesn’t seek deeper understanding about the population he’s trying to portray, and yet he seems to believe he is accurately portraying them. Part of this “accuracy” includes hiring Tongans, some with almost no acting experience, to play characters in the show — but what does it mean that the principal Tongan, the one telling us his story, is actually white? He also told Splitsider, “I try to make my shows really accurate. I’ve always been interested in that part of the culture in Australia. I know a lot of people that have been to Tonga … I get to know the families and I think if they watch it and see how accurate it is, then it’s going to be funny for everyone.”