By NAOMI KRESGE

Bloomberg News

Sonja Miskulin has forgotten her beloved cat, Pooki. She can’t remember whether she has grandchildren and has no memory of her nine-hour journey to leave behind her home in Germany.

Suffering from dementia, the former translator, now wheelchair-bound, celebrated her 94th birthday in a Polish nursing home. Her daughter sent her there in a bid for a better life and more affordable care.

Miskulin has joined the vanguard of a controversial movement: emigrant nursing home residents.

The “Grandma export” trend has set hands wringing in Germany, where Munich’s leading newspaper denounced it as “gerontologic colonialism” and compared it to nations exporting their trash. Yet more families like Miskulin’s say it’s their best option to provide a dignified old age for elderly parents — and save money — amid a lack of affordable quality care at home.

One in five Germans would now consider going abroad for a nursing home, according to a March survey by TNS Emnid, one of Germany’s biggest pollsters.

“I can only say, children, when your parents get older, send them to Poland,” said Miskulin’s 66-year-old daughter, Ilona von Haldenwang.

Germany’s migrating seniors are an early warning sign of a challenge of global proportions. As birth rates drop, life expectancies increase and the baby boomer generation heads into old age, the United Nations estimates the world’s population of people older than 60 will more than triple to almost 2 billion by 2050.

Meanwhile, even for seniors cushioned by government aid in countries like Germany, the cost of nursing home care is rapidly becoming prohibitive. German spending on long-term care for seniors is expected to increase from 1.4 percent of gross domestic product to 3.3 percent of GDP by 2060, the European Commission said in a report last year.

Miskulin’s new home is in a picturesque Polish ski resort called Szklarska Poreba, which roughly translates to Glassmaking Clearing, named for the many glassworks that once defined the area. Her daughter chose the nursing home sight unseen after studying its website and meeting with a nursing-home placement broker.

What began as an act of desperation — exporting her own mother — quickly began to make sense.

For four years, Von Haldenwang watched with increasing despair as her mother’s health deteriorated in what she says was a poorly run German facility, even as it strained the women’s finances.

Now, at about a third the price for the care she received in Germany, Sonja lives in a restored century-old luxury villa where she enjoys fine meals, around-the-clock nursing and extensive physical therapy.

Miskulin is adjusting to her new surroundings. Still, the trade-off for both mother and daughter is the 350 miles separating them. The two women used to live only a two-minute walk apart. Von Haldenwang recalls the friend who helped move her mother protesting in disbelief as they climbed into the fir-covered Karkonosze Mountains that mark Poland’s border with the Czech Republic.

“Oh God, oh God, where are we going? It’s the end of the earth,” she remembered her friend saying. “Then we drove up the hill and she said, 'Oh! It’s a palace!’ And I said, 'See, I told you, everything will be good.' ”

The owners say half the residents will soon be Germans, who have state-mandated long-term care insurance through a nearly 20-year-old program, a benefit out of the reach of most people beyond Europe, including the United States.

The insurance pays out 1,550 euros ($2,060) a month to German citizens who need the highest level of care. That’s less than half of the 3,250-euro average monthly bill for such care inside Germany. Nursing homes in Poland are marketing care that in some cases may be similar or better for about 1,200 euros a month.

The German government will pay as much as 700 euros toward nursing care outside the country. Though less than half the amount provided for in-country homes, it’s enough, together with pensions, to pay for monthly care costs — with cash to spare.

The arithmetic is compelling for older Germans and their grown children. Ingrid Fetz, 74, did the math after four back operations got her thinking about her financial vulnerability. In Poland, Fetz said she figures she would have money left over each month after paying for her care costs.

“I worked so hard for what I have,” said Fetz. “It would break my heart to give my apartment to a nursing home someday. I thought to myself, why would I have to stay in Germany at all?"