The Great Falls Police Department is asking for help in locating two men who reportedly assaulted an elderly woman on Wednesday.

The GFPD said in a press release that the incident happened at about 1:00 p.m. when two men forcibly entered a residence in the 900 block of 4th Avenue South and assaulted the woman.

The suspects reportedly said that they worked for the “cable company.”

The two men were driving a large white van with a red ladder on the roof.

The GFPD provided the following descriptions of the two suspects and the van:

White man in his 40’s

· Approximately 5’8” tall

· Scruffy beard

· Shoulder length hair

Black man in his 40’s

· Approximately 6’1” tall

Vehicle Description:

· Large white van with double (suicide) doors on the side and rear

· Red Ladder on the top

· No known markings

· No known make or model

Anyone with information about the suspects or the crime is asked to call the GFPD at 406-727-7688 and press #5 as soon as the recording starts.

The condition of the woman has not been released.

Update: Friday, Feb. 26

The Great Falls Police Department has released the following information about Wednesday's assault and home invasion.

“We are grateful for the community’s assistance as we have received several valuable tips thus far.

Our investigators have been working non-stop on this case, we have made the investigation a top priority. We are asking the entire Montana community to aid us further and, in an effort to express the severity of this crime, we are revealing additional details:

In the 900 block of 4th Avenue South, on Wednesday, February 24, 2016 at approximately 1:00pm, two men pulled up in a white van and approached a 72 year old woman as she sat on her front porch. The men identified themselves as employees of a cable company and asked if the man of the house was home. The woman told the men the individual they were seeking was not home and further revealed that she was home alone.

When the woman reached for her phone to call her family one of the men knocked the phone from her hand and forced her into the home where both men sexually assaulted the victim, eventually leaving the premises.

We are asking for the public to be alert when out and about and to report any information concerning the vehicle of the suspects. If you see, what you believe to be the suspects or their vehicle please call 911 immediately. If you believe you have other information that may aid the case please call the lead investigator, Detective Noah Scott at 406-455-8575."

Suspect Descriptions:

White male in his 40’s, approx. 5’8” tall, scruffy beard, shoulder length hair

Black male in his 40’s, approx. 6’1” tall

Suspect Vehicle Description:

Large white van with double doors on the side and rear

Red ladder on the top

No known make, model or markings.