HERE’S A LOOK AT THE DAY AHEAD

OBAMA ADMINISTRATION: President Barack Obama delivers remarks and hosts a reception for mayors at the White House at 5:10 p.m. First lady Michelle Obama addresses the U.S. Conference of Mayors at 11:30 a.m. on the administration’s efforts to end veteran homelessness. Vice President Joe Biden meets with several world leaders at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, including Israelie Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif of Pakistan and President Ashraf Ghani of Afghanistan, President Nicos Anastasiades of Cyprus, President Mauricio Macri of Argentina and Prime Minister Haider Al-Abadi of Iraq.

ELECTION 2016: Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton speaks at Simpson College in Indianola, Iowa, at 10:30 a.m., attends an organizing event at Vinton Country Club in Vinton, Iowa, at 2:45 p.m., and attends an organizing event with Demi Lovato at University of Iowa Memorial Union at 6:30 p.m. Sen. Bernie Sanders is in New Hampshire. He meets with senior citizens at Peterborough Community Center at noon, with students at Southern New Hampshire University at 1:30 p.m., and attends a town hall in Wolfeboro at 6 p.m. GOP front-runner Donald Trump speaks at a rally in Las Vegas at 10 a.m. EST. Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush continues campaigning in New Hampshire, with town halls at firearm manufacturer Strum Ruger & Co. Inc. at 10:05 a.m., at aerospace company BAE Systems at 2:30 p.m. and in Hampton at 6:30 p.m. Sen. Ted Cruz holds a meet-and-greet in Manchester, N.H., at 3:30 p.m. Sen. Marco Rubio speaks to Americans for Peace, Prosperity and Security at University of New Hampshire at Manchester at 8:30 a.m. New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie stops at Olde Post Restaurant in Chester, N.H., at 9 a.m., holds a town hall at Globe Manufacturing in Pittsfield at 11 a.m., visits Merrimack County Sheriff’s Department in Boscawen at 3:30 p.m. and holds a town hall at Inter-lakes High School in Meredith at 6 p.m. Ohio Gov. John Kasich visits the Laconia Rotary in New Hampshire at noon and holds a town hall at Morningstar Masonic Lodge in Wolfeboro at 6 p.m. Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee attends meet-and-greets at Sioux City, Iowa, at 11:30 a.m., in Rock Valley at 2 p.m., in Sheldon at 4 p.m., and in Spencer at 7 a.m.

ECONOMIC INDICATORS: The Labor Department releases weekly jobless claims at 8:30 a.m

CONGRESS: Veterans Affairs Secretary Robert McDonald testifies at 10 a.m. before the Senate Veterans Affairs Committee on the plan to modernize the Veterans Affairs Administration. The Senate Finance Committee holds hearings to review financial and oversight controls of health care co-ops at 9:30 a.m. Energy and Natural Resources holds hearings to examine innovative technologies in the automotive industry at 9:30 a.m.

ANNOUNCEMENT

Readers: Ask Washington Bureau Chief Jerry Seib a question about the political and international scene. He would be happy to answer in an upcoming Capital Journal Daybreak video. Send your questions to editor Kate Milani at kate.milani@wsj.com. We look forward to hearing from you.

TOP STORIES FROM WSJ’S CAPITAL JOURNAL

U.S., ALLIES AGREE TO ACCELERATE FIGHT AGAINST ISIS: U.S., French and other allies agreed they must step up the fight against Islamic State in coming months to vanquish the extremist group from its strongholds in Syria and Iraq. U.S. Defense Secretary Ash Carter and French Defense Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian hosted a meeting of five other coalition partners on Wednesday to discuss what each could do to intensify the fight against Islamic State in Iraq, Syria and beyond. The two men said the coalition is setting its sights in the coming weeks on pushing Islamic State out of the major cities from which the group controls its territory: Raqqa in Syria and Mosul in Iraq.

REUTERS

Since Sunday, the coalition has conducted three airstrikes against Islamic State targets in Mosul, Mr. Le Drian said at a news conference with Mr. Carter at France’s Defense Ministry. Amid political pressure in Washington and abroad, the U.S. has sought to expand its own fight against Islamic State and is eager for allies to show they will do so as well. On Tuesday, the White House gave the Defense Department legal authority to target militants affiliated with Islamic State in Afghanistan. Gordon Lubold and Matthew Dalton report.

Plus: U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry met Wednesday with Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov to try to push ahead international talks on a political transition in Syria, a process complicated by divisions over who will represent the Syrian opposition … Islamic State militants are using Syria’s largest dam as a fulcrum of power, hiding high-value prisoners and sheltering senior officials there in the conviction the U.S. won’t bomb it for fear of unleashing a giant flood … Tensions are rising between governments and big U.S. technology companies over widening surveillance demands, part of a broader debate over how to reconcile online privacy with the fight against terrorism.

PATRICK O’CONNOR’S EARLY HIT: WHY HILLARY CLINTON IS EMBRACING BARACK OBAMA’S LEGACY

Hillary Clinton and her would-be Republican rivals don’t agree on much these days, but one consensus is starting to emerge – that the former secretary of state is, indeed, running to preserve President Barack Obama‘s legacy. Before Republican strategists do a victory lap, it’s worth noting how Mr. Obama is viewed by voters at the beginning of his eighth and final year in the White House. Read Patrick O’Connor’s full post in Washington Wire.

Associated Press

WSJ STORIES YOU SHOULDN’T MISS

PEDRO PORTAL/EL NUEVO HERALD/ASSOCIATED PRESS

FLORIDA LATINOS SAY TRUMP HURTS THE GOP BRAND: Florida’s March 15 primary will present the first big test of what effect, if any, Mr. Trump’s rhetoric has had on GOP efforts to court all Latino voters, who made up 14% of the state’s GOP primary electorate in 2012. Recent polls show that Mr. Trump is far ahead of his GOP rivals in Florida. Older Cuban-Americans who came to the U.S. soon after the Cuban Revolution appear especially open to his message, according to some Miami Republicans. Interviews with Florida Hispanic Republicans suggest that while Mr. Trump benefits from pockets of support, many regard him with unease, or even hostility. Arian Campo-Flores reports.

More on 2016: Mr. Trump lit into rival Sen. Ted Cruz Wednesday morning for taking bank loans to finance his Senate campaign that he didn’t properly disclose during his successful 2012 run … Mr. Cruz said his campaign raised $700,000 in the hours after he was pointedly criticized by Iowa Gov. Terry Branstad … Ohio Gov. John Kasich helped pass the beer labeling law he now vows to undermine … Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton went after Sen. Bernie Sanders for his comments dismissing Planned Parenthood and the Human Rights Campaign, two big liberal groups backing Mrs. Clinton, as part of the “establishment.”

IRAN NUCLEAR DEAL DEBATE FLARES UP IN TIGHT SENATE RACES: Republican Jon Keyser had officially been a Senate candidate in Colorado for only one day last week when he began criticizing Democratic incumbent Sen. Michael Bennet over the Iran nuclear deal. Mr. Keyser was quick to try to link Mr. Bennet’s support for the accord struck last July aimed at severely constraining Iran’s nuclear program with the country’s detention of 10 U.S. sailors in the Persian Gulf. The sailors were released less than 24 hours later, but the incident—as well as two missile tests Iran conducted last fall—provided fodder for Republicans who argued Democrats have misplaced trust in Iran and will have to shoulder political liability from the deal. The Iran debate has also recently surfaced in tight races in Ohio, Wisconsin and Nevada. Kristina Peterson reports.

Plus: Senate Democrats blocked legislation to pause and overhaul a program to resettle Syrian and Iraqi refugees in the U.S., stalling the momentum of a measure that President Barack Obama says is untenable and contrary to American values.

ALSO IN THE NEWS

Financial markets are in a panic over a sharp economic downturn that has yet to make an appearance—and may never, writes Greg Ip. Plus, shares across Asia fell sharply Thursday on the heels of a rough day on Wall Street, while stocks in Europe pared early gains ahead of a European Central Bank meeting.

Will a storm threatening to drop a foot or more of snow on Washington, Philadelphia and other East Coast cities put a winter chill on the U.S. economy for a third straight year? It’s unlikely, writes Eric Morath.

The nation’s system for conducting background checks of would-be gun buyers is overwhelmed with the growing demand for weapons, U.S. Attorney General Loretta Lynch told Congress Wednesday.

Vice President Joe Biden sternly warned the world’s leading corporate executives Wednesday at the World Economic Forum that economic growth and global security will face increasing risks if they don’t shift tactics and do more to bolster the middle class as the economy undergoes a wrenching transition. Plus, Ebola, Zika virus and other infectious diseases have catapulted the threat of infectious-disease epidemics to a top spot at the World Economic Forum as world leaders meet in Davos this week.

Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew issued his most forceful call to date for Congress to pass legislation allowing Puerto Rico to restructure its debts and avoid looming defaults during his first visit to the island territory Wednesday.

House Republican lawmakers issued subpoenas Wednesday to Obama administration officials, seeking documents about payments the federal government made to insurance companies under the 2010 Affordable Care Act.

Federal climate experts announced Wednesday that 2015 was the warmest year world-wide since reliable global record-keeping began in 1880, easily surpassing a record set in 2014.

Widespread teacher “sickouts” all but closed Detroit’s public schools Wednesday and Republican legislators in Illinois called for a state takeover of Chicago’s district, as two of the nation’s largest systems face financial strain.

Amid the gloom hanging over China, a senior adviser to Chinese President Xi Jinping gave a rare defense of the country’s economy, saying Beijing has strong leadership to continue its effort to remake the country’s growth model while pledging not to launch massive stimulus to revive growth.

Seven people were killed by a Taliban car bomb in Kabul targeting staff of one of Afghanistan’s largest television networks on Wednesday, the latest in a wave of attacks that are shaking the country.’

A new report by retired judge Robert Owen said former Kremlin spy Alexander Litvinenko was probably murdered on the orders of Russia’s FSB intelligence service.

SEIB VIDEO: DO POLITICAL ENDORSEMENTS REALLY MATTER?

With Donald Trump receiving a political endorsement from Sarah Palin, Washington Bureau Chief Jerry Seib discusses whether such announcements have lasting impact.

WHAT WE’RE READING AROUND THE WEB

Sen. Ted Cruz is “trying to dispense with Marco Rubio by choking off his path to the nomination in New Hampshire,” and is trying to use Mr. Rubio’s support of immigration reform to do it, writes Sahil Kapur of Bloomberg.

Dov S. Zakheim writes in National Interest that some of the funds Iran will receive now that international economic sanctions are being lifted will go to its economy, but that “they also are needed to accelerate Iran’s ongoing thrust for regional hegemony.”

Hillary Clinton’s aim of trying to get voters to view a Bernie Sanders nomination as too risky in a general election is complicated by the lack of enthusiasm for her candidacy, especially among younger voters, and the great enthusiasm among voters for his, writes BloombergView’s Al Hunt. To help her close the enthusiasm gap, he writes, one name occurs: Sen. Elizabeth Warren.

Harold Meyerson writes for the American Prospect that to do better in elections the Democratic Party needs an organized left—”if only because the prospects for building an organized center are nil, and because a progressive economic program that limits corporate and financial power with the countervailing power of workers, consumers, and citizens would unite the Democratic base, strengthen the party’s ability to recapture working-class voters now lost to it, and help rebuild the country’s shrunken middle class.”

In the WSJ’s Think Tank, John Feehery writes that political instability produces economic instability and wonders: “Will something change before voting begins, or are those looking to elect populists prepared to make the problems facing the country much, much worse?”

MILESTONE

54.4° F: For the 48 contiguous U.S. states, 2015 was the second-warmest year on record, with an average temperature of 54.4° F, about 2.4° above the 20th-century average.

TWEET OF THE DAY

‏@MrDanZak: It took Obama’s motorcade 74 min (w/sirens) to make 13-mile trip from Andrews AFB to White House: http://wapo.st/1OIbcbm … #snowmaggedon2016

FEEDBACK: The Capital Journal Daybreak newsletter is The Wall Street Journal’s morning rundown of the biggest news stories and exclusive features from Washington on politics, policy, financial regulation, defense and more.

Send your tips, feedback and suggestions for recommended reading to editor Kate Milani at kate.milani@wsj.com.