2016 Legislature

Close state health insurance gap

The 2016 legislative session is here. During the 60-day session, lawmakers and advocates will address several issues that are critical to our state. As policymakers prepare to dive into these conversations and as a former state lawmaker, I implore them to make affordable, quality health coverage available to hardworking Florida families.

Florida's current health coverage strategy excludes nearly 600,000 low-income Floridians from access to health care, including 93,000 people living in the Tampa Bay area. They earn too little to qualify for subsidies on the federal health insurance marketplace and are ineligible to enroll in Medicaid. These Floridians would become eligible for health insurance coverage if the state closed the coverage gap. This is a win for Florida, and especially our region, for three reasons.

First, closing the coverage gap would be good for our economy. People who have comprehensive coverage are healthier than those who are uninsured. A healthier population means a more productive population. More than 70 percent of uninsured Floridians are working, and doing so in industries that are vital to our region, including hospitality and tourism, education, health care and construction. With health insurance coverage, these workers would be sick less and more productive on the job.

Second, closing the coverage gap saves our counties and the state money. The federal government will pay 100 percent of the cost through this year. After that, it will cover no less than 90 percent. As a federal taxpayer, Florida is already contributing to these funds. It should recoup them. It is estimated that Florida could lose upward of $700 million of our own tax dollars this year alone because we chose not to close the gap. Closing the coverage gap could save the state billions in general revenue, and more than $500 million could flow into local economies each year.

Third, our region's veterans deserve quality, affordable coverage. Across the country, 40 percent of uninsured veterans could qualify for coverage if the 20 remaining states closed the coverage gap.

Support for closing the coverage gap comes from more than 100,000 individuals, nearly 1,000 business owners and over 30 local chambers of commerce — not to mention hundreds of health care professionals and advocates across the state. It's time for lawmakers to work them, and with each other, to make affordable, quality health insurance coverage available to hardworking Florida families.

Mike Fasano, Land O'Lakes

Health insurance

Policies hurt consumers

Ideally, the United States would have a Bernie Sanders-like "Medicare-for-all" option for all Americans, as well as the mandate that Americans could purchase their health insurance from private insurance companies across state lines. What would this do?

It would put the consumer in the driver's seat, making all private insurance companies (those that deserve to stay in business) compete against one another (and against Medicare) to provide the best possible value. By value, I mean providing consumers with the highest magnitude of benefits for the lowest price. By price, I mean the lowest premiums and deductibles.

However, instead of doing these things, President Barack Obama developed the Affordable Care Act behind closed doors with for-profit health insurance and drug corporations — offering the least benefits for the highest price. As a result, Americans have progressively seen their health care insurance premiums and deductibles skyrocket while their benefits progressively decrease.

President George W. Bush also acted on behalf of those for-profit corporations when he pushed through Medicare Part D instead of simply allowing Medicare to negotiate lower drug costs with drug manufacturers.

Because of these Republican and Democratic policies, Americans suffer greatly while large for-profit corporations bring in record profits year after year.

John I. Campo, Tampa

National response to weather extremes Jan. 5, editorial

Don't subsidize risk-takers

Against the backdrop of holiday misery brought on by torrential rains and flooding in the Midwest, the Times raises the false idea that what we need is a national catastrophe fund. We already have one: It's called the National Flood Insurance Program. And guess what, taxpayers: It is billions of dollars in debt and sadly serves to add to the problem by offering subsidized insurance for those living in flood-prone areas. That's not a solution. It is a recipe for further economic and environmental disaster, not to mention the terrible loss in human life such exposure to risk presents.

Indeed, as the Times suggests, Florida and the nation should begin to address mitigation for climate change and sea level rise. However, offering people a tax-paid subsidy that simply reinforces poor decisionmaking is not going to bring about a responsible plan for dealing with these kinds of calamities.

Insurance customers, weighing the costs of risk-based, private markets, will be better-educated home buyers. Given choices of location and construction practices that reward good decisionmaking rather than the feel-good politics of a free ride will lead to better policy choices and safer, more resilient communities that are more in harmony with nature.

What would serve the public discourse better is an airing of adaptation and mitigation models that offer some mechanism whereby those who currently live in harm's way can move inland without incurring unacceptable financial losses. Once reclaimed, those lands subject to repetitive flooding could become beach access, local parks and recreational areas. In addition, they will serve as buffers from wind and water for those living farther inland.

Manley Fuller, president, Florida Wildlife Federation, Tallahassee

Feds: Extinction no longer looms | Jan. 8

Is manatee 'harvest' next?

As Florida bears became "unendangered," the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission announced a bear hunt and stated that in order to "harvest" a bear, a permit costing $100 for Florida residents and $300 for nonresidents was required.

Now that the manatee is merely considered "threatened" and no longer in danger of extinction, I wonder how much the commission is going to charge for a permit to "harvest" a manatee.

Rob Dennard, Belleair Bluffs