Anthony Jahn, archivist for the State Historical Society of Iowa, opens a drawer of newspaper microfilm in the State Historical Building Library in Des Moines on Feb. 17. The Des Moines archives include more than 30,000 rolls of microfilm. (Photo: Lauren Mills/IowaWatch)

Eleven years after Iowa became a state in 1846 the State Historical Society of Iowa was established in Iowa City. In the ensuing 158 years the society has amassed an impressive collection of print, audiovisual materials and artifacts that document the history of the state and its citizens.

These collections, housed in repositories in Des Moines and Iowa City, include newspapers published between 1836 and the present representing hundreds of Iowa communities; census records from 1840-1930; birth, marriage, death and immigration records from all of Iowa's counties; manuscript collections of personal papers; records of schools, clubs, corporations and churches; millions of photographs; audio and film collections; maps and atlases; permanent executive branch state government records; and tens of thousands of books, pamphlets and periodicals.

Recent comments made by Department of Cultural Affairs (DCA) officials refer to an ongoing collection review process due to be completed this summer. Jeff Morgan, spokesperson for the department, said a comprehensive analysis of the state's collections "will make Iowa's history more findable and accessible to all Iowans."

A December 2014 communication by State Archivist Anthony Jahn references a "long anticipated collection management reappraisal process." He went on to say that "once completed we will then transition our efforts towards the yet to be finalized plan to reorganize and digitize the State Historical Society of Iowa collections."

The State Historical Society has a "dual mission of education and preservation regarding the state's history, helping Iowans connect generations — past, present and future." Iowans should not tolerate being disconnected from their past. Jahn's promise of digitized collections sounds enticing, but the DCA has not financially supported any digital projects for its collections and has insufficient staff and technical resources to carry out such projects.

Well-designed digital collections with the robust metadata files that would provide Iowans with easy and enduring access to their history are very expensive undertakings. So far the Branstad administration has only demonstrated a willingness to financially support the extensive remodeling of the Des Moines Historical Building, not the activities that it houses. There certainly has been no demonstrated support for adopting "modern practices" and promoting "more accessible collections." In fact, recent reductions to public service hours in the society's research centers in Iowa City and Des Moines belie this DCA commitment to making the collections more accessible.

— Carol Kirsch, Supervisor of libraries, special collections and publications, State Historical Society of Iowa (2006-2013)

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1brDiuH