Photo

MANCHESTER, N.H. — When Senator Kelly Ayotte is in Washington, she plows through the halls of the Capitol, her face pinched into an expression somewhere between suspicion and agitation, a human tuning fork of intensity.

But from the moment the New Hampshire Republican rolls her carry-on bag to the airport gate for her flight back home, Ms. Ayotte’s face softens, her gaze broadens and she chats with half her fellow passengers, all of whom she seems to know — lobbyists, college students, someone who has noticed her daughter’s basketball game has improved.

She may not always telegraph it, but Ms. Ayotte, a freshman senator, is locked in a herculean battle with the state’s popular Democratic governor, Maggie Hassan. As one of five Senate Republicans running for re-election in states that supported President Obama in both 2008 and 2012, Ms. Ayotte is seen as particularly vulnerable this November, and is a major reason national Democrats, now on the short end of a 54-46 Republican majority, are optimistic about taking back the Senate.

Six years ago, Ms. Ayotte was part of a Republican wave that swept Democrats out of power in blue states like Illinois and Wisconsin, as well as swing states like New Hampshire. For Ms. Ayotte and other Republicans from that class, 2016 was always going to be a difficult year to run for re-election because more Democrats vote in presidential years. But with the possibility that Donald J. Trump, the most divisive Republican presidential candidate in a generation, will be at the top of the ticket, the party’s task may be all the more arduous.

“They have to find a way to keep Trump voters excited, and appeal to those who are offended by him,” said Nathan Gonzales, editor of The Rothenberg & Gonzales Political Report. “That is the tension they have to navigate.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Nowhere is that tension more apparent than in New Hampshire, a moderate state that also gave Mr. Trump one of his most critical victories in its presidential primary last month. “New Hampshire is one of the most competitive races in the Senate,” Mr. Gonzales said. “If the cycle turns into a catastrophe for Republicans, New Hampshire will be one of the first states to fall.”

Ms. Ayotte, like most of her Republican colleagues, stands with Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, in opposing a confirmation vote on a Supreme Court nominee, in refusing to reject Mr. Trump should he become the party’s nominee, and in opposing Mr. Obama. But on issues that appeal to moderate voters — drug programs for addicts, clean power plants and the so-called Gang of Eight immigration bill — Ms. Ayotte has often sided with Democrats. And that is likely to be a familiar strategy for some of her fellow Senate Republicans this year.

Photo

“With the potential for a polarizing nominee like Trump or Cruz at the top of the ticket, it will be more important than ever for Republican Senate candidates to cement their own identity and distance themselves when necessary,” said Brian Walsh, a longtime Senate campaign aide and Republican consultant, referring also to Senator Ted Cruz of Texas. “Senators in both parties have been successful in doing that in recent years, but you need to run hard and run your own race because the top of the ticket inevitably dominates the broader national political environment.”