TALLAHASSEE – Florida Democrats are elated with the U.S. Supreme Court’s 6-3 decision Thursday to uphold subsidies for health plans on federal exchanges created by the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare.

The ruling keeps intact subsidies for 1.3 million Floridians receiving health care through a federal exchange. If the court had ruled to strip the subsidies, the enrollees could have been priced out of the health coverage market.

Republican lawmakers and Gov. Rick Scott, however, did not have a plan in place to cope with the newly uninsured. They preferred to wait for the court’s decision and deferred to Congress to craft a solution if the subsidies had been eliminated.

“I’m especially happy with the court’s ruling because, if the outcome would have been different, Republican leadership in Florida – particularly Gov. Rick Scott – had done nothing to prepare for such an outcome. Even though that negligence is fact, I’m glad it won’t harm anyone,” said House Democratic Leader pro tem Mia Jones, D-Jacksonville.

"It’s a bad law,'' Scott said at an event in St. Augustine. "It makes promise after promise. It was supposed to reduce health care costs, and costs have gone up. I hope the next president repeals it.''

Senate President Andy Gardiner, R-Orlando, applauded the decision as well, but bemoaned the 800,000 Floridians that remain without health care because House Republicans rejected his push to expand Medicaid eligibility using state-run exchanges. He also signaled the fight over health care, which blew up the regular session and led to a special session that ended last week, isn’t quite over.

“Unfortunately, more than 800,000 of our friends and neighbors still fall into the coverage gap, making too much to enroll in traditional Medicaid and too little to qualify for a subsidy on the federal exchange. The Senate remains committed to addressing this serious health care problem through a free-market Florida solution that maximizes consumer choice and personal responsibility, while protecting state sovereignty,” Gardiner said.

“With today’s ruling behind us, it is my hope we can continue to work with our colleagues in the House and with Governor Scott to craft a compromise plan to expand access to health care coverage and services for low-income working Floridians across our state,” Gardiner added.