Barton Associates, a leading national locum tenens agency, is excited to announce the release of two original resources healthcare organizations can use to better understand the staffing challenges they are facing as a result of the physician shortage.

According to the Association of American Medical Colleges, the United States faces a shortage of more than 90,000 physicians by 2020—a number that will grow to more than 130,000 by 2025.

There are a number of factors contributing to the workforce shortage, including:



A significant portion of the physician workforce (33%) is over the age of 55 and is planning to retire in the next 10 to 15 years.

The number of federally-sponsored residency slots is capped, limiting the number of new physicians.

The general population is aging, with 10,000 Americans turning 65 every day.

Millions of Americans are projected to obtain insurance this year through the Affordable Care Act.

Barton Associates understands how the shortage will affect healthcare organizations’ ability to generate revenue, deliver quality care, and maintain employee satisfaction.

The healthcare staffing experts at Barton Associates created the “Get the Facts: The Physician Shortage” article as well as the accompanying “Surviving the Physician Shortage” infographic after collecting statistics from various sources and applying their own industry insight. Healthcare organizations can use these two original resources to better understand the staffing challenges they are facing and how Barton Associates is positioned to help.

For many organizations, locum tenens physicians and nurse practitioners are a flexible staffing option that will help mitigate the effects of the shortage.

To learn more about locum tenens staffing solutions available through Barton Associates, please visit http://www.bartonassociates.com.

Barton Associates is a leading national locum tenens staffing company serving physicians, nurse practitioners, hospitals, medical practices, and companies across the U.S. from national staffing offices in Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Florida.