Topics: Feminism, Miley Cyrus, Nicki Minaj, pop stars, porn, Rashida Jones, Rihanna, Sex, sexuality, Entertainment News

Two months ago, after being exposed to Nicki Minaj’s bedazzled breasts, Miley Cyrus’s twerk-a-thon and Rihanna straddling a stripper pole, “Parks and Recreation” actress Rashida Jones decided that she had “had enough.” She vented her frustration on Twitter by issuing a series of condemning, judgy tweets aimed at the pop stars: “This week’s celeb news takeaway: She who comes closest to showing the actual inside of her vagina is most popular. #stopactinglikewhores,” she wrote.

Immediately, feminists called Jones out for slut-shaming. “Let me clarify. I don’t shame ANYone for anything they choose to do with their lives or bodies…,” Jones responded. “BUT I think we ALL need to take a look at what we are accepting as ‘the norm’…There is a whole generation of young women watching. Sure, be SEXY but leave something to the imagination.”

On Thursday night, the actress offered a lengthier explanation decrying the “pornification of pop stars” in an op-ed in Glamour Magazine. Though Jones “would never point a finger at a woman for her actual sexual behavior” and thinks that “all women have the right to express their desires,” she argues that “This isn’t showing female sexuality; this is showing what it looks like when women sell sex.”

She wrote:

My hashtag was “stopactinglikewhores.” Key word, acting. Like I said, I’m not criticizing anyone’s real sex life; as George Michael tells us, “Sex is natural, sex is fun.” But the poles, the pasties, the gyrating: This isn’t showing female sexuality; this is showing what it looks like when women sell sex. (Also, let’s be real. Every woman’s sexuality is different. Can all of us really be into stripper moves? The truth is, for every woman who loves the pole, there’s another who likes her feet rubbed. But in pop culture there’s just one way to be. And so much of it feels staged for men, not for our own pleasure.)

Jones’s line of thinking is tempting: Women are still fighting to be taken seriously on all social fronts; we want to have it all, we are leaning in, and we are demanding agency over our bodies. Seeing young women flaunting their physical assets seemingly to fulfill male fantasies is the antithesis of that. Even feel-good site Upworthy lumps Rihanna and Cyrus in as examples of “How the Media Failed Women,” alongside misogynistic Seth MacFarlane jokes and airbrushed ads.