Babystyle Oyster2 pushchair: New and improved? Which? experts take the Oyster2 for a spin

The brand new Babystyle Oyster2 pushchair

Babystyle recently launched the Oyster2 pushchair - a new and improved version of the iconic Babystyle Oyster stroller. It costs £299, but you'll have to pay £70 extra to buy a colour pack that includes the hood. Our pushchair researchers have taken it for a spin while we wait for full test lab results.

The Babystyle Oyster2 is an updated version of the Babystyle Oyster pushchair, which has one of the most popular pushchair reviews on our website.

The Oyster2 has been updated with a whole host of features. Babystyle says these include a lie-flat seat, a new 'silent' hood, high shine wheels to match the chassis and a new harness. We took the pushchair out and about over pavements, cobblestones, gravel paths and bumpy grass to see how well the new Oyster2 handled.

UPDATE: We have now tested the Babystyle Oyster2 pushchai – visit our full review to see the test results.

Babystyle Oyster2 video review

Take a look at the video below to see some clips of the BabyStyle Oyster2 pushchair in action - or go to our full first look review to see our full video with expert commentary on the pros and cons of the design.

Please enable JavaScript to access this content.

The Oyster2 comes with a reversible seat that can face the parent or the world and it's compatible with the Oyster Max carrycot (sold separately for £110).

It can also be turned into a travel system as it's compatible with the Maxi Cosi Cabriofix, Pebble, Be Safe and Cybex child car seats - if you buy the adaptors (which cost between £10 and £19).

Babystyle says the Oyster2 is 'lightweight and compact, with a narrow width chassis', but it doesn't come with a hood included in the standard price. You'll need to buy a colour pack to complete your Oyster2 purchase. The colour pack costs £70 and includes the hood, an apron, a pushchair liner and a head hugger - so make sure you budget for this.

Pushchair reviews

Over the years we've tested hundreds of pushchairs in our labs, and have spent more than £80,000 on testing this year. All our tests are based on what matters to you most, so you can avoid buying a pushchair that makes your life as a parent more, rather than less, stressful.

In our lab we look at safety and durability, including how well a pushchair is made, its strength and stability and the quality of its locking mechanisms and brakes.

Along with our experts, our parent panel rates each pushchair on its ease of use, looking at folding and pushing, attaching and removing accessories, cleaning and loading the pushchair into a car boot.

More on this...