Topics: From the Wires, News

RIYADH, Saudi Arabia (AP) — Iran and Saudi Arabia’s rivalry has played out in proxy wars across the region, and escalated further after the two severed diplomatic and trade ties last month. Yet in the Saudi capital, Riyadh, popular Iranian restaurants are outselling feverish calls for a boycott and stand as a reminder of when ties between the two countries held promise.

In the 1990s, inside steaming kitchens in Riyadh, Iranian chefs taught their counterparts how to season and cook Persian dishes for a Saudi-owned Iranian restaurant called Shayah. The food proved so popular that nearly 20 years later, Shayah is a chain with 13 outlets in the kingdom, 11 of them in Riyadh.

The bold signs on their storefronts proclaiming the restaurants as the “House of Iranian Cuisine” are daring in a country where Iran is now viewed as an existential threat.

Despite Saudi-Iranian tensions, the two countries have deep historic links. For centuries, traders carrying spices and rugs have traveled the Persian Gulf, landing on the shores of the Arabian Peninsula and weaving Iranian culture into Arab life.

A prominent Saudi prince, speaking to reporters this week in Abu Dhabi, said political tensions do not change that Arabs and Iranians “believe in the same God, and the same prophet and the same holy book.”

“I don’t think there is any family in the Arabian Peninsula in general, and Saudi Arabia in particular, that has not had, in one form or another, some kind of link to Iran in the past and visa-versa,” said Prince Turki al-Faisal, a former director of Saudi intelligence.

In Bahrain, where Shiites are the majority, many villages have Persian names and many speak Farsi at home. In Kuwait, some of the wealthiest families and businessmen are originally Iranian. The United Arab Emirates has long been a haven for Iranian businessmen, who have established an Iranian hospital, business council and club for Iranian families living in Dubai.

Even Saudi and Iran’s longstanding rivalry appeared to be cooling in the 1990s, as joint opposition to Saddam Hussein’s invasion of Kuwait helped Riyadh and Tehran restore ties in 1991. The two governments exchanged high-level visits in the late ’90s and ties improved further until a political crisis in Yemen saw them backing opposite sides of the conflict in 2000, with Saudi Arabia intervening militarily nine years later and again in 2015.

A handful of Iranian chefs were able to live and work in Saudi Arabia during the 1990s and early 2000s. Today, that would be unthinkable, said the General Manager of Shayah restaurants, Mohammed Farhat — for a start, they wouldn’t be granted work visas. He said the last of Shayah’s Iranian employees left Saudi Arabia five years ago.

Saudi Arabia and Iran are now locked in proxy wars for regional supremacy, backing opposite sides of the wars in Syria and Yemen and supporting political rivals in Lebanon, Bahrain and Iraq. The conflicts have deepened Sunni-Shiite enmity between hard-liners on both sides.