The recovery in the construction industry in Texas and across the country that began last year will continue this year, industry experts predicted today.

“Contractors are more optimistic about 2014 than they have been in a long time,” Stephen Sandherr, chief executive of the Associated General Contractors of America said today in a conference call.

U.S. construction employment grew just over 2 percent (+122,000 jobs), while investments rose 6 percent for the year ended November 2013, Sandherr said. Still, the industry has 1.9 million fewer workers than in 2006 and investments are still below peak levels (excluding inflation), he said.



“We are eager to see if last year’s growth will continue in 2014 … and what kind of challenges will accompany growth,” Sandherr said.



Texas has been a “consistently hot market” largely from oil and gas field activity, the association’s chief economist Kenneth Simonson said on the call. He expects to see the same trends this year.

In addition, Texas has seen “consistent population growth this decade at double the rate of the country as a whole … about 1.5 percent a year,” Simonson said. “That always triggers additional construction activity – houses and schools,” he said.

The association provided specific construction hiring and business forecasts for 19 states, including Texas, matching national data from a recent survey of more than 800 companies.

In Texas, 47 percent of the contractors surveyed expect the industry to grow this year, 24 percent don’t expect growth until 2015, 18 percent in 2016 and 11 percent in 2017 or later.

Despite a more optimistic outlook nationally, “many firms will struggle to find enough skilled workers, cope with escalating materials and health care costs, and comply with expanding regulatory burdens,” Simonson said.

Here is a break down of select survey results for Texas and the nation:

Jobs: Many companies plan to begin hiring again, while relatively few plan to lay off workers. Nationally, 41 percent of companies that did not change staff levels in 2013 plan to hire this year, while 2 percent plan layoffs. Overall, 86 percent of U.S. firms plan to hire 25 or fewer new employees this year. Among 19 states, Utah had the highest number of companies (100 percent) that plan to hire this year after making no staff changes in 2013.

In Texas, no companies plan layoffs this year. Half of Texas companies expect no staff changes this year, 38 percent don’t know and 13 percent plan to add workers (all between 16 and 25 people). Last year, 79 percent of Texas contractors hired and 10 percent laid off people in 2013.

Markets: The outlook for the construction industry in 2014 is “mostly upbeat,” particularly the private-sector work, and is “significantly” better than a year earlier, Simonson said. Within the private sector, U.S. and Texas contractors are most optimistic about the manufacturing, office and retail/warehouse/lodging markets. Energy and hospital/higher education construction also rate high. In the public sector, U.S. contractors are more optimistic about the demand for new water and sewer construction, followed by highway construction.

Most Texas contractors have a strong outlook for all 11 construction sectors, Sandherr said.

Worker shortage: Companies in Texas and across the country continue to be concerned about not being able to find enough skilled workers as they expand, Simonson noted. Overall, the worker shortages already have had an impact, with more than half of companies losing workers to other companies or industries. As a result, many companies have increased pay and benefits to help retain workers.

In Texas, 46 percent of companies have a hard time filling all or some professional and craft construction jobs. On the professional side, Texas contractors have the most trouble finding project managers/supervisors, estimators and engineers. On the craft side, they have the hardest time finding carpenters, equipment operators and laborers. Three quarters of Texas companies (at least two-thirds nationally) expect it will become harder or remain as difficult this year to fill professional and craft construction jobs.

Credit: Credit conditions have improved nationally, with fewer companies reporting difficulty getting a bank loan than a year ago. Roughly one-third said customers’ projects were delayed or canceled because of tight credit conditions, compared with 40 percent a year ago.

Equipment: Many contractors plan to invest in new construction equipment this year: 73 percent plan to buy equipment and 86 percent plan to lease it. However, the investments will be modest: 54 percent plan to invest $250,000 or less in equipment purchases and 53 percent will invest that amount in equipment leases.

Materials prices: About 90 percent of construction companies in Texas and across the country expect prices for key construction materials to increase modestly this year.

Federal regulations: More than half of contractors say demand for their services has been negatively affected by federal spending or budget cuts and new federal regulations. In Texas, 54 percent of companies saw no impact from federal spending cuts or federal regulations, 41 percent did. Texas companies’ priorities for lawmakers are: help in preparing the next generation of skilled workers, repealing all or part of the Affordable Care Act and passing comprehensive immigration reform.

Competition: Competition is increasing. As a result, just under half of contractors in Texas and nationwide plan to pursue new projects beyond their geographic area this year.