Births

Community Memorial Hospital

Maudlin, Alana Lynn, girl, born May 31 to Brock and Kate Maudlin, of Ventura.

Chessani IV, John, boy, born June 4 to John Chessani III and Gina Chessani, of Oxnard.

Aguilar, Jayden Jesus, boy, born June 5 to Carolina Cornejo and Jesus Aguilar, of Oxnard.

Godinez, Isaiah Allen, boy, born June 28 to Allen Godinez and Hannah Beltran-Godinez, of Oxnard.

St. John’s Regional Medical Center

Talavera, Lukas C., boy, born May 29 to Yelen and Jason Talavera, of Oxnard.

Flores, Axton, boy, born June 11 to Andy and Alisa Flores, of Ojai.

Guzman, Abigail Darling, girl, born June 12 to Josh and Christen Guzman, of Oxnard.

Rosas, Alexis Gabriel, boy, born June 15 to Ana and Abel Rosas, of Oxnard.

Graduated

Erin Peterson, of Camarillo and Jonathan Trinh, of Oxnard, graduated from the University of New Haven in West Haven, Connecticut, in May.

Jordan Anderson, of Oak Park, Sean Gunn, of Thousand Oaks, and Kienan McCarty, of Ventura, graduated from Tufts University in Medford, Massachusetts, on May 17.

Dean’s List

John Woodward, of Westlake Village, was named to the 2015 spring dean’s list at the University of Albany in Albany, New York.

Taylor Barnes, of Ventura, was named to the 2015 spring dean’s list at Rockford University.

Breanna Naranjo, of Oxnard; Amanda Soper, of Simi Valley; and Breanna Naranjo, of Oxnard were named to the 2014-15 commissioner’s honor roll at Newberry College in Newberry, South Carolina.

Muriel Antwi-Sohngen, of Simi Valley, was named to the 2015 spring dean’s list at the University of Wisconsin-Green Bay.

Shane Hall, of Ventura, was named the 2015 spring dean’s list at Merrimack College in North Andover, Massachusetts.

Meagan Chew, of Moorpark, was named to the 2015 spring dean’s list at Oklahoma City University.

Derek Smith, of Thousand Oaks, was named to the 2015 spring dean’s list at St. Olaf College in Northfield, Minnesota.

Kylie Rae Kinder, of Oak Park; Riley Ridgik, of Ojai; Rachel Brown, of Simi Valley; Kevin Chapman, of Thousand Oaks; and Matthew Cohen, of Westlake Village, were named to the 2015 spring dean’s list at Wake Forest University in Winston-Salem, North Carolina.

Ryan Patrick Cotter and Grant Elliott Rohach, of Moorpark; and Alison Louise Knutson, of Westlake Village, were named to the 2015 spring dean’s list at Iowa State University in Ames, Iowa.

Noelle Anderson of Simi Valley was named to the 2015 spring dean’s list at Gustavus Adolphus College in St. Peter, Minnesota.

Kathleen Borchard, of Somis; and Paige Bartholomew, of Thousand Oaks, were named to the 2015 spring dean’s list at Furman University in Greenville, South Carolina.