Li zhongxian – Imaginechina

The Wall Street Journal reported that at attack last spring on the Metcalf Transmission Substation outside San Jose, Calif., is raising concerns that there may be concerted efforts to sabotage the U.S. electric grid. Reporter Rebecca Smith answers some questions about the article:

This attack happened in April – why haven’t we heard about it before?

There were some local media reports at the time about vandalism at the substation. But the utility that owns the substation, PG&E, investigators and federal agencies didn’t want to draw attention to the attack, for fear it would inspire copycats.

So why is The Wall Street Journal publicizing it?

Americans have a right to know about serious threats to their security. And Jon Wellinghoff, the former head of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, decided to go public with his concerns about the attack because he fears not enough has been done to protect the grid.

Why can’t we just put bullet-proof shields around transformers?

Actually, that’s under consideration – but there are problems. Transformers get very hot; bullet-proof cladding might interfere with cooling, making them work less well. Some people have suggested installing concrete barriers around some equipment. Transformers can be very big, though, and they have parts that stick out that would be hard to protect.

How about fences around substations, like ones that gunmen couldn’t see through?

Some utilities are considering this, as well. But substations are typically kept lit at night, so intruders can be seen by passersby or security details. Opaque fences would make it harder to see if vandals or other unauthorized people were inside.

How may substations should be upgraded?

Dozens, not hundreds, security experts say. The electric system has lots of redundancy built in, so grid operators usually have lots of ways to get electricity to any given spot. But few massive substations function like linchpins and make it possible for the system to operate smoothly; they are the ones that need better protection.

How many big substations would have to be knocked out to bring down the grid?

It’s probably not smart to say, but federal officials think it’s not a huge number.

Then the question is, how long would it take to put the pieces back together again?

Some grid officials think they could restore power service in a few hours. Others think it could take days or even weeks, depending on the level of damage.

What would be the hang up? We lose power as a result of storms, all the time, and it usually comes back on pretty quickly.

True, but that’s not always the case; just ask the people who lost power during Super Storm Sandy. Some equipment is hard to replace. Big transformers are hand-built and it often takes months to complete one. And they’re hard to move, often requiring special rail cars and cranes.

Isn’t the utility industry doing anything?

Yes. But there aren’t federal standards for physical protections. So it’s up to each company to decide how to protect wires, substations and generating stations. That means more than 1,800 companies can make their own decisions.

Could this have been the work of people who wanted to manipulate power prices?

Probably not. The incident occurred at a time of year – and a time of day – when demand for power is very low. Anyone interested in skewing prices would probably strike during the hottest days of the summer, when demand for electricity is very high.

See also:

Mystery Assault On Power Grid – WSJ