Sunday Show Preview: August 9, 2015

Written by Nick Field, Managing Editor

Every Friday afternoon, we provide a preview of the various Sunday morning political talk shows that are filmed and broadcast throughout the commonwealth.

Our hope is to alert readers to the important interviews and insights that each show in their region offers.

@Issue

NBC10-Philadelphia-11:30 a.m.

Host: Keith Jones

We are devoting the entire show to Clear the Shelters. Guests are Dr. Brittney Watson from Penn Vet School, Melissa Levy from Paws and Brian Anderson from Deputy Dog.

Face the State

CBS2-Pittsburgh-11:30 a.m.

State Sen. Scott Wagner is on the show this week and we talk about Attorney General Kathleen Kane. Tony May and R.J. Harris provide commentary for the week.

Inside Story

6abc-Philadelphia-11:30 a.m.

Host: Matt O’Donnell

Host Matt O’Donnell asks our Insiders if the recently announced Papal Visit traffic closures will scare people away from attending this truly historic international event happening in their hometown. Topics also discussed include Attorney General Kathleen Kane charged by Montco DA Risa Ferman, Katie McGinty running for Senate and Governor Wolf’s liberal label. Plus…a rousing debate on Chaka Fattah’s indictment and the perceived culture of corruption in politics. From left to right…but always local…get the Inside Story.

Roundtable

George Burrell

Nelson Diaz

Christine Flowers

Val DiGiorgio

KD/PG Sunday Edition

CBS2-Pittsburgh-11:30 a.m.

This Sunday morning on KDKA-TV’s “KD/PG Sunday Edition”, with KDKA-TV Weekend News Anchor Paul Martino substituting for KDKA-TV News Anchors Stacy Smith and Ken Rice, and John Allison – Associate Editor of the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, as co-host:

Pennsylvania’s State Attorney General Kathleen Kane – the first woman to be elected to this office in state history – has now been charged with leaking secret, grand jury material to a political operative, in order to get back, at those who she believed were her enemies.

We’ll look at the charges, and Kane’s political future, with the Chairman of the Pennsylvania State Democratic Committee – attorney James Burn, Jr. – and Phillip DiLucente, Esq. – Pittsburgh defense attorney, with Di Lucente and Tetlow, LLC.

Don’t miss this discussion – on “The KD/PG Sunday Edition” – right after “Face the Nation”, on KDKA-TV.

Pennsylvania Newsmakers

WGAL Channel 8 (Harrisburg and Lancaster) Sunday, August 9th at 7:30 AM

Pennsylvania Cable Network, Sunday, August 9th at 4:30 PM

WBPH (Lehigh Valley and Philadelphia) Monday, August 10th at 8:30 PM

WKBS 47 (Altoona) Saturday, August 15th at 9:30 AM

WPCB 40 (Pittsburgh) Saturday, August 15th at 9:30 AM

This week’s Pennsylvania Newsmakers features an update on road and bridge construction and the need for federal funding, with Leslie Richards, PA Transportation Secretary, and Bob Latham, Exec., VP, Associated PA Constructors. Then Karen Langley, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, and Steve Esack, Allentown Morning Call, join host Terry Madonna for a review of the charges filed against Attorney General Kathleen Kane. Link here.

The Sunday Business Page

CBS2-Pittsburgh-6:30 a.m.

This Sunday morning on KDKA-TV’s “The Sunday Business Page” – with KDKA-TV Weekend News Anchor Paul Martino substituting for KDKA-TV’s Money & Politics Editor, Jon Delano:

Could the Pittsburgh area and Pennsylvania become an even greater center for film and television production? While the state budget discussions between the Republican-controlled state house and senate and Democratic Governor Tom Wolf remain stalemated – the future of state film tax credits remains uncertain. However, the film industry in Pennsylvania commissioned a study by the Milken Institute – a non-profit, “think tank” – to measure the economic impact of that industry. We’ll discuss the results of that report – with Dawn M. Keezer – Director of the Pittsburgh Film Office – and Kevin Klowden – the Milken Institute’s Managing Economist, and co-author of this report.

Then, marking the 50th anniversary of the implementation of a piece of landmark, historic legislation, that changed healthcare in America. Not the Affordable Care Act – but, Medicare! We’ll talk with Heather Cianfrocco – CEO of United Healthcare Northeast – about the impact that Medicare has had, on seniors’ health, and the changes that the program has undergone, since its passage.

Finally, the 20th anniversary of a valuable program, that has become “a port in a storm” – for homeless women, and their dependent children:

Many of these families have fled a residence filled with domestic violence. The non-profit organization in Pittsburgh’s North Hills is “Hearth” – and we’ll introduce you to its executive director – Judy Eakin – and board member Barb Smith – for an inspiring message about providing shelter, education, and supportive services, to help these victims to become self-sufficient.

August 7th, 2015 | Posted in Features, Front Page Stories, Top Stories | No Comments