Former U.S. Rep. John Dingell receives an honorary degree at the University of Michigan’s spring commencement ceremony on May 2, 2015 at Michigan Stadium. (Photo: Scott C. Soderberg) Story Highlights Dingell retired early this year after 59 years in the U.S. House

Former congressman also plans to work with students, faculty at U-M Dearborn

Dingell collection could take years to process

Think of your biggest move ever and how many boxes it took: What, 20? Thirty? More?

How about 550?

The University of Michigan's Bentley Historical Library had a celebration this afternoon welcoming the voluminous papers and other materials compiled by former U.S. Rep. John Dingell during a record-setting 59 years in Congress, a collection that would fill more than 550 ten-inch-by-12-inch-by-15-inch bankers boxes.

Filled with correspondence to presidents, scrapbooks, bill texts, photographs and more, there are more items in the collection than Bentley Director Terrence McDonald cares to guess, comfortably putting the number in the hundreds of thousands and saying it could take years to catalog.

"It's big," he said simply.

Buy Photo Former U.S. Rep. John Dingell (Photo: Ryan Garza, Detroit Free Press)

But it won't be alone: Dingell's collection, which has been making its way to the library since early this year, joins those from 31 Michigan governors — from Territorial Gov. Lewis Cass to Jennifer Granholm, who left office in 2011 — as well as 15 U.S. senators and 16 U.S. House members.

Dingell's, however, is singular, as was his career in Congress. Winning a special election in 1955 to replace his father in the House after his death, Dingell, D-Dearborn, went on to serve longer in Congress than any other person in history, a record that won't be broken anytime soon.

"We're not going over and culling what is in there, we're simply conveying the things that are there," Dingell told the Free Press today. "It's just damn near anything you would care to name."

Today's reception, coming just a few days after Dingell, 88, was awarded an honorary doctor of laws at U-M's spring commencement, came as the University of Michigan-Dearborn announced he will work with the school's College of Arts, Sciences and Letters, discussing his experiences with students and promoting its Washington internship program.

There are also discussions under way with the Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy at U-M to have Dingell work with students and faculty in Ann Arbor as well.

President Barack Obama presented John Dingell with the Presidential Medal of Freedom. Thousands of Dingell’s papers have been donated to U-M’s Bentley Library. (Photo: EPA)

Over a storied career, Dingell rose to the pinnacle of congressional power, especially as chairman of the powerful House Energy and Commerce Committee, a panel whose authority and scope he helped expand exponentially. He also had a hand in writing or helping to pass some of the seminal legislative achievements of the last 60 years, including Medicare, the Clean Water Act, the Endangered Species Act, the Affordable Care Act and many more.

According to McDonald, the Dingell collection is "fabulously rich," including memos on policies, scrapbooks compiled by staff members and legislative texts. It can also be expected to include some famous Dingell-grams, the missives he would often shoot off to bureaucrats or industrialists demanding answers to questions in a tight time-frame.

The library also has received the papers from another Michigan political legend, U.S. Sen. Carl Levin, who with Dingell, retired in January. Levin served 36 years in the Senate.

In a way, the Dingell collection's coming to U-M is a homecoming, considering the Bentley Library already has the papers of his father, U.S. Rep. John Dingell Sr., the first person to sit in the legislative seat now filled by Dingell Jr.'s wife, Debbie Dingell.

"I am pleased they were able to find the space for all of it," said the recent retiree.

Contact Todd Spangler: 703-854-8947 or at tspangler@freepress.com. Follow him on Twitter at @tsspangler.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1Re8bDs