Dr. Mary Reeves is retiring from patient care on July 1.

After 22 years with First Street Family Health, she is leaving patient care to work part time on policy-making with the Comprehensive Primary Care Initiative.

CPCI is an “experiment” in transforming the way primary care is delivered and paid for that is part of the Affordable Care Act. “Colorado is one of seven states and we are one of 71 primary care practices in this state participating,” Reeves explained.

“My partners, Drs. Schaler, Burkley and Grant-Nierman, and I started in the fall of 2012 to make the changes, and I will devote my time, after July 1, to collecting, analyzing and reporting what we have learned back to CMS (Medicare), the major funder of the initiative.

While she has enjoyed her 22 years of patient care in Salida, she is excited about the transition to a new aspect of health care, leaving her practice in the hands of Dr. Dan Lombardo.

“It’s an honor to have participated in the lives of my patients,” Reeves said. “Dr. Lombardo and his family will be a great addition to the community, and I have the utmost confidence that my patients will have a wonderful relationship with him in the years to come.”

Reeves was Dr. Mary Underwood when she joined First Street Family Health with Drs. Leo Leonardi and William Mehos and physician’s assistant Eileen Van Dyke in July 1993. The mother of 14-year-old twins and a 10-year-old daughter, she was a nontraditional medical student and faced some barriers as an older student, a single mother and a woman in medicine.

“I expected to face some issues with that in Salida, but they never came up,” she said. “Drs. Leonardi and Mehos as well as the physicians in the other practices just saw me as a colleague, and they mentored me from the beginning in a respectful way.”

Reeves is probably the first female physician to serve Salida. Back in the late 1800s a female homeopathic physician and her brother had a practice here, but The Mountain Mail was unable to find any other record of a female physician prior to Reeves.

She graduated from the University of Colorado Medical School and came to Salida from St. Mary’s Hospital in Grand Junction after completing her residency and internship. For Reeves, medicine was a second career. She had been a science teacher, working with junior high, high school and community college students.

“I always wanted to practice rural medicine, and Salida was a perfect fit,” she said.

Moving to Salida also brought another change in her life. She met her husband, Bill Reeves, in the process of the move. They were married Jan. 1, 1994.

Bill has also contributed to the community as a member of Salida Brass for many years, choir director at First Methodist Church, member of High Country Fine Arts Association, Colorado Mountain College Jazz Project and running for Chaffee County commissioner among other civic projects.

Between them they have seven children and nine grandchildren.

“The collegiality of the medical community in Salida was a big part of its attraction,” Reeves said as she recalled her initial impressions of the community.

“I didn’t feel that in other towns. I wanted to practice the full spectrum of family medicine, including obstetrics, and in many other areas I couldn’t include obstetrics because someone else was offering it, or there wasn’t as congenial a relationship with the different practices or with the hospital.

“The community welcomed both Bill and me, and it is a very special community to be a part of.”

One of the major changes over the years has been the switch from paper charting to electronic medical records. Patients’ records are now typed into a computer and can be accessed quickly for information on medications, allergies, etc.

“In general, computers have made life better for patients and doctors,” Reeves said. “Patients can also look up a lot of information themselves, and this has empowered patients.”

Since joining First Street Family Health, Reeves has moved to both new offices and a new hospital. The practice moved into the present location at 910 Rush Drive in 2009, a year after Heart of the Rockies Regional Medical Center opened in its new location at 1000 Rush Drive, off Colo. 291 on the west side of Salida.

“When we moved into the new office, I wanted a plant, so I bought an orchid at Safeway, and I watered it faithfully from April until July when my stepdaughter came to visit,” Reeves laughed. “I was showing her around the new office and was proud of the orchid since it was doing so well, and then my stepdaughter said, ‘You know it’s plastic, don’t you?’

“I hadn’t realized it was plastic because it was so lifelike! I haven’t watered it since, and it still looks as good as it did when I bought it.”

With a little more time on her hands, she also plans to do some traveling, visit her children and grandchildren and read a book before book club.