Celebrating a few of Colorado's finer features

EDITORS NOTE: This story incorrectly reported that snow for the event was brought in from Estes Park. The snow came from Winter Park.

It doesn't get much more Colorado than Hops and Handrails.

The annual throwdown that on Saturday rocked Longmont for the third year in a row, combined a 40-foot snowboarding ramp, dozens of craft beer tents and live bluegrass, all under the brilliant sunshine of an 80-degree Saturday afternoon at Roosevelt Park.

All that was missing was a pop-up pot dispensary.

"This is a lot more laid-back than other beer festivals I've been to," said CJ Aguilera, of Denver. "The music's great, it's a great environment and it definitely feels like Colorado."

With more than 2,000 in attendance, local bands Euforquestra and Whitewater Ramble jammed in the background, while boarders flew through the air and flashed nifty tricks before throngs of fans knocking back suds from some of the 50 breweries on hand.

The snow for the event — 16 truckloads, to be exact — was hauled in from Winter Park, and hung tough in the heat of the day, as groomers worked tirelessly to keep the ramp as un-slushy as is possible on the warmest day of this young spring.

"These guys set it up really well, and the atmosphere just makes it 10 times more fun," said Alex Gumper, 19, of Fort Collins. Gumper is practiced in the art of snowboard trickery, but he'd never rode anything like the ramp at Hops and Handrails.

Advertisement

"It's pretty sweet," he said. "Honestly, when you're on there, you don't even notice where you are. I guess it's a little sketchy, but they did a great job with it."

Emily Armstrong, a spokeswoman for the host, Left Hand Brewing Company, said Left Hand is pleased to deliver to the populace what it craves.

"I think people in this state love being outdoors, and it's a big part of the reason why we all chose this state, as opposed to any other," she said. "You get to be with your neighbors, rub shoulders and drink beer on a beautiful day. It's everything people here want."

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness