Five of today’s top Florida political stories at your fingertips:

Obama arrives in Tampa for talks on ISIL: Air Force One landed at MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa on Tuesday at 6:30 p.m… On Wednesday morning, the president will visit U.S. Central Command (CENTCOM) to receive a briefing from top commanders and thank the men and women who will partner with others in the region to carry out the strategy to defeat ISIL. CENTCOM’s responsibility includes 20 countries in the Middle East and Central and South Asia, including Iraq and Syria. Read more

Border kids a boon for Fla. charities receiving federal grants: Florida nonprofits have taken in more than 3,000 unaccompanied minors from Central America who illegally crossed the southern border, but those organizations are being paid handsomely by taxpayers for their charity. The Department of Health and Human Services’ Tracking Accountability in Government Grants System, or TAGGS, reports Florida nonprofits have received $21 million thus far in 2014 to care for the children who came with a wave of illegals earlier this year. Read more

Captain Citrus to the rescue of struggling industry: Florida’s homegrown superhero, Captain Citrus, has undergone a $1 million head-to-toe makeover with the help of comic-book giant Marvel Entertainment. The muscled-up Captain Citrus, powered by the sun and intended to help boost Florida citrus sales while fighting evil, was unveiled Tuesday by the Department of Citrus at a comic-book store in Tampa. “Raising awareness of the amazing nutritional benefits of Florida citrus, especially among families, is a priority,” department Executive Director Doug Ackerman said in a prepared statement. Read more

Funding the navigators: Florida’s Obamacare helpers get another $6.8 million: Round two of Obamacare open enrollment is eight weeks away, and the Obama administration is once again spending millions on “navigator” outreach programs. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services announced last week it’s handing out $60 million in new funding for 90 organizations. Florida was among the top states, garnering nearly $6.8 million — only Texas received more. The grant recipients are tasked with continuing sign-up efforts aimed at enrolling eligible participants in mostly government subsidized health insurance plans. Read more

Florida’s NAACP backs medical-marijuana ballot initiative: Today, the Florida State Conference of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People proudly announced its support of United for Care and the passage of Amendment 2 this November. The amendment, which would legalize medicinal marijuana in Florida, will appear on the ballot on November 4, 2014. NAACP Florida State Conference, including its Branches, Youth Councils and College Chapters, is a state affiliate of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. Read more

For more Florida political news, visit BPR’s FLORIDA NEWS page