Buy Photo Dancers celebrate the Fourth of July with Geno Delafose and French Rockin' Boogie at the 25th annual Lebeau Zydeco Festival. See a photo gallery at dailyworld.com and on Facebook. (Photo: Freddie Herpin, Daily World)Buy Photo

Rockin’ Sidney Simien was born in Lebeau. He attended Immaculate Conception School from first through twelfth grade. He is buried near his parents in the town cemetery.

So it’s only fitting that for its 25th anniversary, the Lebeau Zydeco Festival honored the native son behind the music’s only million-seller, “(Don’t Mess With) My Toot Toot.” With its danceable groove and open-to interpretation lyrics, that record became an international hit 30 years ago.

“He’d be proud that people here remember him,” said Franklin Simien, one of Rockin’ Sidney’s 12 brothers and sisters and a former bandmate.

Remember him they did. The first song from the first band to perform, Geno Delafose and French Rockin’ Boogie, was a cover of Simien’s “Jalapeño Lena.” Just as it did when it was new, the number drew eager dancers to the floor steps away from Immaculate Conception Catholic Church.

Sidney Simien started pleasing crowds as a child. “When I was in first grade, we used to have little dances,” recalled John Rideau of Lebeau. For a dime or a quarter, “he played on the stage in the (Immaculate Conception) gym, so we could raise a few dollars for the things we needed.”

He was reluctant at first to admit he wanted to make a living in music, his sister Majesta Simien LeDee said. When an elementary school teacher asked his classmates what they wanted to do when they grew up, little Sidney was so embarrassed the teacher asked him to tell her in the hallway out of earshot from the other children.

“He wanted to be a singing cowboy,” like Herb Jeffries, the “Bronze Buckaroo” of Saturday afternoon movie matinees, LeDee said. For that to happen, the teacher recognized that the child would need music lessons.

Eventually, a priest who charged other students for piano lessons taught Sidney Simien for free, his sister said.

The family didn’t have much money. The Simiens planted and harvested cotton, and Sidney lagged behind. “He was always in the field making his songs,” LeDee said. “He’d go in the barn to be in his little private place to make his songs.”

Another sister, Mildred Simien LeDee, recalled her brother as “a dreamer. Dreaming about (how) he would get away and make a living playing music.”

He’d also entertain his nine sisters and three brothers with jokes, stories and funny drawings, the sisters said.

Simien started his musical career performing rhythm and blues. He switched from piano and organ during the 1970s as zydeco music gained popularity, and for awhile he worked into his act impersonations of Stanley “Buckwheat” Dural and Clifton Chenier.

His biggest success came from an album he recorded in his home, playing all the instruments and performing the vocals. After the single attracted attention in Louisiana and Texas, the Epic record label promoted it on country stations.

There it stayed on the Top 40 for 18 weeks, became a certified platinum hit and won a Grammy Award.

Although he never again scored a hit as big, Simien reveled in the one he’d made and stayed active on the scene until throat cancer ended his life in 1998. He was 59 years old.

Majesta LeDee carried from her home in New Iberia a vanload of display boards, portraits, scrapbooks and vinyl record jackets to show the Lebeau festival crowd Saturday. That crowd also included alumni at a reunion for the classes of 1963, ‘64 and ‘65 of Immaculate Conception and Phyllis Wheatley high schools, now closed.

“I think he would really feel honored” that the event honored him, LeDee said. “He tried for so long to be successful. I prayed for him every day.

“I think God finally answered my prayers and his hard work.”

Read or Share this story: http://www.dailyworld.com/story/news/local/2015/07/04/lebeau-fest-rocks-honor-native-son/29710571/