Doctors and hospitals say they must collaborate to survive and thrive under the Affordable Care Act.

But Deborah L. Feinstein, director of the bureau of competition at the Federal Trade Commission, said the health care law did not repeal the antitrust laws.

“I don’t think there’s a contradiction between the goals of health care reform and the goals of antitrust,” Ms. Feinstein said in an interview, as she surveyed the wave of mergers, consolidations and affiliations sweeping through the health care industry.

Edith Ramirez, the chairwoman of the commission, said it had challenged fewer than 1 percent of hospital deals. But the message of those cases is reverberating in the health care industry.

In the Idaho case, Federal District Judge B. Lynn Winmill acknowledged that the combination in 2012 of St. Luke’s Health System and the Saltzer Medical Group — the largest independent physician group in the state — was primarily intended to improve care for patients. But, he said, “there are other ways to achieve the same effect that do not run afoul of the antitrust laws.”

Judge Winmill said the combined entity would have a huge share of the market for primary care physician services and could charge higher prices to health insurance plans, which could then pass the costs to consumers by charging higher premiums.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“The Clayton Act is in full force, and it must be enforced,” the judge said, noting that the law bans mergers that may substantially lessen competition. He ordered the hospital system to divest itself of the physician group. The decision is being appealed.

A federal investigation can be an ordeal for hospital executives. “I was shocked at how aggressive the F.T.C. was,” said Randy Oostra, the president of ProMedica, the hospital system at the center of the Ohio case.

Photo

Jeffrey C. Kuhn, the general counsel of ProMedica, said: “The government has lots of resources and lots of lawyers. Their attitude was adversarial. Our trustees and top executives had to fly to Washington to be deposed. We were eager to tell our story, but it quickly turned into an inquisition. We turned over millions of pages of documents, at great expense.”

A federal appeals court said in April that the commission was justified in blocking the merger of ProMedica with a smaller hospital in the Toledo area.

“The commission’s analysis of this merger was comprehensive, carefully reasoned and supported by substantial evidence,” the appeals court said, and it found that the deal would hurt the community by forcing higher rates on consumers.

Hospitals often contend that the antitrust laws are at odds with the goals of the Affordable Care Act because they limit the ability of doctors and hospitals to join forces and collaborate.

Federal officials see no conflict. The health care law and the antitrust laws, they say, have the same goals: to lower costs, increase access to care and improve its quality by fostering competition.

“You can have collaboration, you can have consolidation, you can have cooperation, and we don’t worry if it doesn’t harm competition,” said Mr. Gaynor, the chief economist at the commission.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In Illinois, the commission challenged a merger that it said would “eliminate vigorous competition” among hospitals and primary care doctors in the Rockford area.

“The F.T.C. has shown that the merger would likely lead to higher prices,” said the judge, Frederick J. Kapala of the Federal District Court in Rockford. He granted a preliminary injunction, and the hospitals promptly abandoned their plans to merge.

Hospital executives say mergers can benefit consumers by pumping money into struggling institutions in order to buy new medical equipment and adopt electronic health records. In other cases, hospitals say their goal is to increase the quality of care, lower its cost and eliminate duplication — for example, by consolidating cardiac care or cancer treatment at one site.

Federal officials view such arguments with skepticism and require hospitals to document the benefits with detailed studies.

“Vague promises and aspirations that an acquisition will reduce costs and improve care are not sufficient,” said Julie Brill, a member of the commission.

Often, Ms. Feinstein said, when hospitals and doctors join forces, their goal is not just to control costs or improve care, but to “get increased leverage” in negotiations with health insurance companies and employers.

“They say they need better rates so they will have more money to invest in their facilities,” Ms. Feinstein said. “When you strip that down, it’s basically just saying, ‘We want a price increase.’ Even if the price increase is motivated by a desire to invest more in the business, that’s problematic. That incentive to invest may not be there if you don’t have competition as a spur to innovation — if you’re not worried about losing business to the hospital down the street.”

The F.T.C. has long argued that mergers can cause higher prices by reducing competition among hospitals in the same market. New research suggests that another dynamic, rarely considered by antitrust officials, can also lead to significant price increases.

The research shows that hospitals gain bargaining power when they are acquired and become part of a big hospital system that has no other presence in the local market.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Acquisitions of hospitals by large national chains such as Hospital Corporation of America, Ascension Health or Tenet Healthcare may not increase hospital concentration in the affected local markets, but could nevertheless generate higher prices,” said Matthew S. Lewis, an associate professor of economics at Clemson University.