Cable wake boarder Riley Hackworth, right, of Fort Myers, poses with boat wake boarder Bob Soven, middle, and cable wake boarder Brenno Fantin. (Photo: Special to The News-Press )

There has seldom been a time in my journalistic career when I could write about cables — and how they relate to sports — until today.

These cables, made of various strengths of steel, have launched local athletes to amazing feats recently.

Dennis Trebing, 22, of Cape Coral, held his throttle cable after it broke from his floor pedal of his 180 mph Porsche race car and was able to drive the car back to the pit area for repairs. He finished second in a major European endurance race.

Josh Wright, of North Fort Myers, and Riley Hackworth, of Fort Myers, used steel cables, powered by electric motors, to top finishes at the World Wakeboard Association Wake Park National Championships in Waco, Texas. Wright, 31, won the master’s division for the second year in a row and Riley, 12, competing in his first national competition, claimed second in the boys 10-13 age division.

Trebing, whom I have known for the past eight years and I consider a very talented driver, pulled off what I consider one of the most amazing athletic accomplishments ever. His throttle — or gas pedal — went to the floor after the cable broke, causing the car to stop while he was leading the race during the 21st hour of the 24-hour event. He had no tools to repair it. The fans in the area where he stopped didn’t have tools.

But Trebing had a cellphone. He called his team back in the pits and they talked him through a way to rip off a rubber housing to get to the cable. He was able to wrap the cable around his finger and drive the car slowly back to the pits along the 14-mile Nurburgring course in Germany. He reached over with his left hand to make his shifts, while steering and operating the cable with his right hand.

The team made the repairs, but it took time, and he fell back to fourth place. Trebing went out for another one-hour stint and drove the car back to second.

“I was literally in tears when that happened, but it turned out to be a cool story,” Trebing said.

Most of the time, during such an incident, the driver gives up and the car is pulled from the race. Trebing’s quick thinking and determination saved the car and the race.

Trebing’s ability to take an out-of-control moment and bring it back under control only illustrates the tremendous talent within this 21-year-old. His racing file is filled with remarkable moments. He dominated the Skip Barber regional and national racing series. He went to Europe to race three years ago and became the first American to win a race in the Volkswagen Scirocco R-Cup series. He had second- and fourth-place finishes during two of those years.

With limited racing time this year, he has competed in several endurance races and always performed at a high level. He deserves sponsorship and a full-time ride. He has the talent to drive any race car to the front whether it be on the road courses of Europe or in the U.S. He just needs the chance.

Wake boarding with a cable and pulley system — and not a boat — is something I was not aware of, until Thursday. Basically the cable system replaces the boat, pulling wake boarders at more than 18 mph along a circular course about 2,000 feet in length, where various tricks are performed over ramps and other obstacles.

The cable system was developed in the 1950s by a German engineer who wanted to create a way for more water skiers to be able to compete at the same time. Boats were limited to pulling one or two skiers. The cable system allows as many as six boarders, or skiers, to use a course at the same time.

As the systems developed through the 1960s, the first cable parks started to open throughout the U.S., including parks in Deerfield Beach and at Wet ’n Wild Orlando about 30 years ago. There are about 20 parks throughout the country, including one in North Fort Myers called Revolution Cable Park, which opened six years ago. The park features a full-length cable system, extending about 1,900 feet around a lake. The systems aren’t cheap, costing approximately $350,000. In fact, owner Nick DiMasi said the entire park, including purchase of about 20 acres of land, construction of a shop and other infrastructure, cost about $2 million.

It’s where Riley started about six years ago and where he has learned to perfect his craft.

At the national championships, Riley never made a mistake in completing his tricks.

“It was a great experience, said Riley, who is a student at St. Michael. “I beat some really good kids. I learned a lot from that.”

He also performed a new, difficult trick for the first time in competition — a backside 540. Not to make it too complicated, the 540 refers to the number of spins. He didn’t do 540 of them, but he did a lot, enough to impress the judges. “I saw other kids doing tricks similar to that, so I knew I needed to step it up,” Riley said.

Added DiMasi: “When I first saw Riley, he was learning how to get up on a wake board, learning to ride through the corners. Now, he can do tricks off obstacles like a 360, 540 and 720.”

Tom Hayden is community conversations editor of The News-Press.

About Revolution Cable Park

• Location: 17590 East St., North Fort Myers. Park is near Interstate 75 and Bayshore Road.

• Hours of operation: 1-8 p.m. Wednesday through Friday; noon to 8 p.m. Saturday and Sunday. Park is closed Monday and Tuesday, except for special holidays.

• Cost: Hourly $17 (1), $22 (2), $28 (4), $38 (all day). Fees do not include rental equipment. There is a $25, two-hour, first-timer pass and includes helmet, life jacket and skis. Six month pass is $600; a year’s pass is $1,000.

• Website: revolutioncable.com

• Phone: 656-3000.

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1omwLFY