District aims to provide more freshly prepared lunches

The Nutrition Services department of Harrison K-8 School poses for a photo on Aug. 23 at the school. From left to right are Robin McCluskey, kitchen manager; Barb Fawcett, assistant kitchen manager; Roxann Shinaut, Wanda Adamic, Chelsea Martinez, Alicia Camacho and Adam Merlino, director of Nutrition Services for Ca単on City Schools. ( Carie Canterbury / Daily Record )

With an entire week of school now completed, the Ca単on City School District's Nutrition Services department is looking forward to some exciting changes throughout the year.

Director of Nutrition Services Adam Merlino said the district has joined LiveWell Colorado's efforts to ensure that school meals are both nutritious and delicious.

During the school year, the district will receive assistance from the LiveWell@School Food Initiative to transition their kitchen operations to serve healthier school food. Merlino said the district also will receive a grant to purchase kitchen equipment, free culinary training and on-site support from a LiveWell Colorado chef consultant.

"Ca単on City Schools is very excited to be participating in this initiative and looks forward to serving meals that are both good for students and taste good," he said. "It's going to take some time and effort to complete the process, but it'll be worth it because it's the right thing to do for our kids.

"We want our students to make, and even demand, healthier food choices."

With the grant, the district will receive a robot coupe, a chopping machine that significantly will cut down time kitchen staff spends cutting and chopping produce.

"That will allow us to use more fresh produce," Merlino said. "It will save us a lot time on the fresh so that we can start eliminating canned."

Advertisement

Ca単on City High School also will receive an immersion blender so staff there can begin making homemade dressings for all district schools.

"That's a lot of preservatives we're taking out right off the bat," Merlino said. "We're going to start picking off individual items that are processed and we'll take them one at a time and we'll convert it to a fresh homemade product."

Merlino took three district kitchen managers to a three-day LiveWell workshop during summer break, including Robin McCluskey, kitchen manager for Harrison K-8 School.

"It was the best training I've had in my 26 years (as a school kitchen manager)," she said. "I learned so much in those three days; we learned how to do the fresh Ranch dressing, strawberry vinaigrette, and different ways to cut fresh fruits and vegetables."

Merlino said school food directors need support from the community to be successful. Parent advisory volunteers, student taste-test organizers, newsletter writers, and more are needed to help champion change and set an example for healthier school food.

He said nearly 58 percent of Colorado adults and one-fourth of its children are overweight or obese. The goal of LiveWell@School Food Initiative is to reverse childhood obesity trends by making it easy for kids to make healthy lunch choices. He said research also proves that when kids eat a balanced diet, they are better able to focus on both academics and extracurricular activities.

For more information, or to learn how to support the Nutrition Services department, email merlina@canoncityschools.org.