Defense, offensive line will be in spotlight

Colorado head coach Mike MacIntyre decided to only spend about half of the allotted two hours at Folsom Field with his team in scrimmage situations. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

COLORADO SPRING FOOTBALL GAME When: 2 p.m. - 4 p.m. Sunday (gates open at 1 p.m.) Where: Folsom Field Broadcast: Television - Pac-12 Networks. Radio - KKZN AM-760 Cost: Admission and parking are free Format: The team is expected to practice about 50 percent of the time and conduct a scrimmage the other 50 percent. Notable: Players and coaches will be available after the game for a meet and greet session with fans. ...CU is offering fans a chance to sign an iron beam that will be used to top the new Champions Center in the northeast corner of the stadium.

The earliest spring football game in Colorado's history isn't expected to be much of a game at all.

It's not because coach Mike MacIntyre is allowing all his starters to play on the same team. MacIntyre has decided to only spend about half of the allotted two hours at Folsom Field with his team in scrimmage situations. The rest of the session will be more like a traditional practice, albeit with several thousand fans looking on.

MacIntyre scheduled selection Sunday's spring game with the school's basketball teams in mind. He believed back in December, like many, that both teams had a good chance of making the NCAA Tournament when he set the spring schedule. He thought it would be nice for CU fans to be able to leave the football game and walk a few blocks to the Coors Events Center to watch the men's NCAA Tournament selection show and find out where Tad Boyle's team would be playing in the postseason.

Advertisement

The basketball teams under-achieved this season and won't be in the NCAA Tournament, which gives the football team the day to itself.

MacIntyre and the Buffs began spring ball last month looking to evaluate defensive personnel and decide which schemes fit the talent best with defensive coordinator Jim Leavitt and safeties coach Joe Tumpkin making their debut. The goals on the offensive side were beginning to evaluate the best options for two starting jobs at guard on the offensive line, working on the running game and the continued development of junior-to-be quarterback Sefo Liufau and his backups.

The team is also trying to find a new place-kicker and holder on special teams with incoming freshman Alex Kinney expected to handle the punting duties. Here is a look at some points of interest for CU fans Sunday.

Maturation process

Sefo Liufau threw 15 interceptions last fall, some in critical situations that changed games. He also lost several fumbles. Fans will want to see Liufau come out of the spring game turnover free and looking sharp in the passing game like he did much of last season.

Jordan Gehrke played in three games last fall, including his first start on the road at No. 2 Oregon on senior day. While he didn't play well at Oregon, coaches understand they put him in a tough spot there and came into spring hoping to see him playing with more confidence and recognizing things more quickly. Fans will be looking for that as well.

Redshirt freshman Cade Apsay is entering his second year with the program. Is there any reason to believe he's ready to challenge Gehrke for the backup job?

Guard candidates

CU lost its two most experienced offensive linemen at the end of last season to graduation. There are four players competing for those open jobs this spring and the battle will likely stretch into the fall.

Shane Callahan, Gerrad Kough and Jonathan Huckins all earned at least some playing time last fall. Sully Wiefels is a junior college transfer who redshirted last fall. Huckins and Wiefels also are getting reps at center.

"They could play better than the guys that played last year," MacIntyre said. "We'll know when the heat of the battle really starts."

Thin backfield

Only three running backs have been available most of the spring and, at times, just two have practiced. The two familiar faces are senior Christian Powell and sophomore Phillip Lindsay. Walk-on Kyle Evans also has been a bright spot this spring making the most of his increased reps with Michael Adkins out following knee surgery.

Powell and Lindsay are trying to solidify themselves in the rotation next season. CU used four running backs last fall and there is no reason to think it won't do the same in 2015.

But there are three new running backs set to join the program this summer and if one or more of those players is impressive, it could be bad news for one or more of the veterans.

New faces up front

Three junior college defensive lineman joined the program this spring, but only two of the three have been able to practice. Jordan Carrell and Leo Jackson have made an impression and will be in contention for plenty of playing time in the fall if not starting jobs.

Blake Robbins has not been able to practice as he recovers from injury, but he also is expected to play in his first season in Boulder. The program also welcomed back Samson Kafovalu after he took last season off. The added depth to the defensive front is expected to help the Buffs improve overall defensively.

Even though coaches generally keep schemes vanilla in spring games, fans will get a look at how it's all coming together in the spring.

Secondary strength

Afolabi Laguda is another junior college transfer in the secondary. He has practiced this spring at both safety and cornerback and should push some of the veterans in the secondary for playing time this season. Fans will be eager to see Laguda on Sunday.

The secondary is one of the deepest units on the team with veterans such as Ken Crawley, Tedric Thompson, John Walker, Chidobe Awuzie, Marques Mosley returning. The Buffs should be improved against the pass with so much experience. It will be interesting to see how Liufau fares in the spring game. It will be an indication of how well the secondary is picking up the new defense.

Kyle Ringo: ringok@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @kyleringo