Caitlin Gregg of Minneapolis crosses the finish line Saturday for her third American Birkebeiner victory. Credit: Associated Press

By ,

Hayward — Two veterans of the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver — one American and one German — earned gold Saturday in the American Birkebeiner and eased the disappointment of failing to join their national ski teams in Sochi.

Defending Birkie champion Caitlin Gregg of Minneapolis surged ahead of the elite women with 15 kilometers to go in the 50-kilometer skate race and skied solo to the finish line in 2 hours, 40 minutes, 57 seconds. She was more than a minute ahead of Antonella Wyatt Confortola of Italy. Rosie Brennan of Park City, Utah, took third.

"It's the greatest feeling you could imagine," Gregg said, wiping blood from her nose at the finish line.

The New York native said she saw an opportunity when a pack of men's elite skiers caught her and made her winning move earlier than expected.

"I put the hammer down like I never did before and got on that train," she said. "I was thinking I don't want to be waiting for those girls who can sprint, so I'm going to go right now."

The fresh snow — about 13 inches fell in the area Thursday — slowed the elite groups and 10,000 citizen skiers dramatically. At least the extra work pushing through the soft powder and bright sunshine helped keep them warm in the single-digit temperature and subzero wind chills.

Well-bundled, the skiers reached Hayward with impressive icicles dangling off their faces and the masks they used to ward off frostbite. Many covered exposed areas with bandages and made the start line look like a medical unit.

In the grueling conditions, Thomas Reichelt of Germany held off a pair of Italian skiers on the sprint up Hayward's Main St. and won in 2:14:29, the slowest winning pace on the men's side in more than a decade.

Italian teammates Simone Paredi and Sergio Bonaldi, the defending champion, chased Reichelt across the line and finished within a second of the German.

"I was waiting for the others to catch me and nobody did," said Reichelt, who took the lead into the headwind that swept across Lake Hayward. "I thought in the sprint, I had no chance."

Reichelt skis for the German Army team and raced in the Vancouver Olympics. He moved into first place in the FIS Worldloppet Marathon series with the win Saturday.

"To win here is my second-biggest success," Reichelt said. "Now, I can drink a beer because the win it is great for me."

Gregg, who also competed in Vancouver, devoted this season to securing a spot in the Winter Games in Sochi but quickly reset her goals when she narrowly missed a post on the U.S. team. From home, she cheered for her husband, Brian, who was set to ski for the U.S. in the Olympic 50-kilometer race Sunday.

"My motto has been, because you don't reach one goal, you don't stop fighting for the next one," she said. "It's a good message for all athletes."

Gregg became the first woman to win three American Birkebeiners, the largest cross-country ski race in North America and one that dates to 1973. She secured a $10,000 check: $7,500 for the victory and $2,500 as the first American to finish.

The Greggs spent her first Birkie prize on a new house and paid off student loans with the second.

"I'm thinking baby No. 1 is on the way," she laughed, sharing plans for Birkie prize No. 3.