Reputation Investigation: Two-thirds of the 50 private equity investors polled by Kroll last month said the primary goal in conducting reputation-focused due diligence is to mitigate fraud; 52% said it’s to protect the commercial viability of an investment. But 32% said they use such investigations to identify opportunities to create value and improve performance.

“As investors become increasingly focused on GPs’ [general partner’s] ability to add value to their investee companies, it is becoming increasingly clear that far from merely looking for problems, reputation-focused due diligence is now also being used as a critical strategic tool to identify operational improvement and value creation opportunities within potential portfolio companies,” said Violet Ho, senior managing director of Kroll.

Audit Insecurity: In a survey of 450 senior IT decision makers on IT security challenges, by consulting firm Ovum Ltd. and business technology firm Axway, 23% of respondents said their company failed a security audit in the last three years, and 17% didn’t believe or didn’t know if they would pass a compliance audit today.

Mid-Sized Miscalculations: One in three mid-sized businesses surveyed by employment services management firm ADP said they have faced fines for noncompliance and are vastly underestimating the time and money it takes to comply with new government regulations.

Embracing Risk: Executives who fail to spot and prepare for strategic risks can be the reason a company’s market position is destroyed or upended by new disruptive technologies, according to a report from Deloitte & Touche LLP, which sponsors the Risk & Compliance Journal page.

Regulatory Impacts: In a survey of 56 women general counsels who attended a leadership summit by law firm DLA Piper, 89% of respondents said the recent uptick in regulatory activity has affected their company and/or industry.

At Your Own Risk: In a survey by consulting firm Protiviti and St. John’s University of more than 100 U.S. insurance industry executives about pending changes to the Own Risk and Solvency Assessment (ORSA) requirements, 51% percent of respondents said heightened regulatory scrutiny associated with ORSA could affect the nature and types of insurance products sold.

Regulation Overload: The latest indicator survey from Wolters Kluwer Financial Services shows a nearly a 30% jump since January 2013 in concern expressed by nearly 400 U.S. banks and credit unions over increasing regulatory requirements and risk-management challenges.

Dodd-Frank Impact: A survey of boutique money managers by software and IT services company SunGard Financial Systems and financial markets research firm Tabb Group found 42% saying regulations are the greatest obstacle to their success, up from 17% who said that in 2013.

Supply and Comply: Amid increasing regulation and consumer demand for companies to achieve sustainable global supply chains, consulting firm ACE Group’s ESIS division released a report on ways electronics organizations can ensure compliance with the Electronic Industry Citizenship Coalition Code of Conduct.

Burden Growing: There were 82 new regulatory changes that impact community banks added in the third quarter, according to compliance management firm Continuity Control’s quarterly Banking Compliance Index.

Feeling Crabby: Crab stocks in the Russian Far East are at risk of collapse due to overharvest from rampant illegal fishing, with much of the catch entering into the U.S., a World Wildlife Fund report found.

Write to Ben DiPietro at ben.dipietro@dowjones.com, and follow him on Twitter @BenDiPietro1.