Cañon City High School cheerleaders, Shae Sandritter, Emily Johnson, Ashton Hopkins, Raina Snelson, Porsha Sawyer and Morgan Correa pose Thursday during cheer practice at CCHS. Not pictured is Shelby Flick. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

The Cañon City High School cheerleaders usually are the ones to cheer on the home teams at competitions, but Saturday, they will participate in a contest of their own.

Under the guidance of fourth-year coach Makayla Snelson, the girls are ready to show the judges at the Denver Coliseum what they've got during the annual state spirit championships.

"This year, we've rechoreographed five times," she said. "The routine they have now is completely different than the one they started with, but they have done really, really well."

The girls will compete against about 39 other teams in the 4A Cheer Division today.

Team co-captain Raina Snelson said a lot of effort has gone into preparing for state.

"I think we're going to be so much more excited about how things turn out just because we've tried so hard for this," she said. "Whatever the outcome is, we already won because we are competing, which is a big deal."

She said the teams are judged on dance, stunt, motion, music, appearance and crowd appeal.

"Our goal is to get the crowd involved, especially when we do our cheer in between," she said. "If they are yelling back with us or if other teams are cheering with us, they will judge us for that if they see it."

Shae Sandritter, co-captain, said going to state for a second time for her is "going to be a blast."

Advertisement

"I enjoy competing and seeing all of my teammates improve," she said. "We have made changes to this routine from the very beginning and the girls have all had great attitudes and made changes quickly."

She said they have practiced hard and often.

"I have no worries, I have complete faith in my team," she said. "State here we come!"

The team is comprised of Sandritter, Raina Snelson, Emily Johnson, Ashton Hopkins, Porsha Sawyer, Morgan Correa and Shelby Flick.

"I really do think they're going to step into the Coliseum Saturday with their best foot forward," Coach Snelson said.

The team cheers at school football, basketball and soccer games. They also have helped with a cross country meet, and they bake cookies for the various sports teams at the beginning of their season.