WRAPPED IN THE CHAINS OF OBAMA CARE

By Ron Ewart

December 11, 2013

NewsWithViews.com

"As democracy is perfected, the office of the President represents, more and more closely, the inner soul of the people. On some great and glorious day, the plain folks of the land will reach their heart's desire at last and the White House will be occupied by a downright fool and complete narcissistic moron." -H.L. Mencken, The Baltimore Evening Sun; July 26, 1920

"And so it was written in the distant past and so the predictions for the future have been finally realized, at the hands of an ever-growing weak, apathetic and distracted electorate." -Ron Ewart

And so it came to pass in the year of our Lord 2010, King Obama decreed that all the people are entitled to Health Care as a fundamental right. The Democrat-controlled Senate, in its all-wise and infinite wisdom and using some parliamentary tricks, agreed with King Obama and passed this fundamental right into the law of the land. Those nasty and obstructionists Republicans cried foul and would not sign onto the law. The press, academia and those Americans beholden to King Obama's legacy and promises, vilified the Republicans and the Republicans were sore afraid. But King Obama quickly signed the bill into law and sealed the document with his royal ring, before the people had a chance to learn what was in it.

The people rejoiced that so benevolent a King and the King’s royal Senate would grant each man, woman and child such an important right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, as codified into law in our beloved Constitution. And King Obama said unto the people, “they could keep their old health care plans and they could keep their doctor and the hospital of their choice ..... period!”

The new law was to be implemented into the fabric of America's health care system over a period of three years with full implementation to take place by the year of our Lord 2014. King Obama heralded the new law as a fundamental and fair transformation of America and with the fling of his royal robe he named the new law, Obama Care, after himself. The people sang songs and praised the King, while the King and the royal Democrats issued false proclamations and lied to the people with malice aforethought, in order to lure them into the chains of Obama Care.

But low and behold, the people began to see what was in Obama Care and King Obama and the Democrats in the royal Senate realized that they were facing a serious backlash in the mid-term 2014 elections, if the law was implemented in the timetable the law required. In July of 2013, King Obama unilaterally issued an unconstitutional decree that the employer mandate would be delayed until 2015 so as to avoid an election uprising of the millions of employees who would lose their health care plan prior to those mid-term elections. Once again, those intransigent Republicans cried foul, but academia, the news media and those beholden to King Obama's legacy and promises, vilified the Republicans as obstructionists, racists, homophobes and just plain mean.

With much fanfare on October 1, 2013, King Obama and his team of royal Democrats, fired up the great and glorious Healthcare.gov website so the people could sign up for Obama Care, like cattle being herded into a corral. But King Obama and his team of IT guys and gals, from a foreign country, had not done their homework, after the taxpayers were cheated out of over $500,000,000 as payment for this lemon called Healthcare.gov. The website immediately crashed as the people tried to access it. King Obama came out before the people and said: "Verily I say unto you, there are only a few glitches in the website. We'll have them fixed in a jiffy. Everything will be hunky-doory by November 30th. Be of good faith and trust your King, because he has only your best interests at heart."

Meanwhile, all across the land, the people, by the millions, were losing their health care plans to insurance company cancellations caused by Obama Care and the people were sore afraid. Like sheep moving to the bark of the sheep dog, the people moved in waves, here and there, baying loudly that they had been duped and lied to by King Obama. But the sheep dog running round and round and well paid by King Obama's civilian army, kept the people in a huddle. None of the sheep broke out of the huddle while saying they had no recourse but to comply with King Obama's Obama Care. They wanted to yell from the rooftops that they had been cheated, but alas they were afraid they would be called racists.

But King Obama sayath unto the people in the huddle, that what they were losing would be replaced by better plans and lower costs. The King played down the small numbers that were losing their plans and that it only represented 5% of the people eligible for Obama Care. According to King Obama and his team of royal Democrats, the number was insignificant to the all-important benefits of the King's signature legislation, bearing his name.

King Obama made no mention of the millions of people that would lose their health care plans when the employer mandate kicked in, in late 2014. Worrying that these health care cancellations would happen before the mid-term elections, King Obama once again issued a decree from his throne, demanding that employers could not dump their policies and force their employees onto the health care exchanges, until after the mid-term elections. The King was proud of what he had done and paraded before his mirror, glowing with red cheeks, a big smile and a happy heart.

Then King Obama commanded the people in the huddle to be silent and to wait for the great and wondrous things that Obama Care would bestow upon the people. "Trust me oh ye of little faith" he said. "Set aside your concerns and put your faith in my wisdom and wise counsel, for I am the Lord King Obama."

And it came to pass on November 30th that Healthcare.gov was stilled plagued by glitches. Not to worry said the King, "..... we will fix the glitches." And again he said, "Trust me, you know I speak the truth!" The people looked at each other with wide-eyed disbelief.

The people then learned from the experts that Healthcare.gov would not protect their most personal information and they would be subject to identity theft. King Obama and his IT guys and gals from a foreign country had failed to lace adequate security into the website code. The King rose up to the dais of his royal pulpit and said, "Therefore I say unto you, it's OK. Don’t worry about your security. We're going to fix it. Sign up people, we need you to make Obama Care work properly so that all Americans will have health care. After all it is your fundamental right. Sign up all you young people because we need your money to pay for the sick and elderly among us. Are you so self-absorbed and selfish that you would you deny health care to the sick and elderly? Trust me, you will be doing the right thing!"

In spite of King Obama's assurances, a tempest was stirring across the Kingdom as more sheep (people) found themselves in the huddle and discovered that they could not break free of King Obama's sheep dog and the chains of Obama Care. They had been trapped by their own ignorance and their belief that King Obama was the Messiah and would not harm them. As the Obama Care chains locked around their wrists, ankles and neck and the door slammed shut on the jailhouse cell, they cried that it wasn't fair. King Obama had lied to them and it wasn't their fault for not paying attention to who the character of the King really was, evil incarnate. Unfortunately for the people, it was too late and they discovered that there would be no escape from the dreaded law that bears the King's name! They were now permanently locked in the chains of their own making, the victim of King Obama's signature legislation ..... the infamous, the great and glorious ..... OBAMA CARE!

America, once the land of the free and the brave, is now inhabited by mostly cowards, cringing in a corner, in abject fear of government. Like cattle being herded into the corrals of the slaughter yard, they move without thought, into the long lines at the Obama Care entrance. One man in the line was overheard saying: "We see people go in, but they never come out. What does it mean? It reminds me of the movie Soylent Green where old people were enticed to go into this plant, where they were killed and then turned into green wafers as food for the rest of the population. Can we get out of this line?" Someone else in line said "..... no, the Gestapo IRS hounds you to death if you try to leave the line."

Long live Obama Care. Long live the IRS, the Obama Care enforcer. Long live King Obama and long live our socialist utopia. May the people of this new Obama utopia finally pay the price they deserve for their in-attention, apathy and ignorance, once and for all.

Subscribe to the NewsWithViews Daily News Alerts! Enter Your E-Mail Address:



"Oh what fools we mortals be,

With open eyes that cannot see.

For those of you who do not live in fear of government, we beseech you to get out of the Obama Care line and run as fast as you can, before you too find yourself in a trap from which there is no escape. Look for solutions that do not include government. Get creative and work with others of like mind to find the solution that works for you. Free yourself from the bonds that take away your individual freedom ..... not only for you, but for your children and your grandchildren. Either fight now, or capitulate yourself into slavery. Otherwise, future generations will never know the fresh air of freedom. For those of you in trouble with the IRS, we encourage you to log onto our "Attack Watch Spies" website for a one-stop-shop of IRS information, offenses and defenses.

"Disobedience is the true foundation of liberty. The obedient must be slaves." -Henry David Thoreau

ï¿½ 2013 Ron Ewart — All Rights Reserved

Ron Ewart, a nationally known author and speaker on freedom and property issues and author of his weekly column, "In Defense of Rural America", is the President of the National Association of Rural Landowners, (NARLO) a non-profit corporation headquartered in Washington State and dedicated to restoring, maintaining and defending property rights for urban and rural landowners. Mr. Ewart can be reached by e-mail for comment at ron@narlo.org, or by 'phone at 1 800 682-7848.

Website: www.narlo.org

E-Mail: ron@narlo.org