GUELPH—Five to eight minutes is a long time to spend in Antarctic water after your Zodiac flips over on you. Ask Shoshanah Jacobs. Bobbing in her flotation survival suit about 150 metres offshore from the Antarctic Peninsula and unable to right the rubber dinghy, she had no choice but to wait for rescue in minus-1.8 C water.

"I don't remember feeling the cold but knowing the water was way too cold for my health," says Jacobs.

Seated this month in a Guelph pub, she laughs at the memory. Certainly, that day in 2007 ranked among the more notable moments from the seven years she spent running scientific and adventure expeditions in some of the colder places on Earth.

Just turned 36 and a recently minted biology professor at the University of Guelph, she's finding life a little less hazardous now. But Jacobs – a scuba diver, adventure tour leader and adept photographer—still has a hand in Arctic and Antarctic expeditions through her students' varied research jaunts and through consulting with occasional media and film crew clients.

By the time of that 2007 Antarctic mishap, she had already spent two years with various expedition companies, lecturing to tour groups on cruises in the North.

Those treks attract tourists willing to pay up to tens of thousands of dollars each to experience relatively untouched geography and wildlife at both northern and southern extremes of the planet.

Jacobs was still working on her PhD on Arctic seabirds when she spent her first season aboard a ship that she calls a "wonderful disaster in public relations." The Ushuaia had been named for the southernmost city in the world, located at the extreme tip of Argentina and the jumping-off point for many Antarctic cruises.

But for people in northern Canadian communities, says Jacobs, the name "was similar to the Inuktitut translation of 'my large penis.' So we were sailing around the Arctic in a 'large penis.'"

Most of those Arctic treks departed from St. John's, Newfoundland. They often included stops in the L'Anse aux Meadows Viking settlement, and in Red Bay, an old Basque whaling site in Labrador. "There's history from the 1500s, which is just blow-your-mind incredible," says Jacobs.

In Hudson Strait, tour groups routinely spot the "big five" of Arctic wildlife: whale, walrus, caribou, polar bear and musk ox.

Changing ice conditions make the route different – and sometimes even impassable—from one summer to the next. One of her cruise ships spent several days stuck in ice at Happy Valley-Goose Bay in Labrador. Other times, they were freed by icebreakers in Hudson Strait and in Frobisher Bay off of Baffin Island.

Besides working with several companies, she went freelance in 2010 as Sho Expeditions to lead cruise teams, organize itinerary and navigation routes, and offer scientific lectures to passengers en route. She's also been hired to advise or accompany media and film crews to northern locations.

Last year she went with German wildlife photographer Uli Kunz to Hudson Bay in search of what she calls "the other white mammal of Churchill" besides the polar bear. Diving in 8 C water, they photographed the beluga whales that gather off of Churchill, Manitoba, in the thousands in summer. Jacobs described the trip in a feature article this year in Diver magazine.

She started diving during her undergrad in marine biology at the University of New Brunswick. Although she has dived in the Red Sea and the Caribbean, she prefers cold water, either Arctic or Antarctic. "I like to push limits. I like cold water."

Or at least when the plunge is a planned one.

That wasn't the case one day in 2007 when Jacobs was helping to run a southern tour. The group was exploring the Antarctic Peninsula, home to masses of penguins and seals.

Piloting a Zodiac alone toward shore, she ran into a katabatic wind sweeping downward from a glacier and onto the water. "It blew the Zodiac up and over on top of me."

While the shore group watched in horror, she was pitched into the frigid ocean.

The dinghy was too heavy to right on her own. "These are full 'double-oh-seven' Black Ops Zodiacs, they're so cool, great engines, 80 horsepower. They're not things you can just flip over."

In Antarctic water, even the strongest swimmers have only seconds' worth of energy before losing muscle control. The five to eight minutes she spent trying to conserve heat while waiting for another Zodiac to pluck her out seemed to take forever.

Back on the cruise ship, the crew had gone into full "man overboard" mode – boiling water in the kitchen, rustling up warm clothing. She had hypothermia, which she says felt like having a vigorous workout after too long away from the gym – only many times worse. "I stayed in bed for five days."

Less harrowing but more embarrassing was a mishap involving a polar bear on an early Arctic research trip.

Jacobs had visited a biffy about 300 metres from the field camp. Standing up with her pants still around her ankles, she looked out the window and locked eyes with the bear, only 10 metres away.

She had her shotgun with her: you never go outside in the north without a gun. But there wasn't room in the biffy to load. Remembering to zip up first, she stepped outside to chamber a bullet.

Jacobs fired into the air to scare the animal. The bear watched as the kickback knocked her to the ground.

Relating the story during a campus lecture two years ago, she said, "While I was getting to my feet, the bear turned her head away and oh-so-very-slowly wandered off in the opposite direction. I ran back to camp as fast as I could and hoped I wouldn't be labelled the new recruit who let a polar bear scare the crap out of her."

Originally from Ottawa, Jacobs did her undergrad and a master's degree in marine biology on the east coast. She returned to Ottawa in 2001 for her doctorate on seabird ecology.

She went to the Arctic for the first time to study thick-billed murres, a northern bird that resembles a penguin. She was interested in how climate change might affect the birds' foraging for food.

This summer, one of her zoology students from Guelph will visit Greenland for similar studies with a mini species of auk. Justine Ammendolia has received funding from the National Geographic Society in Washington, D.C., and the Explorers Club in New York for her studies.

Ammendolia asked Jacobs for help in fleshing out her northern studies plan. Jacobs had joined the university as a biology researcher in 2012 and was named as a professor last year.

Jacobs says auks can also act as barometers for effects of potential disturbances such as increased shipping traffic in the north. Energy companies are eyeing Churchill as a potential deep-water port for shipping Canadian oil and liquefied natural gas to global markets.

Those cruise expeditions are arguably another source of stress on northern and southern habitats. More travellers are looking to experience "last-chance" tourism in both the Arctic and the Antarctic, although far more cruises visit the latter.

About 35,000 tourists visited the southern continent in 2012-13, up from 7,500 people about a decade earlier, according to the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators.

Jacobs is also helping to supervise research on adventure cruising near both poles by Brittany Manley, a master's student in tourism management. Manley says about 50 companies worldwide run tours in Antarctica alone.

Manley was working on an Arctic tour one summer when she met Jacobs, who was lecturing on wildlife for the expedition. That was aboard the Lyubov Orlova, a Russian-built ship that sailed both northern and southern seas.

In 2010, the vessel was seized in St. John's for alleged non-payment of debt.

Sold and destined for scrap, the ship drifted away after its towline broke, says Jacobs, flicking air quotes around the word "broke." The ghost vessel was last seen drifting eastward across the Atlantic.

Jacobs wasn't even out of grade school when she decided what she wanted to be one day. "I told everybody at age seven that I was going to be a marine biologist," she says. "I knew I was going to get my PhD."

Her parents – now retired – taught at Algonquin College in Ottawa. Dad taught social psychology; mom studied human sexuality. They moved around a bit while Shoshana and her twin brother, Jonathan, grew up, including spending short stretches in Israel and Chicago.

(Jonathan is studying traditional Arctic kayak and canoe building for a master's degree in anthropology at Concordia University in Montreal.)

Jacobs fell in love with the North during her PhD fieldwork. She quips: "My mother says it was the furthest place I could get from her. I was drawn to extreme places."

She loved the challenge posed by the conditions, the terrain. She even relished tackling unexpected problems dealt out by the North.

Once, a generator conked out on Coats Island at the mouth of Hudson Bay. That meant no electricity to run a centrifuge she needed to spin blood samples. Using string, a paint roller, duct tape and the base of the centrifuge, she managed to rig up a hand-operated alternative. "I'm really good at not over-reacting. I watched a lot of MacGyver when I was a kid."

No amount of improvisation could help her on another trip to Prince Leopold Island near northern Baffin Island. That's where she lost a necklace bearing a gold Star of David that her mother had given her as a child.

"I was so bothered I called my mom. I said: 'I've lost my star.' She paused and said: 'It's okay, in a thousand years when archeologists are digging up the site, they're going to know that the Jews were there.'"

Jacobs isn't completely intrepid. One heart-in-her-mouth flight over the Andes left her uneasy about flying. And she doesn't like bugs, including spiders.

She says her worst night ever was spent sleeping outside on the Paraná River delta in Argentina. What looked like ropes strung between the trees turned out to be webs of spiders with bodies the size of quarters. "The whole night there were things falling on the sheet."

Besides teaching courses in the university's integrative biology department, she studies how students learn biology.

She's also studying biomimetics, or how what we learn in biology might be used in other fields such as engineering. Think of Velcro, modelled after plant burrs that stick to clothing and dog hair.

Along with other university researchers, she's leading an evolution project this year with students from six local high schools. The teens are looking at whether regular mowing makes dandelions grow faster and encourages them to make seed earlier.

Having spent much of her life on the move, Jacobs had to get used to a different lifestyle when she arrived in Guelph two years ago. She came more or less straight from the Arctic with a 22-kilogram backpack, and spent the next few days in tears, wondering whether she'd made a mistake.

Now living in The Ward neighbourhood with Lily, her short-haired dachshund, she's getting used to being part of a permanent community. And she's learned to outfit a house instead of a campsite or field station, although there are still challenges for an inveterate traveller.

"It was hard for me to buy a toaster or plates that define who I am. Going to HomeSense and buying stuff for home—I stand there and go, what's the difference. I still have only four plates."

Her next trek might not be far off. Along with a few companions, she plans soon to walk through Torngat Mountains National Park on the Labrador Peninsula. "You can see forever. And there are no bugs."