Correction: This story contained incorrect information about the delivery service's relationship with the University of Tulsa athletic department. There is no agreement in place. This article has been corrected.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

The next time you feel like having food from one of your favorite Tulsa restaurants, you may not even need to leave your couch.

Mr. Delivery, a new delivery service that allows customers to order off the menus of 18 different local restaurants, launched in Tulsa a few weeks ago.

Larry Favalora, managing member and president of National Delivery Group, said the number of restaurants that people can choose from is continuing to expand.

"What we do is facilitate marketing and delivery for restaurants that don't deliver on their own," Favalora said.

Some of the restaurants that work with Mr. Delivery include Cafe Ole', Chimi's, Elmer's BBQ and Golden Chef of Tulsa.

The delivery service area is currently from Interstate 244 south to 93rd Street and Sheridan Road west to Riverside Drive. By the end of the summer all of Tulsa proper and Broken Arrow, Jenks, and Bixby will be included, he said.

Customers pay a $6 delivery fee. There is also a 5 percent processing fee that is standard with restaurant delivery services, he said.

Customers also typically tip the drivers on average about 12 percent, Favalora said.

He said that the service has been popular at places such as hospitals, where groups of nurses or medical workers place an order together because they are working long shifts and sometimes it is troublesome to move their cars or leave.

"We have a real high level of customer service from the time they place an order. We confirm with an email and send a countdown clock," Favalora said. "Once the drivers leave the restaurant, our call center makes a phone call and lets the customer know the food is on its way."

Orders less than $75 typically take between 45 and 60 minutes. If it is more than an hour, the customer receives a free delivery the next time.

Drivers are equipped with heated bags so the food stays hot until delivered.

There are 18 locations across the country where Mr. Delivery operates. Eventually, they hope to have 200 locations with the entire company based in Tulsa.

The company is also working with nonprofits in the communities that it serves.

In Tulsa, they are currently working with John 3:16.

The nonprofit receives a code that it can provide to its members. The members provide that code when placing an order, and Mr. Delivery donates a meal to someone in need through John 3:16, Favalora said.

The delivery service operates from 11 a.m. until 10 p.m., he said. They are always looking for new drivers and restaurants to join them, he said.

"We are always looking to add to the list of Tulsa's finest eating establishments," Favalora said.

For more information go to mrdelivery.com or call 918-791-3450.

Nicole Marshall Middleton 918-581-8459

Here are the restaurants that are currently working with Mr. Delivery: