Freshman from Monarch has exceeded expectations in first season at CU

CU freshman Kaitlyn Benner was the top American finisher March 28 in the IAAF junior World Cross Country Championships in Guiyang, China. It was the latest in a collection of excellent performances for the 2014 Monarch High School graduate. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

Benner at a glance A quick look at University of Colorado freshman runner Kaitlyn Benner: Age: 18. Class: Freshman. High school: Monarch. Elite company: In February, Benner won the women's junior race at the USATF Cross Country Championships, joining Liza Pasciuto (2005) as the only Buffs to win that race. ... On March 28 in Guiyang, China,, Benner became the third Buff to lead the Americans at the IAAF junior World Cross Country Championships. Erika Odlaug (2002) and Carrie Verdon (2013) were the others. Monkey business: While in Guiyang, Benner went to a park that had wild monkeys running around. "One jumped on my back," she said. "I was pretty excited about that." Bright future: Speaking about Benner's potential, CU associate head coach Heather Burroughs said, "She's done things her freshman year that some of our big stars couldn't do. If we manage her well and she manages herself well and she progresses, she can be one of the best women in the NCAA, I think. Right now, we're just saying, 'Let's take it one season at a time and keep having fun,' and that's worked so far."

Kaitlyn Benner's legs felt like they were moving in slow motion.

While her Colorado cross country teammates were warming up for a workout last fall, Benner struggled to keep up.

"I was like, 'Well, this is going to be different (from high school),' " Benner, a CU freshman, said of her first collegiate workout. "I don't know how I'm going to do this for four years."

Advertisement

Very little of what Benner has done so far at CU has been like high school, and that's a good thing for her and the Buffaloes.

On March 28, Benner was the top American finisher at the IAAF junior World Cross Country Championships in Guiyang, China. It was the latest in a collection of excellent performances for the 2014 Monarch High School graduate.

"I was not expecting anything like this," she said of her success this year.

Nobody did, really.

CU freshman Kaitlyn Benner wins the junior women's race in the USA Cross Country Championships at Flatirons Golf Course in February. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

At Monarch, Benner helped the Coyotes win three consecutive state titles in cross country from 2011-13. She also left as the school record-holder in the 3,200 meters.

Benner, however, wasn't even Monarch's top runner. Claire Green, now running at Arizona, garnered most of the attention.

"I definitely wasn't one of the superstar runners of the state, or a superstar recruit by any means," she said.

Plenty of college coaches, including those at Oregon State and Utah, liked Benner's potential, though.

"Her high school coach (Kent Rieder) did an excellent job with her," said CU associate head coach Heather Burroughs. "He has a consistently good team, a team that can contend for the state title and make it to the high school nationals, and yet he doesn't over-train them.

"That's one of the reasons we were intrigued with (Benner). We knew she had been managed well, but because (Rieder) is a really good coach, we didn't know there would be this next step in her within six months."

Benner may have struggled in that first workout, which she said was more like an all-out race in high school, but she quickly proved she belonged at CU.

In the fall, Benner became a regular scorer for the women's cross country team, which finished seventh at the NCAA championships. She was 29th at the Pac-12 championships, 13th in the NCAA regionals and 81st at nationals.

She carried that momentum into the indoor track season, becoming the first Buff in nine years to win the 5K title at the Mountain Pacific Sports Federation championships in February. Her time (16 minutes, 8.22 seconds) was the ninth-best 5K in CU history, and that was supposed to be a training run for her trip to China.

Benner qualified for the race in China by winning the USATF Cross Country Championships at Flatirons Golf Course on Feb. 7.

"I figured I might as well run it since it was in Boulder and cross season went fairly well," Benner said. "I didn't expect it to go how it did, though. It ended up being a good day."

Benner has had a lot of good days since arriving at CU.

"She has surprised us," Burroughs said. "It's not an insult, I think, for us to say that she's gone way beyond what we expected, certainly for her freshman year. There is a better runner in her than we knew.

"It's all been a big, fun surprise."

Burroughs is equally impressed with the relative ease with which Benner, a biological and chemical engineering major, seems to get through her school work. She posted a 4.0 GPA in her first semester.

Benner has embraced the intensity of her studies and, after that initial eye-opener in the fall, she's embraced the increased work load on her legs.

"Definitely the training that (head coach Mark Wetmore) and Heather are having us doing, the intensity and the mileage, is what has helped me progress as a runner," Benner said.

"I think it's been a smooth transition and definitely upward progress throughout the year. I'm definitely very happy with where I am now."

Benner has done things as a freshman that CU greats didn't do. Burroughs said it's important to not place too high of expectations on her at this point, but this may just be the start of a stellar career for Benner.

"I'm really looking forward to the next three or four years here," Benner said. "(Burroughs and Wetmore) know how to keep runners improving. I'm just really excited."

Brian Howell: howellb@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @BrianHowell33.