Ted Cruz: ‘Sad and unfortunate’ U.S. didn’t send official to Paris march

Ted Cruz said Monday that the Charlie Hebdo terror attack and the CENTCOM social media hack should serve as a reminder to the Republican-controlled Congress that it needs to secure the United States border and “stop the president’s unconstitutional amnesty.”

In a speech at the Heritage Action Conservative Policy Summit, the Texas Republican called securing the border “a matter of basic common sense,” criticizing the Obama administration for its continuous insistence that the border is impenetrable and suggesting that Democratic lawmakers from non-border states — and President Obama — do not recognize the problem at our nation’s seams.

“Perhaps we should move the White House down to the Rio Grande Valley,” Cruz joked. “After all, there can’t be more people climbing the White House fence than there are now.”

The Republican senator suggested that a secure border is necessary to protect Americans from attacks like the one waged against the Paris offices of satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo.

Cruz lamented the apparent Islamic terrorist attack, which killed 12 individuals.

“Our hearts weep for the journalists wrongfully murdered, for the police officers targeted and murdered, for the Jewish customers at a grocery store murdered for who they are,” Cruz said.

He also expressed his disappointment at the “sad and unfortunate” fact that the U.S. did not send a high ranking official to attend the Paris unity march Sunday, a mistake that the White House — in a rare moment — copped to Monday.

Additionally, Cruz named the ISIS beheadings, the Boko Haram crisis and Monday’s CENTCOM hack — apparently perpetrated by pro-ISIS hackers — as reasons for the administration to recognize the threat facing our country and the world.

“These are not isolated incidents,” Cruz asserted. “These are not challenges for law enforcement. This is a concerted, radical, dangerous attack that seeks to undermine the very basis of free civilization.”

“You cannot win a war against radical Islamic terrorism with an administration afraid to utter the words ‘radical Islamic terrorism,'” added the Texas lawmaker.

Cruz particularly criticized former secretary of State Hillary Clinton — his potential Democratic presidential foe — for suggesting late last year that the United States should “respect” and “empathize with” its enemies.

“We don’t need empathy for radical Islamic terrorists,” declared Cruz. “We need the resolve to stop them.”

Cruz also mentioned the threat of a nuclear Iran as one that plagues the U.S. and that Congress and the Obama administration must thwart head-on.

On the domestic front, the Texas senator and potential GOP presidential candidate emphasized the need for Republicans to pass legislation authorizing the Keystone XL pipeline, repeal Obamacare and get rid of Common Core in 2015.

He urged Republicans to work — really work — to “get things done” in Washington and serve the throngs voters who came out in support of GOP candidates in the November midterm election.

“For all the Republicans saying ‘let’s get things done,’ if we simply settle into business as usual in this town … we will demoralize the millions of men and women who came out in November,” said Cruz.