NEW RUSSIA TWP. — Trounced in her election bid last year, 4th Congressional District Democratic candidate Janet Garrett vowed Sunday to run harder this time to unseat U.S. Rep. Jim Jordan, R-Urbana, next year.

The 62-year-old Garrett retired in June after 24 years as an Oberlin Schools teacher. Garrett — defeated 122,215 votes to 59,112, or 67 percentage points to 33 percentage points — said retirement will allow her more time to raise money and win over some 300,000 independent voters in the district. Garrett admits to having doubts.

“But every time I think I’m unworthy, I think about Jim Jordan, who has a lot of experience attending to his personal agenda and voting against the interests of the very people who put him there,” Garrett told about 50 supporters at her campaign kickoff at New Russia Township Hall. “It’s time for a fresh perspective and making the needs of the people the priority.”

Garrett has an uphill battle against the 51-year-old Jordan, who took office in 2007. The 4th District was redistricted by state Republicans in 2011 with Amherst, Elyria and Oberlin making up the Lorain County portion of the district. Democrats accused Republicans of gerrymandering to ensure permanent majorities in the House of Representatives.

Besides political geography, Garrett also faces a huge money disparity. Jordan spent about $1 million in last year’s campaign, compared to just $44,108 spent by Garrett, according to the Center for Responsive Politics.

In Oberlin, Garrett won handily last year — Jordan joked before the election about increasing his Oberlin votes from four to five — but Jordan dominated the rest of the district. Jordan was unavailable Sunday night, but Jordan spokesman Darin Miller wrote in an email that Jordan’s views are representative of the district’s residents.

“He hears every day from people across the spectrum that the irresponsible practice of borrowing and spending like there’s no tomorrow has to stop before it bankrupts our country,” Miller said. “That’s why Congressman Jordan has been a leader in trying to change Washington, standing up to the Washington power brokers and special interests in order to protect our tax dollars.”

Garrett conceded that independent voters outside of Oberlin lean Republican.

Nonetheless, she said some believe the Republican Party and Jordan are too extreme.

Jordan heads the Freedom Caucus, a conservative group of some 40 House members from 25 states who were instrumental in the 2013 government shutdown. The shutdown cost taxpayers $24 billion, according to Standard & Poors, a financial rating company. “He’s willing to hold the government hostage for his own personal agenda,” Garrett said.

The caucus also was instrumental in the impending resignation of House Speaker John Boehner, R-West Chester, and has threatened another shutdown if Planned Parenthood isn’t defunded. Garrett ripped Jordan’s grilling of Planned Parenthood President Cecile Richards at a Sept. 29 congressional hearing. Citing a sting video by an anti-abortion group, Republicans accused Planned Parenthood of profiting from fetal tissue research, which is illegal.

Garrett said Jordan’s support for forcing pregnant incest and rape victims who want abortions to give birth is extreme.

“He once said to my face, ‘If a woman gets pregnant as a result of rape, it’s an act of God,’” Garrett said. “I believe God gives each and every one of us the right to be captains of our own destiny.”

Miller denied Jordan — who in 2013 introduced a bill to give Constitutional rights to fertilized eggs and fetuses — made the statement to Garrett. “It’s hard to take Ms. Garrett seriously when she tells such a complete and utter lie,” Miller said.

Garrett also criticized Jordan’s votes against equal pay for women and numerous votes to defund the Affordable Care Act, commonly referred to as Obamacare. Garrett said Obamacare doesn’t go far enough and she supports single-payer health care.

Under a single-payer system, health care is government-run with costs deducted from paychecks. Insurance companies, co-pays and out-of-pocket costs are eliminated from the process.

Regarding climate change, Garrett said in the wake of Hurricane Katrina, Superstorm Sandy and other extreme weather, Jordan’s denial of climate change wasn’t just ignorant, but dangerous.

Garrett, who said she wondered how she could protect her students after the 2012 Sandy Hook school massacre in Connecticut, said she supports renewing the assault weapons ban, which Jordan opposes. She also favors immigration reform and opposes mass deportations. Garrett said Jordan’s opposition to reform is un-Christian.

“I am really tired of Jim Jordan claiming to be a Christian and demonstrating none of the basic Christian values,” she said.

Garrett said she began her campaign early to raise money faster. Garrett said her goal is to raise $100,000 as quickly as possible to demonstrate she is a viable candidate to PACs and big unions.

Last year, Garrett said those groups ignored her because her campaign didn’t demonstrate enough grass-roots support. “This time, we are going to show them that we have that support,” she said.