Brittenham works mind and body

Tennis pro Abigail Spears hops back and fourth, touching her toes to a tennis ball on the gym floor while she juggles two more balls and a blue foam ring.

She never looks down. She doesn't need to. Spears can sense where the ball is on the hardwood floor and focuses instead on the floating objects trading places in front of her face.

Her coordination is perfect, but her trainer, Lyons resident Dean Brittenham, always finds room for improvement.

"I tried to get her to toss the ball through the ring but she hasn't been able to do that yet," Brittenham said.

Spears, 32, accepts the challenge during a workout at the Ed and Ruth Lehman YMCA in Longmont Wednesday. She drops the ring and laughs before moving on to the next drill.

Professional tennis player Abigail Spears works out with trainer Dean Brittenham (not pictured Tuesday at Ed and Ruth Lehman YMCA of Longmont.) Her workout includes both physical and mental exercises. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

It was Brittenham's quirky workout routines that brought Spears to Longmont while she chases her dreams of a doubles championship title in Singapore later this year.

Spears and her partner, Raquel Kops-Jones, are currently ranked fourth in the world on the "Road To Singapore" Doubles Leaderboard, according to the Women's Tennis Association website.

Spears has been training with Brittenham on and off since she was 13. In December, Spears moved to Longmont to work with Brittenham full-time between tournaments.

Brittenham, 83, combines common drills like running with unconventional exercises like juggling in a holistic fitness regimen.

"It's like a game," Spears said. "The workouts are so fun that it doesn't feel like work at all."

Advertisement

During her Wednesday morning workout, Spears played catch with foam bricks; jumped on dots on the gym floor in a hopscotch pattern; and put her hands on numbers on the wall in a Twister-like game as Brittenham called out directions.

Brittenham has been a trainer most of his life working with a range of athletes from Olympians and NFL athletes to pre-teen ice skaters and high school football teams. After retiring in 2000, Brittenham said, he had a lot of time on his hands so he started reading books about how brain growth can impact physical activity and perfecting his methods.

"We thought we were just doing dynamic, functional strength exercises, but it turns out we were also growing the right brain," Brittenham said. "By strengthening the brain, we were making smarter and stronger athletes."

Brittenham's method focuses on three concepts: sensory expansion, physical activity and whole brain thinking.

As a way to increase her whole brain thinking, Spears has homework most nights, which include practicing penmanship, drawing, learning to play a musical instrument and, most recently, learning Spanish.

Brittenham focuses on developing the right hemisphere of the brain, which increases creative thinking and subconcious functioning, he said.

Lyons resident Dean Brittenham encourages professional tennis player Abigail Spears during a workout Tuesday at the Ed & Ruth Lehman YMCA. Spears moved to Longmont in December to work with Brittenham full-time. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

Athletes are at their best when they're "in the zone," Brittenham said. Through brain workouts Brittenham's athletes become mentally stronger, he said, giving them the confidence and control to stay focused and preform at the highest level.

"Most women start to lose energy after 30, but not Abby," Brittenham said. "She is getting stronger and faster everyday. Her best tennis is still ahead of her."

Brittenham's unusual methods and encouragement have not only improved Spears' tennis game but helped her become a better person, she said.

The pair have become like family. Spears refers to Brittenham as her "adopted grandpa."

"He came into my life at the right time," she said.

Having a strong support system has been vital to Spears' career, she said, and is the reason she loves working with Brittenham.

The support of a partner is what attracted Spears to doubles and convinced her to give up her singles career.

Spears went pro in 2000 when she was 19-years-old and gave up her singles career in 2011 to focus on doubles with her partner Kops-Jones.

Spears has won 12 doubles titles through the Women's Tennis Association during her career, according to wtatennis.com.

On Friday, Spears and Kops-Jones headed to the next tournament in Indian Wells, Calif. before competing in Miami later this month.

"We're hoping to do a little damage in our country before we head to the grand slams," Spears said.

Contact Times-Call community reporter Whitney Bryen at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com