The president doesn’t get to say “You’re fired!”

That, writes Bloomberg, is Chris Christie’s message for Donald Trump as the billionaire sees his standing grow in the 2016 Republican presidential field. The New Jersey governor, himself a GOP White House aspirant, invoked the line used by Trump on the show “The Apprentice” when speaking to a town hall in New Hampshire on Thursday. “I know he says he tells it like it is, too. I tell it like it is from the standpoint of having actually done these jobs,” Christie said. “I think quite frankly Donald would be a little frustrated if he became president of the United States.”

Trump leads another poll: There’s a reason Christie and other Republican hopefuls are talking about Trump. Another poll, released Thursday night, showed him leading the Republican field. This time, it was a Fox News survey showing the billionaire with 18% support from GOP primary voters. Earlier this week, a USA Today/Suffolk poll had Trump in the lead — though he was the weakest against Democrat Hillary Clinton among the top seven GOP candidates.

Bush on equal pay: Jeb Bush indicated Thursday he thinks existing laws are sufficient to ensure men and women are paid equally for the same work, writes Time magazine. The former Florida governor, also a Republican White House hopeful, said in response to a question: “Wages should be equal, and there are laws to make it so, and they should be enforced.” Bush was also asked about his position on legislation to ban discrimination against LGBT Americans. He replied: “I don’t think you should be discriminated because of your sexual orientation. Period. Over and out.”

Coal country: There’s a new chapter in what Republicans call the Obama administration’s “war on coal” and the White House calls protection for Americans’ health. The administration unveiled guidelines Thursday designed to protect streams from pollution caused by coal mining. The proposed rule, writes National Journal, strengthens a decades-old regulation requiring mining activity to take place at least 100 feet away from streams. One GOP critic, Sen. John Barrasso of Wyoming, said the rule was “designed to help put coal country out of business.”

The life Obama could have had: President Obama said Thursday his life could have been very different had it not been for the family and community support that many young men of color lack. Obama, writes the Washington Post, suggested inside the walls of a federal prison in Oklahoma that under different circumstances he could have been there as an inmate rather than as president. “That’s what strikes me — there but for the grace of God,” Obama said, standing in an empty cell block. Obama, who has acknowledged using marijuana and trying cocaine in his youth, became the first sitting president to visit a federal prison Thursday.

More from MarketWatch