130-foot mural to adorn two sides of venerable restaurant at corner of Main, Pine

LOUISVILLE - It's going to be big. It's going to be bold. It's going to make heads turn.

Where today there is only a long stretch of pale blue blankness along the upper half of The Blue Parrot Restaurant in Louisville, starting this weekend there will be a diverse and colorful 130-foot mural telling the city's story through a collage of historic and contemporary photos.

"I've been going to the Blue Parrot since I was a kid and one day I was looking at the façade of the building and it looked like a big canvas," said Mark Zaremba, owner of graphics design firm Zaremba Graphic and Web Solutions. "It's the perfect place to celebrate downtown Louisville in words and image."

Zaremba, who is doing the project as a "labor of love," said he was able to get free use of historic photos from the city's historical museum and pictures taken more recently by the likes of Erin Cox, a local photographer who shot two "Faces of Louisville" exhibits.

Passersby will see an array of oversize images dating back to the 1909 Louisville High School girls basketball team, the 1948 Louisville High School state champions football team, a shot of local coal miners from 1911, and Big Head Todd's Todd Park Mohr, who played the Louisville Street Faire last summer.

"It's something that's going to make downtown Louisville a more interesting place," Zaremba said.

The mural, a digital collage printed on a pair of 65-foot-by-5-foot aluminum panels fronting both Pine and Main streets, will be mounted to the building this weekend if weather permits. The project costs $13,000 to produce and install, a sum that is being covered by the Louisville Downtown Business Association and The Blue Parrot.

Paul Weissmann, general manager of the 95-year-old restaurant, said he loves the concept Zaremba came up with for the mural.

"We're trying to do the same thing the mural is doing," he said. "Mixing the history of Louisville with the Louisville people know now."

For the past few months, Weissmann has been leading an effort at The Blue Parrot to re-inject life into the restaurant, which lost some luster as a parade of new eateries has made its way into downtown over the last five years.

The Colacci family, five generations of which have run the restaurant since it opened in 1919 to serve Louisville's predominantly Italian-American coal mining community, came close to selling or closing The Blue Parrot in recent years, Weissmann said. But now the venerable joint is making a comeback, with a new outdoor dining area in the back ready to open next month and menu changes to reflect a more modern sensibility.

The mural installation coincides with a refurbishment of The Blue Parrot's signature neon sign, which has been removed from above the front door for touching up and will be returned to its regular place in a few weeks.

Weissmann said taken all together, the splashes of new color on the façade along with the buffed up sign that has for decades lit up downtown Louisville's nights should present a welcome resurgence at one of the city's best known and most well-trodden intersections.

"It's going to be a real eye-catcher," he said.

Contact Camera Staff Writer John Aguilar at 303-473-1389 or aguilarj@dailycamera.com