Construction is in its final stages for the park in west Loveland, with an opening date dependent on water delivery and weather

Loveland's newest park and home to the city's first arboretum, Mehaffey Park, is expected to open in late June or early July, according to city officials.

"This park is going to be one of the biggest and one of the best," said city senior parks planner Janet Meisel-Burns.

Meisel-Burns said construction of the estimated $13.6 million park is in its last stages, with most of the park's amenities in place, leaving seeding, planting and some remaining playground construction.

The park will have an arboretum, a dog park, four designated pickleball courts, seven tennis courts, a "class A" skate park, open spaces and a trail paths connecting to the Loveland Recreation Trail, three multi-purpose fields and a "creative and adventure" playground. The playground will include an extensive climbing wall, swing bridges and a treehouse, which will connect to each other.

0320 NWS Mehaffey Site Plan-sub.jpg Mehaffey Park Site Plan submitted 3/18/15 (Not Provided)

And its completion doesn't come a moment too soon, especially on the west side of town, according to Mayor Cecil Gutierrez.

Gutierrez said he moved to the northwest side of Loveland with his family when his son was in elementary school, and the city was having discussions then about the park. Now, he has a granddaughter who is turning 21.

"I'm excited to see it finally come to be," Gutierrez said.

Loveland, he said, is known for its great parks system, and Mehaffey Park will be no different.

The exact opening date of the park will depend on water delivery from the Louden Ditch Co., Meisel-Burns said, which won't be before May 1.

This is important for placing sod, which takes about six to eight weeks to establish, as well as for seeding, she said.

Parks Manager Larry Callihan said the pond at the park has been topped off, but there probably won't be more water to fill it before mid-April to May 1.

The opening will also depend on scheduling of other city events such as the June employee picnic and July 4th as well as the weather. If it cooperates, the project can stay on schedule, he said.

The park was initially planned to be constructed in phases, which turned out to be a challenge, Meisel-Burns said. It ended up costing more, especially as construction prices went up after the September 2013 flood, and it created delays for the same reason. An additional $500,000 was added to the projected cost because of the flood and delays.

That cost includes engineering, design, construction, environmental work and land acquisition — the first 60 acres was acquired in 1997 from the Mehaffey family, with the remaining 9.5 acres acquired in 2013. The 2013 acquisition was for the connection to 29th Street.

A small piece of land at 29th Street that the city purchased won't have anything on it — at least in the short term. By the time all the features were laid out, Meisel-Burns said, they didn't need it.

A disc golf course is planned in the long term as well for the park, but it could be one or two years before that's added.

"The disc golf course will be added at a later date," Callihan said. "One of the reasons is we need to do some planting of trees and landscaping there," adding that they also need to mature to make the course more interesting.

The course will be located at the northeast side of the park, he said.

The park will have two entrances -- the north entrance will be at 3350 W. 29th Street and the south entrance will be at 3285 W. 22nd Street. See the included map for more details or visit http://www.cityofloveland.org/index.aspx?page=1624.





Saja Hindi: 970-669-5050 ext. 521, hindis@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/SajaHindiRH.