Marathon County sheriff's deputies used the department's armored vehicle in the Town of Stettin last year in the process of collecting an $80,000 civil judgment from a county resident. Legislators took steps Friday toward restricting the ability of local law enforcement to acquire military equipment. Credit: Ryan Lister

SHARE Marathon County sheriff's deputies used the department's armored vehicle in the Town of Stettin last year in the process of collecting an $80,000 civil judgment from a county resident. State legislators on Friday took Ryan Lister In 2011 the Waukesha County Sheriff’s Department acquired a $260,000 armored vehiclecalled the Bearcat short for Ballistic Engineered Armored Response Counter Attack Truck. Legislators on Friday voted in favor of a measure to limit the type of military equipment local police can acquire. Waukesha County Sheriff’s Department

By

Madison— Republicans and Democrats joined together Friday to limit the ability of police departments in Wisconsin to acquire and use military vehicles and equipment.

The unanimous vote by the Legislature's Joint Finance Committee came amid increasing national scrutiny of the militarization of local police forces.

"I think it presents not only a bad image but portends problems for our society," Rep. Dean Knudson (R-Hudson) said of the police use of military vehicles and weapons.

The move came on the committee's second day of voting on Gov. Scott Walker's budget. In other action, the committee voted to put more money toward job training for food stamp recipients and approved eliminating a property insurance program for local governments.

The committee will spend the next several weeks tweaking Walker's budget and then send it to the Assembly and Senate for final votes. Like the committee, the two houses are controlled by Republicans.

Local governments and state agencies can acquire surplus military equipment for police use through the U.S. Department of Defense. In the last year, dozens of communities have taken possession of armored vehicles, military rifles and — in one case — a grenade launcher.

The committee voted to require police agencies to post a notice on the Internet any time they make a request to acquire military equipment. Agencies would have to establish policies for how such equipment can be used and get the approval of elected officials to take possession of them. They would have to report on the use of the equipment within two weeks whenever they deploy it.

In other matters:

FoodShare. The committee voted 12-4 on party lines to charge food-stamp recipients $3.50 when they lose the electronic benefits cards they use to purchase groceries.

Rep. Michael Schraa (R-Oshkosh) said FoodShare recipients need to be responsible for keeping track of their cards, saying he'd heard "horror stories" about fraud in the program.

Recipients lost about 130,000 cards in a recent one-year period, according to the Legislative Fiscal Bureau.

Charging them to replace lost cards would take effect in October and is expected to save the program $682,500 through June 2017. The savings would be split between the state and federal government.

The committee also agreed to mostly go along with Walker's plan to pump an additional $37 million into job training for FoodShare recipients. But the committee put in a requirement that the Department of Health Services report to the committee on the program before it can access all the money.

That money is needed to fully fund Walker's plan from two years ago to require able-bodied people who don't have dependents to get job training in order to receive FoodShare benefits. About $18 million would come from state taxpayers, with the rest coming from federal taxpayers.

Property insurance. The committee agreed to eliminate a state program that has been in place for more than a century that provides property insurance to local governments. All but three of Wisconsin's 72 counties participate in the program, as do 128 of the state's 190 cities and hundreds of other units of government.

The committee decided to take longer than Walker proposed to wind down the program, which has more than $52 billion of coverage in force.

Walker wanted coverage under the program to end on Dec. 31, 2016. The committee delayed its termination until Dec. 31, 2018.

Walker wants local governments to get their insurance from the private sector. Democrats question whether some entities — such as rural schools or old government buildings that don't have fire sprinklers — could get private insurance at affordable rates.

"We're making a decision that goes against something that's been working for a very long time," Rep. Gordon Hintz (D-Oshkosh) said.

The program ended last year with a deficit of $1.4 million. Rep. John Nygren (R-Marinette), co-chairman of the Joint Finance Committee, said that showed a need to move to the private sector.

Sen. Luther Olsen (R-Ripon) said the deficit means insurance rates for local governments will go up whether they remain in the state program or move to the private insurance market.

"Local units of government are going to have to pay more," Olsen said.

The deficit was incurred in part because of $12 million in dividends paid to local governments in 2010 when the insurance fund had a surplus. The fund's condition has worsened in recent years because of higher-than-normal claims.

The state insurance commissioner believes the insurance fund could recover as much as $30 million from a private insurer that provides additional coverage. At issue is a 2013 fire at the Milwaukee County Courthouse. The insurer has declined to pay about $19 million in claims because it disputes the cause of the incident.

The state sued the insurer over the issue in December.

Technical colleges. The committee approved having 30% of state aid to technical colleges doled out based on how the schools perform. Walker had wanted to have that percentage increase annually, until all of the funding was awarded based on performance starting in 2019.

Currently, 20% of the funding is based on performance. This year, the schools received a total of $88.5 million in general state aid.

Veterans. The committee unanimously approved giving grants totaling $500,000 to technical colleges for programs aimed at getting jobs for veterans. The colleges would have to find matching funds from other entities.

The committee approved the grants over a plan by Walker to give $500,000 to the Global Entrepreneurship Collective, a group aimed at helping veterans start up companies that was formerly known as Veteran Entrepreneurial Transfer, or Vetransfer.

Transportation fund. Also Friday, the committee released a report showing over the next two years the state will take in $73.5 million more than originally expected in gas taxes and other revenue for transportation.

That slightly eases the transportation challenges for lawmakers. Walker wants to borrow a record $1.3 billion for transportation projects, and lawmakers from both parties have said they want to bring that figure down.