Amgen, Inc. (NASDAQ:AMGN) announced that the company has decided to appeal against the court’s rejection of its petition to stop Sandoz, a generic drugs-making subsidiary of Novartis AG (ADR) (NYSE:NVS), from launching the first biosimilar in the US market.

Amgen has filed the motion for another injunction against Sandoz while appealing against the court's denial last week of its request to block a biosimilar version of Neupogen, called Zarxio, developed by Novartis’ subsidiary. Amgen, this time, is appealing against both the denial of the injunction and the court’s judgment in favor of Sandoz.

As reported by Aude Gerspacher and Asthika Goonewardene, analysts at Bloomberg Intelligence, the court has granted a request made by both companies to expedite the briefing on Amgen's motion. Sandoz will be responding by March 31, while Amgen is expected to reply by April 2. A decision on Amgen's motion is expected in early April.

The second petition filed by Amgen will delay the launch of biosimilar drugs in the US market, and Sandoz will have to further wait to launch its Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved Zarxio, even after the court’s ruling in favor of Sandoz. There are no legal bindings preventing the launch. However, Sandoz has agreed to wait until the earlier of May 11 or a ruling in its favor on Amgen's motion for an injunction pending appeal.

"Sandoz has agreed to refrain from launching its Zarxio product until the earlier of May 11, 2015 or a decision by the Federal Circuit on Amgen's application for an injunction pending appeal,” the court’s filing stated.

Amgen had earlier sued Sandoz for unfair competition and patent infringement over Zarxio, a biosimilar version of Amgen’s blockbuster drug Neupogen. Neupogen is used for treating neutropenia in cancer patients. Amgen claimed that Sandoz had failed to comply with disclosure requirements under the Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act (BPCIA).

Sandoz developed Zarxio from the same active ingredient as that of Neupogen. An application for the biosimilar drug was filed with the US FDA, which was accepted in July 2014 — the first ever biosimilar application with FDA approval. Prior to 2010, US regulators could not review or approve biosimilar drugs due to a lack of regulatory framework for imitation drugs. It was the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act 2010 which gave regulatory bodies the authority to approve imitation drugs after thorough examination.

Since biosimilar drugs are not exact copies of biologic drugs, mainly due to the difference in organic substance used to develop them, a comprehensive evaluation process had to be devised to establish similarity between two versions of a drug.

The FDA panel reviewed the imitation drug earlier in January and gave a positive opinion on the drug, soon after which Amgen filed its first preliminary injunction request with the court.

Sandoz announced on March 6 that it had received FDA approval of its biosimilar product, making it the first approved biosimilar drug in the US. However, the company decided not to launch it before any ruling from the court. Despite the court’s ruling in its favor, the company has again decided to delay the launch till a decision is made on Amgen’s appeal or May 11, whichever is earlier.

Amgen does not want the imitation version of its blockbuster drug in the US for the main reason that the biosimilar is expected to cannibalize sales of the original biologic drug significantly. Despite facing patent expiration in 2013, Neupogen was able to generate $1.2 billion in sales in 2014. The blockbuster status of the drug is expected to continue till 2016.

Neither Sandoz nor Novartis has disclosed the pricing strategy for Zarxio. The drug is already being sold in over 40 countries at a price 30% lower than the original drug’s price.

An estimate presented in a report by Rand Corp. asserts that biosimilar drugs will manage to have prices as much as 50% less than the original drugs. However, some other analysts have been more conservative with their forecasts, expecting the imitation versions to have prices only 20-30% less than the originals.

Analysts further presented their grave forecasts for the drug, stating that as much as 8.6% year-over-year decrease can be expected in sales of Amgen’s drug, clearly indicating that the drug’s sales will plunge to $1.05 billion in 2015 and further drop to only $985 million in 2016.

Another threat Amgen faces from biosimilar drugs is the health insurers’ quest to support drugs that are offered at lower rates and to provide exclusive coverage to drugs offered at discounts, consequently making them affordable for the insurers as well as the patients. Sandoz is likely negotiating with payers to favor Zarxio over Neupogen, according to BI analysts.

Pharmacy-benefits managers are expected to side with pharmaceutical firms developing biosimilars. Troyen Brennan, chief medical officer at CVS Health Corp (NYSE:CVS), mentioned that the pharmacy-benefits managers expect makers of cheaper biosimilars to slash the prices by as much as 40-50%. However, the estimates are contingent upon various factors such as the competition in the industry and the price tags set for biosimilar drugs.