“When you get these into court, the notion that the administration has been overreaching just doesn’t stand up,” said W. Neil Eggleston, the White House counsel. The Republicans’ lawsuit, he said, “is a case of them not being able to do what they wanted through the constitutional process and then wanting to get the third branch involved.”

If the House prevails, it would be damaging, but not fatal, to the health care act, with nearly six million low-income consumers facing much higher deductibles, co-pays or other out-of-pocket costs unless the administration gets congressional approval for the insurance reimbursements, an unlikely occurrence. But the suit could backfire on Congress. Should the administration win, it could shift more decision-making on spending to the executive branch.

Despite criticism from congressional Democrats and some legal experts that he is turning a partisan political fight into a legal one, Mr. Boehner is resolute.

“This was clear as a bell to me that it needed to be done, and if we win this suit it will reverberate for decades,” he said in an interview. “This case goes to the constitutional structure of our government and to the heart of our democracy.”

Dating back to George Washington’s time, Congress and the White House have engaged in a tug of war over their respective powers. The strains have intensified as President Obama, frustrated that Republicans have stalled his legislative priorities and blocked confirmation of some nominees, increasingly asserted executive power to accomplish his goals. (Mr. Obama poked fun at his reputation for acting unilaterally when he recently threatened to issue an executive order to keep Jon Stewart on “The Daily Show.”)

Scholars say the complaints of House Republicans that Mr. Obama is breaking new ground in presidential power grabs might be taken more seriously if they had not been so quiet when the administration of George W. Bush flexed its executive muscle on foreign and domestic policy.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“What makes the current moment, if not historically unique, at least distinctive is the degree to which Congress’s vigilance over its constitutional authorities seems to vary according to partisan identification,” said Peter M. Shane, an Ohio State University professor who has written on executive power issues.

The current executive power fight began in early 2011 after Republicans took back the House and installed Mr. Boehner as speaker. To the shock of Ms. St. Martin, 55, a career Capitol Hill staff member, the Justice Department that February informed the new speaker that the Obama administration would no longer stand up for the Defense of Marriage Act, judging it to be unconstitutional. (The measure defines marriage as the union of a man and a woman.)

The House joined in defending the marriage law all the way to the Supreme Court, which ultimately overturned it. But that was just the first episode; the two sides clashed over environmental, immigration and Justice Department issues. After a Republican challenge, Mr. Obama was rebuked by the Supreme Court on appointing nominees while Congress was in recess.

Ms. St. Martin, little known beyond Capitol Hill but a major force with a broad portfolio within the speaker’s office, was in the middle of most of those fights. She met Mr. Boehner when he was a freshman troublemaker on the House Education and Labor Committee in the early 1990s and she was a young lawyer for committee Republicans. She offered him advice on how to use committee rules to aggravate majority Democrats, who were soon to fall from power under an assault from Republican agitators.

When Mr. Boehner lost his post as chairman of the House Republican Conference in a shake-up that followed election losses in 1998 and returned to the education committee, he and Ms. St. Martin reconnected. She has had his confidence and ear ever since.

After weighing what would constitute the best claim against the administration, the Republican legal staff settled on the health care law and the administration’s delaying of dates for requiring employers to provide health insurance. Setting dates is generally considered the domain of the legislature.

Then, a potentially more potent angle surfaced. Senior staff members on the Energy and Commerce Committee alerted Ms. St. Martin to a puzzling expenditure under the health law they discovered as they pored over budget documents in the Rayburn Office Building.

Though a request for $4 billion for insurance companies to cover cost sharing had been in Mr. Obama’s 2014 budget request, staff experts were certain that Congress had never appropriated the money. In fact, the Senate had seemed to explicitly reject the appeal. Yet the money was flowing.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Excited Republicans seized on the spending as the perfect illustration of the Obama administration’s long reach into the exclusive domain of the legislative branch. If the House cannot lay claim to its spending power, its best weapon against executive excess, what could it ever sue over, Mr. Boehner and his legal team asked. “Every child in this country is told as a mantra that the definitional power of Congress is the power of the purse,” said Jonathan Turley, the George Washington law professor representing the House in the case.

Lawyers for the administration, who were on the defensive in a combative May court hearing, say the decision to initially seek an appropriation for the insurance funding was a mistake. They say that officials later determined that the Department of Health and Human Services did not need any additional authority since the funding was a permanent program, akin to Social Security and Medicare.

And even if the money is being spent inappropriately, the administration argues that the House has no standing to sue because it is wrongly using the courts to pursue a political dispute. Such fights, Justice Department lawyers say, are more properly resolved by passing a corrective law, repealing the one at issue or applying leverage such as stalling other legislation or holding up nominations.

“There are any number of tools that the legislature can use to exert its influence on the executive branch,” Joel McElvain, the lead lawyer for the administration, told Judge Collyer. “It does not need reference to the judiciary, which is why we’ve never seen a lawsuit like this one in the last 230 years.”

Even if they are set back at the district court level, administration officials say they believe they will eventually prevail. But House Republicans express confidence that they have made a persuasive case that the courts are the only option to halt an abuse of power and improper spending of nearly $136 billion over the next decade.

“The Obama administration, through magic, has created an entitlement program,” Ms. St. Martin said. “Everyone always argues you can fix every problem through the power of the purse. Well, I guess you can’t if they are just making it up.”