DALLAS, September 5, 2014 /PRNewswire/ --

According to the new market research report "Care Management Solutions Market by Component (Software & Services), Delivery Mode (On-premise, Web, & Cloud), End-user (Payer, Provider, Employer Groups, & Government Bodies) - Trends & Global Forecasts to 2018", published by MarketsandMarkets, analyzes and studies the major market drivers, threats, opportunities, and challenges in North America, Europe, Asia, and Rest of the World (RoW).

Browse 34 market data tables and 27 figures spread through 154 pages and in-depth TOC on "Care Management Solutions Market"

http://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/care-management-solutions-market-19482811.html

Early buyers will receive 10% customization on this report.

This report studies the global Care Management Solutions Market over the forecast period of 2013 to 2018. This market was valued at $2.8 Billion in 2013 and is poised to grow at a CAGR of 21% from 2013 to 2018, to reach $7.3 Billion by 2018.

The care management solutions market is segmented into four broad segments, namely, components, delivery modes, end users, and geographies. The market by component is further categorized into software and services. Based on delivery modes, the market is categorized into web-based, on-premise, and cloud-based. The market by end users is categorized into providers, payers, employer groups, and government bodies. Based on geography, the market is divided into North America, Europe, Asia, and Rest of the World (RoW: Pacific countries, Africa, and Latin America)

The major factors driving the care management solutions market are the legislative reforms of Affordable Care Act (ACA) in the U.S., demand for the improved quality of care, rise in aging population, and incentives by the various governments for the adoption of HCIT and care management solutions. The benefits provided by the care management solutions such as cost reduction, reduced hospital readmission rates, enhanced worker productivity, and improved quality of healthcare are resulting in an increase in the deployment of these solutions. However, in spite of the numerous benefits of care management solutions certain barriers such as huge investments, lack of skilled analysts, fragmented end-user market and security of patient data are restraining the growth of this market.

Further Inquiry: http://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Enquiry_Before_Buying.asp?id=19482811

The North American market commands the largest share of the global care management solutions market in 2013. Europe represents the second largest market. Though the Asian market is relatively new tocare management, the increasing HCIT adoption, proficiency of IT skills, and growing medical tourism in the area will drive the growth of this market.

The global care management solutions market is a highly fragmented market with some major players such as McKesson Corporation (U.S.),Medecision, Inc. (U.S.),EXL Landa (U.S.), ZeOmega, Inc. (U.S.), HealthSmart Holdings, Inc. (U.S.),Allscripts, Inc. (U.S.), Phytel Inc. (U.S.),WellCentive, Inc. (U.S.), TriZetto Corporation (U.S.), and i2i Systems, Inc. (U.S.).

Browse related reports

Practice Management System Market by Products (Integrated, Standalone), Components (Services, Software), Delivery Mode (On-Premises/Desktop-Only, Web-Based, Cloud-Based) & by End-Users (Physician, Pharmacist, Diagnostic Labs) - Global Trends & Forecast to 2018

http://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/medical-practice-management-software-market-886.html

Healthcare BPO Market Payer (Claims Processing, HR Services, Finance & Accounts), Provider (Medical Billing & Coding) & Pharmaceutical (Clinical Trial, Contract Manufacturing, & Non-Clinical Services) - Trends & Forecasts (2013 - 2018)

http://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/healthcare-outsourcing-bpo-market-472.html

About MarketsandMarkets

MarketsandMarkets is a global market research and consulting company based in the U.S. We publish strategically analyzed market research reports and serve as a business intelligence partner to Fortune 500 companies across the world.

MarketsandMarkets also provides multi-client reports, company profiles, databases, and custom research services. MarketsandMarkets covers thirteen industry verticals, including advanced materials, automotive and transportation, banking and financial services, biotechnology, chemicals, consumer goods, energy and power, food and beverages, industrial automation, medical devices, pharmaceuticals, healthcare IT semiconductor and electronics, and telecommunications and IT.

We at MarketsandMarkets are inspired to help our clients grow by providing apt business insight with our huge market intelligence repository.

Contact:

Mr. Rohan

North - Dominion Plaza,

17304, Preston Road,

Suite 800, Dallas, TX 75252

Tel: +1-888-600-6441

Email: sales@marketsandmarkets.com

Visit MarketsandMarkets Blog http://mnmblog.org/market-research/healthcare/healthcareit



SOURCE MarketsandMarkets