In response to Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton’s aggressive pro-abortion campaign coining the pro-life movement as a “war on women,” GOP presidential candidate Ted Cruz shot back, calling her rhetoric “nonsense.”

The Texas senator took the opportunity this week to point out Clinton’s radical pro-abortion stance — one he contends that she has tried very hard to conceal.

“Hillary Clinton embraces abortion on demand in all circumstances — up until the moment of birth,” Cruz explained to a crowd during his Iowa campaign, according to CNN. “Partial-birth abortion with taxpayer funding, with no notification for parents in any circumstances — 91 percent of Americans say that’s nuts.”

Pressing his point further, the pro-life Republican candidate explained how Democrats do their best to twist the issue when it comes to abortion.

“So what do they do? ... They try to shift it,” Cruz alleged. “The war on women wasn’t that — it was contraceptives.”

He assured the crowd that progressives have tried to make the abortion debate into something it isn’t by bringing contraceptives into the discussion — incorrectly.

“Now listen, I have been a conservative my entire life,” Cruz continued. “I have never met anybody, any conservative who wants to ban contraceptives.”

A civil rights issue … really?

The Canadian-born pro-life advocate then asserted that Leftists have intentionally crafted their abortion campaign to usher in women under the guise of a civil rights movement, calling the so-called “war on women” to be utterly “concocted” by the Left. He went on to say that Democrats have targeted pro-lifers for years in order to hide their extreme pro-abortion views.

Cruz then tried to figure out where the Clinton camp was coming from in order to come up with such an allegedly far-fetched campaign strategy.

“Imagine for a second you’re Hillary Clinton … You’re trying to think, ‘How do I run?’” Cruz continued. “Well you can’t run on the economy because we have the lowest percentage of Americans working any year since 1977. You can’t run on Obamacare because millions of people have lost their jobs, lost their health care, lost their doctors, seen their premiums skyrocket. You certainly can’t run on foreign policy because every country you touched as secretary of state is a disaster.”

After pondering Clinton’s rationale for her pro-abortion stance against conservatives, Cruz ventured to give the Iowa crowd his own explanation.

“So what do you do?” Cruz asked Iowans. “You go, ‘Ah, ha! Condom police. I’m gonna make up a completely made-up threat and try to scare a bunch of folks into thinking someone’s going to steal their birth control.’ What nonsense.”

According to LifeNews.com’s Steven Ertelt, Cruz’s assertion about the Democrat’s pro-abortion rhetoric as being nonsense is right on target

“Cruz is correct that Clinton’s abortion stance is out of touch with most Americans,” Ertelt reported.

Ertelt then cited a Gallup Poll published in May showing that a majority of Americans (54 percent) would like to see all abortions become illegal, compared to just 29 percent of Americans — including Clinton — who believe that abortion should be made legal under any circumstance for women. He also noted a 2014 CNN poll that found that a majority of Americans believe abortion should be made illegal in almost any situation.

Voting for life

As the son a pastor, Cruz has taken a strong pro-life stance, being very vocal about his support for the Republicans’ fight to defund Planned Parenthood, especially in the wake of its selling baby body parts scandal.

Voting with fellow Republicans in the U.S. Senate earlier this month, Cruz made it clear that the government should not support the abortion giant Planned Parenthood with taxpayer dollars.

“The vote we took today is a significant step towards repealing every word of Obamacare,” Cruz proclaimed once he cast his ballot to defund Planned Parenthood. “This bill repeals as much of that failed law as we can under arcane Senate rules and the narrow guidelines of the budget.”

Cruz added that he was pleased that his vote represented the next step in making sure that abortion facilities across the nation won’t be paid through tax dollars.

“I am also encouraged that this bill prohibits taxpayer funds from going to abortion-providers,” Cruz concluded.