Hundreds of media companies, ad-tech firms and consulting outfits are attending the Cannes Lion advertising festival this week, each hoping to grab the attention of deep-pocketed marketers. To get noticed, companies have to pull out all the stops.

Some are hosting boozy cruises to St.Tropez, others arranging private serenades from top music artists for potential clients. And there are, of course, plenty of VIP dinners at the tony Hôtel du Cap. Then there’s some more zany stunts, a few of which we list below:

1. Mobile ad tech company Opera Media is offering thrill-seeking ad buyers rides on water propelled jetpacks. Yes, JetPacks! The invite reads: “Cannes is a place known for Opulence. Huge Yachts, upscale shopping, fancy cars and Monte Carlo just down the coast. How do you go bigger than all of this? Jetpacks, of course.” The so called flyboarding are water jetpacks that allow you to dive out of the water and fly around like a real jetpack.

Says Scott Swanson, Opera’s global head of advertiser services: “Google, Facebook, Twitter, and other large media conglomerates will have celebrity DJ’s and performers, and many will have an entire beach rented for the week.” He added: “We have to be much more clever in our approach, as our marketing budgets aren’t quite as sizable, but it’s Cannes, so we have to match the mood.”

2. True X Media, an ad network, rented three helicopters that the company used to shuttle VIPs into Cannes from the Nice airport. “There is big value from us being there,” said Sean Finnegan, chief strategy officer at True X “It’s an opportunity to present yourself to brands and agencies,” he added. Mr. Finnegan said his firm has been plotting its Cannes festivities for about nine months.

Some companies are making noise with clever but useful giveaways. Facebook, for example, has pleased the female contingent with a to-go cup specifically made for carrying one’s rose up and down la Croisette.

Meanwhile, Yahoo, is offering attendees help with making their Cannes stay just a bit easier. For VIPs, Yahoo is offering the so called “Yahoo Purple Service,” which is a concierge service that gives the lucky few amenities such as local transportation, someone to run errands and make last minute dinner reservations and even delivery of forgotten essentials such as phone chargers. But Yahoo didn’t forget the non-VIPers. Its providing plenty of Yahoo-branded Pedicabs that can help attendees trek up and down la Croisette.