Getty Images Vice President Joe Biden at a visit to a Costco store in 2012. Biden’s boss is planning a visit. President Obama is shopping for ideas on how to improve the pay of U.S. workers – and the giant warehouse retailer Costco appears to be his brand of choice.

A Costco store in Maryland will host the president on Wednesday the morning after his State of the Union speech. Obama is likely to tout Costco’s /quotes/zigman/67728/delayed /quotes/nls/cost COST generous wages as one of the antidotes to what the president views as a growing disparity in America between the rich and less well off.

Costco is unusual by industry standards. The company pays an average of just under $21 an hour, offers health benefits to most employees and some of its workforce is unionized. Executives back an increase in the minimum wage, supported Obamacare and have been big contributors to Obama’s two presidential campaigns. Read about “cheapest, happiest’ company in the world.

Not surprisingly, Costco has become a darling of the political left for its progressive style of management. The company is seen as a sort of Luke Skywalker of the retail industry – if perhaps less handsome and dashing with its concrete floors and stacked palettes of oversized consumer goods.

The president, who’s praised Costco before, is unlikely to make any mention of the company viewed by liberals as the Darth Vader of retail: Wal-Mart /quotes/zigman/245476/delayed /quotes/nls/wmt WMT . Yet the implication will be clear.

The nation’s largest chain store pays its employees an average of under $13 a hour, health-care benefits are less generous and the company vociferously fights unionization. Many on the left view Wal-Mart’s huge influence on the economy as pernicious.

Could more “enlightened” leadership at Walmart do like Costco? After all, Costco’s stock has surged along with its profits, showing that companies in the cutthroat and low-margin retail trade can still flourish even when paying workers well.

Yet any analysis of the companies’ pay scales needs to take into account the two very different business models, some of which explains the large gap in how they compensate employees.

Wal-Mart is a traditional retailer that stocks a vast array of goods at its nearly 4,000 full-service stores in the U.S., many of based in rural or lower-income parts of the country. Their customers flock to the stores for the wide selection and low prices.

The much smaller Costco, with just 450 U.S. stores, is a specialty retailer that builds warehouses in higher-income suburban areas. The company charges an annual fee of $55 to regular store-goers, offers a more limited but often-upscale selection of goods, and good luck finding a salesperson to help you in a busy aisle. Read Megan McArdle on why WalMart can never be Costco.

Costco is great at what it does – the company beats the pants off Wal-Mart’s own version of a warehouse store known as Sam’s Club. Although Sam’s Clubs outnumber Costco stores by 175 in the U.S., Costco generates one-third more annual revenue. Indeed, Sam’s Club announced just last week that it would cut 2,300 jobs – the sort of thing that never happens at Costco.

If Wal-Mart can’t even duplicate Costco’s success in the warehouse niche, there’s virtually no chance it can run its main stores in the same pro-worker manner. Indeed, Costco’s unique approach to business probably is not a model that most retail chains can emulate, especially with online competition getting fiercer by the day.

-Jeffry Bartash

Follow Jeffry on Twitter @jbartash

Follow Capitol Report on Twitter @capitolreport

Also read: What business expects from the State of the Union

A Clinton ‘State of the Union’ writer on what to expect