ENLARGE Mark Cuban Justin Clemons for The Wall Street Journal

As the owner of the Dallas Mavericks, billionaire entrepreneur Mark Cuban relishes victory, so much so that he often stands during basketball games and screams. But it is an off-court win—against the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission—that has him fired up now, and he isn't backing down any time soon.

Today, he is sitting back on a plush leather couch in a long-sleeved T-shirt, jeans and sneakers, with his feet up on the table in a room known as "the bunker" in the American Airlines Center in Dallas. The room, down the corridor from his office suite, lives up to its name. Inside is a kitchen, bathroom and shower, as well as a wall covered in flat-panel televisions broadcasting Mr. Cuban's high-definition AXS TV network, among others.

These days, most of his energy goes into AXS TV and the Mavericks, but they represent only a part of his business efforts. His latest idea stems from his recent experience with the SEC, which sued Mr. Cuban, alleging that he had traded on material, nonpublic information when he sold his investment in the Internet search company Mamma.com DPSI 0.00 % in June 2004, before the company announced a private offering of shares that caused a drop in its stock price. The SEC alleged that Mr. Cuban agreed to keep confidential and not trade on information about the offering that Mamma.com's former chief executive told him during a phone conversation, but Mr. Cuban denied agreeing to either.

Mr. Cuban could have settled for a few million, a small part of his estimated $2.5 billion fortune, but he chose to fight instead. Ultimately, the jury sided with him. It was a tough case for the SEC to prove, in part because the trial was held in Mr. Cuban's hometown of Dallas, where he is well-known and popular, and the SEC's star witness didn't testify in person.

During the process, Mr. Cuban says, he became so frustrated with the SEC's lawyers that he is now considering a new venture publicizing SEC transcripts. "It wouldn't be a big business, but it would be a business because it's not getting done," he says. "I'm going to get as many as I can, and I'll put it out there." His first step, he says, would be publishing trial transcripts on his blog and highlighting tactics he considers suspect. "Sunshine is the best disinfectant," he says with a smile.

Mr. Cuban doesn't give the SEC much credit for its recent victory in a civil case against Fabrice Tourre, a 34-year-old Goldman Sachs analyst, for misleading investors—a case that became a symbol for some of the behavior that caused the financial crisis. The Mavericks owner doesn't see why the SEC would target the youthful Mr. Tourre. "That's the SEC thinking they have a win," he says.

Mr. Cuban says he isn't against the SEC as a whole but thinks that the lawyers who work there should be held responsible for their actions. "There's such a revolving door, and it was run by attorneys with an attorney's mind-set looking for their next job," he says. "It's a résumé builder." Mr. Cuban says individual lawyers aren't held accountable because the public is familiar only with the name of the SEC's chair, Mary Jo White. "No wonder they say or do whatever they damn well please," he says. "I'm like, 'OK, I'm going to start calling them out by name.' "

George Canellos, co-director of the SEC's enforcement division, sent a response to Mr. Cuban's statements through an SEC spokesperson: "Mr. Cuban's comments are without merit and uncalled for. Our lawyers acted in the finest traditions of government counsel and entirely appropriately in strongly advocating the position of the government in this matter."

Mr. Cuban has never shied from combat. Ever since he bought the Mavericks in 2000 for $285 million, his ownership style has been controversial. He has often fought officials and referees, leading to about $1.5 million in fines over the years. Within his first months as owner of the Mavericks, he says, he was fined $100,000 for conduct unbecoming an NBA owner for watching a game while sitting on the baseline. "You realize back then most owners were old rich guys, and I was 40 years old," he says. "The old rich guys are like, 'What the hell is this guy doing?' "

Under his management, the Mavericks have greatly improved their performance, winning the NBA championship against the Miami Heat in 2011. Mr. Cuban credits his players—particularly "a big German guy," power forward Dirk Nowitzki —for the team's success.

Many of Mr. Cuban's other ventures have been entrepreneurial. He first made his fortune founding the software company MicroSolutions and then selling Internet broadcaster Broadcast.com to Yahoo! YHOO 0.44 % for nearly $6 billion in 1999. Still, he says, "you could have the best year for a typical company, and no one is throwing a parade," he says, as fans did for the Mavericks' championship. "There aren't 400,000-500,000 people jamming the streets." And he finds sports more competitive. "Now there's one winner and 29 losers," he says. "You get do-overs, and you get trades; it's not like you get a whole new season in regular business."

Still, Mr. Cuban's business career has been far more varied than a typical sports season. Born in Pittsburgh, the son of an automobile upholsterer and a homemaker, he started his first business at 12, selling garbage bags to pay for basketball shoes. He enrolled at the University of Pittsburgh and then transferred to Indiana University. In college, he started various businesses, including teaching disco-dancing lessons. "If you get asked by a bunch of sorority girls to come to a sorority house to teach girls how to dance for $25 an hour, you do it," he says. He later tried to bring those skills back as a contestant in 2007 and 2008 on ABC's "Dancing with the Stars."

Mr. Cuban has also invested in media companies such as Magnolia Pictures and Landmark Theaters, but he hasn't always been financially successful in the film world. "The first movie I ever greenlit took me 12 minutes," he says. It was called "Enron: The Smartest Guys in the Room" and got nominated for an Academy Award. "I thought, 'This business is easy,' " he remembers. "It went downhill from there." What worked better was his distribution business with Magnolia Pictures. Mr. Cuban changed the model by premiering movies on television as videos on demand 30 days before they would launch in theaters.

Now Mr. Cuban is back on television. On the ABC reality show "Shark Tank," he and other investors called "sharks" listen to pitches and decide whether to fund companies. He says he likes the show's impact on his three children. "My 10-year-old will say, 'I don't know, Daddy, why would you invest in that?' " he says. All of his children want to be entrepreneurs, he says, and he's tried to impress upon them the difficulty of this route. "They don't want to do the work… but I don't let them take shortcuts," he says.

One initiative that Mr. Cuban says he thinks will help enable entrepreneurship is Obamacare. Though he calls its rollout "horrid," he thinks the law will help small businesses focus on their strengths rather than worry about health care. "As someone who owns chunks of small businesses, the one thing all those companies have in common is [that] buying and providing health care is not a core competency," he says. "It's expensive."

By removing the responsibility to provide coverage from these firms and giving it to the government, he says, "You've freed up money and time." When he started his businesses, he never bought health insurance for himself because he thought it was too expensive and preferred to put his money into his companies. Today, he holds up crooked fingers. "I broke my fingers playing basketball, and my whole body is broken," he says. "If I [had] paid a couple hundred bucks a month, maybe my fingers wouldn't be broken."

Despite his support for President Obama's health-care plan, Mr. Cuban doesn't associate himself with either party and considers himself "apolitical." He says he used to be a libertarian but now thinks of himself as an independent. "Libertarians, I think, fail to realize you can't undo" the past, he says. "Now I'm about solving problems." One of his proposed solutions—to the problem of poverty in the U.S.—would be canceling the government's social-welfare programs and giving money directly to the poor. He would also get rid of government-funded pensions. "You can't offer certainty in an uncertain world," he says.

His iconoclastic views extend to foreign affairs too. He commends his former player, Dennis Rodman, for going to North Korea, where he met dictator Kim Jong Un. "Why can't basketball be like ping pong?" he asks. "I would love to go and would in a heartbeat if invited," he says. "Nothing changes if no one does anything."

Write to Alexandra Wolfe at alexandra.wolfe@wsj.com