Radio and TV legend Larry King has been broadcasting since the late 1950s and is best-known for his long-running CNN Show Larry King Live, which helped define long-form talk TV as he interviewed everyone from actors such as Marlon Brando to presidents such as Bill Clinton.

The 81-year-old King is currently hosting PoliticKing on Ora TV which airs on Hulu, the internet, RT, and other outlets. It’s owned partly by Mexican billionaire Carlos Slim as well as by King himself, and guests have included Christian personal finance guru Dave Ramsey, former Clinton Secretary of Labor Robert Reich, socialist independent Sen. Bernie Sanders, and Young Turks host Cenk Uygur. Last year, King’s show on head trauma in the NFL was nominated for a News and Documentary, the only web-based program so honored.

Nick Gillespie sat down with King at Reason’s DC HQ to talk about how much media has changed during King’s career, why he agrees with half of what libertarians say, why he’s going to be cryogenically preserved if and when he dies, and how he would have interviewd Osama bin Laden.

About 30 minutes. Produced by Todd Krainin. Cameras by Meredith Bragg and Krainin.

Scroll down for contents, full transcript, and downloadable versions.

Subscribe to ReasonTV's YouTube Channel to receive notification when new material goes live.

Contents

1:07 - What are Larry's two shows, Politicking and Larry King Now, all about?

3:33 - Larry's ideal government: A kind king. (Preferably Larry King).

7:19 - Larry and Nick debate Obamacare, Medicare, war, and the national debt.

12:18 - The art of the longform interview.

16:10 - Traditional journalism, new media, and the FCC.

21:02 - Libertarian politics.

22:34 - Deregulation will cause people to have sex orgies on airplanes.

28:00 - Larry King will attain immortality through cryonics.

29:44 - Best interview ever: Frank Sinatra, Sandy Koufax, or Danny Kaye?

31:29 - The best goodbye in the history of Reason TV.

This is a rush transcript. Check for accuracy against video.