The U.S. does spectacular doctors well, but not reliable doctors, according to someone who should know.

The industry is so reliant on silos — pharmaceutical companies talking to pharmaceutical companies and doctors talking to doctors — that it has gotten to the point where the U.S. has surpassed $3 trillion in health care spending, said Atlantic Health System CEO Brian Gragnolati.

Gragnolati was the only health system representative at PHARMFEST, an event geared toward the biopharmaceutical industry held Wednesday at Montclair State University.

His focus was on innovation and the role it plays as the industry moves toward value-based reimbursements, and how all sectors of health care need to work together to achieve the same goal.

But the move requires a number of things from the past to change, and, with the help of the Affordable Care Act, it all seems possible, he said.

The payment systems have lagged behind the changes needed and, to-date, almost 90 percent of reimbursements are based on a fee-for-service at Atlantic Health.

Just this month, the system rolled out a bundled payment for full joint replacements, Gragnolati said. This includes a 90 days’ post-care watch.

The reason behind this move is the cost of post-acute care, which is a common expense for patients.

Gragnolati compared his five acute care systems with his time at his previous employer, Johns Hopkins Medicine.

"One of my hospitals had 42 percent going to rehab, and another hospital had 97 percent," he said. "At Johns Hopkins, one of the best in the nation, 15 percent went to rehab. Why do we have that clinical variation?"

The U.S. outspends many European countries, as well as Canada, Australia and New Zealand, by at least 50 percent. In 2014, more than 17 percent of the gross domestic product, about $9,523 per person, was spent on health care, Gragnolati said.

The only way to curb that spending is by innovation, and specifically innovation geared towards the country's largest health care consumers: millennials.

Millennials demand flexibility, choices and apps, and don't do well with lengthy explanations of benefits.

The future is consumer reviews of a health facility, Gragnolati said.

With his position on the board of the American Hospital Association, he often gets asked about the effect the presidential election can have on the ACA.

He believes that, even if Obamacare is repealed, it is unlikely that the trend will change, and he is a huge proponent of price transparency.

"There is lots of money pouring into health care, both from private equity and institutional," he said, so innovation is here to stay.

"Are we going to throw 26-year-olds back into the uninsured market? Are we going to go back to pre-existing conditions and the prejudice associated with that? I don't think so," Gragnolati said. "Consumerism is here to stay."