Darryl “OG” Givens was in a desperate situation.

Givens had testified against the leader of a Denver street gang in a murder case. The day he testified, in January 1996, Darryl ran from the Denver courthouse as a Denver Post photographer tried to take his picture.

This wasn’t the kind of fame he wanted. You could get murdered for that kind of publicity.

Givens had long been a member of the infamous Tre Tre Crips’ Rollin’ 30 gang. Members of the gang were later convicted of murdering former Denver Broncos cornerback Darrent Williams following a downtown Denver New Year’s Eve party in 2007.

Givens’ nickname – “OG” – signified “original gangster.” The man he had testified against, Orlando Domena, and thereby helped put away in prison on a life term, had been a gang shot caller, but also a longtime friend.

Tre Tre Crips members had attended Orlando Domena’s trial and were in the court watching Givens while he testified. They threatened his life numerous times afterwards.

Nine months after the testimony he was trying to make amends with the gang that brought him riches from the illegal drug trade.

As a token of good faith, he offered to give thousands of dollars in illegal street drugs to two Tre Tre Crips gang members including Orlando Domena’s brother, Antonio “Street” Domena, to cement an ongoing drug arrangement.

According to an affidavit by Denver cold case homicide detectives, Antonio Domena and Sheldon “Scrap” Long, 42, agreed to meet with Givens. But it was only a ploy to get him where they wanted him, according to court records.

On the day before Halloween in 1996, Givens was gunned down in an apparent drug deal gone bad. He was shot several times in the head and dumped out of his own car. He had $4,000 in crack cocaine still in his pocket. It wasn’t drugs the Tre Tre Crips had been after but revenge, police contend.

What follows is an account of what happened based in part on the recollection of Alice Givens, OG’s mother, and Denver district court records following the arrest in October 2014 of Scrap and Street on first degree murder charges.

Police had long believed they knew who killed Givens but it took this long to solidify a case against the murder suspects.

Alice Givens recalled how things used to be between her son, Darryl, and one of his friends, Orlando Domena.