By Adam Tobias | Wisconsin Reporter

MADISON, Wis. — Those who believe Obamacare can’t get any worse should think again.

A relatively new provision in the Affordable Care Act that requires states to accept temporary eligibility determinations from Medicaid-enrolled hospitals is opening up the Medicaid program to even more fraud, which in turn creates additional opportunities to raid the pockets of taxpayers, sources say.

A former Medicaid director also is questioning Section 2202 of the ACA because he says it’s inconsistent with the whole premise of Obamacare and gives non-government entities access to public funds.

Under the regulation, hospitals have the authority to use presumptive eligibility to provide temporary care for the uninsured who fall into the Medicaid categories that their respective state already covers, Medicaid spokeswoman Emma Sandoe said.

But if it’s later found that a patient does not qualify for public assistance, the state is on the hook for those costs.

“It’s basically giving the hospitals more guarantee of getting paid, if you will,” said Edmund F. Haislmaier, a senior research fellow at the Heritage Foundation, a conservative think tank based in Washington, D.C.

Presumptive eligibility itself is nothing new. For years, most states have been caring for pregnant women and youth while their Medicaid or Children’s Health Insurance Program qualifications are ironed out.

By expanding the number of acceptable categories and giving hospitals more control, the chance for fraud will only escalate, according to Joshua Archambault, a senior fellow for health care at the Foundation for Government Accountability, a nonpartisan, privately funded, research organization in Florida.

Presumptive eligibility doesn’t require the same level of verification as an actual application, which likely could lead to more patients lying about their personal information — such as income or family size — to receive care, Archambault said.

“The Medicaid program has fraud problems and this might make it slightly worse,” he added.

Dennis Smith, a former George W. Bush administration Medicaid director and Wisconsin Health and Human Services secretary, also doesn’t understand why Section 2202 is needed because the ACA tries to convince all citizens to be insured.

“Presumptive eligibility goes away if everyone has become insured in the first place,” said Smith, who now is a managing director at McKenna Long & Aldridge LLP in Washington, D.C.

Smith also is concerned about the provision because he said it “gives hospitals, in essence, the keys to the state treasury.”

“To me, it’s a slippery slope when you give a non-state entity the right to tap into state funds,” Smith added. “I think there’s a fundamental issue at stake.”

Section 2202 also will provide hospitals with more chances to “work the system” by being authorized to make on-the-spot determinations, according to Tom Miller, a resident fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, a private, nonpartisan, public policy research agency.

“Given the nature of data keeping and standard anti-fraud enforcement in many state Medicaid programs, a lot goes through the cracks,” Miller said.

But in Wisconsin, steps are already being taken to protect state taxpayers from being ripped off, according to Department of Health Services spokeswoman Claire Smith.

The DHS and its Office of the Inspector General, which was created in 2011 by Gov. Scott Walker, will review any instance where there is a suspicion of inappropriate presumptive eligibility submissions, Claire Smith said.

“Wisconsin will be holding hospitals accountable to ensure they assist individuals with the completion of the full Medicaid application,” she added. “The Department of Health Services will do this by establishing standards related to the proportion of individuals determined presumptively eligible through the regular application process.”

The OIG has collected or avoided nearly $8 million in state public assistance recipient fraud in the first half of 2013, Claire Smith said.

In 2012, the OIG collected or avoided $12.3 million and had a return of $23 for every dollar invested, she added.

But the exact toll on taxpayers regarding improper presumptive eligibility cases isn’t known at this time.

The U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services doesn’t have national records on the amount of public money that is spent on uninsured patients who apply for Medicaid through presumptive eligibility but are later found to be unqualified, according to a source from that office who requested anonymity.

That is up to each state, the source said.

But the Wisconsin DHS was unable to readily hand over those numbers when contacted by Wisconsin Reporter.

It would cost “thousands of dollars” to get those figures because they would have to be pulled from a system that is managed by vendors, Claire Smith said.

Section 2202 becomes effective Jan. 1.

Contact Adam Tobias at atobias@watchdog.org or follow him on Twitter at @Scoop_Tobias