Deborah Pauly, a former Villa Park City Council member and candidate for Assembly, was arrested for driving under the influence following a car crash in Anaheim this month, according to police.

Pauly, 56, was driving a Porsche 911 when she struck a parked, unoccupied Mazda pickup truck in the 1100 block of Minot Street around 1 a.m. on Sept. 12, Anaheim police Lt. Eric Trapp said. Information was not available regarding where Pauly had been prior to the crash.

An Anaheim police officer administered a field sobriety test to Pauly at the scene of the crash but she failed to pass, Trapp said.

Pauly was booked into the Anaheim Temporary Detention Facility for driving under the influence of alcohol and driving under the influence with a blood alcohol level of .08 or greater, he said. Police wouldn’t provide her exact blood alcohol level due to the pending criminal case.

Pauly was released from jail on written promise to appear in court, said Trapp. She is slated to be arraigned on Oct. 26 in Orange County North Justice Center in Fullerton.

Pauly, a Republican, said Monday that personal issues contributed to the DUI incident.

“In the midst of launching my campaign for assembly, in August my husband filed for divorce to end our 32-year marriage,” she said in a written statement. “However, the stresses of this very painful personal circumstance are not an excuse and I take full responsibility for this lapse. This incident is a reminder to stay focused on the campaign and to maintain my high personal standards of conduct and character.

“This is completely uncharacteristic and I am asking for understanding, compassion, prayers and forgiveness. This difficulty shall pass and I will be stronger for it. Ultimately, persevering through this challenge will make me a better person and a better legislator.”

Orange County court records show Pauly has had no other local criminal arrests.

She told the Register in a phone interview the arrest may affect her run for Assembly, but did not elaborate.

“Anything I do or say is going to have an impact on my campaign,” she said in a phone interview. “My enemies and opponents are going to be looking for anything they can use to their advantage.”

Fred Whitaker, chairman of the Republican Party of Orange County, declined to speculate on whether Pauly’s arrest may hamper her chances of being elected.

“The voters sort all sorts of things out,” he said.

Pauly is running against fellow Republican Harry Sidhu, a former Anaheim City Council member, in the 2016 election to replace termed-out 68th District Assemblyman Don Wagner, R-Irvine. The district stretches from Anaheim Hills to Lake Forest.

Pauly, a Tea Party favorite, made headlines in 2011 for calling two Muslims speaking at a local event “unadulterated evil” and in 2010 for comparing Obamacare with sodomy.

Contact the writer: sschwebke@ocregister.com