In health care today, bigger is better, and collaborating may be best of all.

This week, the state’s largest health care system, Baylor Scott & White Health, announced a joint research venture with Baylor College of Medicine, a leader in medical research. Across town, Texas Health Resources is in the process of integrating with UT Southwestern Medical Center, a research power in its own right.

While the deals are different, they’re driven by similar forces: the pressure to reform health care and find better ways of treating more people for less.

These institutions are among the biggest, most respected players in the state, and they concluded that hooking up was better than going it alone.

There’s a “need to create a different health care economy,” said Barclay Berdan, CEO of Texas Health Resources, which has 16 acute-care hospitals and over $4 billion in annual revenue. “The system’s near a point where it can’t continue without breaking the bank.”

Rising premiums for health insurance and large deductibles can eat up much of the family budget, he noted. Employers, which sponsor coverage for about half of Americans, and federal payors such as Medicare and Medicaid are all trying to squeeze reimbursements.

That’s led to mergers and consolidation among hospital systems and doctors’ practices. The Affordable Care Act has accelerated the trend by pushing providers to focus on the overall health of their patients, rather than a traditional fee-for-service model.

In this environment, it’s simply smart to pool assets and spread resources across many more customers. Teaming with medical schools offers some unique benefits, including a reputation boost for the hospitals. Patients also get more access to leading-edge research and clinical trials, and everybody gets more referrals.

The upshot is that health care players can add revenue and talent without incurring a lot of upfront costs. As a result, collaborations are emerging in surprising places. Baylor Scott & White helps staff retail clinics at nine Walgreens locations while THR works with about three dozen clinics in CVS stores.

Some high-profile deals in Dallas involve national brand names: the Mayo Clinic teaming with Methodist Health System and Cleveland Clinic working with Baylor Scott & White.

UT Southwestern and THR may be the deepest partnership, at least among those that haven’t actually merged (as occurred with Baylor and Scott & White in 2013).

“Texas Health Resources and UT Southwestern have really come together in every dimension,” said Dr. Daniel Podolsky, president of UT Southwestern. “This is not a merger, but it is a fully integrated network — clinically and financially.”

Doctors from both organizations will work collectively throughout the region, he said. If THR patients are diagnosed with an illness that requires expert treatment from the medical school, they can be transferred to a school facility. And faculty and medical students will be able to work in THR’s community health settings.

The network, known as Southwestern Health Resources, is scheduled to be operating by April 1, the CEOs said, and executive leaders will be named soon.

The two groups also have been working together on an accountable care organization that has 68,000 Medicare patients. In the first year, the collaboration generated Medicare savings of 6.5 percent, placing it among a small group of top-performing ACOs, Podolsky said.

He credited better coordinated care, analytics that are shared with doctors and care pathways that are considered best practices. In addition, the two have already exchanged over 340,000 electronic records.

“This is an example of what we think we’ll be able to do in an even broader way,” Podolsky said.

And the school won’t have to spend millions on facilities to expand its reach. “There’s no reason for us to duplicate the network of hospitals that THR has built over the years,” he said.

Baylor Scott & White has been using collaborations regularly, with leaders often saying, “You can’t own everything.” The deal with Baylor College of Medicine will bring the latest research to patients in Texas and the school will get access to a large, diverse population. That’s a big advantage in competing for federal research grants.

Baylor Scott & White already has partnerships and alliances in surgery, imaging, emergency treatment and rehabilitation. Four partner companies contributed $1.2 billion in revenue last year, said LaVone Arthur, chief integration officer.

That money “allows us to use additional resources for our mission-driven items — patient care, research and medical education,” Arthur said.

Expect to see a lot more collaboration among health care players. And that’s a good thing, said Dr. Steve Berkowitz, a consultant in Austin, because it’s driven by the marketplace, not a government mandate.

“It’s creative consolidation,” he said. “And it will improve outcomes and reduce costs overall.”

Twitter: @mitchschnurman