GRAND RAPIDS, MI – A federal judge dismissed a lawsuit filed by Right to Life of Michigan over provisions of Obamacare involving contraceptive coverage.

The provision allows non-profit agencies and others with closely held religious beliefs to be exempt from providing or paying for a so-called contraceptive mandate. But it then requires insurers and third-party administrators to provide such coverage.

Right to Life of Michigan qualified for an "accommodation" under the Affordable Care Act but said the designation violated its rights to free exercise and free speech under the First Amendment and violated the Religious Freedom and Restoration Act.

U.S. District Judge Robert Jonker in Grand Rapids said the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals has already decided the issue in a "legally indistinguishable" lawsuit by Michigan Catholic Conference and Catholic Family Services against the government.

Jonker said the higher court "rejected precisely the kinds of challenges to the accommodation under the First Amendment and (Religious Freedom and Restoration Act) Plaintiff makes in this case. ... The Sixth Circuit precedent is controlling and binding on this court, and the government's motion (to dismiss the case) must be granted."

The 6th Circuit Court of Appeals has said the accommodation "effectively insulates these entities from the contraception-provision process."

"They no longer have to pay for contraceptive coverage, and all individuals under their plans are notified of the entity's religious objections," the ruling said.

In a case involving Hobby Lobby, the U.S. Supreme Court decided family-owned for-profit businesses can't be required to provide contraception coverage under the federal health care law. Sixth Circuit judges said the Hobby Lobby ruling doesn't change its finding that the contraception provision does not violate the Religious Freedom and Restoration Act.

Right to Life sought a declaratory judgment in its favor.

"This case is unique from almost all other cases filed in the 6th Circuit Court of Appeals: the only reason for Plaintiff's existence is to end the tragedy of abortion on demand," attorney Michael Rizik Jr. wrote.

He criticized a "series of regulations that strong-arms it and its Board of Directors/officers and employees under the Affordable Care Act to provide, receive, cooperate in and abet health insurance coverage for abortifacient drug, devices, and associated education in counseling, in contravention of their fundamental religious and moral beliefs, and constitutional and statutory rights."

Right to Life acknowledges it qualifies for an accommodation, but claims its rights are being violated.

The federal mandate forces Right to Life "into an impossible dilemma," Rizik wrote.

It could offer health insurance with "offensive coverage," violate the mandate - and face heavy fines - by offering a health plan without abortifacient, or end coverage and force workers to obtain insurance under plans that cover surgical abortion. It would put the organization at a competitive disadvantage hiring workers.

The organization is forced to comply with a "greasy 'accommodation' process that obfuscates, but does not eliminate, the coerced violation of the organization's right to freely exercise its religious beliefs," Rizik said.

Right to Life's argument, if successful, would have had "sweeping" implications, Julie Saltman, a trial attorney for the U.S. Department of Justice, wrote in response.

"It is one thing to urge that the government may not impose a requirement to provide contraceptive coverage on a religious organization that objects on religious grounds," she wrote.

"It is quite another thing to urge that the government may not ensure that women have access to separate coverage through third parties after an organization exercises its option not to provide coverage. The latter argument, if accepted, would make access to contraceptive coverage for the female employees of eligible organizations dependent on the religious beliefs of the employers."

John Agar covers crime for MLive/Grand Rapids Press E-mail John Agar: jagar@mlive.com and follow him on Twitter at twitter.com/ReporterJAgar

John Agar covers crime for MLive/Grand Rapids Press E-mail John Agar: jagar@mlive.com and follow him on Twitter at twitter.com/ReporterJAgar