State Agency Wants Century’s Last Doctor Out Of Old Hospital

A State of Florida agency has ordered the last doctor in Century out of a former hospital he’s leased since early 2006.

In a letter dated August 26, Century Health Care Access (CHCA) and Dr. Christian Bachman, president of CHCA and physician for Mayo Street Medical, were ordered to vacate the old Century Hospital facility by the end of September by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, current owners of 25,000 square foot building on Mayo Street.

“I don’t understand why they (DEP) have done this. We had a 50 year lease on the building, and received a 30 day notice to vacate. Even if we wanted to leave, we couldn’t do it in that amount of time. With the Hope and Health Clinic just closing in Century, and no other doctor in town, CHCA and Mayo Street Medical can’t depart without leaving hundreds of people without vital medical care. This is wrong.” Located just across the street, the non-profit Health and Hope Clinic shut down on October 1 due to a lack of funding.

While Bachman is the only doctor that practices in town on a regular basis, Baptist Medical Group, formally Century Medical Center, operates a primary care facility in Century that is staffed by nurse practitioner Georgia W. Agrait, GNP.

In the letter to Bachman, Cheryl C. McCall, chief of the Bureau of Public Land Administration Division of State Lands for DEP, wrote that the eviction was due to a violation of lease terms due to violations of Florida Life Safety Code and National Fire Protection Code.

In addition, DEP’s letter said CHCA had violated other terms of the lease, including:

Purpose — the leased premises shall only be used for the establishment and operation of a health care facility

Unauthorized Use — the lessee shall prevent the unauthorized use the leased premises or any use in violation of the lease

Right of Inspection — the state or representatives have the right to inspect the leased premises

Insurance Requirements – the lessee must maintain fire, extended risk and liability insurance naming the State of Florida as co-insured.

Maintenance of Improvements — the lessee must maintain the property and an improvements in good condition.

Century Health Care Access acquired the lease for the Old Century Hospital in 2006 when a concerned group of citizens from Century formed a not-for-profit organization dedicated to providing medical care to the community of Century and surrounding areas. They now host Mayo Street Medical, a family medical clinic which opened in late 2014 with Dr. Bachman at the helm, and previously hosted Century Family Practice, which closed in late 2013.

Bachman said the practice now provides primary medical services for hundreds of patients throughout Escambia and Santa Rosa counties. He has a reputation for seeing patients regardless of their ability to pay, and he’s even known for making house calls.

“We have had a very difficult time,” said CHCA Office manager, Mary Gilson. “It is hard to run a medical clinic in an area where many people have Medicaid or are uninsured. We are struggling anyway, and if we lose the building we lose our ability to stay open. We can’t afford to move locations even if we had another location to move to – and we don’t. The people of Century desperately need us because many simply can’t afford to go elsewhere. I understand that the government has rules, regulations, and procedures, but evicting us now is madness.”

The letter from DEP gave CHCA until noon on September 30 to vacate the building. Now that the deadline has passed, there’s no concrete answer from DEP as to what their next step may be.

“The department is determining its next step,” Lori Elliot, press secretary for the Florida Department of Environmental Protection told NorthEscambia.com in an email on Friday.

“They will have to send in the sheriff to drag us out of here. We have a commitment to our community and to our patients,” Allison Mills, Bachman’s director of nursing said.

Pictured top: The former Century Hospital, constructed in 1965, on Mayo Street in Century. Pictured inset: Dr.Christian Bachman at his desk in the medical center. Photos for NorthEscambia.com, click to enlarge.