KRBS triumphs in savings survey Building society named best for customer service

Kent Reliance Building Society (KRBS) was named best savings account provider for customer service in our latest satisfaction survey.

The building society toppled First Direct in our bi-annual survey, registering a customer score of 68%.

First Direct lost its place at the top of the satisfaction tables for savings accounts, as its customer score dropped from 71% to 67%.

However, the bank maintained its reputation for excellent customer service with an excellent score of 82% in our current account satisfaction survey.

To generate these scores, Which? Money asked 6,384 people about their experiences with their current account and savings account providers in August 2014.

Which? Comparison Table - Savings accounts and Isas - compare the best deals on the market

Savings accounts: best and worst for customer satisfaction

KRBS didn't feature in our previous savings account satisfaction survey, due to an insufficient sample size, but its score of 68% placed it above 42 other savings account providers in our latest customer satisfaction tables.

Intelligent Finance finished bottom of the table with a score of 40%, earning a Which? Warning logo in the process.

Yorkshire Bank and Nationwide registered the biggest improvement in their customer scores, jumping from 52% in our previous survey to 59% and 58% respectively this time around.

Customer scores in both surveys are based on overall customer satisfaction and the likelihood of recommending the provider to a friend.

Find out more: Best savings providers for customer satisfaction - see the latest results in full

Bank accounts: best and worst for customer satisfaction

Which? Recommended Providers First Direct and Norwich & Peterborough BS remained top dogs in our current account satisfaction survey, with high customer scores of 82% and 71% respectively.

TSB Bank saw the largest leap in customer scores across all of the 23 banks featuring in the survey, from 56% to 62%.

At the bottom end of the table, Ulster Bank's score plummeted to 42%, whilst Intelligent Finance fared almost as badly with a score of 44%.

Find out more: Best current accounts for customer satisfaction - see how your bank fared