We support Republicans, Democrats, independents, anyone who supports women's access to reproductive health care. It just happens to be right now that the Republican leadership in the presidential campaign has taken these extreme positions. I think we're all fighting for the day in which partisan politics is no longer something that is used to attack women's access to health care.

NARAL launched a campaign called "Ask About Abortion" to highlight the lack of discussion about abortion in the Democratic debates. Why do you think abortion has been left out in these debates, and how do you feel that that omission has affected a larger conversation about reproductive rights in the country?

Hogue: One of the interesting things that I've heard as we've run this campaign is that both candidates are pro-choice, and if you actually look at their voting records, that's absolutely true. Now, we believe that the ability to have an honest conversation that moves toward confronting the access crisis in this country has to come from more than just votes. When we leave abortion out of the debates, a couple things happen. One, people don't think that this is a real priority. Two, particularly in the primary that we're facing, as we've already acknowledged where all the pro-choice candidates are on one side and all the anti-choice candidates are on the other, we lose the ability to frame the debate on our terms, right? We saw that with Fox News' town hall when they asked the question about a very small incident of abortion in a very anti-choice frame. It was not about the access crisis in our country, it was not about candidates' plans for what to do about making sure that every woman has access to her constitutional rights. It was about a very small number of cases of later-term abortion, which we can discuss, but it's not real life for most people and the 1 in 3 who do choose to have an abortion in our country. So we want to make sure that we're lifting this up during the primary, because when we do, we're actually debating on our terms, and that is so important to have the conversation in the general election.

Most Popular

The final thing I will say is, some people have said, "But they're both pro-choice, so why don't we spend time on issues that they have differences on?" What my answer to that is, well, they both say they want to regulate Wall Street and they both say they want to expand health care, but we actually demand to know how, right? We want to hear the very concrete steps that these candidates would take to make sure that every woman has access to her constitutional rights and basic health care.

Is there an end in sight to lawmakers threatening to defund Planned Parenthood, or do you think that these attacks based on these videos will continue?

Richards: Look, they've been trying to defund us for years. I would point out that not only has Planned Parenthood been exonerated by a Houston grand jury, but a Republican district attorney in Houston in fact indicted the two perpetrators of this, so if there was any wrongdoing, it's been by the folks who perpetrated this scam against us and other abortion providers. And they are known anti-abortion activists. They are not folks interested in women's health. And that's because, Nancy and Ilyse have said as well, this is about a nationally orchestrated effort to end access to legal abortion in this country. I do think it has pushed us all into a place in which the American people are going to make a very important decision next November about whether in fact we are going to go back to the 1950s, when women didn't have access to legal abortion in this country and young healthy women died routinely in emergency rooms all across America, when birth control was hard to get and expensive to pay for, and when young people couldn't get access to sex education in their schools.

I spent a few hours in front of one of the House committees that was supposedly investigating these matters, even though the chairman admitted himself there's absolutely no evidence of Planned Parenthood's wrongdoing. And really, the result of that was we gained half a million new supporters. Folks saw what Congress was doing and how little empathy they had for women and women's access to health care, and so I feel like this is coming back around against the folks who are trying to deny women's access to health care in a way that is just unacceptable to the broad public. I think actually, all it has done is helped fuel an understanding across the country of what is at stake in this election, both at the Supreme Court, in Congress, in state legislatures, and for everyday Americans simply trying to access health care and live their lives.

Northup: I would just say that what links the deceptive videos and the deceptive sham Texas law is the willingness of certain opponents [of] reproductive health and rights to use deceptive and dishonest means to pursue their agenda. And they use deceptive and dishonest means because they know that the public is on our side. They know the Constitution is on our side. So they turned to underhanded tactics that do more to show why they're trying to go underground to pursue their agenda than to have a policy debate in the broad light of day.

Is there anything that makes you optimistic for reproductive rights?

Hogue: I'm hugely optimistic. Ever since Roe v. Wade, our opponents have actually run a long-term strategy to do away with our constitutional right to abortion. And by proxy, [to do away with] the sort of equality and empowerment that women need in making our own family-planning decisions — because [abortion is] so closely linked with our destiny. But I think in the last five years, their overreach and their willingness to actually lay their cards on the table has really been a clarion call and illustrated for most Americans what's at stake. What's at stake is this ideological worldview where we go back to a day where abortions were in the back alley, contraception was contraband, and women were forced to marry just to even get a credit card or their name on a mortgage.

On the other side of that ideological worldview are the majority of people, who believe not only in legal access to abortion, but that when women have control over our own reproductive destinies, we can more fully participate in society at large, and that benefits everyone. That's why we're seeing more men come to the fight, that's why we're seeing more people speak up about their own abortion stories, and that's why we're seeing more people make reproductive rights and reproductive freedom and reproductive health issues central to every election decision, every legislative decision.

I don't want to gloss over the fact that there is very real impact every single day. Women are being denied basic health care that we need to get along in life, and that's real, and that's bad. To the extent that the sort of increase in energy and momentum can be parlayed into voting and lobbying your state legislature and talking in cultural outlets like Cosmo about how we really feel about access to abortion and reproductive health, that's one less day that women will suffer at the hands of the minority in this country. It makes me optimistic that we're on the right track, and I'm just anxious to get it done as soon as possible so the fewest number of people actually suffer in the interim.

Northup: I'm optimistic because of the tremendous support that we have seen throughout American society for this moment that we've come to at the Supreme Court with this landmark case in the Texas clinic shutdown law. There were 45 "friend of the court" briefs that were filed from a broad array of voices — from business to medicine to women who in their own names talked to the court about their own abortion experiences. For years, the movement that has been fighting these targeted regulations of abortion providers, TRAP laws, have had a tough time because [the laws have] been sailing under the radar screen. Well, now, it is clear to the nation that there is an access-to-abortion crisis. We're going to win this case, and as a movement, we're going to go forward to make sure that there is equity in access. We're going to be fighting it on the state level, and we're going to be fighting it on the national level. We're going to make sure that there are legislative guarantees as well as constitutional guarantees for one to be able to access abortion services, and for insurance, private and public, to cover that. The Women's Health Protection Act is an anti-TRAP law that has been introduced in the Congress. The EACH Woman Act is an insurance coverage law to make abortion affordable for all women, on public or private insurance, that has been introduced in the Congress.

Richards: The things that make me hopeful are that we're actually providing better health care to more people than ever before. We're in a 40-year low for teen pregnancy in the U.S., and it's not because young people aren't interested in sex. We're getting them better birth control, we're getting [them] better sex education, even if they have to go to Planned Parenthood online to get it. Ten years ago, we were fighting to get birth control even covered in insurance plans, and today, under the Affordable Care Act, 55 million women have access to no-cost birth control. It is a radical change, and it's only going to continue to get better. We just had a $50 IUD approved by the FDA. You just can't un-invent a $50 IUD, so no matter the political environment, we just make progress in terms of health care and medicine.

But the cautionary note here is that it's not real equity yet. I think if there is a stake in the ground I would put for the next five years, it is achieving true reproductive equity in the U.S. to make sure that your ability to access abortion services that are safe and legal, or to access birth control or LGBT services, doesn't depend on your zip code or your income or your immigration status or your race or your geography. But I feel like we are on the right path. And again, I think November is gonna be a critical point of demarcation where this country can, and I believe will, stand affirmatively for the progress that we've only begun to make.

This interview has been lightly edited and condensed.

Follow Prachi on Twitter.