Photo

Republican voters got an early Christmas present on Election Day: a Senate majority and expanded control of the House when the next Congress takes its seats shortly after the actual holiday.

But beyond a forceful repudiation of President Obama, there was little uniformity on just what they wanted from the new Republican lawmakers in Washington, who ran more on opposition to the president than a clear agenda.

In interviews in a half-dozen states where a Republican senator replaced a Democrat, voters said they wanted a rollback of the Affordable Care Act, approval of the Keystone XL pipeline and fixes for immigration problems, among other concerns. But beyond any specific policy, Republican voters’ No. 1 wish was for cooperation between the warring tribes of Washington, where gridlock drove much of the voter backlash at the polls this year.

“I want to see cooperation and getting things done,” said Howard Urband, 83, of Lakewood, Colo., who voted for Cory Gardner, the Republican whose win over Senator Mark Udall helped flip the chamber. “Things are hanging fire that haven’t been addressed.”

In a pre-election poll by Gallup that asked voters the most important thing they wanted from their representatives in Congress, the second-most-cited answer was for politicians to work together to end gridlock. (No. 1 was listening to the people.)

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Unlike the Republicans of 1994, who won a House majority by uniting behind the Contract With America, or the Tea Party wave of 2010, which sought to cut government and the deficit, the Republican wave of 2014 was not stirred by candidates with a to-do list.

On Wednesday, in a news conference at the White House, Mr. Obama threw the ball into the court of the new congressional majorities. “I’m looking forward to them putting forward a very specific agenda in terms of what they’d like to accomplish,” he said.

If Tony Reiss, who works in public relations in Sioux Falls, S.D., had his way, completing the Keystone XL pipeline — which would carry Canadian oil to the Gulf of Mexico, running through South Dakota on the way — would be a top priority. “A lot of county officials and schools are wanting it for better tax revenue,” he said. “We absolutely need Keystone.”

In West Virginia — where Shelley Moore Capito, a Republican, won an open Senate seat long held by a Democrat — Tom Hannigan, 57, a financial adviser in Charleston, called on Congress to stop environmental regulations that he said cost jobs.

“They have to do something with the E.P.A.,” he said, referring to the Environmental Protection Agency.

Immigration reform was also on voters’ minds, though there was disagreement over whether to deport workers who are in the country illegally or offer them a path to legal status. Geography seemed to influence views.

“In this state, we’ve got a whole lot of Hispanics,” said Mr. Urband of Colorado. “They’re illegal, but their children were born here. And there’s no sense in talking about deporting people. That’s stupid. I mean, they’re here.”

He added: “We need to have a rational route to citizenship and that sort of thing. Which, maybe, can come. I think.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Not so Brad Gillian, 50, a construction engineer for a wireless company who lives in Putnam County, W.Va. “Hell, no, we shouldn’t have amnesty for illegal immigrants,” he said. “Immigration is getting out of hand.” He urged Congress to erect a border fence “and use it.”

On the Affordable Care Act, there was more unanimity. Although some Republicans said they would keep parts of it, like the provision that forbids discrimination based on pre-existing conditions, there was strong support for a broad repeal.

Photo

“Fix it,” said Annette Stovall of North Little Rock, Ark. “I mean, I know they can’t roll it back. There’s maybe one or two good items in it, but over all, just to toss a blanket out there to basically try to cover everybody is impossible.”

“We need it completely repealed,” said Dr. Maria Stys, a cardiologist in Sioux Falls who immigrated from Poland in 1992. She said that in Poland, patients had few choices about doctors and often faced long waits for treatment. “We need competitive health care,” she said, adding that under the Affordable Care Act, “I had a flashback that I was going back to what I was running from.”

In Raleigh, N.C., Chris Carlino, 26, a commercial real estate investor who voted for Thom Tillis to replace Senator Kay Hagan, a Democrat, said he wanted Republicans to repeal the health care law. “Young people who go out and get jobs are fiscally conservative, but more socially open-minded than the boomers,” he said.

Some Republican voters did not have a wish list for Congress. They expressed anger at the president and said they wanted the new Senate majority to change the direction of the country, a version of the free-floating insecurity that drove many voters on Election Day even as economic indicators rose.

“I don’t care what the Republicans do as long as they do something,” said Jimmy Kyzer, 75, who was at a produce market in Sherwood, Ark. “But get rid of what we’ve got in there.” Pressed for his ideal Republican agenda, he said, “Whatever it takes to get this country back on its feet, and it’s going to take a lot.”

“They need to cut him off,” Mr. Kyzer said, referring to the president. “Just like dropping the curtain. Cut it off. Get rid of him and everything he’s got in mind to do. And if they can do that in this country, all of the people will go back to work.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

There was a sense, though, that the voters who gave Republicans a great victory this week would not wait forever for results.

Ron Moses, 65, a small-business owner from a Denver suburb who voted for Mr. Gardner, said he hoped for a new birth of cooperation in Washington. It is in the congressional majority’s best interest, he said.

“The Republicans are going to be up for re-election in 2016,” he said. “They are at risk of losing the Senate again in two years. I think they recognize that they’re going to have a two-year window, and the only administration they’re going to have to work with is the Obama administration.”