Cougars standout capped senior campaign with second straight 4A title

NIWOT -- Every sport has that one athlete.

That one sure thing.

Elise Cranny was that for girls cross country. Everybody at the Norris-Penrose Event Center knew she was going to win her second consecutive Class 4A state title. The only questions remaining were how fast and by how much?

One year removed from one of the most exciting finishes in recent memory, where she tracked down Air Academy's Katie Rainsbegrer in the final 75 yards to win by 1 second, Cranny rode the wave of momentum from that victory to an outstanding track season and then was 34 seconds better on the same course in 2013 en route to title No. 2.

"I like running and I like being the best," said Cranny, who is being honored as the BoCoPreps.com girls Runner of the Year. "I think in high school, it's for the team and that helps me a lot. It's important to show the members of our team that if you work hard you can get results and you can PR (personal record)."

What made Cranny's season even more successful was helping the Cougars to a second-place finish in the team race. Of all the achievements in her career at Niwot, Cranny pointed to the success of her team -- junior Christa Boettiger, freshman Jenna McCaffrey, sophomore sister Emily Cranny, junior Katie Gillett, sophomore Niki Marshall and sophomore Kela Fetters -- this year as the one that stands out the most.

"We have never placed that high and that was really exciting," Cranny said. "Especially for this program that has always been like fifth or sixth. Even more so because it was such a competitive team race this year and there were so many teams that were so similar."

The Cougars finished with 145 points and were only 10 behind champion Thompson Valley. Niwot was six points better than Battle Mountain and 15 better than Mountain View in the closely contested chase for the crown.

Earlier this month, Cranny set her sights on an even bigger prize on the national stage. In Portland, Ore., Cranny competed in the Nike Cross Nationals and, feeling as though she was the underdog, finished second in the 198-harrier field and was on the shoulder of eventual champion Alexa Efraimson of Camas, Washington. Efraimson, a junior, won the race in 16 minutes, 50.1 seconds and Cranny was just three seconds behind at 16:53.8

"It was great up there and it wasn't muddy at all," said Cranny, who cherished the unfamiliar underdog role. "It was kind of helpful to me, especially when I go to these premier races. There are always a lot of favorites that they talk about and then there is not really any pressure."

Needless to say, the next step for Cranny is college and she was waiting for the end of the season to begin her focus on the next step. Both Stanford and the University of Colorado are high up on the wish list and expect a decision soon. And if anyone thinks she has reached her peak already, Cranny has even bigger goals and aspirations in her future.

The Olympics?

"I think about that all the time and that's the goal," she said. ""That's when Jason (Hartmann) started coaching me my freshman year, he has kind of a different approach and although I didn't like it the first few years because it took more to develop me as a runner. Now, I am so glad he did it. I think that the way he has trained me, he has taken a long-term approach and I will have a lot of longevity and I hope to run in the Olympics someday."

Rio de Janeiro is just three years away.

Follow Jon on Twitter at twitter.com/JonEYunt