In a big win for Obamacare and Floridians, the U.S. Supreme Court recently upheld subsidies for enrollees who buy health insurance through the federally-run Healthcare.gov website.

The ruling means 6.4 million low-income Americans who live in states that have refused to set up their own insurance exchanges (such as Florida) can keep receiving tax credits to buy policies.

Even though Obamacare still has plenty of detractors, I figured the decision would be universally embraced by the 1.3 million Floridians (622,000 in South Florida) who currently get subsidies.

I figured wrong.

"I've changed my mind on Obamacare," said Ramona Boehler, of Sunrise. "I think it's a huge disaster and the Supreme Court made a bad call."

Boehler, 63, is a retired widow with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease who regained health insurance with the help of the Affordable Care Act. I've been following her throughout the health reform saga. She has had two different plans in two years of enrollment, switching after her initial insurer sought a 52 percent premium increase for Year 2. This year she has higher deductibles and copays, less inclusive drug coverage and gets a subsidy of nearly $400-a-month for a $550-a-month plan.

She's fed up with the bureaucratic hassles and said she gets treated like a stepchild by doctors and providers when they see she's on an Obamacare plan.

She also got an unwelcome surprise at tax time: a hefty fine because she underestimated her 2014 income when she enrolled the previous year.

Boehler got an unexpected pension dividend last year. That meant her 2014 subsidy was incorrectly calculated. Instead of recalculating and asking her to return the difference (which would have been a few hundred dollars), the government imposed a $750 fine.

"You get fined a flat $300, $750 or $1250, based upon where you fall [above] the poverty level," Boehler wrote in an email. "Insanity!"

Add it all up and she says, "I'm sick of the words Affordable Care Act." Even though she has benefitted, she doesn't find the health-care system any more affordable than before the bill passed in 2010.

James Farrell, who co-leads the Health Care Practice Group for the Shutts & Bowen law firm in West Palm Beach, calls the ACA "a work in progress" and says premiums for Obamacare plans are rising "significantly."

"If premiums keep going up, what good does a tax credit do?" Farrell said.

And that's why the jury is still out on President Barack Obama's signature achievement. It has cut the ranks of the uninsured and expanded coverage, as insurers can no longer turn down consumers because of pre-existing health issues.

But the American health-care system is still a tangled, frustrating place, with opaque, inconsistent pricing.

Many doctors are demoralized, with shortages in many fields, as their take has been cut by middlemen and overseers. With insurers, drug makers and hospital chains operating in the interests of profits and shareholders, the system is often at odds with individuals' health and well-being.

Boehler said she can't wait until she turns 65 next year and qualifies for Medicare, the government-run program for seniors.

What does it say that most Americans consider Medicare, a single-payer government program, the Promised Land?

mmayo@sunsentinel.com, 954-356-4508.