Dave Williams, who lost to naval chaplain Gordon Klingenschmitt in the 2014 primary for a state House seat, is once again giving it a shot now that Klingenschmitt is running for the state Senate.

Williams, the former chairman of the El Paso County Republican Party, lost the GOP primary 53 percent to 47 percent to Klingenschmitt, who has been a controversial figure at the Colorado General Assembly.

Klingenschmitt’s decision to run in 2016 for the state Senate seat now held by Senate President Bill Cadman, who is term limited, created an open seat in HD 15 in Colorado Springs.

“After much wise counsel, encouragement from fellow neighbors, and discussions with my wife Emily, I’ve decided to run for the Colorado State House in District 15 again,” Williams said in his announcement.

Williams is vice president of logistics for his family-owned and operated company that helps bring businesses together to find tailored solutions for their customers.

Also running for the GOP nomination in Klingenschmitt’s House seat is recycler Josh Hosler.

In his news release, Williams let loose on the left.

“Radical Democrats in our state passed some of the most egregious laws in Colorado history. They’ve dramatically raised our taxes, and are so out-of-control in their spending, that private sector job creation and our economic recovery are suffering.” William said.

“Despite the will of the voters and a constitutional prohibition, they ushered in homosexual marriage through so-called civil unions and through repeated attempts of judicial overreach in our court system. They’re so out-of-touch that they even refuse to give justice to mothers who have lost their unborn babies to heinous acts

of murder at the hands of criminals who have no regard for life.”

Williams noted that Republicans in 2014 were able to take back the state Senate and defeat Democratic U.S. Sen. Mark Udall.

“If we are to ultimately succeed, then we will need to elect authentic, credible conservatives who can properly articulate our message of limited government and freedom. We need leaders who can work with others to help achieve our conservative Republican goals at the state Capitol.”