NJC men's basketball head coach Eddie Trenkle gets 200th win in 95-88 victory over Lamar Community College

Click photo to enlarge «

1

»

When the final horn sounded on Saturday in the Northeastern Junior College men's basketball team's thrilling 95-88 home win over Lamar Community College, none of the Plainsmen on the floor knew quite what the win meant at the moment.

It was more than just a home win, improving NJC to 12-5 overall on the season.

It was more than just a Region IX South win that moved the Plainsmen to 5-1 in conference and kept them tied atop the standings.

Hardly anyone knew, until Ben Blecha made the public address announcement during team handshakes, that Saturday's win also marked a milestone for NJC head coach, Eddie Trenkle, who notched win No. 200 in his eighth season as the Plainsmen's play caller.

"I told the kids after that game that this is a great milestone for a coach. But it only happens because of the kids before them and because of them (current players)," said Trenkle, who also praised his assistants, Shane Gertner and Steve Soza, fans, and his mentor at NJC, Lowell Roumph. "That's what I wanted them to understand: just how important they are to that. It's not just the coach out there. Players have to buy in."

Trenkle and the NJC faithful had to sweat No. 200 out, though, as Lamar Community College rallied from down by as many as 17 points in the first half to take a 3-point lead midway through the second half.

LCC threw a curve ball, following suit with the up-tempo, pressing and five-player substitution patterns championed by its girls' team.

Advertisement

The Runnin' Lopes ball pressure got to the Plainsmen as they committed a season-high 31 turnovers on the night, aiding the LCC comeback.

"We were not prepared for that defense and that style. And we have to do a better job of making that adjustment on the fly," Trenkle said. "I had never seen that run-and-jump for 40 minutes out of Lamar in my life. And it took us by surprise, but we have to make better adjustments."

It took some time, but NJC finally did as it righted the ship to go back up by 10 points and cruise to the 95-88 final.

NJC freshman forward, Nick Smiley, led the charge as one of five Plainsmen in double figures as he posted a double-double with 24 points and 12 rebounds.

"We hit cross-court passes, which helped get Nick and Robert (Jones) layups because our guards did a good job of playing at our pace. And when we weren't turning the ball over, we were getting layups or wide open shots," Trenkle said. "Nick had a great game and seemed to score a lot when we needed it the most."

Sophomore guard Dominic Robinson followed with 17 points, while Jones added 16 points and sophomore transfer Logan Kelley added 14 points off the bench on 5-of-10 shooting, including 4 of-7 from 3-point range.

And perhaps Trenkle's favorite part about Saturday night's win, aside from it coming at home inside the Bank of Colorado Event Center, was that it was a good bounce-back performance after NJC started the New Year with a 89-85 non-conference road loss to Northwest Kansas Technical College two nights earlier.

"We played Northwest Kansas so that we could be ready for games like this and it obviously helped us," Trenkle said. "I think that loss probably helped us, made us a little bit hungrier to go win this game."

NJC will be back in action with a pair of road games this week, starting with a 7:30 p.m. game on Tuesday against Western Nebraska Community College.

David Wilson: 970-526-9285, dwilson@journal-advocate.com