It started as a simple way for Orange County homebuilders to give back to the community and generate some positive PR.

Instead of writing a check, the they would build homes for the homeless.

The program gelled into a permanent charity, building and renovating 54 homeless shelters and creating 1,100 new beds across Orange County over the past 27 years. Eventually, the program served as the blueprint for a national organization.

HomeAid now has chapters in 17 cities and contributed to the renovation or construction of 410 shelters worth more than $200 million.

About 7,800 new beds have been created nationwide, and about 225,000 homeless people have spent at least one night in a HomeAid shelter, said Peter Simons, a former Beazer Homes division president and chief executive of Newport Beach-based HomeAid America.

“Pretty much all the nationals have built a HomeAid project,” Simons said, referring to big builders. “It’s pretty much a builder charity.”

Orange County roots

HomeAid started as a public relations gesture. The local Building Industry Association wanted to improve the image of builders amid the growing popularity of the slow-growth movement.

“We were doing good things for the community, but people weren’t aware of it,” said Larry Webb, CEO of the New Home Co. and a longtime HomeAid board member. “Every company did their own thing. But by doing something together, we’d have a greater impact.”

After doing one project, builders wanted to keep going. HomeAid was born.

Since then, HomeAid has worked with key service providers that include Mercy House, the Orange County Rescue Mission, Casa Teresa and Orangewood Children’s Foundation.

In Orange County, projects range from remodeling a Placentia shelter to reduce energy bills to building a home for AIDs patients in Santa Ana.

HomeAid Orange County helped convert an unmarketable remnant of land in Buena Park into 17 new townhomes for homeless families.

And it was a key player in the 13-year project to build the Orange County Rescue Mission’s Village of Hope, a manicured 192-bed transitional shelter on the former Tustin Marine base.

The 5-acre complex includes three-story barracks renovated to look like modern apartment buildings. The brown, stucco buildings overlook an enclosed, palm-shaded compound that’s home to a medical clinic, cafeteria and programs that provide spiritual guidance, counseling and parenting classes.

The agencies provide the beds and services needed to help struggling families get back on their feet. HomeAid provides the “sticks and bricks” to do it in.

“It is one of the most important nonprofit agencies in terms of addressing homelessness in Orange County,” said Larry Haynes, executive director of Mercy House, which operates the cold-weather armory shelters in Santa Ana and Fullerton. “Without HomeAid, our capacity is a fraction of what it has been.”

Haynes added that prior to HomeAid’s efforts, shelters here were spartan, utilitarian and rundown. Because HomeAid is able to bring in architects, engineers and consultants – often working for free – the buildings are better designed.

“You can say what you want about the value of human dignity, but if you’re moving (homeless people) into a dump, you’ve communicated what you think of them,” Haynes said. “With HomeAid, it really communicates a very different message and respect.”

Life on the street

Cordiella James used to think that life on the street was fun.

After her mother kicked her out of the house for using methamphetamine, she ended up on Beach Boulevard, “stuck doing drugs, not really caring about myself,” she said.

“I was homeless, hopping from motel to motel and kicking it with people who had drugs,” the 29-year-old Fresno native said. “At first, it was fun. It was really, really fun. I didn’t have any rules or anyone I answered to.”

And it continued being fun “until I started going to jail.”

For the next two years, she was in and out of detention for repeated drug and probation violations. Each time she got released, she’d go back to the streets – and to smoking meth.

Then everything changed. She got pregnant, and realized she had to clean up her act.

“I didn’t want (my son) to have the life I had,” she said. “I wanted to get clean and sober before he was born so he’d have a chance at a good life that I didn’t have.”

Instead of hitting the streets, she hit the phones – and found a bed in the Precious Life Shelter for expectant homeless women.

That night, she slept in a compound of neat, yellow-sided homes built by HomeAid.

On the rise

Service providers counted 4,452 homeless people in January during the latest “point-in-time” survey of people living in shelters or on the streets, according to Orange County’s 2015 “Homeless Count & Survey Report.”

Officials projected another 11,000 Orange County residents would become homeless at some point this year.

This year’s tally was up by 201 people from the last count in 2013, a 5 percent gain. It’s possible that counters merely spotted more homeless this time around.

But with rent going through the roof, it’s likely homelessness is on the rise, said Karen B. Williams, president and CEO of 2-1-1 Orange County, a nonprofit referral service that oversees the county’s homeless management system.

“We see more people who are falling into homelessness rather than chronically homeless,” Williams said.

In Los Angeles, the rising tide of homelessness has created a state of emergency, Mayor Eric Garcetti and council members said Tuesday. Estimates of Los Angeles’ homeless population ranged from 25,000 to 41,000, up 12 percent to 16 percent over 2013 counts.

Los Angeles leaders want to spend $100 million to solve the problem.

“We must do everything we can now to get people off the streets and into housing with the resources we have available,” Garcetti said in a letter to the city’s administrative officer.

Making a dent

HomeAid America’s programs are small compared to the scope of homelessness. Still, program executives say they are making a dent in the problem.

HomeAid America has 62 projects underway this year, with a total value of $23.8 million, Simons said. HomeAid typically reduces a provider’s costs by 50 percent by getting contractors at cost, pro bono professional services and donated materials.

Locally, HomeAid had three construction projects this year, with a total value of $3.5 million. About three-fourths of its annual budget goes to housing projects, it reported in its 2013 tax return.

Current projects include renovating apartment buildings for two children’s programs and construction of a new community center at the Orangewood school.

Autumn Strier, president and CEO of Miracles for Kids, estimates she saved $300,000 in renovation costs on a apartment building her agency bought, thanks to HomeAid and other backers.

The 12-unit “Miracle Manor” will house families of critically ill children. Because those families are at risk of becoming homeless, HomeAid brought in a builder to replace decaying stairs with donated labor and materials and an architect to work pro bono.

Today, the walls are covered with black tar paper and chicken wire as workers prepare to re-stucco the first two-story building. Workers are painting newly sheet-rocked interiors.

“If you have a child with a medical illness, it can spin you financially out of control,” said HomeAidOC Executive Director Scott Larson.

Redemption

In Los Alamitos, HomeAid is working on its fifth project with Precious Life Shelter, which helps homeless mothers through childbirth, then provides housing for up to two years after their babies are born.

Theresa and Don Sherrin started Precious Life in 1982 when they took four expectant homeless women into their home.

Eventually, the Sherrins opened a shelter in a house renovated by HomeAid. Over the years, the charity brought in different homebuilders to add space. Today, there are six buildings on the shelter’s property, including a row of two-room apartments for moms and their children.

Now, an architect and a HomeAid staffer are in talks with the city about plans to tear down a nearby house and build a small apartment building to provide permanent affordable housing for new mothers.

The shelter has strict rules.

“It’s actually a working place,” said Cordiella James, who gave birth to a healthy boy, Brandon, four months ago. “From the moment that I got here, they said, this is what you have to do.”

She started attending Alcoholic Anonymous meetings five times a week, took parenting classes and got counseling. They taught her social skills and life skills. She found a job. They provided her with food, dishes, home supplies and daycare while she works at a nearby restaurant.

“They gave me all the tools that I needed to succeed,” James said. “Basically, since I’ve been here, I have not wanted for anything, and that’s the greatest gift I could have ever received.

“I’m a productive member of society now.”

About 100 women go through the program each year, said Precious Life founder Theresa Sherrin.

“HomeAid did all of this,” Sherrin, 79, said, waving a hand at the buildings. “We wouldn’t have any of this without them.”

Register staff writer Teri Sforza and Register wire services contributed to this report.

Contact the writer: 714-796-7734 or jcollins@ocregister.com