Buy Photo CentraState Medical Center in Freehold Township was one of four local hospitals penalized by Medicare over high infection rates and other patient injuries. (Photo: FILE PHOTO)Buy Photo

Shore-area hospitals are learning a tough lesson: They've taken steps to deliver better patient care, but the bar is getting higher and higher.

That's the message after four hospitals at the Shore – CentraState Medical Center in Freehold Township, Monmouth Medical Center in Long Branch, Ocean Medical Center in Brick and Southern Ocean Medical Center in Stafford – were penalized by Medicare because of high infection rates and other patient injuries, Kaiser Health found.

"We know there's more work to be done," said Kerry McKean Kelly, spokeswoman for the New Jersey Hospital Association, a trade group. "But it's very frustrating to see that kind of progress in our state and still have hospitals face penalties under the very limited design of this (Medicare) incentive program."

The Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services' penalties are part of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare. The goal: to reward hospitals that treat Medicare patients efficiently and keep a lid on escalating health care costs.

To do that, Kaiser reported, it looked at three categories: infections caused by tubes that pump fluids or medicine into the veins; infections from tubes to remove urine from the bladder; and rates of eight serious complications, ranging from collapsed lungs to broken hips.

It ranked the hospitals on a scale of one to 10. Those with a total score of more than seven – a quarter of hospitals nationwide – had their Medicare reimbursement rates cut by 1 percent for the fiscal year that began in October. The total amount was estimated at $373 million.

Buy Photo Monmouth Medical Center in Long Branch was one of four local hospitals penalized. (Photo: FILE PHOTO)

Surprised by results

The Medicare findings were surprising, said David Knowlton, president and chief executive officer of the New Jersey Health Care Quality Institute, a research group. Other surveys have found New Jersey hospitals were making strides.

He recently helped with a study by The Leapfrog Group that looked at more than two dozen safety measures. CentraState, Monmouth Medical Center and Ocean Medical Center all received a grade of B. Southern Ocean Medical Center received a grade of C.

The Medicare study looked just at Medicare patients – a group that is mostly 65 or older. The Leapfrog Group study looked at all patients. But Knowlton said the Medicare results should remind hospital executives to have what he called a culture of safety, with employees double-checking each others' work.

Like a pilot who examines his airplane before flying, "you have to have redundancy," Knowlton said. "It's tightening those things up."

Buy Photo Southern Ocean Medical Center in Stafford was one of four local hospitals penalized by Medicare over high infection rates and other patient injuries. (Photo: FILE PHOTO)

Hospital responses

The findings were based on 2013 data. "As a result, we have already addressed the areas of concern and have processes in place to make improvements," said Steven G. Littleson, executive vice president of Meridian Health, the Wall-based company that owns Ocean Medical Center and Southern Ocean Medical Center. "We are constantly reviewing patient safety indicators with a keen focus on quality improvement."

Monmouth Medical Center executives noted it was named one of the top performers by The Joint Commission, a hospital accreditation group. "Monmouth Medical Center has always maintained a strong commitment to quality and outstanding care and we've consistently implemented evidence-based best practices in patient care," the hospital said in a statement.

CentraState referred questions to the New Jersey Hospital Association, the trade group that took issue with the government's methodology.

More than one-third of the state's hospitals were penalized even though the association's members participate in a quality-control program that has cut the number of 13 hospital-acquired conditions by 34.5 percent in two years, McKean Kelly said.

Shore-area hospitals facing Medicare penalties:

•CentraState Medical Center

•Monmouth Medical Center

•Ocean Medical Center

•Southern Ocean Medical Center

Shore-area hospitals not facing Medicare penalties:

••Bayshore Community Hospital

•Community Medical Center

•Jersey Shore University Medical Center

•Monmouth Medical Center Southern Campus (formerly Kimball Medical Center)

•Riverview Medical Center

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/16MTapc