You know me. I never want to offend anyone.

But I walked through a stinking gray cloud of smoke on 16th Street in Denver last week, looked at the winners who were sucking on the smoldering tobacco, and began to wonder: Who the heck still smokes cigarettes?

Remember, we’re talking 50 years after the Surgeon General said in no uncertain terms that smoking will likely kill you.

I smoked. For some 30 years. Quit nine years ago. And I don’t want to be one of those obnoxious, holier-than-thou former smokers who insult and belittle current smokers.

But it turns out — and this isn’t me talking here but the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta — that people who continue to smoke cigarettes are stupid. Or ignorant. Or uneducated. Or all three.

From a 2010 CDC study: “The overall prevalence of smoking declines with increasing years of education. In 2009, the prevalence of cigarette smoking ranged from 9 percent among college graduates to 28.9 percent among those with less than a high school diploma.”

So if we get rid of big words like “prevalence” so you smokers might understand it, what the report is saying is that if you smoke cigarettes today, you:

• Probably stared at the orange juice carton this morning because it said “concentrate.”

• Sold your car for gas money.

• Once got locked inside a mattress store overnight and slept on the floor.

Like smokers, the habit is slowly dying. The American Cancer Society says 42 percent of American adults smoked in 1965. Today it’s just 18 percent.

That puts you smokers in what statisticians call a “smaller group” because there are “fewer of you.” And let’s not even bring up the “yellow teeth.”

Cigarettes cause 480,000 deaths each year in the U.S. Ten times more Americans have died from cigarettes than have died in all the wars fought by the U.S. in its history. Smoking causes more deaths each year than HIV, illegal drug use, alcohol use, car crashes and gunfire. Combined.

Here, many of you smokers are wheezing, coughing up a ball of greenish stuff, trying to get out of your beanbag chair and are saying, “So, what’s with all that stuff about us being stuppid and unedumacated?”

Glad you asked. And remember, these are not my studies. As the old saying goes, don’t blow a noseful of disgusting, low-life, arsenic-filled cigarette smoke at the messenger.

From the CDC: “Behavioral problems have also been linked to smoking. Studies have shown that students who smoke are also more likely to use other drugs, get in fights, carry weapons, try to kill themselves and take part in risky sex.”

Smoking, as we were told in 1964, causes lung cancer, heart disease, stroke and emphysema, to name the biggies. It also causes other people to point at you and laugh.

Cigarettes contain more than 7,000 chemicals, including formaldehyde, which is used to embalm the dead. It also contains cadmium (used to make batteries), arsenic, carbon monoxide (car exhaust), hydrogen cyanide, ammonia, butane and toluene (also found in paint thinner.)

Which makes it even more dangerous than the smoke you inhaled as a kid — when they had to burn down your school to get you out of the third grade.

Contact Rich Tosches at richtosches@gmail.com.