“A couple of glitches, that’s all.” No worries here.

“A few bumps in the road…”

Was that President Obama in the Rose Garden behind those rose-colored glasses spinning his way out of the ugly launch of the so-called “Affordable Health Care Act?”

Or was it Los Angeles Unified School District Superintendent John “What Me Worry?” Deasy, uploading the latest whopper on the LAUSD’s iPad debacle?

The correct answer is C) Both.

While Americans collectively scratch our heads in befuddlement at how more than 400 million taxpayer dollars failed to produce a functional website for the president’s signature health care law, closer to home the LAUSD’s giant leap into the digital future, a scheme to distribute iPads to every student in the nation’s second-largest school district, failed to clear the launch pad.

The bungled debut of the Affordable Care Act and the botched iPad giveaway has produced at least one positive result, actual bipartisanship. Liberal or conservative, Republican or Democrat, Americans by the millions are rightly wondering, “Who’s running the show?”

These twin blunders transcend party politics and cut to something more fundamentally frustrating — rampant incompetence.

The “I” word isn’t used much in Washington. Partisans tend to ascribe nefarious motives to every move made by their political opponents when oftentimes the culprit is simple human foibles.

Granted some foibles are writ larger than others; unconnected dots led to the Sept. 11 attacks and “faulty” intelligence justified the invasion of the wrong country, Iraq, when the terror attacks came from Afghanistan with Saudi Arabian terrorists flying the planes.

Still, the Obamacare mess and iPad snafu are not bumps in the road. They’ve become par for the course, emblematic of governmental bungling at every level.

As reported in the Daily News, the giant retaining walls along the 405 were crumbling before they were even completed and now we learn the new runway at LAX is also failing apart.

Added to an epidemic of sexual shenanigans by elected officials and the mean-spirited and self-serving posturing that passes for political discourse and it’s small wonder we’re suffering from a crisis in confidence.

Every day I encounter remarkable men and women who are great at what they do and work hard to be great at what they do. They rarely hold public office.

That isn’t to say private industry doesn’t produce its share of doofuses and maddening bureaucratic mumbo-jumbo. Try reading your cellphone contract if you don’t believe me. But commercial transactions are voluntary, government isn’t.

Advertisement

The best and the brightest? I’d like some names please.

Instead we get mistake after mistake, and it’s never anyone’s fault.

We’re told that kids easily working their way around the LAUSD’s security firewalls to surf for porn, video games and other areas of academic interest on their free iPads was simply overblown nonsense — minor bumps in the road anticipated by the IT savants at LAUSD.

Then there was the issue of the $38 million keyboards necessary to make the iPads compatible with the Common Core tests the state of California will offer only in digital form.

And there appears to be a little confusion over who’s on the hook for the loss, theft or damage to the $678 iPads.

Now we learn the actual price of the iPads isn’t $678, but $770 per tablet, a 14 percent hike, and the special educational software is still in “development.”

Those bells you hear ringing aren’t school bells, they’re alarm bells. Remember the LAUSD’s computer payroll system? Software problems ran into the hundreds of millions of dollars.

Ultimately the Affordable Care Act and the iPad program may prove to be not only successful but visionary. I’m open to that possibility.

But skepticism is justified based on the long history of misinformation, spin and outright lies that have been fed to a too-patient public left holding the bag for every blunder ... pardon me, every bump in the road.

Doug McIntyre’s column appears Sunday and Wednesday. He can be reached at: Doug@KABC.com.