Eleanor Straub (Photo: Courtesy)

Open letter from the parent of a very small child:

Dear World,

Why didn't you tell me, before I had this child, what I would have to go through to rear him properly? Why didn't you tell me that there is probably no such thing as rearing him properly? If I concentrate on one part of his development, I am sure to ignore another. If I work too hard on his manners, he may lose his charming spontaneity. If I push him toward academic excellence, he may miss the crux of the only really carefree time of his life. I am bound to make bad decisions, and they are certain to show in him.

So please do me a favor. If you notice some area of my child's development which needs attention, please tell me. I am sure you an find a tactful way of doing that and the chances are better than ever that I will appreciate it and remember you kindly for it. One of the things I want most is to raise a happy, useful person who is equipped to reach his highest potential, and I know I will do a better job of it with your help.

Hurriedly yours.

Open letter from the parent of a young teenager:

Dear World,

I have been at this for over a decade now, and frankly, I don't know any more than I did at the beginning. So many times I have wondered, "Is this child going through a phase? Will he grow out of this naturally, or is it a deficit in him as an individual which I should bend my energy toward correcting?"

There is apparently a sound barrier which exists between my mouth and his ears. I have reasoned. I have screamed. I have left clever little notes. I have put the words of my pleas to music and sung them to a chorus of "Baby-baby-baby's" and "Yeah-yeah-yeah's." Still he doesn't hear me.

What frightens me is that I am not only failing to get across my own points, but have, perforce, ignored the things which have not occurred to me. Yet I can't handle much more.

So, please do me a favor. If you notice some area of my child's development which needs attention, tell him. I am sure you can find a tactful way of doing this, and the chances are that he will accept it more gracefully from you than he would from me.

You say he snarled at you, and muttered something which sounded obscene? I told you he would accept it more gracefully from you. That's his graceful acceptance.

We're in this together, you know, because their generation will be running ours one day. So let's unite and do all we can to rear him well for the common good.

Harriedly yours.

Open letter from the parent of a grown child:

Dear World,

Well, that's that. Whatever it was I've been doing these past 20 years is done, for better or for worse. He's his own person, and there may just be a chance that I, too, am again my own person. But the score of years has left its mark. I will never be free of concern for his well-being and, though I know I have no right to do so, I take pride in his accomplishments.

I no longer have the right to criticize or impose my will on him and this is my burden I must always carry, because my will so longs to be imposed on him.

So, please do me a favor. When he has offended you, please don't tell me about it, because there is nothing I can do. But when he has earned you good will, call me — collect —from any place, at any hour, and tell me good things about him, omitting no detail, no matter how minute. For life holds few moments as glowing for a parent as those when a child's praises are sung.

Humanly yours.

— Eleanor F. Straub was a columnist for The Daily Advertiser from 1983-1985. Her funeral was Saturday.

Read or Share this story: http://www.theadvertiser.com/story/opinion/2015/05/09/raising-children-easy-task/27042899/