File: Ezekiel "Zeke" Emanuel, Vice Provost for Global Initiatives and Chair of Medical Ethics and Health Policy at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. ( SHARON GEKOSKI-KIMMEL / Staff Photographer )

File: Ezekiel "Zeke" Emanuel, Vice Provost for Global Initiatives and Chair of Medical Ethics and Health Policy at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. ( SHARON GEKOSKI-KIMMEL / Staff Photographer )

In Tuesday night's State of the Union speech, President Obama said he hoped that American technological knowledge would lead to greater use of precision medicine to cure health problems.

"Twenty-first century businesses will rely on American science and technology, research and development," Obama said. "I want the country that eliminated polio and mapped the human genome to lead a new era of medicine - one that delivers the right treatment at the right time.

"In some patients with cystic fibrosis, this approach has reversed a disease once thought unstoppable. So tonight, I’m launching a new Precision Medicine Initiative to bring us closer to curing diseases like cancer and diabetes, and to give all of us access to the personalized information we need to keep ourselves and our families healthier. We can do this." A link to the White House website related to the speech is here.

What he didn't say was that advances in - and use of - high-tech medical devices are one of the biggest reasons that healthcare costs have soared in the recent decades. Medical device companies want to make big profits, like the rest of the for-profit (and some nonprofit) healthcare industry. Everybody wants lower healthcare costs - except when they are selling medicine, insurance, providing a service. Obama's Affordable Care Act has started to slow the rise in cost of healthcare, but the job losses and wage stagnation since the 2008 recession are also factors.

Ezekiel J. Emanuel, who advised the White House on healthcare reform and now has positions with Penn's Wharton School and the Perelman School of Medicine, appeared Wednesday on CNBC's Squawk Box from the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. A link to Emanuel's Wharton bio is here. The link to the interview is here.

Calling this period, "the biggest revolution in 100 years," of healthcare, Emanuel several times said he was concerned about assumptions that technology will quickly cure diseases or control costs.

"I am a skeptic on all this science," Emanuel said. On slowing the rise of healthcare costs in the last couple years, Emanuel said, "No one attributes that to the advancements in science."

Electronic medical records are logical for saving lives, especially in an emergency room when a doctor doesn't know the patient, and might eventually lead to cost savings, but that savings system-wide is still to come. And if better knowledge is used to raise a price for a drug or deny insurance coverage of medicine or care, how will patients react? Will those patient/taxpayers be willing to pay more for such care?

Emanuel noted that in the early 1970s, President Nixon launched the War on Cancer. While many people now live longer after being diagnosed with forms of cancer, the "war" is far from won. Mapping the human genome is the basis of theories on personal medicine, but early promotion of its immediate impact by some scientists (and some media) has yet to pan out in numerous cures or cost savings. Emanuel noted that idea is now 15 years old.

"I would be skeptical that precision therapy will be how we control costs," Emanuel said.

How should we get healthier and control costs?

"We need to exercise more and eat better," Emanuel said.