It’s official: Following a contentious meeting with City Park neighbors on Dec. 6, Denver Parks and Recreation posted its intentions regarding the next steps in a plan to substitute an outsized folly for the deteriorating one-acre Dustin Redd playground in City Park.

The City Loop proposal would convert 13 acres to a regional destination, with a frenetic mix of kinetic amusements, skate parks, rain gardens, spiral slides and faux forests.

Following months of website postings, phone calls, e-mails and petitions, a group of neighborhood stakeholders finally got the department’s attention. Parks manager Lauri Dannemiller met with 80 residents on Dec. 6. After, the department notified attendees they would:

• Temporarily stop seeking foundation support to pay for the $5 million City Loop project;

• Review an exhaustive list of deferred maintenance and renovation needs, from the Sullivan Gateway to the malfunctioning interactive fountain south of the Museum of Nature & Science; and

• Hire respected local landscape architect Tina Bishop to work with the design team to rethink the project’s scope and scale.

It’s a good start, although improved park maintenance ought to be on the list, too. And if the Loop is such a good idea, why not ask Denver taxpayers to fund it?

The first step in the city’s reevaluation ought to be a thorough review of “Revitalizing the Legacy of City Park,” its comprehensive 2001 assessment and strategic plan for the preservation and enhancement of the park. (Bishop and her partner, Pat Mundus, were prime consultants for the document.)

The plan acknowledges the challenge of protecting the park’s character while serving nearly 4 million annual visitors to the zoo and museum, and an estimated 60,000 residents from dense adjacent neighborhoods who consider City Park their neighborhood respite. The park also hosts concerts and other special events.

The report documents four years of community engagement and is intended to guide long-term policies and decisions for City Park. Adopted unanimously by the city council and approved by the mayor, recommendations include re-establishing historic circulation routes; adding structured parking for the zoo and museum; restoring historic landscape elements; and preserving areas of tranquility, specifically City Park’s six westerly meadows.

Confidence in parks leadership is at an all-time low, thanks to a series of recent initiatives ranging from land swaps to increased fees, competition with private business for fields used by adult sports leagues, and ongoing problems in Civic Center and Skyline parks.

The most recent insult began with the 2010 zoo expansion. A parcel of parkland between the Pavilion and Ferril Lake Gate was fenced for construction vehicles. Upon completion, the trucks went away but the fence remained and the site was used for parking. When neighbors complained, Dannemiller explained that a 1998 agreement gave the parks manager sole authority to negotiate with the zoo and museum for additional land.

Late last week, the construction fence was removed and replaced with concrete panels forming a high wall around the former green space.

It’s time to implement one of the strongest recommendations of the 2001 plan: designate City Park a Denver Historic District. Doing so would mean every project, demolition or alteration within the park’s perimeter requires public notification and expert design review.

Civic activist Susan Barnes-Gelt can be reached at BarnesGelt@gmail. com or @SBGTweets.