Reconsider 'Texas solution' for Medicaid





Photo: LM Otero / Associated Press Image 1 of / 2 Caption Close Image 1 of 2 Gov. Rick Perry refused to support a bipartisan alternative to Medicaid expansion.With new faces in the Legislature and Governor's Mansion next year, the time is right to explore a “Texas solution” that would benefit the state economically and the working poor who remain without health insurance. less Gov. Rick Perry refused to support a bipartisan alternative to Medicaid expansion.With new faces in the Legislature and Governor's Mansion next year, the time is right to explore a “Texas solution” that ... more Photo: LM Otero / Associated Press Image 2 of 2 Robert Brischetto is former executive director of the Southwest Voter Research Institute. Robert Brischetto is former executive director of the Southwest Voter Research Institute. Reconsider 'Texas solution' for Medicaid 1 / 2 Back to Gallery

If candidates for governor and the Legislature can put aside party politics long enough to discern the economic benefits of expanding Medicaid, there may be renewed hope for covering approximately 2 million uninsured low-income Texans left out of the new health care law.

New studies on the results of the first enrollment period of the Affordable Care Act show that the 26 states expanding Medicaid have not only increased insurance coverage but reaped economic rewards from the greater federal funds that have spurred growth in the health sectors of these states.

In August, the Urban Institute released a review of state-level fiscal studies in 16 states. In each analysis, expansion of Medicaid was found to help state budgets. Without exception, state savings and new state revenue were found to exceed state Medicaid expansion costs. The Urban Institute estimated the 10-year state price tag to expand Medicaid in Texas from 2013 to 2022 would be $5.7 billion, but the state would get $65.6 billion in federal matching funds over that period.

Of all the states, Texas would seem to be the most likely candidate for expanding Medicaid. Texas has the highest percent of uninsured residents. One in 4 Texans — 6.4 million — are uninsured.

Only extremely poor families with children qualify for Medicaid in Texas. To qualify under the current plan, an adult must be a parent with an annual family income of less than 19 percent of the federal poverty level: $3,700 for a family of three. Only one other state, Alabama, has a lower income eligibility limit. Nondisabled adults who have no children are not eligible at all.

Expanding Medicaid eligibility to nearly all low-income adults — those with incomes below 138 percent of the poverty level, or $27,300 for a family of three — was one of the core components of the coverage provisions of the ACA as passed in 2010. The federal government would cover total cost of Medicaid expansion for the first three years and at least 90 percent of the cost thereafter.

Then in June 2012, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that Medicaid expansion is optional for states, and Texas was one of 24 (mostly Southern) states that elected not to expand Medicaid. In all states, people with incomes above 100 percent of poverty — depending on their salary and number of people in their household — can receive premium tax credits, or subsidies, to purchase coverage through the Health Insurance Marketplaces. But people below poverty are not eligible for marketplace subsidies, thus creating an eligibility gap for poor people in states that do not expand Medicaid.

It's estimated that more than 1 million working-age Texans living below poverty lack an affordable coverage option, according to Anne Dunkelberg of the Center for Public Policy Priorities. And almost 8 in 10 of them are people of color.

As much as $6 billion in federal funds are lost each year that Texas does not take advantage of the offer to expand Medicaid. Even worse, lack of access to health coverage among low-income Texans results in poor health due to delay of care and continued use of emergency rooms for routine care, increasing costs to everyone in the health care system.

A “Texas solution” to the coverage gap might allow the state to accept federal funds within a state-customized private alternative to expanding Medicaid. Such a plan was offered by legislators on both sides of the aisle in 2013, but it did not receive support from Gov. Rick Perry.

Realizing the economic and health care costs of the governor's rejection of the federal offer to expand, county judges from the six largest Texas counties have called for a “uniquely Texas solution” to the medical needs of the poor in a letter to the chair of the Senate Health and Human Services Commission.

Texas will have a new governor and some new legislators in 2015. The question that voters should be asking the candidates in November is whether they can remove their ideological blinders to allow negotiation with the feds for a creative solution to the problem of health care coverage for the disadvantaged.

Robert Brischetto is former executive director of the Southwest Voter Research Institute.