KALAMAZOO, MI -- Dr. Ben Carson, a nationally renowned neurosurgeon and potential 2016 presidential candidate, is coming to Kalamazoo in November to talk about how faith and family helped him achieve success.

The speech will be at 7 p.m. Nov. 13 at Valley Family Church in Portage. Tickets are $50 and the event is a fundraiser for the Kalamazoo Christian Schools Association.

Carson, 62, recently retired as director of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins Hospital and has been become a popular figure in conservative politics for his outspoken opposition to gay marriage and the Affordable Care Act, as well as his support for a flat tax system.

There is a movement to draft Carson for the 2016 presidential campaign. A political action committee formed by Carson has raised $8 million to date, and this summer Carson has named the person who would head his presidential campaign should he moved ahead.

"I would say we are definitely a step or two closer than we were a year ago," Carson told the Washington Times in July.

However, Carson has drawn sharp criticism for some of his comments, including a controversial speech at the 2013 National Prayer Breakfast and comments that in which he said the ACA was the "worst thing that has happened in this country since slavery."

RELATED STORY: Viewpoint: Divisive Ben Carson bad fit for inclusive Kalamazoo.

Jeff Lectka, KCSA director of development, said the November speech will not be political.

"It's not a political event," Lectka said. "The speech will be based on one of his books, 'Think Big in Education and Leadership,' which is mainly about his story on how he was a troubled young man and how faith and family played into his success. We think that's a message a lot of people can relate to."

Carson's parents divorced when he was 8, and he was raised by a single mother. He graduated from Detroit's Southwestern High School in the late 1960s, and went onto Yale for his undergraduate degree and earned his medical degree from the University of Michigan.

At age 33, he became the youngest major division director in Johns Hopkins history, as director of pediatric neurosurgery.

In 1987, Carson garnered headlines for leading a team of surgeons who were the first to successfully separated conjoined twins who were joined at the back of their heads.

He has received many awards and honorary degrees, including the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2008.

Lectka said there was some discussion in the KCSA about the controversy around Carson. "We talked about it a bit," Lectka said, but decided the community would be interested in what Carson has to say beyond his political views.

In the posting on the KCSA website, KCSA lead administrator said the hope is the event will "bring our schools and our community closer together. Our schools have much to offer Kalamazoo, Portage, and West Michigan. This is our attempt to bring even greater value to that community."

Tickets are available online at the www.kcsa.org/events or by calling Lectka at 269-381-2044.

Julie Mack covers K-12 education and writes a column for Kalamazoo Gazette. Email her at jmack1@mlive.com, call her at 269-350-0277 or follow her on Twitter @kzjuliemack.