SHARE TORIN HALSEY/TIMES RECORD NEWS The former Big 5 Sporting Goods store in Kemp Boulevard will soon be the location of Select ER, a freestanding, independent emergency room business.

By John Ingle of the Times Record News

City and area residents will have a couple more options when it comes to emergency care in Wichita Falls with the addition of two freestanding emergency rooms.

Select ER is set to renovate the former Big 5 Sporting Goods space at 3808 Kemp Blvd., and Neighbors Emergency Center will be a new build on a pad located on the southeast corner of Kell East and McNiel near Outback Pools & Spa. The freestanding emergency room concept is not new to Texas, but it is to Wichita Falls.

Andy Lee Company and Hirschi Associates brokered the deal to bring Select ER here. Information about who brokered the Neighbors deal wasn't available.

Tracey Garman, a registered nurse and principal partner with Select ER, said there are more than 180 stand-alone emergency rooms including about 75 in Houston where she is based. She said the group that began Select ER has been in the business for seven years, but they wanted to branch out and create a new brand.

"We've taken the full services of a hospital emergency department and we've now located them conveniently in locations where neighbors are — neighborhoods, daily needs corners where it's convenient (and) people can see it and they don't always have to go to the busy emergency department at the hospital. They don't have to navigate a busy hospital," she said. "They pull into the parking lot and walk right (through) the door."

Bruce McVeigh, chief operating officer for Houston-based Neighbors, said freestanding emergency rooms are redefining what emergency care is in regards to how quickly a patient can be seen. The retired Army hospital manager with multiple tours to the Middle East said the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act has resulted in more crowded hospital emergency rooms where patient satisfaction has dropped.

"That's the reason our guys formed the company," he said, "to kind of enhanced and redefine that experience."

Both representatives said there respective businesses are full-service emergency rooms that can handle cases traditionally treated at hospital ERs. They said they will have trauma room, X-ray, labs and other services. In the event a patient needs to be hospitalized, they will be transferred to a hospital that can handle acute cases.

Local physicians, nurses and other specialties and support roles will be hired to man and operate the facilities, they said.

The pair also said people should be aware that a freestanding ER is not the same as an urgent care center and will be charged for an ER visit, not the less costly urgent care or walk-in setting. The companies accept most insurance, but because the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid does not recognize them as an ER, they are not able to accept Medicare, Medicaid or TRICARE as insurance.

Phyllis Cowling, president and CEO of United Regional Health Care System, said she doesn't know what type of impact two stand-alone ERs will have on health care in the area. Her concern, she said, is patients might choose to go to a freestanding facility for something they believe is heartburn when in fact they could be having a heart attack and need to be transferred to United Regional for a higher level of care, creating an unnecessary step in the process.

"I do think that people need to be mindful and educated about when to use a freestanding emergency room and when not to," Cowling said. "I think some people — it's easy to get confused and to think a freestanding emergency room is an urgent care clinic. It's not. If you go there, you're not going to get charged a clinic price ..."

Kelly Fristoe, a health underwriter in Wichita Falls, said he has clients who have used stand-alone ERs for minor ailments and suffer sticker shock when they receive the bill. For example, he said a client went to such a place in College Station for a migraine headache and was billed thousands of dollars because the ER was out of network.

"As I've traveled around the state I've even seen commercials where they advertise that the ER will accept all insurance," he said. "The consumer perceives that as, 'Oh, OK, so this ER is in my network and I've got benefits here.' Not so fast. Yes, they accept the insurance but the ER is usually not in the insurance networks."

Select ER has a target of February to open its doors, and Neighbors is shooting for the third week of April.