Funds may offer capital gains surprises

Investors should think twice before buying actively managed stock funds in their taxable accounts until after funds have made their capital gains distributions for the year.

Most funds typically distribute capital gains in November or December. Anyone who owns shares on the record date will receive the distributions. If they hold the shares in a taxable account, the distribution will be considered taxable income for 2014.

Distributions made a big comeback last year and are likely to be even bigger this year.

Based on a Sept. 30 estimate, T. Rowe Price figures that 78 percent of its retail domestic and foreign stock funds will pay a distribution this year, up from 63 percent last year, and that the dollar amount of distributions will be about 58 percent higher.

Many fund families have published preliminary estimated distributions for individual funds on their websites, or will soon.

People who are getting subsidized health insurance premiums under the Affordable Care Act should pay close attention if they own shares in a taxable account. An unexpected distribution could reduce their subsidy or even eliminate it if it pushes their 2014 income over 400 percent of the federal poverty limit for their family size. I highlighted this possibility in my Jan. 30 column, which you can find at http://bit.ly/1ugseqi.

Funds are required to pay out almost all of their realized net capital gains each year, meaning gains minus losses on assets they have sold. If their losses for the year exceed gains, they can carry their net losses forward to offset gains in future years.

After 2008, many stock funds had such huge losses they didn’t have to pay out capital gains for years. But most of those losses have been exhausted, and with the market hitting records, distributions could be even higher next year.

Last year, almost 58 percent of stock funds paid a distribution, up from 36 percent in 2012 and 29 percent in 2011, according to Morningstar. Distributions were also bigger: On average they were 6.1 percent of the fund’s year-end share price, compared to 3.7 percent in 2012.

Fidelity put out estimated distributions in late October and will do a more accurate revision in late November. “We expect distributions to be similar to last year or even higher,” said Fidelity spokesman Charles Keller.

Vanguard will put out preliminary capital gains estimates and scheduled record dates on Tuesday. “It’s almost a given that they are going to be bigger,” said Dan Wiener, editor of the Independent Adviser for Vanguard Investors newsletter.

Investors who own mutual funds in Individual Retirement Accounts, 401(k) plans and similar tax-deferred accounts don’t have to worry about distributions.

Even in taxable accounts, investors might not have much to worry about, depending on what kind of funds they own.

Stocks funds are far more likely to make capital gains distributions than bonds and other fixed-income funds. Stock funds that are actively managed tend to make far more distributions than “passive” funds that try to replicate an index. Funds that trade a lot tend to distribute more capital gains than ones that pursue a longer-term, buy and hold strategy. But after more than five years of gains, even some long-term fund managers are having a hard time avoiding distributions.

In an article on Morningstar.com, Dan Culloton highlighted four funds that expect to pay out capital gain for the first time in a decade or more. “The number of actively managed domestic equity funds that have gone a long time, 10 or more years, without paying a capital gain is vanishing,” he said in an interview.

Capital gains distributions can be some combination of short-term and long-term. Investors who receive unwanted capital gains can try to offset them by selling stocks or funds in which they have losses, but these assets also must be held in taxable accounts. However, they, too, might not have a lot of losses left to harvest.

Kathleen Pender is a San Francisco Chronicle columnist. Net Worth runs Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. E-mail: kpender@sfchronicle.com Blog: http://blog.sfgate.com/pender Twitter: @kathpender