Peyton Manning was wrong in his amusing analogy. His team is the Good News Broncos.

The Broncos are No. 1 in the NFL in total defense, and the defensive unit itself has allowed 6, 17 and 12 points.

Once Gary Kubiak took the “pistol” out of its holster, Manning and the Broncos got their groove back. The Broncos won back-to-back on the road.

The Broncos have developed a closer’s mentality.

And the Broncos are about to be 4-0 by Sunday evening at The Authority.

You want Bad News. Check out the Bears with our old friends John Fox, Adam Gase, Jay Cutler et al. They can’t get out of their own way.

Who’s the MVB at this juncture? Wade “I Was a Lousy Head Coach” Phillips, who is a decent defensive coordinator. For the eighth time in his 46-year coaching career, Phillips has taken over a team as defensive coordinator. The first was in 1970 at Lutcher Stark High School in Orange (yes, Orange), Texas, where he was born. The Son of a Bum became the defensive coordinator of the New Orleans Saints in 1981, the Philadelphia Eagles in 1986, the Broncos in 1989, the Buffalo Bills in 1995, the Atlanta Falcons in 2002, the San Diego Chargers in 2004, the Houston Texans in 2011 and the Broncos, again, this year.

In each situation, he has improved the defense impressively in his first season.

But Wade never quite achieved so much so quickly as through three games this season. The Phillips Screwdrivers have permitted only four touchdowns (two others were pick-sixes off Manning) and three field goals. Offenses are averaging only 259 yards per game against the Broncos, and the attack mode has produced 11 sacks, six interceptions and four recovered fumbles.

Is it possible the Broncos become the 50-50 club on defense?

The original Orange Crush in 1977 had 37 sacks and 38 turnovers (25 interceptions, 13 fumbles recovered). Last year, the Broncos finished with 41 sacks, 18 interceptions and 15 fumbles recovered.

The Broncos are on pace for 59.2 sacks and 52.8 turnovers.

In comparison, the Legion of Boom defense for Seattle in 2013 (when the Seahawks beat the Broncos in the Super Bowl) finished the regular season with 43 sacks and 57 turnovers (100 total). The Broncos could top that total by a dozen.

It’s not often that a franchise can engineer one of the greatest offenses in NFL history (2012) and one of the greatest defenses (2015?).

Peyton made pointed references the other day to the old “Bad News Bears” movies, their sequels and their remakes, trying to deflect criticism of the Broncos’ offense.

This is Orange Crush 15.0.

On the eve of taking over the Broncos, John Elway said his objective was to re-create Denver’s old defense. For quite a while, it was “enver efense” — No D.

The first Super Bowl championship team in the 1997 season managed nine fumble recoveries, 18 interceptions and 44 sacks. The next (and last Super Bowl title team) had 31 turnovers and 40 sacks.

This could be the Broncos’ and Wade’s best defense ever, with as many as eight Pro Bowl types (Chris Harris, Aqib Talib, Darian Stewart, Brandon Marshall, Von Miller, DeMarcus Ware, Malik Jackson and — yes, even — Sylvester Williams).

The Vikings bring in Adrian Peterson, the premier running back in the league. He has accumulated more than a third of the Vikings’ total offense, but, lest we forget, Teddy Bridgeovertroubledwater has one touchdown and two interceptions. Peterson could run for 200 yards and three touchdowns, but that won’t be enough to defeat the Broncos.

Not against Optimum Orange.

Bad to the Bone Broncos.

Denver Demolition Inc.

BTU (Broncos Thermal Unit).

Nuke U.

The Broncos are playing one game at a time, of course. It’s not possible to play a doubleheader in pro football.

But the rest of us can think two, or 10, games at a time.

The Broncos didn’t lose in September, and will remain undefeated through October.

But November is another month — with home games against Green Bay, Kansas City and New England, and road games at Indianapolis and in Chicago — vs. the real Bad News Bears.

How about 6-0 Pack and 6-0 Broncos on Sunday night, Nov. 1, on the night Pat Bowlen will be inducted into the Ring of Fame. Who you got?

Or how about 10-0 Pats and 10-0 Broncos on Sunday night, Nov. 29? Brady and Manning last time?

Both games are here, not there. That’s the good news, Broncos.

Woody Paige: woody@woodypaige.com or @woodypaige