Bill Ellis St. Vrain Valley Voices

(Re: Times-Call editorial May 1, 2016, " Hey Congress: Hang up, get back to work" and Dana Milbank, Washington, Post commentary, May 18, "Novel idea: Lawmakers making laws."

In case you missed this excellent editorial, it reported the results of a "60 Minutes" segment documenting how little time members of Congress allot to their jobs. Milbank's commentary endorses it. Political parties now require members to spend 30 hours per week (in a three day workweek) making calls asking for campaign donations. Since they are prohibited from doing that in their offices, members leave and go to call centers off Capitol Hill.

There is an eight-year backlog of problems waiting for Congressional action due to a general atmosphere of non-cooperation, euphemistically called gridlock.

1. At the top of my list of neglected business is a Congressional overturn of Citizens United.

If you want to understand why Bernie Sanders has started a revolution, and Donald Trump has appealed to an angry working class, each throwing their respective parties into turmoil, look at this Supreme Court decision that gave personhood to corporations. This single decision overturned the concept of "one man one vote." It separated us into two groups: the wealthy and a dwindling middle class now merging with citizens at or below poverty level. Money from multi-national corporations and Wall Street controls votes through unlimited campaign contributions to super pacs. Their votes count more than ours and maintain the privileges of the privileged.

Advertisement

2. Next on my list is a tough law mandating public financing of elections. If you want to understand why Congress has ignored the public's problems, see item 1.

3. We need exacting reform of the tax code. If the corporate tax rate is responsible for businesses offshoring capital and jobs, then it needs to be fixed. And that doesn't mean lowering the tax. Rather, loopholes must be closed and personal income of the richest 10 percent must be raised. While Congress has protected the wealth of its wealthiest patrons, refusing tax increases under any circumstance, it has ignored stabilizing Social Security and Medicare funding.

4. A massive drawdown of military funding is overdue. We have been deceived and lied to by our government regarding war in the Middle East. Placing "advisory troops" in Iraq is a canard; it is truly an incremental nudge toward full armed involvement.

5. Republican members of Congress have sworn for the past six years to overturn the Affordable Care Act. They haven't been successful for several reasons: a) They don't have an alternative; and b) opponents of the ACA are so bent on abolishing it they do not realize the public needs and wants a universal health care, single payer system. Medicare expanded to 100 percent of us is the answer. Medicare with additional power to negotiate lower drug prices will control costs. It should be evident to everyone, even Congress, that condemning health care to the vagaries of the market is failed thinking. (See items 3 and 4 for funding solutions.)

6. Our immigration policy and procedures are long overdue for reform. Compromise was possible a few years ago, but it too has been ignored in favor of demagoguery to cadge votes. Building a wall to keep out people of any race or ethnic group and rounding up anyone by "management" are ridiculous ideas.

7. The GOP-controlled Senate is required to set a hearing for the president's nomination for the Supreme Court vacancy. Even deceased justice Scalia in his strict interpretation of the Constitution would agree there is no language to deny a hearing.

Our elected government employees are guilty of malfeasance, doing their jobs poorly, and worse, nonfeasance, not doing their jobs at all. As such, they have ignored their duties under the Constitution in favor of dialing for dollars to get re-elected.

That is not leadership; it is certainly no example of upholding the Constitutional oath sworn to by all members of our federal government. It is a shameful example of slurping at the public trough while doing nothing.

Bill Ellis is a Longmont resident; respond to bill-ellis@comcast.net