Fremont Elementary School Principal Jan Draper, (Courtesy Photo)

This school year, Fremont Elementary School has two new principals.

Principal Jan Draper was the assistant principal for the 2014-2015 school year.

"Before that, I taught in the building for four years," Draper said. "I was in the classroom for about 15 years, mostly in Colorado. I taught for a little while in Arizona. I've taught every grade except kindergarten and third. I have a range of experiences with elementary grade levels."

Draper received her administrative license eight years ago but didn't think she would use it.

"Then the opportunity presented itself," she said. "I hope to be a good leader, and I hope to continue the upward trajectory that our school is on. I hope to make Fremont Elementary School a really great environment, not just academically. I hope to continue to build the culture in our school."

The school has a community-oriented culture, she said.

"I think teachers here are passionate about educating kids," Draper said. "I think that we have a drive to create 21st-century learners, kids that are college and career ready. I think our teachers are very focused on that."

She said there are too many reasons to list why she enjoys education.

"I think that education empowers kids," Draper said. "I think that you have nothing without education, and I think that being able to facilitate education is one of the greatest things you can ever do for a person."

She said this is going to be an excellent school year.

"We are really looking forward to getting started on a new year," Draper said. "Learning is exciting."

Advertisement

Knapp begins first year at FES

Assistant Principal Vicki Knapp is starting her first year at FES.

Before this year, she was the assistant principal at Harrison School for nine years.

"Most of my career is elementary physical education," Knapp said. "I taught at McKinley Elementary for five years as elementary education PE and then two years in the classroom as a five/six combo teacher. Prior to that, I was in Texas for 13 years teaching elementary PE for almost all of those years."

Fremont Elementary School Vice Principal Vicki Knapp. (Sarah Rose / Daily Record)

She said she decided to apply for the assistant principal position at FES for multiple reasons.

"I needed a change," Knapp said. "They are doing good things here at Fremont, so I wanted to be a part of learning different things and doing different things. I hope to spend a few years in this position just working with kids and parents and the school district itself and helping it to continue to grow in that upward direction."

She said the upward direction of the school has to do with testing scores and being a positive place to learn.

Knapp said she enjoys being in an administrative position.

"It's neat to see kids grow, it's neat to see their eyes light up when they learn something. I like to hear them laugh. I like to be a part of them making good decisions," she said. "I'm looking forward to starting the school year in a new position and also being able to contribute from that position."

Sarah Rose: 719-276-7648, roses@canoncitydailyrecord.com