× Framing choice about the future, Bill Clinton rallies for Udall, Hickenlooper & Romanoff

AURORA — Former President Bill Clinton continued the parade of prominent Democratic surrogates in Colorado to stump for Democratic U.S. Sen. Mark Udall in the closing weeks of a race that may shift the balance of power in Washington, DC.

Kicking off two rallies over the next 18 hours in Colorado’s two biggest swing counties, Clinton echoed the message delivered last week by First Lady Michelle Obama and his wife, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, urging voters not to vote their fears about ISIS or Ebloa, as he alleged Republicans are encouraging them to do — and he framed the choice for middle class voters as a matter of economic fairness.

“I’ve always thought of Colorado as a state of the future,” Clinton said. “We have to decide whether we’re going into the future together, with shared opportunities for everyone willing to work for it, or whether we’re going to go back to trickle-down economics where one or two percent of the population are getting all the benefits.”

Clinton also rattled off a list of Udall’s work with Republican lawmakers on earmark reform, the Farm Bill, and comprehensive immigration reform, making a more convincing argument about the lawmaker’s bipartisan background than the incumbent’s campaign has to date.

After defending the Affordable Care Act and noting that insurance premiums are rising at a lower rate since the law’s implementation, Clinton looked to unpack Gardner’s campaign strategy of nationalizing the race against Udall.

“He wants to take Mark Udall off the ballot and put the president on the ballot,” Clinton said, noting the president only has two years left in office but that Gardner is seeking a six year-term.

“He’ll vote against you for six years but it’ll feel so good on Election Day,” he continued. “Isn’t that basically whats going on? He’s saying give me a six-year job for a two-year protest.

“I wouldn’t take the deal.”

Clinton also implored voters here to support Democratic Gov. John Hickenlooper and congressional candidate Andrew Romanoff, running in perhaps the country’s most competitive race to unseat Rep. Mike Coffman, R-Aurora.

“I have an admission: I really like Andrew Romanoff, personally,” Clinton said.

Touting Hickenlooper’s work after last year’s devastating floods and his effort to bring together the state’s oil and gas industry and environmentalists, Clinton urged Coloradans to give the governor four more years.

“You say you want leaders who bring people together,” Clinton said. “That’s what John Hickenlooper has done. You’d better reelect him.”

Clinton will rally supporters again Tuesday morning in Lakewood, smack in the heart of Jefferson County, the state’s biggest bellwether.

Udall, who 10 days ago told a group of canvassers that the pundits were counting him out, shrugged off the cloak of the underdog as he introduced Clinton, telling supporters that his campaign is on the road to victory.

“We have momentum. We are surging,” Udall said. “We are going to win this election.”

Republican Congressman Cory Gardner, who has mostly held smaller campaign events in the closing weeks, is set to rally alongside former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush on Wednesday in Douglas County, a solidly Republican county.