Topics: From the Wires, News

FRANKFURT, Germany (AP) — Small SUVs for families and powerful sports cars for the rich are the big things this year at the Geneva International Motor Show this year. Environmentally correct electrics and hybrids, not so much — thanks to cheaper gas and limits on battery life.

Here are the major themes for the March 5-15 show:

___

LOOKING FOR A WINNER

Analysts say this show is more about the search for hit vehicles than new technology, since automakers are trying to boost sales as Europe slowly recovers from its debt crisis.

Car registrations in the 28-country European Union increased 5.4 percent last year to 12.5 million, but remain woefully below their peak of around 16 million in 2007. High unemployment and weak growth are still holding back the industry, despite 17 straight months of increasing sales.

And there are headwinds from Russia, which appears headed for recession after the ruble’s plunge.

On the other side of the ledger, expensive new luxury and sports cars will cater to demands from buyers in the recovering U.S. economy and China.

___

THE INCREDIBLE SHRINKING SUV

Small SUVs and car-like SUVs known as crossovers have become a hot seller for growth-hungry automakers. The category will get even more crowded with new vehicles on display at Geneva. Renault will offer the Kadjar, a crossover in two- or four-wheel drive versions, while Honda blurs the borders between car and hatchback with its new HR-V, touting acoustic insulation that reduces road noise and three different ways to configure the interior to carry things. At the higher priced end, Infiniti shows off its QX30 concept with carbon-fiber trim and big 21-inch wheels. Concepts are clues to what the company may introduce in the future.

Small SUVs are the same length as compact or smaller midsize cars, but have more ground clearance and off-road features such as cladding protecting the wheel wells and underside.

___

CRISIS? WHAT CRISIS?

High-priced sports cars and luxury vehicles will be on display in abundance. Audi is showing a new version of its R8 with a 10-cylinder engine churning out 610 horsepower and acceleration of 0-100 kph (0-62 mph) in only 3.2 seconds. It’s priced at 165,000 euros ($185,000) for the basic version, 187,000 euros ($202,000) for the more powerful one and goes on sale in Europe this summer.