Topics: Beyonce, Editor's Picks, Grammys 2014, Katy Perry, Lady Gaga, Miley Cyrus, The Grammys, Video, Entertainment News

The Grammys tonight will feature performances by two musicians who had radically different 2013s. Beyoncé spent the year on a lengthy tour with anticipation mounting for an album she had never acknowledged she was working on, trying out different songs in commercials before — surprise! — dropping a self-titled album onto iTunes in the middle of the night. It had seemed that a burst of promotion she’d done at the very beginning of the year had been wasted effort; instead, it became clear her new record didn’t need the promotion in the first place. She’s since released two songs off the record as singles, but the album was designed to be bought all in one piece — all without a single track getting previewed on a live performance or on the radio.

Katy Perry, by contrast, went through the paces in the run-up to the release of her album “Prism”; covers of Vogue and Entertainment Weekly, talk-show appearances, a performance at the end of August’s Video Music Awards, set up in opposition to putative rival Lady Gaga’s number at the show’s start. And though “Prism” debuted at number one on the charts and lead single “Roar” was huge, the follow-up “Unconditionally” wasn’t nearly as strong a chart performer as any of Perry’s nine singles since 2010, peaking at 14 on the Billboard Hot 100. Her label had invested significant resources into “Prism,” and Perry seemed at least temporarily against the ropes.

Particularly among female pop stars, the perception of rivalry has become the coin of the realm. “Roar” and Lady Gaga’s “Applause” were put into a perceived “chart battle” that Perry won, but it was a pyrrhic victory; with her widely-remarked-upon performance, Miley Cyrus consumed all the oxygen at the Video Music Awards and had a number-one single by early fall. (The awards ceremony, designed as it was to be bookended by established stars on lengthy promo cycles, thus provided one of the year’s many surprises.) A New York magazine cover on Taylor Swift pointedly noted in its headline that she was a bigger pop star than Perry, Cyrus or Gaga. Around that time, the writing was on the wall about Gaga’s luxuriantly promoted album “Artpop” — its lengthy roll-out, complete with Jeff Koons album cover and two-day release party, came to seem utterly vexed, with misinformation about the cost of the album’s promotion seeming credible enough to end up reprinted in major news outlets. Young star Lorde found herself the subject of controversy, time and again, for seemingly insulting remarks about Taylor Swift and Selena Gomez, inadvertently playing into a public appetite for female artists fighting over slices of a smaller and smaller pie. At the end of the year, pop culture provocateur Perez Hilton posted a GIF of Beyoncé pushing albums by Lorde, Perry, Cyrus, Gaga and Britney Spears off a table. It really was, in ways Hilton couldn’t have known, the GIF of the year.

The problem was that not every fixed idea at the end of 2013 was accurate. “Artpop,” relative to its performance, seemed vastly more like a “flop” than it had been. That perception came thanks to a series of unlucky turns (the fate of single “Do What U Want,” whose R. Kelly feature seemed in poor taste once allegations of his sexual impropriety resurfaced, among them) and a general market correction from Gaga’s onetime most-famous-singer-on-earth status. “The idea that it’s hard to sustain that frenzied level of engaged popularity that Lady Gaga had when she was on top of the world with ‘Just Dance,’ ‘Poker Face,’ and ‘Bad Romance’ — that can’t necessarily last at that level forever. Every artist has ebbs and flows and I think that it’s hard to sustain that momentum,” said Keith Caulfield, the associate director of charts at Billboard. “These comparisons that people try to make from one album to another — it’s just not that easy sometimes.”

Similar comparisons between Perry singles, Caulfield said, were equally ineffective: “Unconditionally” “certainly was not not a hit, it was still a top 20 record! It performed quite respectably.”

So why are pop fans so eager for a narrative whereby an artist either unequivocally succeeds or utterly fails? It was easy, in media-saturated 2013, to view an artist’s traditional promotional cycle as exhausting. Longtime pop-world observer Maura Johnston, Journalism Fellow at Boston College’s Institute for the Liberal Arts and editor of Maura Magazine, noted the particular case of “Artpop”‘s drawn-out release cycle: “The genesis of it was so long — the period after [prior album] ‘Born This Way”s release was two years, which five years ago would not have been too long. But in the era of hyper-compressed promotional cycles, it seemed like a lot for not a lot of payoff. It got to the point of ‘Release this damn record already!'”