In today’s anesthesia machine market, the high-acuity/top-tier systems have become the fastest growing segment. This spot was once held by the mid-acuity systems, which were often the “go-to” machines for the majority of U.S. hospitals. At that time. high-acuity systems were available but had a reputation for being unreliable, with interfaces that were not user-friendly

Today, the advanced technology offered by high-acuity systems such as high-end ventilation modes found on critical care ventilators has changed the landscape for anesthesia machines. The high-acuity models are replacing older, obsolete machines as the top pick for facilities.

High-acuity machines also offer technology that allows for low-flow techniques that provide substantial cost savings and improved patient care by decreasing the amount of anesthetic agent used. Features also include improved agent analysis and spirometry. The systems are designed for patient applications ranging from premature infants to bariatric patients, including patients with challenging ventilation requirements.

Current measures of satisfaction ratings show the highest ratings are for high-acuity anesthesia machines

Our current measures of satisfaction show the highest ratings are for high-acuity anesthesia machines. Purchasing trends indicate that anesthesiologists prefer these systems and that hospitals find top-tier systems are worth the additional cost.

Nonetheless, mid-tier systems offer sophisticated platforms with a range of options that can allow a surgical department to design a system that best suits its needs at a more affordable price. These systems are designed for pediatric and adult patient applications. Within this tier is a sub segment for magnetic resonance (MR) conditional models, approved for use within the MRI environment.

Growth remains strong for the low-acuity segment that serves the surgical center and office based market. Once supported by used and refurbished models, vendors now offer current technology in a compact, low-cost machine.

Some vendors offer a family of products with similar user interface, allowing a facility to purchase a machine that best matches the types of patients and cases it sees while providing a consistent user experience. This product family includes high-acuity systems for the cardiovascular and neurosurgical suites, mid-tier units for L&D department and low-acuity units for satellite and day surgery suites.

Anesthesiologists, CRNAs, anesthesia techs and biomedical staff report a preference for related models, which offer a familiar user interface, similar consumables/supplies and one source for service and support.

For new purchases, clinicians recommend including advanced ventilation mode options to expand the range of patient types supported and improve patient care. Additional considerations include patient monitoring—new or existing, EHR/Anesthesia Information Management System requirements and clinical application training. Point of sale is the optimal time to consider long-term service and support options and negotiate service agreements or biomedical training options.

Prices for anesthesia delivery systems reflect the wide range of configurations purchased—from a basic platform to one including advanced options, such as ventilation software. The prices below reflect the cost for the anesthesia machine only. Additional costs may include monitoring, anesthesia information management system, service, biomedical training, and clinical application training.

The cost for service for anesthesia delivery systems is reflected by the range of options available. Prices start at around $500 for a first-year preventive-maintenance (PM) option and can amount to $3,640 for full service for a high-acuity model.

Vendors offer agreements for parts only and preventive maintenance all the way up to full comprehensive coverage. Savings are available with multi-system and multi-year agreements.

A large percentage of hospitals support their anesthesia equipment in-house with trained biomedical staff. Hospitals utilizing their clinical engineering department may choose to include vendor support depending upon their needs. These include parts only, PM only and partnership plans allowing biomed to handle first call.

Data source: MD Buyline

(Please note, these numbers have been adjusted to exclude special deals, outliers, and unique circumstances.)