A man enrolls in a health insurance plan under the Affordable Care Act with some assistance in Miami. (Photo: Joe Raedle, Getty Images)

As the rollout of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) continues, readers take stock of the overhaul of the health system. Comments from Facebook are edited for clarity and grammar:

There are three fatal flaws to Obamacare that no number of executive orders can overcome:

The Obamacare policies were designed by government bureaucrats.

Obamacare relies upon some people (young/healthy) to overpay for health insurance in order to fund the subsidies and coverage for people who are sick, old and have pre-existing conditions.

The mandates (individual and corporate) are supposed to force companies and businesses to buy these overpriced policies in order to fund those subsidies. And we can all see how that is working. It is not working because forcing people to overpay for something that they might not want or need is neither politically popular, nor is it good for the economy.

— Bernd Harzog

The health care act is a small first step to moving the country into the 21st century.

Unfortunately, conservatives detest change, which is inevitable. Many will look for anything that puts a blemish on a program that eventually will make our country healthier and possibly even prevent bankruptcy.

— James Rubner

EFFECT ON JOBS

We needed a Congressional Budget Office report to tell us the effect Obamacare will have on full-time jobs?

I was working for Staples during these changes. The company was going to cut my part-time hours down to a cap of 25 hours per week because of the ACA. Trust me when I say that most joblessness isn't people being lazy; the many I know were being forced into a huge pay cut.

— Doug Irvin

This is a perfect example of how the middle class is being squeezed from top and bottom. The rich are given advantages, with wealth creating more wealth, while the poor and working class are subsidized by the government to the point where there will be much less gain to working more.

The tax code needs to be flattened and loopholes closed for all to re-balance things. A minimum safety net for the poor should exist, but after that, private charity should step in.

— Chris Parker

Letter to the editor:

The number of full-time workers could decrease by more than 2 million by 2021 because of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), according to a recent Congressional Budget Office report. That's great news for our country.

The need for workers over the next 10 years is the real determinant of employment and unemployment. If some employees find that they can still carry their health insurance while working less than 40 hours per week, or not working at all, that's good news. More people working fewer hours per week equates to more people employed, assuming the need for workers remains the same.

The ACA will give more workers greater freedom of choice but will not reduce the total number of man hours required to keep our economy running. This latest CBO report confirms that the ACA is good for workers, and good for our country.

Wallace Wolff; Souderton, Pa.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1bb7o4e