It’s been two years since Dr. Ben Carson spoke courageously at the National Prayer Breakfast. He caught my eye that day and has stayed in my sights since. Carson’s lifetime of proven high character attracts many who support him as a presidential candidate. He was considered a long-shot, but that has changed.

Billionaire Donald Trump always gets what he wants. Earlier this year he decided he wanted the office of President of the United States. Currently Trump is leading in the polls amongst the sixteen other Republican candidates, while his historical positions on every issue seem not to trouble his current supporters. It seems that the pleasing content of his speeches is enough for the majority of Republicans to take Trump to the White House.

Though I find it frustrating that so many are still propping up Trump, I also find it encouraging that nearly as many are supporting Carson. What is it about these two men that attracts Conservatives’ support? And I do believe it is Conservatives (not moderates) that support both men. The answer to that question should give us great hope, but also a stern warning.

Both Trump and Carson are “outsiders.” Neither have held a public office, thus neither has yet publicly disappointed their constituents by failing to keep their promises. Both men have proven themselves capable of truly great accomplishments, with reputations as hard workers, creative, skilled, ambitious, and successful. Both men communicate boldly, rejecting the poison of politically correct speech. Both men have become attractive candidates to desperate Conservatives, and both are a gamble!

If both Trump and Carson started this race on a level surface, with equivalent quality of histories, they could be assessed as two of the same. However, they do not have the same historical qualities. Carson’s life story is filled with beauty and inspiration. His personal and professional accomplishments have been truly remarkable. Ben Carson’s wisdom and honesty inspires!

Donald Trump’s life story is riddled with ugliness. For those who rabidly support this man, you must open your eyes and look at what you are following! Trump’s public and private history has always focused on what’s best for Donald Trump. Though his current rhetoric seems pleasing, it is actually poison. Regardless of the current message coming out of his mouth, the man is foolish and dishonest. If Conservatives put Trump into office the end result will surely be degradation and humiliation!

So, where is the hope? The fact that conservatism polls Trump and Carson neck and neck is hopeful. The fact that, at this time, the public is not seeing Trump as he is (not a Conservative) tells me that half of those polled are determined to have a truly conservative candidate this time.

The stern warning still applies. Trump supporters must wake up! You have created a “Frankenstein” of a front runner. If you do not stop that trajectory it may be too late to have a real conservative for our candidate.

(Jesus) “One who is faithful in a very little is also faithful in much, and one who is dishonest in a very little is also dishonest in much.” (Luke 16:10/ESV)

The purpose of this blog is to encourage Christ-followers to see God’s Big Picture and be a part of it. Adonai Eloheinu!