Buy Photo Meghan Trainor's "Lips Are Movin'" is the perfect anthem for Pensacola. (Photo: Andy Marlette illustration)Buy Photo

Here it is! The perfect summer soundtrack for the city of Pensacola!

In the aftermath of goofing off, rejecting leases and losing a proposed $20 million in projects for the Community Maritime Park, city officials were still saying they really want the projects.

Cue the Quint Studer karaoke cover of pop sensation Meghan Trainor:

“I know you’re lyin’

‘Cause your lips are movin’

Tell me do you think I’m dumb?

I might be young (at heart),

But I ain’t stupid!

Talking ‘round in circles with your tongue!

I gave you bass (i.e. a ton of cash), you gave me sweet talk,

Saying how I’m your number one,

But I know you’re lyin’

‘Cause your lips are movin’

Baby, don’t ya know I’m done!”

That’s right Pensacola, on the park leases, Studer is done. Thanks Obama!

Oh wait. Maybe he’s not the executive to blame for this botched deal.

But how in the world did the botching happen? Mayor Ashton Hayward rah-rah-ed it publicly. He called it a “golden opportunity.” He even spent taxpayer dollars on a special attorney to get the deal done. Two weeks ago, he said they it just needed “tweaks.”

Then just a few days ago, City Hall sent out an exciting, new press release in an “effort to increase transparency and respond proactively” (can one “respond” “proactively?”) to the “hot topic” of the park leases. Then about an hour later, the city blasted out another email that said the CMPA-approved leases would not be accepted. According to Studer’s team, that was the first they’d heard of it. No phone call, no heads up. Just the “transparent” and “proactive” press release about what once was a “golden opportunity.”

Cue the Meghan Trainor:

“If your lips are movin’,

If your lips are movin’,

If your lips are movin’, then you’re lyin’, lyin’, lyin’, babe!”

So Studer’s out. Frustrated? Done with the games? Tired of reading emails from the Upside? Presumably all of the above. Who can blame the guy? It ain’t like he doesn’t have other places to put shiny, new multimillion-dollar buildings. There are only so many governmental hoops a millionaire philanthropist can jump through, right?

I mean, most folks in Pensacola these days seem pretty dadgum jazzed about Studer’s work around here. And after starting businesses, creating jobs, promoting wellness, inclusiveness, creativity, positivity and thereby, building a better community, I reckon there’s only so much jerking around a guy can take. At some point, it becomes a simple matter of self respect.

Tell ‘em, Meghan:

“I’m a classy girl

I’m a hold it up

You full of something but it ain’t love

And what we got is straight overdue

Go find somebody new.”

But City Hall pleads they still want to work on the project. The mayor’s newly promoted Grand Exalted Ruler over half the city, Tamara Fountain, even said so on 1620 AM on Friday.

What say you, Miss Trainor?

“Hey, baby, don’t you bring them tears,

‘Cause it’s too late, too late, babe, oh!

You only love me when you’re here,

You’re so two-faced, two-faced, babe, oh!”

Alas, talk is cheap. Especially when it costs you $20 million. Here’s the thing that the noble, competent and ethical officials at City Hall need to get. When they talk all this game and don’t back it up with action, it’s not just Studer that’s being misled — it’s all citizens.

So spare us the smack talk about transparency, proactivity and Upsidedness. Maybe we’re old. Maybe we’re young. But like Meghan says, we ain’t stupid. And if things don’t change, everyone in Pensacola will sing along:

“If your lips are movin’,

If your lips are movin’,

If your lips are movin’, then you’re lyin’, lyin’, lyin’, babe!”

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1S4XBBF