Photo

For most customers returning to the Obamacare marketplaces this year, it really paid to shop around. New data shows that a large number of them did. That bodes well for those shoppers and the future offerings of the insurance marketplaces.

More than half of people who bought insurance on HealthCare.gov last year explored their options before choosing a 2015 plan, according to a report from the Department of Health and Human Services. Of those 2.2 million who shopped, more than half switched to a new health plan.

Those high rates of shopping and switching are unusual in public health insurance marketplaces. Other government programs that allow customers to shop for health plans have had switching rates close to 10 percent. Indeed, a key policy feature of the marketplace this year was an automatic renewal process, which kept people who did nothing enrolled in the same plan from last year.

There are clear advantages for some people in staying in the same insurance plan from year to year — mainly that you can stick with the same doctors and hospitals. But an Upshot analysis of data from the McKinsey Center for U.S. Health System Reform found that people who bought the most popular plans last year often faced substantial premium increases if they stayed put.

It’s not clear from the government’s report how many people who switched saved money by doing so. But the administration has said that more than 70 percent of all customers could save money by switching, so it’s likely that most of the switchers ended up in a cheaper plan. There may be other reasons to switch, of course — maybe some people didn’t like their plan. And even some of last year’s plans are experiencing some changes that could make them less attractive to existing customers, as a ProPublica analysis published in The Upshot highlighted.

Many Returning Obamacare Shoppers Switched Plans The rate of plan switching was far higher for HealthCare.gov than previous government insurance markets. Percent of customers switching HealthCare.gov Medicare Part D Federal employees Massachsuetts Commonwealth Care 29% 13% 12% 7% Percent of customers switching HealthCare.gov Medicare Part D Federal Employees Massachsuetts Commonwealth Care 29% 13% 12% 7%

The high switching rate, a surprise, remains a bit of a mystery to experts who study insurance markets. There are a few possible reasons more people than expected may have shopped. One is that Health and Human Services worked hard to encourage people to look again at other options. The customers shopping for insurance in the Obamacare marketplaces also tend to have lower incomes than those in previous public insurance markets, and insurance premiums make up a larger proportion of their incomes. Those factors may have made them more price sensitive and motivated to find the best deal.

Regardless of the explanation, the high switching rate is probably good news for the functioning of the insurance marketplaces in the coming years. The concept behind the marketplaces is that insurers will try to keep prices low to attract customers. If almost no one ever changes plans, though, insurers lose an incentive to keep prices low.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Studies have shown that drug plans sold to Medicare patients, who rarely switch, tend to substantially increase in price over time. The pricing patterns for last year and this year may point to a similar pricing strategy — the lowest-cost providers from 2014, which captured large shares of the market, tended to raise their prices more than the market average.

If most repeat customers are looking at their options every year — and a substantial number are willing to change plans — that is likely to encourage insurers to compete on both price and features and improve consumers’ options.

Andy Slavitt, the principal deputy administrator at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the government agency running the marketplaces, said the high shopping rate had been gratifying. “As we think about what the objectives of this marketplace — of any marketplace — it’s to have competition, and have issuers competing to offer better prices and better products for consumers,” he said.

Mr. Slavitt said he expected these numbers would send a strong message to insurers. “If I were an issuer, I would want to come out next year very price-competitive,” he said.