Chris Christie wins an endorsement: Maine Gov. Paul LePage

PORTLAND, Maine — Chris Christie’s out to prove he’s the bluntest and most straightforward candidate running for president. So it was only natural that the first major endorsement of his bid for the Republican nomination came from the only governor with a brasher and more plainspoken reputation: Maine’s Paul LePage.

At a last-minute event organized by Christie’s camp during a weeklong swing through of New Hampshire, LePage became the nation’s first sitting Republican governor to endorse a candidate for president. For Christie, who crossed the state border to get LePage’s imprimatur, it was a slight diversion from his laser focus on the Granite State. But it was a chance to reinforce Christie’s overarching message: that he’s a truth-teller in a field of smooth talkers.

Story Continued Below

“Lots of people may try to play the game of deciding to watch for awhile and see which way things go. That’s not Paul,” Christie said, as rain pelted an outdoor patio at Becky’s Diner here. “When I called him this weekend and told him that I was going to get into the race this week. He said, ‘all right, well, I’m with you, so let’s go.’ That’s a good friend and that’s a strong leader.”

The endorsement was Christie’s first political return on the connections he made while running the Republican Governors Association last year. Christie repeatedly traveled to Maine to help LePage win a three-way reelection battle — at a time when LePage was similarly considered an underdog.

“When all of your and your colleagues around the country had me as a dead-walking governor, Chris Christie had faith. He believed in us, came up, supported me whole-heartedly, never batted an eye,” LePage said.

Referring to another successful long-shot Republican gubernatorial candidate whom Christie backed in 2014, LePage added: “He is the first person in America to recognize that Larry Hogan in Maryland was the real deal.”

The LePage endorsement comes from a polarizing politician who, like Christie, has battled with his state Legislature and is mired in his own political controversy. While Christie is still attempting to shake off the yoke of the Bridgegate scandal in New Jersey, LePage was accused last week by state House Speaker Mark Eves of threatening to withhold state funds from a charter school unless the school reconsidered its decision to hire Eves as its president.

Asked about the conflict, Christie tried to fit it into the theme of his campaign. “I support the governor’s stand that he’s taken on this. Controversies come and go. Leadership is what stands strong and firm,” he said.

LePage refused to criticize Christie for accepting Obamacare’s huge Medicaid expansion, a program LePage has derided as “welfare expansion” and that he repeatedly vetoed when the Maine Legislature sent it to his desk. Asked about their differences, LePage said it was simply a matter of states with different health care systems making independent decisions that were right for them.

The pair, alongside their wives, described a deep friendship built in the 2014 trenches and based on an admiration for each other’s plainspoken nature.

“Sometimes I’m overly blunt. I don’t like to mince words. I like to get things done,” LePage said. Then the punchline: “That’s the only difference between Chris Christie and I — he’s a little shy.”