An AgustaWestland AW109SP

By Bill Sanderson

The new, state-of-the-art helicopter that Mayor Michael Bloomberg has at his disposal was busy flying to vacation hotspots this summer, according to federal records.

The AgustaWestland AW109SP helicopter traveled at least four times in May, June and July to Francis S. Gabreski Airport in Westhampton, according to Federal Aviation Administration records reviewed by The Wall Street Journal.

The chopper – estimated to be worth around $7 million – also flew to East Hampton’s airport on June 30th and Newport, RI, on July 13th, the records show.

Gabreski Airport is a busy stopover for Hamptons visitors like Mr. Bloomberg, who owns a mansion in Southampton, a 20-minute drive from the airport.

“It is a seasonal airport. We generally get not only helicopters but corporate jets, mainly from Memorial Day to Labor Day,” said Gabreski Airport’s manager, Anthony C. Ceglio.

“We are still open 24 hours a day, seven days a week, throughout the year,” Mr. Ceglio said. “But the majority of the traffic is here for the beaches or the summer homes that are open here in the warm months.”

The airport handles from 1,100 to 1,200 helicopter flights a year, said Mr. Ceglio, who said that with so many flights, he had no recollection of the mayor having visited. “You really don’t know one from the next,” he said.

Not all the helicopter’s movements are documented. The FAA may not have records of flights when a pilot does not file a flight plan, or is not in contact with air controllers. There’s also no official record of who piloted the helicopter on the AW109SP’s trips – though Mr. Bloomberg is a seasoned helicopter pilot.

The chopper’s first recorded flight was May 28, from Northeast Philadelphia Airport, which is AgustaWestland’s U.S. base, to Morristown Airport in New Jersey, where the helicopter is based, federal records show.

On May 29, the new chopper hopped around the area, from Morristown Airport to La Guardia Airport, the East 34th Street Heliport and finally to Westhampton. The chopper made another trip on May 30 from Morristown directly to Westhampton, the records show.

On June 30, it flew from Westhampton to Westchester County Airport in White Plains, and on July 2 it made a trip from Westhampton to Morristown, the records show.

On July 13, the helicopter was recorded as flying from La Guardia Airport to Newport. It flew from Morristown to Baltimore, MD on July 23, the records show.

The AW109SP was registered in June to Wing & Rotor Transportation Holdings LLC, according to FAA records. Other aircraft owned by that company, according to an FAA database, are operated by Bloomberg Services LLC. And aircraft operated by Bloomberg Services LLC are used by Mr. Bloomberg and executives at Bloomberg LP, the mayor’s private financial-information firm, according to a person aware of the matter.

The cost of Mr. Bloomberg’s travel on the planes, even for city business, is paid by the mayor, not taxpayers, aides have said.

Marc La Vorgna, Mr. Bloomberg’s city hall spokesman, declined comment. A spokesman for Bloomberg LP did not immediately return a message seeking comment.