At kitchen tables across America, real families are confronting the same question: How will we care for Mom and Dad (or another loved one) if something happens and they can’t take care of themselves?

When my mother’s health declined, I served as her best friend, her adviser, her house manager and her hospital Sherpa. I am not alone.

Every family caregiver has a personal story to tell — which is why caregiving is one of those rare issues that cross geographic and political lines. This isn’t a Democratic issue. It’s not a Republican issue. It’s a family issue.­­ It’s one shared by more than 42 million Americans who are helping their older loved ones live independently at home, where they want to be.

In some ways, caregiving is a wonderful gift.

It affords us the opportunity to:

Give back to the ones who gave so much to us.

Spend quality time with the people we love.

Step back and put things in perspective.

But it also can be a difficult and trying time — and it can be isolating.

>> Sign up for the AARP Advocacy Newsletter

The level and kind of help family caregivers provide vary greatly, and depend on the circumstances:

Some provide care from a distance, while others are just a short drive away.

Some support aging parents who have physical disabilities, while others are also managing through the challenges that come with Alzheimer’s and other types of dementia.

Some perform complex medical tasks that were once handled only by trained medical personnel.

Some step in to help mom and dad manage their finances.

And some caregivers do it all.

Today, the average family caregiver is a 49-year-old working woman who cares for her mother. She provides 20 hours of care per week. Meanwhile, other family caregivers help their loved ones around the clock, and many can’t even take a break. In total, America’s family caregivers provide an estimated $450 billion in unpaid care annually.

Beyond the kitchen table, into legislative chambers

That’s why AARP is fighting to help this silent army of Americans who lovingly care for their parents, spouses, brothers, sisters, aunts, uncles and friends. We’ve seen real progress in states across the country as this personal issue becomes a political issue — as we move the conversation beyond kitchen tables and into legislative chambers.

We couldn’t do this work without state legislators, governors and other elected officials—especially those who are at the vanguard of the movement:

Who write, support and move legislation.

Who work with colleagues on both sides of the aisle to get things done.

Who come together to pass those critical votes that turn bills into law.

Capitol Caregivers

To recognize the state elected officials who were integral to the passage of key caregiving legislation in 2014, last night at the National Conference of State Legislatures Forum, I introduced our inaugural, bipartisan class of Capitol Caregivers. This class includes 46 state legislators and three governors from 19 states who helped family caregivers by:

The 2014 Capitol Caregivers are:

State Sen. Hannah-Beth Jackson, California

Assembly Speaker Toni Atkins, California

Assemblywoman Cheryl Brown, California

Gov. Dannel Malloy, Connecticut

State Sen. Terry B. Gerratana, Connecticut

State Rep. Theresa W. Conroy, Connecticut

State Rep. Jason Perillo, Connecticut

State Rep. Valerie J. Longhurst, Delaware

State Sen. Suzanne Chun Oakland, Hawaii

State Sen. Rosalyn Baker, Hawaii

State Sen. Vaneta Becker, Indiana

State Sen. Ed Charbonneau, Indiana

State Rep. Edward Clere, Indiana

State Sen. Patricia Miller, Indiana

State Sen. Robert Hogg, Iowa

State Rep. Chip Baltimore, Iowa

State Sen. Morgan McGarvey, Kentucky

State Sen. Reginald Thomas, Kentucky

State Rep. Joni L. Jenkins, Kentucky

State Rep. Tommy Thompson, Kentucky

State Rep. Robert A. Johnson, Louisiana

State Sen. Gale D. Candaras, Massachusetts

State Rep. Anne M. Gobi, Massachusetts

State Rep. Christopher M. Markey, Massachusetts

State Rep. James O’Day, Massachusetts

State Sen. Sandra L. Pappas, Minnesota

State Sen. Kathy Sheran, Minnesota

State Rep. Carly Melin, Minnesota

State Rep. Dan Schoen, Minnesota

State Sen. Terry C. Burton, Mississippi

State Sen. Briggs Hopson, Mississippi

State Rep. Mark Baker, Mississippi

State Rep. Bobby Moak, Mississippi

State Sen. Kate Bolz, Nebraska

State Sen. Sue Crawford, Nebraska

State Sen. Robert W. Singer, New Jersey

State Sen. Joseph F. Vitale, New Jersey

Assembly Speaker Vincent Prieto, New Jersey

Assemblywoman Nancy F. Munoz, New Jersey

State Sen. Michael Padilla, New Mexico

State Rep. Tomás Salazar, New Mexico

Gov. John Kasich, Ohio

Gov. Mary Fallin, Oklahoma

State Sen. Brian A. Crain, Oklahoma

State Rep. Harold Wright, Oklahoma

State Sen. Thomas Alexander, South Carolina

State Rep. Rebecca Chavez-Houck, Utah

State Sen. Brian Shiozawa, Utah

Del. Barbara Evans Fleischauer, West Virginia

More work to do

In 2015, AARP will continue to press for commonsense solutions to help family caregivers and their loved ones: more support, help at home, training and more.

I invite you to help us fight for you and your loved ones. Learn more at aarp.org/iheartcaregivers

Nancy LeaMond, executive vice president of AARP’s State and National Group, leads government relations, advocacy and public education for AARP’s social change agenda. LeaMond also has responsibility for AARP’s state operation, which includes offices in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.

You can follow her on Twitter @NancyLeaMond.

Also of Interest

See the AARP home page for deals, savings tips, trivia and more