Duckworth, Kaifesh disagree on what to do with 'Obamacare'

hello

Democrat Tammy Duckworth and Republican Larry Kaifesh are candidates for representative of the 8th Congressional District.

Neither Democratic U.S. Rep. Tammy Duckworth nor her 8th District Republican challenger Larry Kaifesh see the Affordable Care Act -- often referred to as "Obamacare" -- as the perfect remedy for the nation's health care needs.

But they hold different opinions on whether the changes made by the act have done more harm than good, and whether improvements can be made within the confines of the existing legislation.

Duckworth sees some pillars of the bill, such as the ability to obtain insurance with a pre-existing condition, as things that should never be lost.

But Kaifesh believes the act has achieved nothing worth keeping, and that health care would be better -- and more affordable -- by returning to more of a free-market system.

"We need to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act," Kaifesh said. "Health care needs to be more available and more affordable. I think the bill is harmful."

Kaifesh argues that the act has raised premiums on American families, and believes more health care decisions need to be put back into the hands of individuals -- especially women, who make 80 percent of family health decisions.

Duckworth concedes that aspects of the act are flawed, not the least of which was the way it was rolled out. She voted to extend the deadline for individuals to sign up, as well as to delay the employer mandate to keep small businesses in particular from being unfairly burdened.

"I felt the rollout was so poorly done and so badly botched that it was unfair to Americans," she said.

But more than 45 percent of 8th District residents who were uninsured before the act are now insured, Duckworth said. And seniors are saving $2,000 to $3,000 a year under the act, a benefit that would be lost by repealing it, she added.

Duckworth said working to improve the act will be an ongoing process, like any other program that has no finish line or final product. She believes, for instance, that dental care should also be covered by the act eventually.

But to maintain the act's goal of preventing any American from going bankrupt as a result of a medical issue, Congress has to commit to constantly improve it, she said.

"I think it would be irresponsible to say, 'OK, we're done. Let's move on to the next thing,'" Duckworth said.

The 8th District is roughly centered in Schaumburg and includes parts of Northwest Cook, central DuPage and eastern Kane counties.