Donald Trump, the former reality TV star and presumptive 2016 Republican presidential nominee, made quite the stir last week when he casually suggested that the U.S. could, in a pinch, intentionally default on its debt. "I would borrow, knowing that if the economy crashed, you could make a deal," Trump said on CNBC.

He's spent the intervening days since trying to clarify that he wasn't actually suggesting the U.S. play hardball with its debt by refusing to pay it in full. "This is the United States government," he said. "The bonds are absolutely sacred." He even correctly noted that "you never have to default because you print the money," a perhaps inelegant but nonetheless true assessment of the U.S.'s situation.

The trouble, though, is a leader can't just offhandedly make it seem – even if he is being misunderstood – that the country might consider not paying its bills without serious repercussions. Treasury Secretary Jack Lew, for one, was not impressed by Trump's cavalier attitude.

"I'm not going to comment on the political debate," Lew said Friday at a breakfast sponsored by the Christian Science Monitor, before adding, "Treasuries are the definition of safety. ... Dollars are the definition of safety and we've spent many years building that reputation. It's an important element of our economic and national security." (Translation: I don't want to be political because it will cause headlines, but Trump's rhetoric is terrible.)

Indeed, were a President Trump to hint that, hey, maybe the U.S. isn't going to pay back all its debt if the proverbial stuff hits the fan, it would create a total mess. Also, as The Economist noted, "[T]he Federal Reserve owns almost $2.5 trillion of Treasury bonds and the Social Security Fund some $2.8 trillion. So the government would, in part, be defaulting to itself."

But in this, Trump is actually behaving much like the rest of the party he has taken over. The GOP has made a habit, after all, of threatening to default on U.S. debt under President Barack Obama.

Remember, in both 2011 and 2013, Republicans said they wouldn't increase the federal debt ceiling if Obama did not agree to unrelated policy changes, such as repealing Obamacare or approving the Keystone XL oil pipeline. (Quick reminder: The federal debt ceiling caps the amount of debt the U.S. is allowed to accrue, even if previous legislation has already authorized borrowing and spending that would require exceeding the cap, setting the government on a ridiculous collision course with itself.) Prior to these shenanigans, the debt ceiling had been treated as an opportunity for show votes, allowing the party out of power to score some political points – and Obama himself was certainly not immune – but Republicans weaponized it in recent years, saying they would allow the country to default if they didn't get their way.

Ultimately, each standoff was resolved without the ceiling being breached. But if the U.S. were to truly default, that's how it would happen: By political choice, not economic necessity. And, wouldn't you know it, here's Trump back in 2012 calling the debt ceiling a "nuclear weapon" for Republicans. Last year he said the debt ceiling is "an amazing tool to negotiate, because it is a very, very – it's fairly catastrophic if it happens."

RELATED CONTENT RELATED CONTENT Trump's Big Budget Bamboozle The Trump campaign is either peddling lies or woefully ignorant with its absolutely outlandish fiscal promises.

In this, as in so many things, the GOP has only tself to blame for Trump's proclivity for extremism. Republicans normalized the notion that the U.S.'s commitment to paying back its bills was a political tool to be negotiated with, not a sacrosanct pillar of its economic policy, just as they normalized the idea that the U.S. is just one hop from economic ruin but can be saved by implausibly large tax cuts and gutting regulations. And then Trump turns it up to 11, morphing mere nonsense into outlandish absurdity, and his supporters eat it up, while establishment Republicans wonder what went wrong.

Even without defaulting, though, these debt ceiling standoffs didn't come cheap. According to the Government Accountability Office, the 2011 episode cost taxpayers $1.3 billion during that fiscal year alone in higher borrowing costs, and billions more thereafter. 2013 came in at an comparably cheap $70 million, per the same organization. Trump and his party have turned the debt ceiling into an expensive and perpetually ticking time bomb.