The Eye

Angelina Jolie Threw Up After Watching Her First Movie

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Getty Images/Frazer Harrison) Star of new movie The Maleficent, actress Angelina Jolie admits to vomiting while watching her first starring role.

Many actors don't like to watch themselves onscreen, but few have admitted to getting physically ill after witnessing one of their own performances. However, during an interview with BuzzFeed to promote her new Disney film "Maleficent", Angelina Jolie revealed her nauseous reaction after watching her movie debut.



The "Salt" actress nabbed her first starring role in the 1993 straight-to-video sci-fi thriller "Cyborg 2", in which she played a robot assassin who's able to feel human emotions.



When asked about her role as a the cyborg killer, Jolie had this to say:



"Oh, I threw up, I did. I saw it and I threw up. Just nausea. But the kickboxing was fun. It was the first time I was sent to do kickboxing. But I was 17 and I think I thought I was making a real movie, which is odd, since there's a scene when I'm decapitated and talking ... as one does. But, yeah, I saw it and got really sick. I just remember my brother Jamie [Haven] holding me and saying, 'It's going to be all right.'"



Although Jolie does in fact have work to be proud of since starring in "Cyborg 2", she still doesn't like to watch herself act. She does, however, enjoy partner Brad Pitt's movies. She tells The Telegraph, "I like the process of doing them more than watching them. I don't really like to watch movies. I love to watch Brad's movies...".



One of Jolie's bigger hits in recent years was the action-thriller "Wanted", but she never saw it, "I never like to watch myself ever. I still haven't seen "Wanted." I heard it was fun." She does mention though, that Brad watched "Wanted" and enjoyed it.



Jolie's movie "Maleficent" is currently playing in theaters and you can catch her second directorial effort, the World War II drama "Unbroken", when it's released later this year.



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.