By Logan Albright | Watchdog Opinion

There’s a lot not to like about the Affordable Care Act – from the “if you like your plan you can keep it” lie, to rising premiums and deductibles, to the dysfunctional insurance exchanges collapsing all around the country, the law has been a great big mess from the start. But one of the most damaging features of the law has yet show its full effect. The high-cost plan tax, often referred to as the Cadillac Tax, is scheduled to hit employers in 2018, and it’s already affecting calculations as businesses plan for the future.

The Cadillac Tax is a 40 percent tax on health benefits provided by employers exceeding a certain value. For 2018, that value is set at $10,200, and it will increase in subsequent years along with the rate of inflation. The tax doesn’t apply to the whole benefit, but only the amount exceeding the threshold.

The primary purpose of the tax is twofold: to collect revenue to pay for expanded coverage under the Affordable Care Act, and to discourage employers from being too generous with their benefits. The reason for the latter is that, since employer-provided coverage is tax free, while wages are not, employers are being “too generous” with benefits, and that is driving up the cost of health care.

Like all attempts to use the tax code to manipulate behavior that is seen as undesirable, however, the government is incapable of foreseeing how the incentives will play out, and the unintended consequences of the policy. People, it will be remembered, are not automata who will merely accept changes in public policy without reacting. Instead, they will act to try to maximize their own benefits and circumvent regulations not in their best interests.

A recent report from the Kaiser Family Foundation found that the tax will affect about one in four employers in 2018, and we can expect those employers to act so as to avoid paying a new 40 percent tax whenever possible. One of the first casualties of the new tax will likely be the use of flexible savings accounts (FSAs) and Health Savings Accounts (HSAs).

FSAs and HSAs work by allowing employees to set aside a portion of their wages tax free, which they can then spend on health-related expenses. The promotion of HSAs has been a prominent feature in most proposals for repealing and replacing the Affordable Care Act. The reason for the popularity of HSAs is that, since customers are spending their own money rather than relying on insurance companies to pay the bills, there is an incentive for people to shop around and find the best value, which in turn encourages price transparency and competition. HSAs are therefore an important element in driving the cost of health care down, not up.

Under the Cadillac Tax, it is likely that many employers will do away with FSAs and HSAs altogether, however. The reason for this is that allowing employees to set their own contribution levels introduces a level of uncertainty into tax filings that few would be comfortable with. If the company doesn’t know how much individuals plan to contribute, it has no way of knowing which employees will trigger the tax threshold. Since wages are taxed at a lower rate than the 40 percent required by the Cadillac Tax, it would be preferable to tightly control the value of benefits to avoid the taxes, while paying anything extra in the form of wages.

For workers, this means three things: First, the value of your total pay will diminish, due to more of it being taxed as ordinary income; second, the price of health care in general will rise due to a lack of competitive pressure from price transparency; third, you will have fewer options on how you can spend your health care dollars. While HSAs allow customers to purchase a wide array of services as long as they are broadly categorized as medical, forcing workers into more traditional insurance plans will necessarily limit the types of care that are covered.



Instead of restricting options, we should be expanding them. Instead of eliminating features that reduce health care costs, we should be embracing them. Offering individuals the same tax-free benefits for health care spending as corporations would reduce consumers’ reliance on their employers, and expanding the use of HSAs would give people more control over their own spending while incentivizing health care providers to compete on price. However, if the Cadillac Tax is allowed to go into effect, things will only get worse for the American worker.